
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-43</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B038-161</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/General/twins2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122071207 text/html 8754
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:11:57 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:29:22 GMT
Content-length: 8537
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Danger Of Lying In Bed by Mark Twain</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<h1>The Danger Of Lying In Bed </h1>

<p><b>By Mark Twain</b> </p>

<p><b>1871</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>The man in the ticket-office said: </p>

<p>&quot;Have an accident insurance ticket, also?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;No,&quot; I said, after studying the matter over a
little. &quot;No, I believe not; I am going to be travelling by
rail all day to-day. However, to-morrow I don't travel. Give me
one for to-morrow.&quot; </p>

<p>The man looked puzzled. He said: </p>

<p>&quot;But it is for accident insurance, and if you are going
to travel by rail - &quot; </p>

<p>&quot;If I am going to travel by rail I sha'n't need it. Lying
at home in bed is the thing I am afraid of.&quot; </p>

<p>I had been looking into this matter. Last year I traveled
twenty thousand miles, almost entirely by rail; the year before,
I traveled over twenty-five thousand miles, half by sea and half
by rail; and the year before that I traveled in the neighborhood
of ten thousand miles, exclusively by rail. I suppose if I put in
all the little odd journeys here and there, I may say I have
traveled sixty thousand miles during the three years I have
mentioned. And never an accident. </p>

<p>For a good while I said to myself every morning: &quot;Now I
have escaped thus far, and so the chances are just that much
increased that I shall catch it this time. I will be shrewd, and
buy an accident ticket.&quot; And to a dead moral certainty I
drew a blank, and went to bed that night without a joint started
or a bone splintered. I got tired of that sort of daily bother,
and fell to buying accident tickets that were good for a month. I
said to myself, &quot;A man can't buy thirty blanks in one
bundle.&quot; </p>

<p>But I was mistaken. There was never a prize in the lot. I
could read of railway accidents every day - the newspaper
atmosphere was foggy with them; but somehow they never came my
way. I found I had spent a good deal of money in the accident
business, and had nothing to show for it. My suspicions were
aroused, and I began to hunt around for somebody that had won in
this lottery. I found plenty of people who had invested, but not
an individual that had ever had an accident or made a cent. I
stopped buying accident tickets and went to ciphering. The result
was astounding. The peril lay not in traveling, but in staying at
home. </p>

<p>I hunted up statistics, and was amazed to find that after all
the glaring newspaper headings concerning railroad disasters,
less than three hundred people had really lost their lives by
those disasters in the preceding twelve months. The Erie road was
set down as the most murderous in the list. It had killed
forty-six - or twenty-six, I do not exactly remember which, but I
know the number was double that of any other road. But the fact
straightway suggested itself that the Erie was an immensely long
road, and did more business than any other line in the country;
so the double number of killed ceased to be matter for surprise. </p>

<p>By further figuring, it appeared that between New York and
Rochester the Erie ran eight passenger-trains each way every day
- 16 altogether; and carried a daily average of 6,000 persons.
That is about a million in six months - the population of New
York City. Well, the Erie kills from 13 to 23 persons out of its
million in six months; and in the same time 13,000 of New York's
million die in their beds! My flesh crept, my hair stood on end.
&quot;This is appalling!&quot; I said. &quot;The danger isn't in
traveling by rail, but in trusting to those deadly beds. I will
never sleep in a bed again.&quot; </p>

<p>I had figured on considerably less than one-half the length of
the Erie road. It was plain that the entire road must transport
at least eleven or twelve thousand people every day. There are
many short roads running out of Boston that do fully half as
much; a great many such roads. There are many roads scattered
about the Union that do a prodigious passenger business.
Therefore it was fair to presume that an average of 2,500
passengers a day for each road in the country would be about
correct. There are 846 railway lines in our country, and 846
times 2,500 are 2,115,000. So the railways of America move more
than two millions of people every day; six hundred and fifty
millions of people a year, without counting the Sundays. They do
that, too - there is no question about it; though where they get
the raw material is clear beyond the jurisdiction of my
arithmetic; for I have hunted the census through and through, and
I find that there are not that many people in the United States,
by a matter of six hundred and ten millions at the very least.
They must use some of the same people over again, likely. </p>

<p>San Francisco is one-eighth as populous as New York; there are
60 deaths a week in the former and 500 a week in the latter - if
they have luck. That is 3,120 deaths a year in San Francisco, and
eight times as many in New York - say about 25,000 or 26,000. The
health of the two places is the same. So we will let it stand as
a fair presumption that this will hold good all over the country,
and that consequently 25,000 out of every million of people we
have must die every year. That amounts to one-fortieth of our
total population. One million of us, then, die annually. Out of
this million ten or twelve thousand are stabbed, shot, drowned,
hanged, poisoned, or meet a similarly violent death in some other
popular way, such as perishing by kerosene-lamp and hoop-skirt
conflagrations, getting buried in coal-mines, falling off
house-tops, breaking through church or lecture-room floors,
taking patent medicines, or committing suicide in other forms.
The Erie railroad kills from 23 to 46; the other 845 railroads
kill an average of one-third of a man each; and the rest of that
million, amounting in the aggregate to the appalling figure of
987,631 corpses, die naturally in their beds! </p>

<p>You will excuse me from taking any more chances on those beds.
The railroads are good enough for me. </p>

<p>And my advice to all people is, Don't stay at home any more
than you can help; but when you have got to stay at home a while,
buy a package of those insurance tickets and sit up nights. You
cannot be too cautious. </p>

<p>[One can see now why I answered that ticket-agent in the
manner recorded at the top of this sketch.] </p>

<p>The moral of this composition is, that thoughtless people
grumble more than is fair about railroad management in the United
States. When we consider that every day and night of the year
full fourteen thousand railway-trains of various kinds, freighted
with life and armed with death, go thundering over the land, the
marvel is, not that they kill three hundred human beings in a
twelvemonth, but that they do not kill three hundred times three
hundred!<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>