
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B041-173</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/clinic1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130648 text/html 12011
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:06:38 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:16 GMT
Content-length: 11793
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LaGuardia Committee Report -- Clinical Study</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<h1>The LaGuardia Report </h1>

<h1>THE CLINICAL STUDY</h1>

<h2>PLAN AND SCOPE</h2>

<hr>

<p>Interest in the effects of marihuana on the human subject
follows two main lines: first, concerning what may be called
pleasurable effects which account for its widespread use- and
second, regarding undesirable effects, including those leading to
criminal and other antisocial acts. </p>

<p>In his monograph on marihuana, Walton has reviewed at length
the literature on hashish experience. He has grouped these
descriptions as retrospective accounts by professional writers
and physicians who have taken the drug through curiosity or
scientific interest, reports by physicians concerning patients
who have taken excessive doses, and observations by psychiatrists
on subjects under marihuana influence. In all of these instances
a dose toxic to the individual had been taken and the effects
described correspond to psychotic episodes of greater or less
degree. </p>

<p>In the literature there are commonly described two basic types
of effect, one of excitation, psychic exaltation, and inner
joyousness, with divorcement from the external world; the other a
state of anxiety with fear of consequences, such as death or
insanity. Either one of these types of reaction may be
experienced alone, but usually both are present during the
intoxication. They occur in no regular sequence but replace each
other in rapid succession. The euphoric and anxiety states are
generally accompanied by mental confusion, a rapid flow of
dissociated ideas, and a feeling of prolongation of time and
spatial distortion. Sexual desires or phantasies may also occur. </p>

<p>The detailed descriptions of the experience vary. Those given
by trained writers, such as Ludlow and Bayard Taylor, are vivid
and dramatic, embodying sensual, visual, and auditory
illusions-phantasies of overpowering splendor and beauty, on the
one hand, and intense suffering and horror on the other. The
authors, familiar with stories of hashish effects and gifted with
strong imaginative powers, undoubtedly were expectant of much
that happened. The account given by the eminent Philadelphia
physician, H. C. Wood, while following the same general pattern,
has much less embellishment. He describes a feeling of well-being
and inner joyousness and buoyancy and the performance of antics
which he knew to be foolish but was unable to control. He was
able to recall no illusions or hallucinations. Later a state of
anxiety came on, developing into an overpowering fear of death. </p>

<p>A number of studies by psychiatrists on selected subjects have
been reported. An excellent example is that of Kant and Krapf.
Each acted as subject for the other and the effects of marihuana
are described and analyzed at length. In general, the objective
in such studies is the interpretation of the reactions in terms
of disturbances in psychological processes and functionings. The
descriptions referred to have been given by persons of a higher
social class, well educated and accustomed by training to act in
conformity with conventional social behavior. Although a state of
irritability may occur and threats of suicide be made by
individuals of this type under toxic doses of marihuana, it is
noteworthy that in none of the descriptions is there found an
expression of antagonism or antisocial behavior which led to acts
of violence or what would be called criminal conduct. </p>

<p>Of more direct interest are the publications of Walter
Bromberg, psychiatrist, Bellevue Hospital,
Psychiatrist-in-Charge, Psychiatric Clinic, Court of General
Sessions of New York County. Marihuana users who are brought
before the court or admitted to the hospital come under his
observation and he has reported at length on the psychiatric
observations of 29 of these who showed psychotic reactions. He
describes two types of reactions, one an acute marihuana
intoxication with a psychotic syndrome, the other a toxic
psychosis. Acute intoxication occurs in any individual if the
marihuana is taken in sufficiently large doses. It comes on
promptly and passes off some hours later. In marihuana psychosis,
the symptoms are much more severe and of longer duration. He
describes a number of cases in which the psychotic state
continued for a number of days and required hospitalization. </p>

<p>The toxic psychosis seen in marihuana users occurs at any time
and is of indefinite duration. Bromberg states that the
relationship between cannabis and the onset of a functional
psychotic state is not always clear. The personality factor is of
undoubted importance and other toxic agents, such as alcohol and
other drugs, as well as endogenous elements, may be involved. The
symptoms, except for the longer duration, resemble those observed
in persons under marihuana intoxication, but often take on the
characteristics seen in schizophrenic or manic- depressive
psychosis. </p>

<p>A description of 11 cases admitted to Bellevue Hospital is
given for illustration. The marihuana was taken in the form of
cigarettes. In this group were 5 Negroes, 2 of whom were women, 1
Puerto Rican, and 5 whites, one of whom was a Mexican and another
a boy of 16. Except for one of the whites, a homosexual, they
were all of a low intellectual and social order. One of the
Negroes was arrested for following women in Central Park. The
others were admitted at their own request, or were sent in by the
police or family. Three of the group had definite sexual
stimulation but in none was there an outburst in the form of an
attack on women. The Puerto Rican became confused and excited and
began chasing people with an ice pick. Shortly after his
discharge he was readmitted to the hospital, was diagnosed as
definitely psychotic, and was transferred to a state hospital as
a schizophrenic. The majority of the group, 8 in fact, had
psychopathic personalities and 3 of these were transferred to
state institutions for further care. The group as a whole is
representative of those who come into the hands of the police
because of abnormal conduct and who are the source of the
sensational newspaper and magazine stories. </p>

<p>Bromberg's findings concerning the lack of a positive
relationship between marihuana and crime are described in the
sociological section of this study. </p>

<p>In marihuana literature, the action of the drug is usually
described from retrospective observation of the effects on a
single individual. Relationship to varying dosage, to the
subject's personality and background, to environmental conditions
when the drug was taken, is given little if any attention. It is
the lack of information concerning these and other factors
involved in marihuana reaction which has given rise to the
present confusion regarding its effects. </p>

<p>The clinical study here described was designed to afford
information not found in marihuana literature but necessary for
any comprehensive view of marihuana action. For obtaining this
information there were these requisites: an adequate number of
subjects for the study, a clear understanding of the mental and
physical make-up of each subject, a uniformity of environmental
factors, accurately graded dosage of marihuana, and standardized
methods of obtaining and recording marihuana effects. In addition
to defining the usual and unusual effects of marihuana, as shown
by subjective and objective symptoms and alterations in behavior
and in physical reaction, the study was expected to answer
questions which must arise in consideration of the problem as a
whole. Of special importance are these: Do marihuana users show
fundamental traits differentiating them from non-users? Do users
present evidence of psychological or physical damage directly
attributable to the drug? What are the pleasurable effects which
account for the widespread usage of marihuana? To what extent
does it lead to antisocial or dangerous behavior? </p>

<p>The sections covering the clinical study are under the
following headings: </p>

<p><b>A. Medical Aspects</b> </p>

<p>1. Symptoms and Behavior </p>

<p>2. Organic and Systemic Functions </p>

<p><b>B. Psychological Aspects</b> </p>

<p>1. Psychophysical and Other Functions </p>

<p>2. Intellectual Functioning </p>

<p>3. Emotional Reactions and General Personality Structure </p>

<p>4. Family and Community Ideologies </p>

<p><b>C. Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from the
Standpoint of Mental and Physical Deterioration</b> </p>

<p><b>D. Addiction and Tolerance</b> </p>

<p><b>E. Possible Therapeutic Applications<br>
<br>
</b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Organization for the Study<br>
</h2>

<p>The clinical studies were carried out at the Welfare Hospital
(1) a New York City hospital for chronic diseases on Welfare
Island. The quarters assigned to the study consisted of a ward of
eight beds for the group to be studied at any one period, an
adjoining ward of two beds for the study of individuals of the
group, three additional rooms with equipment for special
examinations, and a diet kitchen for the preparation of the
subjects' meals. </p>

<p>Four female nurses were employed and the subjects in the
larger ward were under constant supervision. In addition to
routine records, each nurse reported the behavior of the subjects
while she was on duty. Guards were assigned from the Department
of Correction and the New York City Police Force for the subjects
drawn from the Riker's and Hart Island penitentiaries and the
House of Detention for Women. </p>

<p>The facilities of the Third Medical Division laboratory were
used for general clinical laboratory examinations and for more
detailed study of organ functioning. For measurement of
psychological reactions, special apparatus was provided. A
description of equipment used for each division of the study is
given under its proper section. <br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>