
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-38</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B037-255</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/General/unlucky.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070944 text/html 22222
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:09:36 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:29:17 GMT
Content-length: 22004
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Unluckiest Guy I Ever Met</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<h1>The Unluckiest Guy I Ever Met </h1>

<p><b>by Clifford A. Schaffer</b> </p>

<p>This is a true story. The facts have not been embellished. In
fact, I left a lot of stuff out. </p>

<hr>

<p>When I first met Art in the late 1960's, he had just gotten
out of prison the first time and was in college, desperately
trying to make a go of his life. He was a bit scroungy in his
appearance, but everybody was a little scroungy in those days and
the truth was that Art never did have the money for fine clothes.
He did the best he could. Art was one the nicest, friendliest,
and most agreeable people I ever met. As a friend, I enjoyed his
company on every occasion and found that Art was not a complete
angel (neither was I, for that matter), but there was no reason
to ever believe that he might be any real threat to society. </p>

<p>But Art was the unluckiest soul I have ever run across. For
example, the first time Art went to prison, it was for stealing
his own motorcycle. He was later arrested and/or went to prison
for burglarizing his own apartment, stealing a mattress from a
Salvation Army box, and for selling marijuana that even the
police knew wasn't his. Those are only a few of the misfortunes
which befell him and I haven't even gotten to the part about his
lawyer. I will explain. </p>

<hr>

<h3>Stealing His Own Motorcycle </h3>

<p>When Art became old enough to get a driver's license, he
worked hard and saved his money until he was able to buy the
vehicle of his dreams, a three-wheeled motorcycle. When he
thought he had enough money, about $1,000 as I recall, he
searched around and found a three-wheeled motorcycle for sale at
a local wrecking yard. The owner of the wrecking yard was not
well-renowned for his honest business dealings, and Art probably
should have been more cautious but Art was so dazzled with the
prospect of fulfilling his dream that he bought it anyway. As Art
tells it, the owner of the wrecking yard made certain promises
about the mechanical fitness of the vehicle and Art quickly found
out that the vehicle was in no shape to be driven. </p>

<p>Art called the owner of the junkyard, raised the riot act, and
demanded that repairs be made immediately. The owner of the
junkyard told him to bring the bike on over and he would fix it
up. Art did so. </p>

<p>About a week later Art showed up to pick up his bike. It was
all repaired and ready for the road, complete with a bill from
the junkyard owner for several hundred dollars worth of repairs.
Art went ballistic, screaming and shouting that he had been
robbed and that the junkyard owner had warranted that the vehicle
was in good shape when he bought it. It was an old story, the
used car dealer with a mechanic's lien against the injured buyer
- who are you going to believe? </p>

<p>Art left in a rage and his common sense, which never was in
great supply, left him completely. The next weekend, he went to
the wrecking yard when it was closed, cut the lock on the gate,
went in, got his bike, and took it home. </p>

<p>On Monday morning, it was perfectly obvious to the junkyard
owner what had happened. The lock was cut and only one thing was
missing. This didn't take Sherlock Holmes to figure out. He had
long experience in turning such situations to his advantage. He
quickly called the police, reported the theft and, in addition,
claimed that several thousand dollars of other goods had been
taken. Who can tell what is missing from a junkyard? </p>

<p>The police simply stopped by Art's house, found the bike in
the driveway, and hauled him off to jail. The DA then trumpeted
the news that a major theft ring had been broken and shipped Art
off to prison. The proof that Art was part of a major burglary
ring was supplied by the fact that there really wasn't much
evidence. They expected, from the junkyard owner's description of
the incident, that there would be tons of stuff in Art's garage.
As it was, there was nothing but the bike which indicated only
one possible conclusion - he must have stolen tons of the stuff
and been able to fence all of it in less than 48 hours -
obviously a major theft ring. The DA and cops got a lot of good
publicity for saving the community from this awful scourge. Fine
police work saved the day, they said. </p>

<p>The junkyard owner got Art's money, the bike, and payment from
the insurance company for the items &quot;stolen&quot; but not
recovered. Art's lawyer got a mortgage on Art's parents' house.
The situation worked out great for everybody, except Art. A
couple of years later, when I met him, Art was still dealing with
insurance company people who were pursuing him and his parents
for reimbursement of the stuff he never stole. </p>

<p>For that he got a sentence of about five years, which netted
down to about 18 months in prison. He might have deserved a day
in jail and a short lecture about mechanics liens. </p>

<p>When I walked down the street with Art, or appeared in any
public place, it was immediately apparent that the Sacramento
County Sheriffs had it in for him. I am not sure whether they
really believed that Art ran a major theft ring as had been
alleged or whether they just didn't like his looks, or just
didn't like Art. I suspect it was the latter. He was an easy
target to pick on, and my personal impression was that they did
it just because a number of them were plainly sadistic and they
liked easy targets. </p>

<p>From that point forward, Art was likely to be stopped
anywhere, any time, by any Sheriff who happened to see him,
without any real cause that I could determine. They just made it
a point to hound him wherever they saw him. </p>

<hr>

<h3>The Mattress Incident </h3>

<p>Art got out of prison and enrolled in the local junior
college. Art had no money and his parents had been effectively
bankrupted by the legal experience so Art was in a daily struggle
just to keep food in his belly and clothes on his back. But there
was no question that he was trying to get an education and point
himself in the right direction. </p>

<p>Because of the financial strains at home, Art moved out of his
parents' house and got a small two-room cottage.
&quot;Small&quot; is the operative word. The &quot;bedroom&quot;
was literally not big enough to put a double bed in, and the
kitchen was smaller. Mice and roaches? Of course. It was simply
the best Art could do. </p>

<p>Life was extremely tough for Art. There wasn't much employment
available for anyone, let alone ex-cons, and he lived a
day-to-day, hand-to-mouth existence. Beset by financial
pressures, he turned to dealing marijuana on a small time basis,
using some of the contacts he had met in prison. That income was
&quot;iffy&quot; at best and Art had to use nearly all of it just
to eat, pay the rent, and support his dilapidated pickup truck,
which meant he didn't have any furniture. That is, the only thing
he had to sleep on was the linoleum floor. </p>

<p>He went out driving with his friend John one night and noticed
a mattress that someone had dumped at a Salvation Army donation
box. It seemed pretty clear to both of them that Art was just the
kind of person for whom such a donation was intended, so they
proceeded to load it in to the back of Art's pickup truck. As
they were doing so, the Sheriff pulled up. John, a tall
long-legged guy, had an ounce of weed in his pants so he quickly
hurdled two or three six-foot fences and was gone into the night.
Art was stuck. </p>

<p>The deputies started their standard routine of harassing Art
for everything they could think of. They first hit him with every
kind of mechanical citation they could on the truck, but that
wasn't much. Then they told Art they had found a joint on the
running board. Art, by this time, had learned the drill and
pointed out that, realistically, such a charge would never stick
and would just be a waste of time for both of them. Frustrated,
the cops decided to charge him with stealing the mattress. Art,
of course, clammed up and said nothing. </p>

<p>They stuffed Art and the mattress into the back of their
patrol car and drove down to the main jail in downtown
Sacramento, about fifteen miles away from where Art was arrested.
When they got downtown, they talked it over with their superiors
and decided that - despite all the danger that mattress-stealing
represented to the community - there was no way they could make
the charges stick in court. The reason was that they had caught
Art with the mattress half in, and half out, of his pickup truck
and they couldn't tell for sure whether Art was stealing the
mattress, or dropping it off. I am sure it disappointed them. </p>

<p>So they went to Art, gave him the news and showed him the exit
door. He asked for a ride back to his truck which was greeted
with great hilarity all around. Art just turned slowly and walked
to the door. As he reached the door they called out &quot;Wait!
Don't forget your mattress!&quot; </p>

<p>They explained that he certainly couldn't leave his mattress
there and would have to take it with him. Art considered telling
them that the mattress wasn't really his, but quickly realized
that, if he did so, and refused to take the mattress, they would
bust him again for stealing it. He asked for a ride again which,
he later told me, provoked absolutely panic-stricken laughter.
&quot;They were in tears!&quot; he said. </p>

<p>Art left the building dragging his mattress behind him, and
went out on the street to try to hitchhike home. He was tired,
looked a little scroungy anyway, and was carrying a mattress, all
of which is a real hindrance to efficient hitchhiking. He
considered just dumping the mattress and walking home, but there
were regular police patrols going by to watch his progress and
make sure that he didn't litter. Then it began to rain. </p>

<p>Holding the mattress over his head allowed him to keep the
rain off of himself, but it meant that the mattress got
progressively heavier with each step - and he still had more than
ten miles to go. Late that night, after several hours of struggle
with the wet mattress, an undercover narc picked Art up, allowed
Art to stuff the wet mattress in the back seat of his car, and
gave him a ride home, pumping him all the time for information on
where one might find a little weed. Art didn't tell him anything.
</p>

<p>Art finally got home, propped the soaked mattress up against
the wall in the bedroom, and went to sleep, exhausted, on the
linoleum floor again. An hour after he fell asleep, the mattress
fell over on him and, because the room was so narrow and the
mattress was so wet and heavy, it wedged him in so tight he
couldn't get out until his friend John came looking for him the
next day. </p>

<hr>

<h3>Burglarizing His Own Apartment </h3>

<p>Times were undeniably tough for Art, and the exhaustion of
having to deal with the cops on an almost daily basis didn't help
matters. A couple of times he did manage to get jobs, only to be
let go when it became obvious to his employers that Art was a
center of attention for the police. </p>

<p>But he managed to get by for quite a while doing odd jobs here
and there, eating next to nothing, and wearing the same old
threadbare clothes. Then one day the rent was due and his
landlord came to the door. Art explained that he was about to go
a job interview and then would pick up the rent money from his
parents and, if the landlord would kindly wait a little bit, Art
would surely have the money for him. It was a partial story - his
parents didn't have the money, either, but he did have a job
interview - but Art was just trying to buy a little time to keep
his life together. The landlord seemed to accept the story and
Art thought everything was fine. </p>

<p>Art started to get cleaned up for his job interview and, after
taking a shower, put on his pants and went down to the mailbox to
check the mail. By the time he got back, there was a padlock on
the door. He pleaded with the landlord but the landlord also knew
by now that Art was of special interest to the cops, so the
landlord had no incentive to give Art even the tiniest break. Art
went out and sat in the middle of a field, with nothing on but
his pants, to think. </p>

<p>By and by it got dark and Art figured he would sneak back in
to get the rest of his possessions which amounted to a belt, a
couple of shirts, an old pair of shoes, three or four pieces of
raggedy underwear, and the mattress, which he decided not to try
to deal with again, because it had become extremely moldy from
the earlier soaking in the rain. Getting in to his place was
easy. He just popped in through a side window. He was inside no
more than two or three minutes. </p>

<p>When he popped his head out the window a deputy sheriff's
flashlight shone squarely in his face. The landlord had alerted
them hours before and they were waiting for him. Due to his
previous criminal record, he wound up doing about another six
months on that one. </p>

<hr>

<h3>The Marijuana That Wasn't His. </h3>

<p>When Art got out of jail he went back to college and tried to
make a go of it again. The only regular income he could find was
from selling small amounts of marijuana and other drugs. He had
some fairly good drug connections from his various times in jail,
but we was more honest and friendly than he was shrewd so he
never did much more than a few small sales to eke out an
existence. </p>

<p>As luck would have it Art ran into a bright young business
executive who was just starting out with a new wife and baby and,
having put a little money aside, decided to dabble in the
marijuana trading market. Somehow, he managed to get his hands on
thirty pounds of weed and then started looking around to sell it.
He didn't know anyone himself who was interested in thirty pounds
of weed but eventually he ran into Art and mentioned that he
would pay Art a commission of one hundred dollars and a small bag
of personal stash if Art could introduce him to someone who would
buy it. Art knew lots of people and one hundred dollars was a lot
of money to Art, so he looked around until he found someone. </p>

<p>Art introduced the two parties to the transaction and waited
patiently for them to conclude their business so he could get his
commission and leave. In the middle of the transaction, car
lights went on and car motors started in the neighborhood around
them. In a matter of a few moments, they were surrounded by
Sacramento sheriff's deputies. The buyer he found turned out to
be a snitch. </p>

<p>To summarize the legal proceedings which followed, the guy who
actually owned the weed pleaded that he was really a good citizen
who made a mistake, he had a wife and baby, etc., etc., He walked
out with probation, with an agreement to testify against Art. </p>

<p>The snitch, who had previously been busted, got his previous
charges dropped with an agreement to testify against Art. </p>

<p>Art was charged with possession for sale of the entire thirty
pounds. That brings us to the lawyer. </p>

<hr>

<h3>And Now, The Lawyer </h3>

<p>Art's lawyer advised him that, in view of all the previous
convictions, and a long string of nuisance violations (which
should have been self-evident police harassment), this time Art
was destined to do some serious time in prison unless some sort
of miracle happened. Art's lawyer suggested that the only way out
was for Art to turn someone else in - turn snitch. </p>

<p>&quot;Snitches get killed.&quot; Art said. &quot;What else can
I do?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Maybe they would let you off if you had a job and could
show that you were trying to be an honest citizen,&quot; his
lawyer suggested. </p>

<p>Art promptly went out and got an absolutely grinding job
several miles from home. It was a massive struggle just to keep
up with the job, but he did it. Then he went back to his lawyer. </p>

<p>&quot;No dice,&quot; his lawyer told him. &quot;You are going
to have to do something else.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Like what?&quot; Art asked. </p>

<p>&quot;You could always snitch someone off,&quot; his lawyer
suggested. </p>

<p>&quot;Snitches get killed,&quot; Art said. &quot;I don't want
to get killed. What else can I do?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Hmmm,&quot; his lawyer said, &quot;maybe you should get
married to show them that you are trying to settle down.&quot; </p>

<p>Art looked up an old high school girlfriend, explained the
situation to her and she agreed to get married. She had a fairly
decent job and they were able to move into a good apartment on
her income. After the wedding, he went back to his lawyer. </p>

<p>&quot;Still not cutting it,&quot; his lawyer told him.
&quot;You are going to have to do something else.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Like what?&quot; Art asked. </p>

<p>&quot;You could always snitch someone off,&quot; his lawyer
suggested. </p>

<p>&quot;Snitches get killed,&quot; Art said. &quot;I don't want
to get killed. What else can I do?&quot; </p>

<p>His lawyer thought it over again. &quot;Maybe if you had a
baby on the way. Babies always get sympathy.&quot; </p>

<p>Art promptly went out and got his bride pregnant. When she was
beginning to show, he went back to his lawyer. </p>

<p>&quot;Closer. I had them going for a while with the baby
story, but it is still not enough,&quot; his lawyer clucked.
&quot;You're going to have to do something more.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Like what?&quot; Art asked. </p>

<p>&quot;You could always snitch someone off,&quot; his lawyer
suggested. </p>

<p>&quot;Snitches get killed,&quot; Art said. &quot;I don't want
to get killed. What else can I do?&quot; </p>

<p>His lawyer thought and thought again and finally said,
&quot;They might cut you some slack if you were a heroin addict
and claimed that what you were out of control because of your
addiction and what you really need is rehabilitation. If you did
that, I might be able to get you out with a year or so in a
hospital.&quot; </p>

<p>Art had never taken heroin in his life, but it was hard to
turn down that kind of opportunity to avoid a long stretch in
prison. He developed a good-sized heroin habit, went through a
couple of really good withdrawal episodes in front of doctors who
could testify that he really was addicted, and then went back to
his lawyer. </p>

<p>&quot;We almost had them there,&quot; his lawyer said,
&quot;but it still wasn't quite enough. You are going to have to
do something else.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Like what?&quot; Art asked. </p>

<p>&quot;You could always snitch someone off,&quot; his lawyer
suggested. </p>

<p>&quot;Snitches get killed,&quot; Art said. &quot;I don't want
to get killed. What else can I do?&quot; </p>

<p>By that time, both Art and his lawyer had run out of ideas.
Art was now working, married with a baby on the way, and a pretty
good heroin habit, all on the advice of his lawyer. Art became
resigned to the fact that, in order to avoid spending the rest of
his life in jail, he was going to have to snitch someone off. </p>

<p>The sheriffs really enjoyed Art's company as a snitch. They
rounded up several people before the word got out about Art and
it wasn't long before there were rumors floating the streets that
Art would not be long for this world if he hung around
Sacramento. </p>

<p>But, it seemed to work. For the first time since he had been
busted for the thirty pounds of pot which wasn't his, it began to
look like they were going to let him off the hook - until the
next time, at least. </p>

<p>Then, a week before his case was due to come its final
resolution, his lawyer was busted for income tax evasion and had
to drop out of the case. Art got a public defender who knew
nothing about the case and believed the sheriff's deputies when
they gleefully told him that there had been no deal with Art at
all. Art went to prison, full sentence for the full thirty
pounds, a multiple felony offender besides, and remains there
today. He spends most of his time alone in protective custody
because of the death threats against him. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>