
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B025-156</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/mcn/mcn8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124623 text/html 8816
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:46:12 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:01:06 GMT
Content-length: 8601
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>America&#146;s Plague of Bad Cops</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mcnamara_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../../other/other.htm">Other Publications</a> | <a
href="mcntoc.htm">Joseph McNamara Collection</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="47040" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="4"><strong>America's Plague of Bad Cops</strong></font><font
size="5"><strong> </strong></font></p>

<p><font size="2">By Joseph D. McNamara</font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><strong>Los Angeles Times - September 17, 1995<br>
</strong></font></p>

<p><font size="2">Citizens are having trouble distinguishing the
good guys from the bad. Retired LAPD Detective Mark Fuhrman
spouts venomous racism and brags to an aspiring screenwriter
about torturing, beating and framing suspects. Cops across the
country. murder people, pull armed robberies while in uniform,
sell dope, steal drug-buy money, shake down criminals, accept
bribes and falsify evidence against criminal defendants. The
standard defense coming from law enforcement is that only a
relative handful of the 400,000 cops nationwide go bad. For
several reasons, the public is not reassured.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">First, the number of reported cases of bad cops
is rising. Some L.A. County deputy sheriffs get caught robbing
and extorting money from drug dealers. In New Orleans, a
uniformed cop is accused of murdering her partner and shop owners
during a robbery committed while she was on patrol. In
Washington, D.C., and in Atlanta, cops in drug stings are
arrested for stealing and taking bribes. In Boston, two white
cops frame a black man for murdering a white woman. New York
State troopers falsify evidence that sends people to prison. In
San Francisco, counterfeit evidence means hundreds of drug
convictions are likely to be overturned. Similar evidence
tampering forces the prosecution to reopen many cases in
Philadelphia.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It's not just the rank and file, either. The
former police chief of Detroit is in prison for stealing drug-buy
money. In a small New England town. the chief steals drugs from
the evidence locker for his own use. A number of Southern
sheriffs are convicted of being in league with drug smugglers.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Agencies thought to be untouchable are suddenly
reaping as many bad headlines as the perennially troubled New
York City Police Department. The Drug Enforcement agent who
arrested Panama's Gen. Manuel Noriega on drug- trafficking
charges is in jail for stealing laundered drug money. The FBI
catches one of its agents taking drugs from the evidence
stockpile and trying to market them to regional drug dealers.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Of course, police corruption is not new. The
heritage of cops in America includes corruption, racism, and
abuse of power for political purposes. The urban police forces
started in the 1840s followed the.orders of political machines
like Tammany Hall. Aficionados of Raymond Chandler's private eye,
Philip Marlowe, will recall his good luck in encountering an
occasional honest cop as he roamed Southern California in the
1930s. Ironically, it was the LAPD-whose recent problems have
amplified police departments'- sins nationwide-under the
leadership of William IL Parker, that first gained its freedom
from politics to become a professional force.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">One, of the fundamental problems of American
policing is the conflict between law-enforcement duties and
maintaining order in the streets. For example, the Los Angeles
Police Department is probably the most arrest-happy department in
the country. By contrast, cops in other cities send drunks home,
overlook minor violations and seek to keep the streets calm
without resorting to arrest. Also, the L.APD, as well as other
police forces, maintain control by aggressively policing minority
communities. Resisters are taught a lesson and, if necessary,
punished physically, especially if they show &quot;contempt of
cop&quot;. Politicians and officials whose careers depend on
tough-on-crime rhetoric are reluctant to ask too many questions
about what the cops are doing.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Indeed. public fear of crime has made it
increasingly difficult for the relatively small number of police
chiefs who really care to get civil-service commissions to uphold
discipline in their ranks. And the few district attorneys willing
to prosecute cops for unnecessary use of force find it difficult
to get juries to convict officers, especially when the victim of
a police beating is a minority. After all, in a war, you cannot
tie your soldiers' hands when the &quot;enemy&quot; is so
dangerous.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">True, American policing has greatly improved
since the civil rights movement directed attention to police
abuses. But the recent outbreak of bad-cop problems has cost
police forces a lot of the credibility they had gained among
minority groups with good policing. Still. there is one silver
lining in the cloud of distrust created by the Fuhrman tapes and
the plethora of police scandals: more self scrutiny.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">We should not, however, make the mistake of
getting lost in debates about such reform mechanisms as
civilian-review boards, community policing and special
prosecutors. Rather, the essential task is to create within
police agencies an incentive to break the code of silence among
the rank and file and encourage cops to police themselves. A
corrupt, racist or brutal cop will abstain from misconduct only
when he looks at the cop next to him and believes that the
officer will -blow the whistle if he hits the suspect. The police
value system is what permits the kind of behavior that gets bad
.headlines. Real reform is possible only when that value system
changes and cops come to realize that they must police
themselves.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">For mayors and chiefs, the first step is to
stop telling cops they are engaged in war. Next, they and
rank-and-file cops must also stop using the &quot;few bad
apples&quot; defense to obscure the fact that the code of silence
among honest cops is allowing crooked and racist cops to
flourish. Finally, leaders should be honest and acknowledge that
good cops are now punished, instead of rewarded, if they expose
bad cops. Politicians and chiefs must recognize that it is not
negative publicity to weed out misfits; it actually demonstrates
to the public that it can trust the police to police themselves.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Only when the community can tell the good guys
from the bad will we be able to get tough on crime. Then, people
will report crime to the police, serve as witnesses and, when
they sit on a jury, believe police testimony. Justice is not
served when juries spend as much time judging the police as
determining the guilt or innocence of the person on trial. <br>
</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mcnamara_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../../other/other.htm">Other Publications</a> | <a
href="mcntoc.htm">Joseph McNamara Collection</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="47040" -->

<p><font size="2"><br>
</font></p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>