
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-93</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B019-107</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044859 text/html 14309
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:48:52 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:47 GMT
Content-length: 14091
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Statement of Royal C. Johnson, Attorney, Washington, DC</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->

<h1>STATEMENT OF ROYAL C. JOHNSON, </h1>

<p><b>ATTORNEY, WASHINGTON, D.C., REPRESENTING CHEMPSCO, INC. OF
WINONA, MINN. AND HEMP CHEMICAL CORPORATION OF MANKATO, MINN.</b>
</p>

<hr>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I am
representing Chempsco, Inc. of Winona. Minn, and the Hemp
chemical corporation of Mankato, Min.. </p>

<p>These people and those associated with them in Minnesota had
2,200 acres of hemp last year, and they use only the fiber and
the stalk. I want to say in the beginning that they are heartily
in favor of this bill. They think the use of marihuana ought to
be prohibited and they feel further that these legitimate
industries dealing with hemp and the stalk owe a duty to the
Government and to the Treasury to cooperate in every way. I would
even go so far as to say that f the do not cooperate they could
readily visualize themselves as entirely out of business, because
no industry, legitimate or otherwise, has any right in their
viewpoint and in mine to be so conducted in the United States as
to aid in the dissemination of any narcotics of any kind. </p>

<p>We have no dispute whatever with Mr. Hester and Mr. Anslinger.
or the Government. We have gone over the testimony carefully, and
we find that the testimony of Mr. Hester and others shows rather
definitely that there is not deleterious matter or property in
the stalk of the fiber. As I showed the chairman the other day,
the leaves and the seeds are the part of the plant that contains
marihuana. </p>

<p>The fiber, stalk, or hurd has nothing in it and the fiber in
which we are interested is an important part of the industry. It
is used in the making off fine papers, condenser tissues, carbon
paper, bible paper, and all other types of papers, including
cigarette papers. </p>

<p>As there is no marihuana, and no resin in the stalk, we think
the phraseology should be changed in the bill to some degree, not
to change the merits of the bill, but the phraseology. so that it
can be made clear that there iis no deleterious property in the
stalk or in the fiber. Very great industries can be worked up in
this country. I can readily visualize without much difficulty
25,000 or 30,000 or 40,000 acres of hemp with 2000,000 acres of
flax being used in the paper industry and in the plastic
industry, concerning which the gentleman just testified. </p>

<p>I would like to suggest a change in subsection (b) at the top
of page 2 in the bill. I do not think the use of the word
&quot;marihuana&quot; belongs in this measure, because it is a
word that came up from Mexico and attached to those cigarettes. I
see no use in it. This is hemp that is being grown, not
marihuana. I am going to offer these suggestion. I have handed a
copy to Mr. Anslinger, and I wish to offer these suggestion. I
have handed a copy to Mr. Anslinger, and I wish to read it for
the committee. Amend section 1, subsection (b) to read as
follows: </p>

<p>The term &quot;marihuana&quot; means such parts of the plant
Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, which consists of the
leaves of the plant, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from
any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or
resin; but shall not include ---- </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Mr. Johnson, as I understand it the petals of
the flower are the most dangerous. </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: Yes; which eventually become the seeds. The
flower becomes seed. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: It is used, as I understand it, as a petal. It
is not ground up? </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: The leaves. </p>

<p>SENATOR HERRING: Is not the bloom used the same as the
leaves.? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: Oh, yes, the flower on the tops. </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: The flower and the seeds. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: It seems to me that you did not cover the
flowers. </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: I tried to copy in detail the words now in the
bill. I am copying the bill at this time, except as to the
insertion of the word &quot;such&quot; where they say
&quot;all&quot; in the first line. they have not said
&quot;flowers&quot; so I did not say &quot;flowers&quot;. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: &quot;All parts of the plant&quot; would
include the flowers? </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: Then flowers could be inserted. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I think so. </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: The leaves or the flowers of the plant&quot;; I
concede that, because I have wanted to cover it all (reading): </p>

<p>Such . . . plant, its seeds or resin; and shall not include
oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any compound,
manufacture,, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of mature
stalk, oil or cake of the sterilized seed which is incapable of
germination. </p>

<p>And then for the purpose of clarification I wanted to insert
this: </p>

<p>Specifically excluded are mature stalks known as hemp stalks,
which contain no resin or harmful properties, which are used for
various legitimate commercial purposes, and which are grown by
producers under contract with licensed processors or
manufacturers. </p>

<p>Now, getting down in the practical part of the measure; no one
has any business growing this hemp in any quantity whatever
except under contract with someone who is using it for a
legitimate business. They have no more business growing it on
one-tenth of an acre than I have growing sweet potatoes on my
front lawn. Anyone who uses the seed or who uses the stalk -- the
hurd -- or uses the fiber is a manufacturer, a processor, who
will contract to pay a man a good price to grow it for him; and
these other people ought to be simply barred, and I am in favor
of licensing them. I think the small producer is going to be
eliminated, this man that sticks in 0one-tentth of an acre. An
why shouldn't he be? He is doing no good to himself or anybody
else. But here is a great industry where men will put in 10, 20,
30,40, one gentleman will put in 10 acres, and the people I
represent have planted 2,200 acres and expect to plant 20,000
acres. </p>

<p>This has been experimented with in South Carolina, in Oregon,
and all over the country, because these big industries that use
the fiber and use the hurd have to take into consideration crop
failures, and therefore cannot confine themselves to just
Minnesota or to South Carolina or to Oregon. Some of these people
have already expended $300,000 in the last few years, trying to
work out in big industries the use of this fiber, and they feel
that it should be so stated in the law that the farmer who is
growing the stalk and growing the fiber knows definitely that he
is not growing anything that has marihuana in it. He does not
want to grow marihuana and yet we might lose an industry purely
by the phraseology of the measure. </p>

<p>I think I have said all I could say on that. I could say much
more, but I have stated it in a few words. </p>

<p>Now, on this question of the tax, and the constitutionality of
the law, I am firmly convinced that the farmers can be reduced to
one dollar and this law be sustained. This is not the sort of
measure that people here are saying it is, a regulatory measure
under the guise of a tax measure. We do not need to run around
the corner to the hemp in order to stop the sale of the flower or
of the leaves. it can be taxed like the automobile industry, like
the cosmetic industry, like the fur industry, and we o not need
to use any legal sophistry in this to sustain this statute
because hemp is produced in the United States and I would say in
the presence of this committee that I am sure and would almost
guarantee that Mr. Hester and Mr. Tipton could go before the
Supreme Court and get a unanimous decision, if they would argue
along the lines I am suggesting. This is not like narcotics where
there are no poppies grown, nothing like it. An my judgment a one
dollar tax on the farmers is sufficient. To my mind this industry
is going to be more affected by the regulations, but I have no
doubt Mr. Anslinger and the gentlemen associated with him, with
their wide experience and with their desire to do justice, will
work out regulations far more important than the law which will
be fair to industry and the farmer. </p>

<p>Now, I want to say further a little more on this industry
itself. If there are abuses by the legitimate producer --- </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Just let me ask one question there. You say you
want the farmer to be made to realize that he is not growing
marihuana? </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: In the stalk and fiber. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: In the stalk and fiber, but of course he cannot
grow the stalk and fiber without growing the resin plant? </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: That is right. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: How are you going to leave that out? I do not
see. </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: Because he is going to have to sell his product.
He will have to sell this to a manufacturer. Now, as a matter of
fact the people making paper, and the finest grades of paper,
which you cannot make in this country without the use of hemp at
the present time, and which is being imported -- even a great
deal of the paper that goes into our money is being imported --
must have hemp fiber. It is just a ridiculous situation because
it can be made out of our local products in this country. The
paper manufacturer, when he gets the plants simply blows these
leaves away. They disappear when dried. They are gone. As a
matter of fact these people in Minnesota did not know until two
months ago that the hemp which they grew there contained
marihuana. Until this agitation came up they did not dream of it,
and the were as much surprise and anyone else. </p>

<p>Now, they will have some little difficulties, just as the
liquor people had some difficulties, eventually and the man who
does not recognize that, the producer or manufacturer, is going
to be put out of business in my judgment, because there is a
problem with marihuana. I will concede these licenses are right,
but I do think that the farmer's license fee ought to be reduced
to one dollar. I have no fear whatever but what the law will be
declared constitutional. I would like to see such amendments in
there. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Of course, you must have a situation where the
farmer is made to realize, it seems to me, just the opposite of
what you say. He has got to be made to realize that in growing
this legitimate product and fiber it can be put to illegitimate
uses. Therefore I think the bill should place in the farmer a
knowledge of that fact. Otherwise he will be just as your clients
were, ignorant of the fact that he is growing on his farm a
decidedly dangerous and deleterious product. </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: Mr. Chairman, do you not think that thought that
that section 2 could be rewritten so it would say definitely that
&quot;in the flower, in the leaves&quot; and so forth, there is a
harmful product? </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Yes, that is all right. </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: So that it is clear, make it clear to him then,
but also make it clear in the bill that there is no harmful
product, which is agreed to by everyone, in the hurd, fiber, and
in the stalk. In other words, I do not think we have any
difficulty. If we would sit around the table for five minutes, I
think this could be worked out so we could do exactly what the
committee wants to do, and that there would be no opposition
whatever to this bill, except a desire on the part of everyone to
strengthen it and make it stronger in every possible way against
the illegitimate use of this hemp. </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: If I may say a word there, we will be very happy
to sit down with you Mr. Johnson. I am sure that if you should
ask our recommendation on his amendment that we would agree to
recommend it, but we would be very happy to sit down and study it
with him. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Is that all, Mr. Johnson? </p>

<p>MR. JOHNSON: That is all, and I thank the committee very much.
</p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: We have Mr. Olman, I think as the only
remaining witness. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>