
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-56</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B015-19</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/cocaine/cokecol.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122042754 text/html 10944
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:27:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:31:25 GMT
Content-length: 10726
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Cocaine story in Colombia</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Cocaine story in Colombia </h1>

<p> <b>From: dash@netcom.com (David Ashley)</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> A few years back I went on a trip down south through Mexico,
Central America, and then to Colombia and Ecuador. It was great
fun, and a very rewarding experience. </p>

<p> In Guatamala I met an English guy named Nigel that had been
in Colombia. He said that he had traveled from England, going to
Brazil, then through various countries, and ending up in
Colombia. Nigel told me that along the route he met locals that
became his friends, and often they used Cocaine. </p>

<p> Nigel said he had been afraid of Cocaine, having been brought
up in the typical &quot;drugs are bad&quot; environment. He was
afraid that if he tried it he'd become addicted. Eventually he
saw that although his friends used it, they were not addicted. He
tried it, and he liked it. He told me that he used it daily for a
couple of months. I asked him if it was hard to stop. He said it
wasn't. </p>

<p> Now I left him and I kept heading south. He told me of a
place called the Hotel Miramar in Santa Marta, Colombia. It's
east from Cartegena. He said it's a place where gringos can go
and use cocaine, and not really be hassled. Somewhere along my
trip I decided I wanted to try cocaine if I had the opportunity. </p>

<p> I made it to Colombia and ended up in Santa Marta. The Hotel
Miramar was a fantastic place because it's a gringo hangout. My
spanish was decent but I could never get close to the natives
because it was too cumbersome talking in their language, and very
few Latins speak English. Colombia has a reputation of being
unsafe so not many tourists go there, so if you're traveling
around the country you feel like you're the only gringo. </p>

<p> So it was nice to meet up with other travelers in the Hotel
Miramer. There were people that stayed there for months or years,
and then the others that would come for just a day or two. I
ended up staying there for a month. </p>

<p> I was waiting for mail from home, and also I was enjoying the
company of other travelers. During this time I tried cocaine, and
decided I liked it. I would snort the cocaine only. I'd typically
use it with other travellers, then a bunch of people would get
together and just talk or hang out. I'd usually start using it in
the early evening, continue over about a 6 hour period, then I'd
stop and go to sleep. I never used it as a pick-me-up in the
morning. </p>

<p> I got in the habit of only using it when I already felt
pretty good. There were other people that used it a lot
more--they would keep going for more than a day or two. I thought
this was silly because even though you don't feel sleepy, you
know your body wants to sleep, and I didn't want to push it. Also
there's not much point in using it for longer periods, as the
effect seems to diminish. I would build up a tolerance so that as
the time wore on I'd have to take it more and more frequently
(over the 4 or 6 hour period in the evening). As I say, I'd
usually be with other people when using it and we'd sometimes go
out in the night for walks. While in the Hotel you feel perfectly
safe using it, it's not a good idea to carry it around town with
you--you never know. </p>

<p> I figure that over the month I used the cocaine maybe 15 or
20 times. I liked the feeling it gave me. It completely
eliminates any feelings of inhibition, so you feel comfortable
talking about anything. You also feel fascinated by what other
people are saying, although I would prefer to talk. You feel
really good, like the cocaine is tickling your pleasure center.
You feel energetic. You wouldn't get hungry. </p>

<p> After a month I decided that the surroundings were getting
stale, so I left to go to a neighboring beach called Park
Tayrona. It's a really beautiful place and a lot of gringos hang
out there as well. I didn't do any cocaine while here but I
didn't miss it either. There was no feeling of dependency. </p>

<p> Cocaine was more of something you did when it seemed like a
good idea-not because you felt you needed it. It was something
that you'd use when you're already having a good time--it would
kick you up into the next level of enjoyment. </p>

<p> There was immeasurable pot available also in Colombia. I used
to smoke a little but didn't really smoke enough to get over the
munchy/can't concentrate stage. Other people constantly smoked
the stuff. I never really understood the allure. I figured that
the best time to use it was when you were hungry and wanted the
local food to taste like a king's banquet :^). </p>

<p> The only problems I had with the cocaine was frequent pain in
my nose. I was told this was because it wasn't pure, or that it
was amphetamine and not cocaine. Over my trip I tried cocaine
many more times and it seemed always a variable experience,
depending on where I got it. Also my opinion of what
&quot;good&quot; cocaine was never matched anyone else's. One guy
gave me some of what he said was the best he had ever used in his
life, and it had no effect at all on me. I later decided that
what I had called cocaine before was some kind of amphetamine,
and what this guy called cocaine was really cocaine (pure), and
that for some reason it didn't work on me. This guy used to smoke
it also (freebasing) and I tried that several times but never
once had any significant effect, although he was flying. After
several times when someone would tell me &quot;try this, this is
the best&quot; and it did nothing for me, I decided that the
substance I had liked before was no longer available and I
stopped testing. </p>

<p> At no time did I ever feel any withdrawal symptoms. Also I
never used it every single day--I would stop for a day or two
after each day or two of use. And I never used it for a period
longer than 6 hours. I feel my experience with the drug hasn't
been harmful at all. Instead it destroyed a lot of myths I had
absorbed in the United States culture. I learned that the
substance had absolutely no addictive qualities at all. </p>

<p> Then I decided that the biggest problem was since it was
illegal down there as well (at least if you got caught you'd have
to pay a bribe to make the cop go away) you never knew
&quot;exactly&quot; what you were getting. The danger of the drug
was never the pure part but what you ended up getting that was
called &quot;cocaine&quot;. I believe my experience with the
cocaine has improved me, and I believe everyone (provided they're
adults) should have the same option to experiment. The only
improvement I could suggest would be fixing the situation so you
know what you're getting every time, instead of it being a crap
shoot. </p>

<p> Since Colombia is the source of this stuff, it's certainly
going to be cheaper. I never paid more than $4 or $5 a gram, and
typically paid $3. </p>

<p> Of course I believe it wasn't quite as pure because I'd use a
gram over an evening, and from what I've heard about stuff in US
that's A LOT. Since Colombia I've never used any of the stuff. My
thinking is I've heard prices in the US are $100 per gram. At the
time I was taking it I felt that it was barely worth the $4 a
gram. There's no way I'll pay 25 or 33 times what I could get it
for down there. </p>

<p> Pot was also much cheaper. I saw a guy buy perhaps a half
pound for something like $7.00. It's truly a weed, and isn't
really illegal. Pot is so cheap you never have to buy it--it just
gets passed around by people that keep their own supply. </p>

<p> Wages in Colombia are so low compared to wages here, the
locals have to pay almost the same proportion of their income to
buy cocaine as Americans would have to in the US. I never really
saw any evidence of massive drug addiction in Colombia. Almost
100% of the drug use seemed to be by the gringos that were
visiting. </p>

<p> I've decided that I believe drugs should be legalized. I
believe that we've all been victims of a horrible propaganda
campaign. I believe it would be much better if drugs were
legalized, regulated (for purity), and also perhaps taxed a
little to cover costs of chronic abusers. I believe it is a good
idea to travel, because you find out interesting things, like
perhaps the USA isn't really as free as you might have thought.
In Colombia the police don't really care if you use illegal
substances--they just use it as an excuse to sweat a bribe out of
you. They're not interested in throwing you in jail, they just
want some of your yanqui $$$. Yes, the system is very, very
corrupt. </p>

<p> Colombians were probably my favorite people. The country is
beautiful and the people are very friendly. Although Colombia has
gotten a bad rap in the news, this is unjust. While a few drug
kingpins control a lot of the politics in the country and are
ruthless murderers, the Colombian people are almost entirely very
warm, intelligent, friendly people. It is truly a great country. </p>

<p> When I came back up through Mexico and went through the
border crossing at Tijuana, I told the officer that I had just
flown up from Cartegena, Colombia. He then checked me out a
little more thoroughly than he would have if I'd only been in
Mexico--he checked my drivers licence and then looked at my
backpack in the xray machine. I don't think he had me unpack it.
But the guy said that Colombia wasn't a good place, and the
people were screwing us over. His statement simply is not at all
true. </p>

<p> One other interesting point: As I understand it if I'm
outside the US I am no longer bound by US laws, but must obey the
laws of the country I'm in--but that country enforces them and
the US doesn't care anymore. I was told by Germans that their
laws are binding on them no matter where they are. For example if
they get caught in Colombia using drugs and are punished there,
the Colombian government will inform the German government, and
send them home, and when they get to Germany the German
government will then punish them again. I thought this was
ridiculous. </p>

<p> -- </p>

<p> David Ashley </p>

<p> dash@netcom.com </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>