
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-60</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B036-263</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/jcprolog.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064708 text/html 44358
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:46:56 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:21:10 GMT
Content-length: 44139
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Joyous Cosmology - Prologue</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
</head>

<body>

<hr>

<h2>Prologue</h2>

<hr>

<p> SLOWLY it becomes clear that one of the greatest of all
superstitions is the separation of the mind from the body. This
does not mean that we are being forced to admit that we are <i>only</i>
bodies; it means that we are forming an altogether new idea of
the body. For the body considered as separate from the mind is
one thing---an animated corpse. But the body considered as
inseparable from the mind is another, and as yet we have no
proper word for a reality which is simultaneously mental and
physical. To call it mental-physical will not do at all, for this
is the very unsatisfactory joining of two concepts which have
both been impoverished by long separation and opposition. But we
are at least within sight of being able to discard altogether
ideas of a stuff which is mental and a stuff which is material.
&quot;Stuff&quot; is a word which describes the formless mush
that we perceive when sense is not keen enough to make out its
pattern. The notion of material or mental stuff is based on the
false analogy that trees are made of wood, mountains of stone,
and minds of spirit in the same way that pots are made of clay.
&quot;Inert&quot; matter seems to require an external and
intelligent energy to give it form. But now we know that matter
is not inert. Whether it is organic or inorganic, we are learning
to see matter as patterns of energy---not <i>of</i> energy as if
energy were a stuff, but as energetic pattern, moving order,
active intelligence. </p>

<p> The realization that mind and body, form and matter, are one
is blocked, however, by ages of semantic confusion and
psychological prejudice. For it is common sense that every
pattern, shape, or structure is a form <i>of</i> something as
pots are forms of clay. It is hard to see that this
&quot;something&quot; is as dispensable as the ether in which
light was once supposed to travel, or as the fabulous tortoise
upon which the earth was once thought to be supported. Anyone who
can really grasp this point will experience a curiously
exhilarating liberation, for the burden of stuff will drop from
him and he will walk less heavily. </p>

<p> The dualism of mind and body arose, perhaps, as a clumsy way
of describing the power of an intelligent organism to control
itself. It seemed reasonable to think of the part controlled as
one thing and the part controlling as another. In this way the
conscious will was opposed to the involuntary appetites and
reason to instinct. In due course we learned to center our
identity, our selfhood, in the controlling part---the mind--- and
increasingly to disown as a mere vehicle the part controlled. It
thus escaped our attention that the organism as a whole, largely
unconscious, was using consciousness and reason to inform and
control itself. We thought of our conscious intelligence as
descending from a higher realm to take possession of a physical
vehicle. We therefore failed to see it as an operation of the
same formative process as the structure of nerves, muscles,
veins, and bones---a structure so subtly ordered (that is,
intelligent) that conscious thought is as yet far from being able
to describe it. </p>

<p> This radical separation of the part controlling from the part
controlled changed man from a self-controlling to a self-
frustrating organism, to the embodied conflict and
self-contradiction that he has been throughout his known history.
Once the split occurred conscious intelligence began to serve its
own ends instead of those of the organism that produced it. More
exactly, it became the <i>intention</i> of the conscious
intelligence to work for its own, dissociated, purposes. But, as
we shall see, just as the separation of mind from body is an
illusion, so also is the subjection of the body to the
independent schemes of the mind. Meanwhile, however, the illusion
is as real as the hallucinations of hypnosis, and the organism of
man is indeed frustrating itself by patterns of behavior which
move in the most complex vicious circles. The culmination is a
culture which ever more serves the ends of mechanical order as
distinct from those of organic enjoyment, and which is bent on
self-destruction against the instinct of every one of its
members. </p>

<p> We believe, then, that the mind controls the body, not that
the body controls itself through the mind. Hence the ingrained
prejudice that the mind should be independent of all physical
aids to its working---despite microscopes, telescopes, cameras,
scales, computers, books, works of art, alphabets, and all those
physical tools apart from which it is doubtful whether there
would be any mental life at all. At the same time there has
always been at least an obscure awareness that in feeling oneself
to be a separate mind, soul, or ego there is something wrong.
Naturally, for a person who finds his identity in something other
than his full organism is less than half a man. He is cut off
from complete participation in nature. Instead of being a body he
&quot;has&quot; a body. Instead of living and loving he
&quot;has&quot; instincts for survival and copulation. Disowned,
they drive him as if they were blind furies or demons that
possessed him. </p>

<p> The feeling that there is something wrong in all this
revolves around a contradiction characteristic of all
civilizations. This is the simultaneous compulsion to preserve
oneself and to forget oneself. Here is the vicious circle: if you
feel separate from your organic life, you feel driven to survive;
survival---going on living---thus becomes a duty and also a drag
because you are not fully with it; because it does not quite come
up to expectations, you continue to hope that it will, to crave
for more time, to feel driven all the more to go on. What we call
self-consciousness is thus the sensation of the organism
obstructing itself, of not being with itself, of driving, so to
say, with accelerator and brake on at once. Naturally, this is a
highly unpleasant sensation, which most people want to forget. </p>

<p> The lowbrow way of forgetting oneself is to get drunk, to be
diverted with entertainments, or to exploit such natural means of
self-transcendence as sexual intercourse. The highbrow way is to
throw oneself into the pursuit of the arts, of social service, or
of religious mysticism. These measures are rarely successful
because they do not disclose the basic error of the split self.
The highbrow ways even aggravate the error to the extent that
those who follow them take pride in forgetting themselves by
purely mental means---even though the artist uses paints or
sounds, the social idealist distributes material wealth, and the
religionist uses sacraments and rituals, or such other physical
means as fasting, yoga breathing, or dervish dancing. And there
is a sound instinct in the use of these physical aids, as in the
repeated insistence of mystics that to know about God is not
enough: transformation of the self is only through realizing or
feeling God. The hidden point is that man cannot function
properly through changing anything so superficial as the order of
his thoughts, of his dissociated mind. What has to change is the
behavior of his organism; it has to become self-controlling
instead of self-frustrating. </p>

<p> How is this to be brought about? Clearly, nothing can be done
by the mind, by the conscious will, so long as this is felt to be
something apart from the total organism. But if it were felt
otherwise, nothing would need to be done! A very small number of
Eastern <i>gurus</i>, or masters of wisdom, and Western
psychotherapists have found---rather laborious---ways of tricking
or coaxing the organism into integrating itself---mostly by a
kind of <i>judo</i>, or &quot;gentle way,&quot; which overthrows
the process of self-frustration by carrying it to logical and
absurd extremes. This is pre-eminently the way of Zen, and
occasionally that of psychoanalysis. When these ways work it is
quite obvious that something more has happened to the student or
patient than a change in his way of thinking; he is also
emotionally and physically different; his whole being is
operating in a new way. </p>

<p> For a long time it has been clear to me that certain forms of
Eastern &quot;mysticism&quot;---in particular Taoism and Zen
Buddhism---do not presuppose a universe divided into the
spiritual and the material, and do not culminate in a state of
consciousness where the physical world vanishes into some
undifferentiated and bodiless luminescence. Taoism and Zen are
alike founded upon a philosophy of relativity, but this
philosophy is not merely speculative. It is a discipline in
awareness as a result of which the mutual interrelation of all
things and all events becomes a constant sensation. This
sensation underlies and supports our normal awareness of the
world as a collection of separate and different things---an
awareness which, by itself, is called avidya (ignorance) in
Buddhist philosophy because, in paying exclusive attention to
differences, it ignores relationships. It does not see, for
example, that mind and form or shape and space are as inseparable
as front and back, nor that the individual is so interwoven with
the universe that he and it are one body. </p>

<p> This is a point of view which, unlike some other forms of
mysticism, does not deny physical distinctions but sees them as
the plain expression of unity. As one sees so clearly in Chinese
painting, the individual tree or rock is not <i>on</i> but <i>with</i>
the space that forms its background. The paper untouched by the
brush is an integral part of the picture and never mere backing.
It is for this reason that when a Zen master is asked about the
universal or the ultimate, he replies with the immediate and
particular--- &quot;The cypress tree in the yard!&quot; Here,
then, we have what Robert Linssen has called a spiritual
materialism---a standpoint far closer to relativity and field
theory in modern science than to any religious supernaturalism.
But whereas the scientific comprehension of the relative universe
is as yet largely theoretical, these Eastern disciplines have
made it a direct experience. Potentially, then, they would seem
to offer a marvelous parallel to Western science, but on the
level of our immediate awareness of the world. </p>

<p> For science pursues the common-sense assumption that the
natural world is a multiplicity of individual things and events
by attempting to describe these units as accurately and minutely
as possible. Because science is above all analytic in its way of
describing things, it seems at first to disconnect them more than
ever. Its experiments are the study of carefully isolated
situations, designed to exclude influences that cannot be
measured and controlled---as when one studies falling bodies in a
vacuum to cut out the friction of air. But for this reason the
scientist understands better than anyone else just how
inseparable things are. The more he tries to cut out external
influences upon an experimental situation, the more he discovers
new ones, hitherto unsuspected. The more carefully he describes,
say, the motion of a given particle, the more he finds himself
describing also the space in which it moves. The realization that
all things are inseparably related is in proportion to one's
effort to make them clearly distinct. Science therefore surpasses
the common-sense point of view from which it begins, coming to
speak of things and events as properties of the
&quot;fields&quot; in which they occur. But this is simply a
theoretical description of a state of affairs which, in these
forms of Eastern Mysticism,&quot; is directly sensed. As soon as
this is clear, we have a sound basis for a meeting of minds
between East and West which could be remarkably fruitful. </p>

<p> The practical difficulty is that Taoism and Zen are so
involved with the forms of Far Eastern culture that it is a major
problem to adapt them to Western needs. For example, Eastern
teachers work on the esoteric and aristocratic principle that the
student must learn the hard way and find out almost everything
for himself. Aside from occasional hints, the teacher merely
accepts or rejects the student's attainments. But Western
teachers work on the exoteric and democratic principle that
everything possible must be done to inform and assist the student
so as to make his mastery of the subject as easy as possible.
Does the latter approach, as purists insist, merely vulgarize the
discipline? The answer is that it depends upon the type of
discipline. If everyone learns enough mathematics to master
quadratic equations, the attainment will seem small in comparison
with the much rarer comprehension of the theory of numbers. But
the transformation of consciousness undertaken in Taoism and Zen
is more like the correction of faulty perception or the curing of
a disease. It is not an acquisitive process of learning more and
more facts or greater and greater skills, but rather an
unlearning of wrong habits and opinions. As Lao-tzu said,
&quot;The scholar gains every day, but the Taoist loses every
day.&quot; </p>

<p> The practice of Taoism or Zen in the Far East is therefore an
undertaking in which the Westerner will find himself confronted
with many barriers erected quite deliberately to discourage idle
curiosity or to nullify wrong views by inciting the student to
proceed systematically and consistently upon false assumptions to
the <i>reductio ad absurdum</i>. My own main interest in the
study of comparative mysticism has been to cut through these
tangles and to identify the essential psychological processes
underlying those alterations of perception which enable us to see
ourselves and the world in their basic unity. I have perhaps had
some small measure of success in trying, Western fashion, to make
this type of experience more accessible. I am therefore at once
gratified and embarrassed by a development in Western science
which could possibly put this unitive vision of the world, by
almost shockingly easy means, within the reach of many who have
thus far sought it in vain by traditional methods. </p>

<p> Part of the genius of Western science is that it finds
simpler and more rational ways of doing things that were formerly
chancy or laborious. Like any inventive process, it does not
always make these discoveries systematically; often it just
stumbles upon them, but then goes on to work them into an
intelligible order. In medicine, for example, science isolates
the essential drug from the former witch-doctor's brew of
salamanders, mugwort, powdered skulls, and dried blood. The
purified drug cures more surely, <i>but</i>---it does not
perpetuate health. The patient still has to change habits of life
or diet which made him prone to the disease. </p>

<p> Is it possible, then, that Western science could provide a
medicine which would at least give the human organism a start in
releasing itself from its chronic self-contradiction? The
medicine might indeed have to be supported by other
procedures---psychotherapy, &quot;spiritual&quot; disciplines,
and basic changes in one's pattern of life---but every diseased
person seems to need some kind of initial lift to set him on the
way to health. The question is by no means absurd if it is true
that what afflicts us is a sickness not just of the mind but of
the organism, of the very functioning of the nervous system and
the brain. Is there, in short, a medicine which can give us
temporarily the sensation of being integrated, of being fully one
with ourselves and with nature as the biologist knows us,
theoretically, to be? If so, the experience might offer clues to
whatever else must be done to bring about full and continuous
integration. It might be at least the tip of an Ariadne's thread
to lead us out of the maze in which all of us are lost from our
infancy. </p>

<p> Relatively recent research suggests that there are at least
three such medicines, though none is an infallible
&quot;specific.&quot; They work with some people, and much
depends upon the social and psychological context in which they
are given. Occasionally their effects may be harmful, but such
limitations do not deter us from using penicillin---often a far
more dangerous chemical than any of these three. I am speaking,
of course, of mescaline (the active ingredient of the peyote
cactus), lysergic acid diethylamide (a modified ergot alkaloid),
and psilocybin (a derivative of the mushroom <i>Psilocybe
mexicana</i>). </p>

<p> The peyote cactus has long been used by the Indians of the
Southwest and Mexico as a means of communion with the divine
world, and today the eating of the dried buttons of the plant is
the principal sacrament of an Indian church known as the Native
American Church of the United States ---by all accounts a most
respectable and Christian organization. At the end of the
nineteenth century its effects were first described by Weir
Mitchell and Havelock Ellis, and some years later its active
ingredient was identified as mescaline, a chemical of the amine
group which is quite easily synthesized. </p>

<p> Lysergic acid diethylamide was first discovered in 1938 by
the Swiss pharmacologist A. Hofmann in the course of studying the
properties of the ergot fungus. Quite by accident he absorbed a
small amount of this acid while making certain changes in its
molecular structure, and noticed its peculiar psychological
effects. Further research proved that he had hit upon the most
powerful consciousness-changing drug now known, for LSD-25 (as it
is called for short) will produce its characteristic results in
so minute a dosage as 20 micrograms, 1/700,000,000 of an average
man's weight. </p>

<p> Psilocybin is derived from another of the sacred plants of
the Mexican Indians---a type of mushroom known to them as <i>teonanacatl,</i>
&quot;the flesh of God.&quot; Following Robert Weitlaner's
discovery in 1936 that the cult of &quot;the sacred
mushroom&quot; was still prevalent in Oaxaca, a number of
mycologists, as specialists in mushrooms are known, began to make
studies of the mushrooms of this region. Three varieties were
found to be in use. In addition to <i>Psilocybe mexicana</i>
there were also <i>Psilocybe aztecorum</i> Heim and <i>Psilocybe
wassonii</i>, named respectively after the mycologists Roger Heim
and Gordon and Valentina Wasson, who took part in the ceremonies
of the cult. </p>

<p> Despite a very considerable amount of research and
speculation, little is known of the exact physiological effect of
these chemicals upon the nervous system. The subjective effects
of all three tend to be rather similar, though LSD-25, perhaps
because of the minute dosage required, seldom produces the
nauseous reactions so often associated with the other two. All
the scientific papers I have read seem to add up to the vague
impression that in some way these drugs suspend certain
inhibitory or selective processes in the nervous system so as to
render our sensory apparatus more open to impressions than is
usual. Our ignorance of the precise effect of these drugs is, of
course, linked to the still rather fumbling state of our
knowledge of the brain. Such ignorance obviously suggests great
caution in their use, but thus far there is no evidence that, in
normal dosage, there is any likelihood of physiological damage.<a
name="back1"></a><a href="#foot1">*</a> </p>

<p> In a very wide sense of the word, each of these substances is
a drug, but one must avoid the serious semantic error of
confusing them with drugs which induce physical craving for
repeated use or which dull the senses like alcohol or the
sedatives. They are classed, officially, as hallucinogens---an
astonishingly inaccurate term, since they cause one neither to
hear voices nor to see visions such as might be confused with
physical reality. While they do indeed produce the most complex
and very obviously &quot;hallucinatory&quot; patterns before
closed eyes, their general effect is to sharpen the senses to a
supernormal degree of awareness. The standard dosage of each
substance maintains its effects for from five to eight hours, and
the experience is often so deeply revealing and moving that one
hesitates to approach it again until it has been thoroughly
&quot;digested,&quot; and this may be a matter of months. </p>

<p> The reaction of most cultured people to the idea of gaining
any deep psychological or philosophical insight through a drug is
that it is much too simple, too artificial, and even too banal to
be seriously considered. A wisdom which can be &quot;turned
on&quot; like the switch of a lamp seems to insult human dignity
and degrade us to chemical automata. One calls to mind pictures
of a brave new world in which there is a class of synthesized
Buddhas, of people who have been &quot;fixed&quot; like the
lobotomized, the sterilized, or the hypnotized, only in another
direction---people who have somehow lost their humanity and with
whom, as with drunkards, one cannot really communicate. This is,
however, a somewhat ghoulish fantasy which has no relation to the
facts or to the experience itself. It belongs to the same kind of
superstitious dread which one feels for the unfamiliar, confusing
it with the unnatural---the way some people feel about Jews
because they are circumcised or even about Negroes because of
their &quot;alien&quot; features and color. </p>

<p> Despite the widespread and undiscriminating prejudice against
drugs as such, and despite the claims of certain religious
disciplines to be the sole means to genuine mystical insight, I
can find no essential difference between the experiences induced,
under favorable conditions, by these chemicals and the states of
&quot;cosmic consciousness&quot; recorded by R. M. Bucke, William
James, Evelyn Underhill, Raynor Johnson, and other investigators
of mysticism. &quot;Favorable conditions&quot; means a setting
which is socially and physically congenial; ideally this would be
some sort of retreat house (not a hospital or sanitarium)
supervised by religiously oriented psychiatrists or
psychologists. The atmosphere should be homelike rather than
clinical, and it is of the utmost importance that the
supervisor's attitude be supportive and sympathetic. Under
insecure, bizarre, or unfriendly circumstances the experience can
easily degenerate into a highly unpleasant paranoia. Two days
should be set aside---one for the experience itself, which lasts
for six or eight hours, and one for evaluation in the calm and
relaxed frame of mind that normally follows. </p>

<p> This is simply to say that the use of such powerful medicines
is not to be taken lightly, as one smokes a cigarette or tosses
down a cocktail. They should be approached as one approaches a
sacrament, though not with the peculiar inhibition of gaiety and
humor that has become customary in our religious rituals. It is a
sound general rule that there should always be present some
qualified supervisor to provide a point of contact with
&quot;reality&quot; as it is socially defined. Ideally the
&quot;qualified supervisor&quot; should be a psychiatrist or
clinical psychologist who has himself experienced the effects of
the drug, though I have observed that many who are technically
qualified have a frightened awe of unusual states of
consciousness which is apt to communicate itself, to the
detriment of the experience, to those under their care. The most
essential qualification of the supervisor is, therefore,
confidence in the situation---which is likewise &quot;picked
up&quot; by people in the state of acute sensitivity that the
drugs induce. </p>

<p> The drugs in question are not aphrodisiacs, and when they are
taken in common by a small group the atmosphere is not in the
least suggestive of a drunken brawl nor of the communal torpor of
an opium den. Members of the group usually become open to each
other with a high degree of friendly affection, for in the
mystical phase of the experience the underlying unity or
&quot;belongingness&quot; of the members can have all the clarity
of a physical sensation. Indeed the social situation may become
what religious bodies aim at, but all too rarely achieve, in
their rites of communion---a relationship of the most vivid
understanding, forgiveness, and love. Of course, this does not
automatically become a permanent feeling, but neither does the
sense of fellowship sometimes evoked in strictly religious
gatherings. The experience corresponds almost exactly to the
theological concept of a sacrament or means of grace---an
unmerited gift of spiritual power whose lasting effects depend
upon the use made of it in subsequent action. Catholic theology
also recognizes those so-called &quot;extraordinary&quot; graces,
often of mystical insight, which descend spontaneously outside
the ordinary or regular means that the Church provides through
the sacraments and the disciplines of prayer. It seems to me that
only special pleading can maintain that the graces mediated
through mushrooms, cactus plants, and scientists are artificial
and spurious in contrast with those which come through religious
discipline. Claims for the exclusive virtue of one's own brand
is, alas, as common in organized religion as in commerce, coupled
in the former instance with the puritan's sense of guilt in
enjoying anything for which he has not suffered. </p>

<p> When I wrote this book, I was well aware that LSD in
particular might become a public scandal, especially in the
United States where we had the precedents of Prohibition and of
fantastically punitive laws against the use of marijuana---laws
passed with hardly a pretense of scientific investigation of the
drug, and amazingly foisted upon many other nations. That was
nine years ago ( 1961 ) and since then all that I feared would
happen has happened. I ask myself whether I should ever have
written this book, whether I was profaning the mysteries and
casting pearls before swine. I reasoned, however, that since
Huxley and others had already let the secret out, it was up to me
to encourage a positive, above-board, fearless, and intelligent
approach to what are now known as psychedelic chemicals. </p>

<p> But in vain. Thousands of young people, fed up with
standard-brand religions which provided nothing but talk,
admonition, and (usually) bad ritual, rushed immediately to LSD
and other psychedelics in search of some key to genuine religious
experience. As might be expected, there were accidents. A few
potential psychotics were pushed over the brink, usually because
they took LSD in uncontrolled circumstances, in excessive dosage,
or in the arid and threatening atmosphere of hospital research
run by psychiatrists who imagined that they were investigating
artificially induced schizophrenia. Because most news is bad
news, these accidents received full coverage in the press, to the
relative exclusion of reports on the overwhelming majority of
such splendid and memorable experiences as I describe further on.
A divorce is news; a happy marriage isn't. There were even
deliberately falsified stories in the newspapers, as that several
young men taking LSD stared at the sun for so long that they
became blind. Phychiatrists raised alarms about &quot;brain
damage,&quot; for which no solid evidence was ever produced, and
warnings were issued about its destructive effect on the genes,
which was later shown to be insignificant and more or less the
same as the effects of coffee and aspirin. </p>

<p> In view of this public hysteria the Sandoz Company, which
held a patent on LSD, withdrew it from the market. At the same
time the United States government, having learned absolutely
nothing from the disaster of Prohibition, simply banned LSD (
allowing its use only in some few research projects sponsored by
the National Institute of Mental Health and by the Army, in its
investigations of chemical warfare) and turned over its control
to the police. </p>

<p> Now a law against LSD is simply unenforceable because the
substance is tasteless and colorless, because effective dosages
can be confined, in vast amounts, to minute spaces, and because
it can be disguised as almost anything drinkable or eatable from
gin to blotting paper. Thus as soon as the reliable Sandoz
material was withdrawn, amateur chemists began to produce
black-market LSD in immense quantities---LSD of uncertain quality
and dosage, often mixed with such other ingredients as
methedrine, belladonna, and heroin. Consequently the number of
psychotic episodes resulting from its use began to increase,
aggravated by the fact that, in improperly controlled situations
and under threat from the police, the LSD taker is an easy victim
of extreme paranoia. At the same time, some of these amateurs,
mainly graduate students in chemistry with a mission to
&quot;turn people on,&quot; produced some tolerably good LSD.
Thus there were still so many more positive experiences than
negative that fascination with this alchemy continued and
expanded, and though the general public associates its use with
hippies and college students, it has been very widely used by
mature adults ---doctors, lawyers, clergymen, artists,
businessmen, professors, and levelheaded housewives. </p>

<p> The blanket suppression of LSD and other psychedelics has
been a complete disaster in that ( 1 ) it has seriously hindered
proper research on these drugs; (2) it has created a profitable
black market by raising the price; (3) it has embarrassed the
police with an impossible assignment; (4) it has created the
false fascination with fruit that is forbidden; (5) it has
seriously impeded the normal work of courts of justice, and
herded thousands of non-criminal types of people into already
overcrowded prisons, which, as everyone knows, are schools for
sodomy and for crime as a profession; ( 6 ) it has made users of
psychedelics more susceptible to paranoia than ever. <a
name="back2"></a><a href="#foot2">**</a> </p>

<p> What, then, are the true dangers of real LSD? Principally
that it may trigger a short- or long-term psychosis in anyone
susceptible, and, despite all our techniques for psychological
and neurological testing, we can never detect a potential
psychotic with certainty. Anyone contemplating the use of a
psychedelic chemical should weigh this risk carefully: there is a
slight chance of becoming, at least temporarily, insane. The risk
is probably much greater than in traveling by a commercial
airline, but considerably less than in traveling by road. Every
household contains things of potential danger: electricity,
matches, gas, kitchen knives, carbon tetrachloride (cleaning
fluid), ammonia, aerosol sprayers, alcohol, slippery bathtubs,
sliding rugs, rifles, lawn mowers, axes, plate-glass doors, and
swimming pools. There are no laws against the sale and possession
of such things, nor is one prevented from cultivating <i>Amanita
pantherina</i> (the most deceptive and poisonous mushroom),
deadly nightshade, laburnum, morning-glory, wood rose, Scotch
broom, and many other poisonous or psychedelic plants. </p>

<p> One of the most sensible tenets of Jewish and ( at least
theoretically) of Christian theology is that no substance or
creature is, in itself, evil. Evil arises only in its abuse---in
killing someone with a knife, committing arson with matches, or
running down a pedestrian while driving alcoholized. (But note
that a highly depressed, anxious, or angry driver is just as
dangerous, for his attention is not on the road. ) It seems to me
a sound legal principle that people should be prosecuted only for
overt and clearly specifiable deeds, damaging or clearly intended
to damage life, limb, and property. Laws which proscribe the mere
sale, purchase, or possession of substances ( aside from machine
guns and bombs ) which might be used in some harmful way invite
the worst abuses of police power for political ends or for the
harassment of unpopular individuals. (How easy to plant some
marijuana on an unwanted competitor in business!) All such
sumptuary laws (regulating private morals and creating crimes
without unwilling victims ) are attempts to make personal freedom
foolproof and without risk, and thus to deprive the individual of
responsibility for his own life and of taking calculated risk for
the achievement of political, social, athletic, scientific, or
religious objectives which he feels well worth the dangers. </p>

<p> Adventurous and creative people have always been willing, and
have usually been encouraged, to take the most serious risks in
the exploration of the outer world and in the development of
scientific and technological skill. Many young people now feel
that the time has come to explore the inner world, and are
willing to take the unfamiliar risks which it involves. They,
too, should be encouraged and also assisted with all the care and
wisdom at our disposal. Why permit the purely athletic <i>tour de
force</i> of climbing Everest (using oxygen) and forbid the
spiritual adventure of ascending Mount Sumeru, Mount Zion, or
Mount Analogue (using psychedelics)? </p>

<p> Superficially, the public and official fear of psychedelic
drugs is based on uninformed association with such addictive
poisons as heroin, amphetamines, and barbiturates. But drinking
coffee or whisky is also &quot;using drugs,&quot; and this is
allowed even though the effects may be harmful and the creative
results negligible. Psychedelic drugs are feared, basically, for
the same reason that mystical experience has been feared,
discouraged, and even condemned in the Catholic, Protestant, and
Islamic orthodoxies. It leads to disenchantment and apathy toward
the approved social rewards of status and success, to chuckles at
pretentiousness and pomposity, and, worse, to disbelief in the
Church-and-State dogma that we are all God's adopted orphans or
fluky little germs in a mechanical and mindless universe. No
authoritarian government, whether ecclesiastical or secular, can
tolerate the apprehension that each one of us is God in disguise,
and that our real inmost, outmost, and utmost Self cannot be
killed. That's why they had to do away with Jesus. </p>

<p> Thus the possibility that even a preliminary glimpse of this
apprehension is available through taking a pill or chewing a
plant threatens mystical experience for the millions---that is,
masses of people who will be difficult to rule by force of
&quot;authority.&quot; It is even now being recognized in the
United States that the real danger of psychedelics is not so much
neurological as political---that &quot;turned-on&quot; people are
not interested in serving the power games of the present rulers.
Looking at the successful men, they see completely boring lives. </p>

<p> In the Epilogue I shall make it clear that psychedelic
experience is only a glimpse of genuine mystical insight, but a
glimpse which can be matured and deepened by the various ways of
meditation in which drugs are no longer necessary or useful. When
you get the message, hang up the phone. For psychedelic drugs are
simply instruments, like microscopes, telescopes, and telephones.
The biologist does not sit with eye permanently glued to the
microscope; he goes away and works on what he has seen. </p>

<p> Furthermore, speaking quite strictly, mystical insight is no
more in the chemical itself than biological knowledge is in the
microscope. There is no difference in principle between
sharpening perception with an external instrument, such as a
microscope, and sharpening it with an internal instrument, such
as one of these three drugs. If they are an affront to the
dignity of the mind, the microscope is an affront to the dignity
of the eye and the telephone to the dignity of the ear. Strictly
speaking, these drugs do not impart wisdom at all, any more than
the microscope alone gives knowledge. They provide the raw
materials of wisdom, and are useful to the extent that the
individual can integrate what they reveal into the whole pattern
of his behavior and the whole system of his knowledge. As an
escape, an isolated and dissociated ecstasy, they may have the
same sort of value as a rest cure or a good entertainment. But
this is like using a giant computer to play tick-tack-toe, and
the hours of heightened perception are wasted unless occupied
with sustained reflection or meditation upon whatever themes may
be suggested. </p>

<p> The nearest thing I know in literature to the reflective use
of one of these drugs is the so-called Bead Game in Hermann
Hesse's <i>Magister Ludi (Das Glasperlenspiel)</i>. Hesse writes
of a distant future in which an order of scholar-mystics have
discovered an ideographic language which can relate all the
branches of science and art, philosophy and religion. The game
consists in playing with the relationships between configurations
in these various fields in the same way that the musician plays
with harmonic and contrapuntal relationships. From such elements
as the design of a Chinese house, a Scarlatti sonata, a
topological formula, and a verse from the <i>Upanishads,</i> the
players will elucidate a common theme and develop its application
in numerous directions. No two games are the same, for not only
do the elements differ, but also there is no thought of
attempting to force a static and uniform order upon the world.
The universal language facilitates the perception of
relationships but does not fix them, and is founded upon a
&quot;musical&quot; conception of the world in which order is as
dynamic and changing as the patterns of sound in a fugue. </p>

<p> Similarly, in my investigations of LSD or psilocybin, I
usually started with some such theme as polarity, transformation
(as of food into organism), competition for survival, the
relation of the abstract to the concrete, or of Logos to Eros,
and then allowed my heightened perception to elucidate the theme
in terms of certain works of art or music, of some natural object
as a fern, a flower, or a sea shell, of a religious or
mythological archetype (it might be the Mass), and even of
personal relationships with those who happened to be with me at
the time. Or I would concentrate upon one of the senses and try,
as it were, to turn it back upon itself so as to see the process
of seeing, and from this move on to trying to know knowing, so
approaching the problem of my own identity. </p>

<p> From these reflections there arise intuitive insights of
astonishing clarity, and because there is little difficulty in
remembering them after the effects of the drug have ceased
(especially if they are recorded or written down at the time),
the days or weeks following may be used for testing them by the
normal standards of logical, aesthetic, philosophical, or
scientific criticism. As might be expected, some prove to be
valid and others not. It is the same with the sudden hunches that
come to the artist or inventor in the ordinary way; they are not
always as true or as applicable as they seem to be in the
movement of illumination. The drugs appear to give an enormous
impetus to the creative intuition, and thus to be of more value
for constructive invention and research than for psychotherapy in
the ordinary sense of &quot;adjusting&quot; the disturbed
personality. Their best sphere of use is not the mental hospital
but the studio and the laboratory, or the institute of advanced
studies. </p>

<p> The following pages make no attempt to be a scientific report
on the effects of these chemicals, with the usual details of
dosage, time and place, physical symptoms, and the like. Such
documents exist by the thousand, and, in view of our very
rudimentary knowledge of the brain, seem to me to have a rather
limited value. As well try to understand a book by dissolving it
in solution and popping it into a centrifuge. My object is rather
to give some impression of the new world of consciousness which
these substances reveal. I do not believe that this world is
either a hallucination or an unimpeachable revelation of truth.
It is probably the way things appear when certain inhibitory
processes of the brain and senses are suspended, but this is a
world in some ways so unfamiliar that it is liable to
misinterpretation. Our first impressions may be as wide of the
mark as those of the traveler in an unfamiliar country or of
astronomers taking their first look at the galaxies beyond our
own. </p>

<p> I have written this account as if the whole experience had
happened on one day in a single place, but it is in fact a
composite of several occasions. Except where I am describing
visions before closed eyes, and this is always specified, none of
these experiences are hallucinations. They are simply changed
ways of seeing, interpreting, and reacting to actual persons and
events in the world of &quot;public reality,&quot; which, for
purposes of this description, is a country estate on the West
Coast of America with garden. orchard, barns, and surrounding
mountains---all just as described, including the rattletrap car
loaded with junk. Consciousness-changing drugs are popularly
associated with the evocation of bizarre and fantastic images,
but in my own experience this happens only with closed eyes.
Otherwise, it is simply that the natural world is endowed with a
richness of grace, color, significance, and, sometimes, humor,
for which our normal adjectives are insufficient. The speed of
thought and association is increased so astonishingly that it is
hard for words to keep pace with the flood of ideas that come to
mind. Passages that may strike the reader as ordinary
philosophical reflection are reports of what, at the time, appear
to be the most tangible certainties. So, too, images that appear
before closed eyes are not just figments of imagination, but
patterns and scenes so intense and autonomous that they seem to
be physically present. The latter have, however, proved of less
interest to me than one's transformed impression of the natural
world and the heightened speed of associative thought, and it is
thus with these that the following account is chiefly concerned.</p>

<hr>

<p> <a name="foot1"></a>*Normal dosage for mescaline is 300
milligrams, for LSD-25 100 micrograms, and for psilocybin 20
milligrams. The general reader interested in a more detailed
account of consciousness-changing drugs and the present state of
research concerning them should consult Robert S. de Ropp's Drugs
and the Mind (Grove Press, New York, 1960). <a href="#back1">(back)</a>
<a name="foot2"></a> </p>

<p> **For purposes of this summary I am including marijuana and
hashish as psychedelics, though they do not have the potency of
LSD. <a href="#back2">(back)</a> </p>

<hr>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/jcbody.htm">The
Joyous Cosmology</a> </p>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/jccontnt.htm">Joyous
Cosmology Table of Contents</a> </p>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm">LSD
and the Psychedelics Menu Page</a> </p>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>