
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-64</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B019-239</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/aidscan1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052947 text/html 11773
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:29:24 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:08 GMT
Content-length: 11555
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Cannabis as an Adjunctive Treatment for AIDS Related
Illness. </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical/medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="59406" -->

<h1>Cannabis as an Adjunctive Treatment for AIDS Related Illness.
</h1>

<p><b>Part 2</b> </p>

<p><b>By Tod Mikuriya</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>I interviewed Ken at the San Francisco Cannabis Buyers' Club,
an illegal medical speakeasy where he comes to buy his marijuana.
</p>

<p>Ken D. is in a protracted war. For the last nine years this
thirty eight year old married mainframe computer programmer with
a degree in accounting has fought the human immunodefficiency
virus in his body one skirmish, one battle at a time. He is a
long term survivor, beating the odds. A wiry intelligent man with
a neatly trimmed beard to hide the lesions of Kaposi's Sarcoma,
KS, a form of cancer with many small colonies growing slowly in
his skin and mouth with itching and discolored patches. His beard
also protects from irritating the inflammation of the skin
erupting from the side effects of medications. </p>

<p>Mycosis Fungoides is another cancer that primarily affects the
skin. Colonies of T lymphocyte type white blood cells turned
cancerous by viruses they ingested grow slowly causing intense
itching. They are killed off by low level localized radiation and
chemotherapy. </p>

<p>Ken also holds a fungal pneumonia at bay. Pneumocystis
Carinii, a fungus that is found most everywhere, including normal
healthy lungs without causing symptoms, becomes invasive and
toxic when the immune system is weakened. This is one of many
opportunistic infectious diseases taking advantage of a weakened
immune system. </p>

<p>Oral &quot;thrush&quot;, another opportunistic infection from
the yeast Monilia, causes recurrent sore throat which also
decreases food intake. </p>

<p>He wishes he could work but the terms of his disability status
would cost him his benefits that see him through his periods of
immobilization. The chemotherapies are specific designer poisons
to target specific enzyme systems of the cancer cells or the
fungus but are debilitating to the body. A major symptom is loss
of appetite. Anorexia is a major threat to the body when fighting
these invaders. In order to summon the strength to stimulate the
immune system to resist, there must be nourishment. Otherwise,
the body must consume itself to support the immune system. Thus
loss of appetite, and thus weight, represents a major threat to
survival. </p>

<p>The weakness from inadequate nutrition leads to
immobilization, stasis, and other complications. Ken, in his
fight against depression, a major component, finds cannabis to be
an effective ally as both an appetite stimulant and
antidepressant. The itching from the KS and MF, however, is
intensified by cannabis, reports Ken, because it makes him more
aware of it. </p>

<p>Many of the therapeutic agents cause anorexia as a side
effect, further suppressing an already poor appetite. </p>

<p>Ken had used cannabis 20 years but only occasionally in social
situations. Since then, he has come to rely on using it daily to
maintain his appetite while taking the various chemotherapeutic
drugs. Not one to run from a fight, he has been a &quot;guinea
pig&quot; in many therapeutic research trials that have had
varying success in beating back the cancer or the fungal
infections. </p>

<p>Despite the sensitivity of his lungs from the PCP infection
that caused him to be hospitalized three years ago for four days,
he prefers to smoke cannabis. </p>

<p>Two or three puffs of high grade Northern California
sinsemilla using a water pipe twice or three times a day is
sufficient to maintain his appetite and provide the antidote to
the unwanted effects of the antibiotic and other chemotherapeutic
agents. He has tried oral preparations including Marinol but
found that he had difficulty controlling the dose. He was
incapacitated by both cannabis baked in brownies or 10 milligram
Marinol capsules. Ken describes himself as being sensitive to
cannabis' effects as compared with other social users. For him,
the effects of the brownie and Marinol were the same. </p>

<p>Having had lengthy association with fellow cannabis users in
his twenty years of experience he acknowledged that it is an
individual thing; the impact of the drug on one's mental state
for some may be adverse. For him? Definitely salutary. </p>

<p>The appetite stimulation and antidepressant effects help Ken
maintain his rational, if laconic, intelligent, I'll take it as
it comes attitude in his continuing internal lethal war of immune
system versus virus with opportunistic infectious invaders ever
seeking to gain advantage. The KS may be seen as a viral invader
causing a specific disseminated cancers that will slowly advance
unless poisoned or radiated. </p>

<p>Despite different causes of infectious assault upon the immune
system be it the Human Immunodefficiency Virus or other viral,
parasitic, or bacterial agents, cannabis has a long history of
reputed efficacy in traditional medicine for increasing
resistance to endemic infectious diseases in India. </p>

<p>In its massive study performed a century ago the Indian Hemp
Drugs Commission took note: </p>

<p>&quot;There is a large body of evidence showing that hemp
drugs, both as smoked and as drunk, are used as a febrifuge or
preventive of diseases common in malarious tracts or arising from
bad water. Cannabis continues to be used in contemporary
Ayurvedic Medicine to treat malarial fever.&quot; </p>

<p>The IHDC in its review of medicinal uses of cannabis discussed
one possible mechanism as to utilizing it to ward off febrile
illnesses in areas in India reputed to have high danger of
infection. Cannabis was recommended to be used by manual laborers
to promote appetite, enhance endurance, and protect against
illness. Again, the raising of the spirits, or inspiriting
provide a psychic component that accompanies the physical effects
of the drug. </p>

<p>The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission reviewed Other beneficial
effects: </p>

<p>&quot;The drugs are said to be cheering in their effects, and
to be prized by many on this account. An interesting illustration
of this may perhaps be found in the popular belief existing in
many parts that these drugs protect against cholera and other
epidemic diseases. One very intelligent witness, who had seen
much of this use, explains it to as due to the stimulating and
inspiriting<b>*</b> nature of the drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>Expectations and attributes in the language entwine with the
pharmacology of the drug in producing its therapeutic (or
adverse) effects. This affirmative &quot;popular belief&quot; may
be seen as a factor that favorably affects the physiology of the
user including the immune system in optimizing its resistance to
stress. Psychogenic factors play a significant role in the
mediation of the immune response. </p>

<p>Linguistically the Sanskrit and Hindi references are to the
attributes of healing, strength, and success: </p>

<p>Vijaya victorious </p>

<p>Trailokyavijaya victorious in three worlds </p>

<p>Indracana Indra's food </p>

<p>Jaya victorious </p>

<p>Virapattra leaf of heroes </p>

<p>Capala the light hearted </p>

<p>Ajaya the unconquered </p>

<p>Ananda the joyful </p>

<p>Harsini the rejoicer </p>

<p>vakpradatava speech giving </p>

<p>medhakaritva inspiring of mental power </p>

<p>creshadipanatva a most excellent excitant </p>

<p>These Indian cultural images from a century ago are in bright
contrast with the vulgarized and argot of code, intoxication and
incapacitation where the drug is illegal. </p>

<p>To a worshiper of Shiva, many of the contemporary terms for
cannabis applied to this holy sacrament would be perceived as
unintelligible blasphemy if not barbarous obscenity. </p>

<p>Notwithstanding today's prohibition language of deviance and
intoxication, individuals self-medicating for a variety of
conditions make independent discoveries that affirm attributes
described in the medicine of a different culture. This
independent discovery in a prohibitionist society seems to
support pharmacology over placebo effect. </p>

<p>Ken has always known his antidepressant and appetite stimulant
as marijuana, becoming acquainted with it in a social rather than
therapeutic context. He didn't get to know it as a traditional
medicine Vijaya or Capala but nevertheless obtains benefit from
cannabis. </p>

<p>Postscript: Ken died peacefully ten months later at home with
his wife Mary in attendance who had helped him during his long
fight. He began to significantly decline in his energy a month
after the interview. His legs became increasingly weak and
painful. Morphine was begun six weeks later. Ken managed a trip
to Florida but needed to to be in a wheelchair. </p>

<p>A month after our interview his anorexia was so severe that
Total Parenteral Nutrition (TPN) was begun. A permanent tube was
inserted into a large vein for injecting a mixture of nutrients. </p>

<p>Six months after the interview the PCP worsened his condition
with increasing weakness and fatigue. It was felt that the fungus
had breached the blood-brain barrier and invaded Ken's brain. </p>

<p>Mentally, Ken was free from dementia until six weeks before
his death with intermittantly but increasingly severe
disorientation and confusion. He would be clear for days at a
time before becoming totally disoriented and confused. He would
recognize that someone was familiar but misidentify as someone
else. </p>

<p>Three weeks before he died he stopped smoking cannabis which
continued to ease his nausea and anorexia. Ken became too
confused and disoriented to light his pipe. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical/medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="59406" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>