
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-9</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B027-297</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/heroin/methadone/dont/v1n5_4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122061648 text/html 43671
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:16:34 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:43:43 GMT
Content-length: 43453
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Methadone Today, Volume I, Issues 4-5</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFE8" vlink="#FF0000" alink="#0AC074">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_heroin_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../../opiates.htm">Heroin and the opiates</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46357" -->

<h3 align="center"><a name="Methadone Today"><b><i>Methadone
Today</i></b></a> </h3>

<p><b>Articles<br>
Volume I, Issues 5 - 4 (Most recent first)</b> </p>

<p><a href="#Fighting for Life:  Health Hazards and Methadone">Fighting
for Life</a>: Health Hazards and Methadone - by Ira Sobel<br>
<a href="#Patients to Dose at Clinic 7 Days a Week?">Patients to
Dose at Clinic 7 Days a Week?</a> - by Beth Francisco<br>
<a
href="#Methadone Clinics in Trouble--Patients and Society Will Lose!">Methadone
Clinics in Trouble--Patients and Society Will Lose!</a> - by Jon <br>
<a href="#Confidentiality in Treatment">Confidentiality in
Treatment</a> - by Penny<br>
<a href="#Methadone Treatment">Methadone Treatment</a> - by Ken<br>
<a href="#Narcotics Anonymous NA">Narcotics Anonymous (NA)</a> -
by Nancy R.<br>
<a href="#Historical Perspectives">Historical Perspectives</a> -
by Jon<br>
<a href="#Methadone Awareness:  Get Up Stand Up!!!">Methadone
Awareness: Get up, Stand Up!!!</a> - by Ira Sobel </p>

<p align="center"><b><br>
</b><a name="Fighting for Life:  Health Hazards and Methadone"><b>Fighting
for Life: Health Hazards and Methadone</b></a> </p>

<p align="center"><b><i>Why Am I Still on Methadone?</i></b>
After all these years on methadone, I occasionally take a
personal inventory to check to see my progress on the program
which directly affects my life. After 2½ years (on this second
go-around), my reasons for remaining in methadone treatment have
basically not changed. The bottom line is that methadone works
for me. I'm no longer out of control and heavily addicted to
opiates and prescription narcotics. I no longer hurt myself in a
self-destructive death mission. What a relief. All that negative
behavior is off my shoulders. When I enrolled on a methadone
program, all that street hustling, petty arguments over petty
things, stress, frustration and insanity left me phase by phase
as I got better.<br>
<br>
<b><i>Why Aren't You on Methadone?</i></b> A major point is that
I no longer have to get high every few hours in order to stay one
shot away from being dope sick. Methadone is long lasting. Its
effects last up to 36 hours. That should be the number one reason
why so many heroin addicts should surrender and get on methadone.
By taking methadone <b><i>as prescribed</i></b>, there shouldn't
be any problems with being maintained or being sick. It's the use
of other drugs with methadone, like crack and alcohol, that makes
those on the program feel depressed, confused and unbalanced. The
unhealthy effects of all- night drinking, hangovers and crack
binges keep these people down and going nowhere. People should
know the facts that powdered drugs have killed before, and there
is no telling when and who will die next from an overdose. So, by
enrolling in a methadone program and putting down the needles and
powdered drugs, the chances for a brighter future is very
promising.<br>
<br>
<b><i>Methaphobia: Losing its Grip</i></b>. I live one day at a
time, and I do not worry myself about not being drug free or
whether if/when I'm going to detox off methadone or not. I feel
comfortable with my decision, and I don't care what others think.
I remain on this medication because it has helped me so much. I
believe that as long as I remain on methadone, things are going
to get better and better. Those methaphobics get upset because
with all of their chiding and all of their putdowns, you know
what? They are getting boring! &quot;Why can't you get off
it?&quot; &quot;You are weak.&quot; &quot;You are a loser.&quot;
I've heard that shit so many times in my life that it has become
boring!!! <b><i>Boring!!! <br>
</i></b><br>
I mean, why should I risk everything I've built up for myself on
someone else's whims and expectations. Most of the methaphobics
that take this position don't even know who I am or my fellow
patients. They really do not care about me and you. They just
like to play God, doctor and pharmacist. These methaphobics mean
nothing to me.<br>
<br>
We cannot change the nature of a methaphobic or stop their
unresponsive, close-minded, stigma-spewing tirades. I've coined
an appropriate phrase--<b><i>METHAPHOBIA</i></b>--a state of mind
in which someone, or a group, displays an intense fear, bias and
prejudice against people on methadone and methadone programs.
There are those methaphobics that would feel justified in
dismantling the whole methadone system. That's methaphobia at its
most extreme. As I said: Methaphobics are <b><i>BORING!!!</i></b>
<br>
<br>
<b><i>Methadone in the Age of AIDS</i></b>. I realize now that I
must present the bigger picture of the importance of methadone
maintenance in the age of AIDS. With all of the inappropriate
actions and all of the self-destructive behavior by active users,
methadone treatment becomes an important link in minimizing
health hazards to users. Most of all, enrolling in a methadone
program <b><i>reduces</i></b> the risk of acquiring all of these
numerous health hazards which is a keynote in harm reduction.<br>
<br>
I believe that harm reduction must take on a holistic approach in
order to <b><i>decrease</i></b> self-destructive behavior, <b><i>reduce
</i></b>the transmission of diseases and viruses, and <b><i>carry</i></b>
the message to every IV user that there is a better way to live.
That users should stop abusing themselves, get in a methadone
program to take care of their powerlessness over opiates and the
needle, and stabilize their minds and bodies in order to get
healthy because this self-abuse takes its toll on one's self
respect. Methadone enables the person time to build a firm
foundation for their lives. In this way, IV users <b><i>can</i></b>
discover harm reduction practices, and this enables them to
aspire to greater heights in taking proper care of themselves.
This translates into cleaning needles properly and getting tested
for HIV and Hepatitis C.<br>
<br>
<b><i>Health Hazards and Shooting Galleries: An Intimate Glance</i></b>.
So you say: What health hazards are you talking about? Such
hazards as: contracting hepatitis and AIDS, venereal diseases,
the possibility of death resulting from an overdose, poor health,
arrest and incarceration. Pertaining to harm reduction in the age
of AIDS, contracting viruses and diseases are at the top of the
list.<br>
<br>
Shooting galleries are the breeding ground for AIDS, Hepatitis C,
endocarditis, venereal diseases, tuberculosis, infections and
open wounds that are getting worse. Health hazards are all around
anyone who enters the premises. There are real people dying in
these dark, cold and colorless rooms. That is why we have to get
the message out there to those most in need that <b><i>getting
out of the gallery and getting on a methadone program</i></b>,
which has been successful in detoxing addicts off heroin and
maintaining addicts for 30 years, will dramatically change
people's lives and, most of all, <b><i>reduce</i></b> these
obsessive self-abuse tendencies.<br>
<br>
People living in these galleries are the ones most affected by
health hazards. There is an <b><i>urgency</i></b> for the
development of harm-reduction practices as soon as possible.
Cleaning needles properly is more important than anything to the
IV user and again, cleaning needles properly with bleach <b><i>reduces</i></b>
the exchange of viruses and diseases.<br>
<br>
Shooting galleries are filthy, and the squalor attacks your
senses as soon as you enter the room. The smell of urine is
everywhere. There is blood and feces all over, both human and
animal, broken needles and syringes, torn newspapers on the
ground, glass from broken bottles, bloody toilet tissue, bloody
water in cups, bloody rags and paper towels. The sight of rats
scurrying across the floors and walls is a natural occurrence.
People have sex in shooting galleries, babies are born, and
people overdose and die every day in shooting galleries
throughout New York City and across the USA. <b><i>We must help
these people get out of the galleries!!!<br>
</i></b><br>
<b><i>Fighting for Life</i></b>. There are many people who forgot
why they got on methadone. They forget how bad life really was in
those last months of active addiction. They get frustrated and
start &quot;stinking thinking.&quot; &quot;Why am I on
methadone?&quot; &quot;Why did I get on it?&quot; &quot;Why do I
need it?&quot; &quot;It doesn't help.&quot; &quot;It was a
mistake?&quot; For those patients who have been in the program
longer than the birth of the AIDS virus should realize now that
being on methadone keeps viruses and diseases away and, as long
as we take methadone correctly, we can live a joy-filled life.<br>
<br>
We will also overcome the methaphobics. We will stop going to
shooting galleries. The hustling ceases, the scams and schemes
leave you, you stop using powdered drugs and needles, you put
down the bottle, you get a job or begin job training, you go back
to school, do volunteer work, and if you maintain your faith in
yourself and belief in a higher power, you are on your way. It's
the fight of your life but by getting in a methadone program and
by using harm- reduction practices, you can change your life and
live respectably and healthy. <b>PEACE<br>
</b></p>

<p align="center"><a href="#Methadone Today"><img src="arrow.gif"
alt="Top of Page" border="0" width="29" height="39"></a><br>
Top of Page </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr align="left">

<p align="center"><a
name="Patients to Dose at Clinic 7 Days a Week?"><b>Patients to
Dose at Clinic 7 Days a Week?</b></a><b><br>
by Beth Francisco</b> </p>

<p align="center"><b><i>Could be!</i></b> Every Wednesday
morning, a few of us meet for the advocacy group and try to get
others involved. Some of you say you do not have time, you have
more important things to do, and others say you are just not
interested. We wonder what it will take to get you interested.
Will you be interested when the regulations are stiffer, or will
it be when we have to come into the clinic seven days a week to
dose? There is serious talk of this at the state level. Will it
be when funding is cut for methadone maintenance treatment? There
is always that threat hanging over our heads. Or, will you have
time when there are no clinics at all?<br>
<br>
According to the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse Counselors, &quot;The Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration (SAMHSA) is now operating under its 5th
temporary spending bill (known as a Continuting Resolution or CR)
until March 15th.&quot; The House passed an appropriations bill
for SAMHSA, but nothing has been done with it by the Senate to
date. &quot;Under the House appropriations bill drug and alcohol
treatment and prevention. . . demonstration programs are cut from
$506 million. . .to $142 million. If there is no change to the
CR, the $360 million shortfall will force the termination of many
demonstration programs. Now, this may or may not affect us
directly, but any cuts in addiction treatment are a threat to us.<br>
<br>
What we need to do is write to our Senators and Representatives
telling them that treatment and prevention in the area of
addiction are proven cost cutters. For every $1 spent on drug and
alcohol treatment, $7 is saved in costs to society, and &quot;<b><i>$12
to $14</i></b> is saved for every $1 spent on <b><i>methadone
treatment</i></b>&quot; (emphasis mine). We need to write to our
representatives in Washington <b><i>and</i></b> Lansing. Talk
about your success stories and how methadone has saved you from
prison or death. Talk about your success in any area, and compare
that to your life on the street. You can type a letter, handwrite
it, e-mail it, or snail-mail it, but just <b><i>do it</i></b>--then
come to an advocacy meeting. If we don't stand up for ourselves,
no one else is going to.<br>
<br>
If you do not mind coming into the clinic every day or if you do
not mind harsher rules and regulations, you can continue what you
are doing. However, if we want to improve the way we are treated
and have a say in that treatment, every single one of us needs to
become involved. You do not have to spend a lot of time on
advocacy, but you do need to let everyone know that you care
about what happens to you. </p>

<p align="center"><a href="#Methadone Today"><img src="arrow.gif"
alt="Top of Page" border="0" width="29" height="39"></a><br>
Top of Page </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr align="left">

<p align="center"><a
name="Methadone Clinics in Trouble--Patients and Society Will Lose!">Methadone
Clinics in Trouble--Patients and Society Will Lose!</a><br>
<b>by Jon Wilson</b> </p>

<p align="center">Methadone treatment in Michigan is in serious
trouble. The most effective treatment for narcotics addiction is
in danger of being eliminated in this state. Thousands of
successfully recovering addicts will be forced back into the
streets. Some may detox successfully and do well in drug free
treatment programs, but most will not. According to studies by
Dole, Nyswander, McClellen, Payte, Joseph and others, those who
attempt to detox abruptly, or at all, are likely to return to
opiate use. Methadone's effectiveness has been proven, yet we are
in danger of losing it as a treatment alternative in Michigan.<br>
<br>
If methadone is so effective, why would Michigan eliminate it?
This question cannot be easily answered. However, some reasons
for phasing out the treatment are more apparent than others.
Substance abuse is a very unpopular issue. Medicaid and private
health insurance providers do not want to pay for substance abuse
treatment at all. Since methadone is the most controversial form
of substance abuse treatment, it is an easy target. Due to
society's stigmatization of substance abusers, people in
treatment for addictions are perceived as having little
credibility and virtually no power to fight back. Medicaid and
private insurers have already taken steps to greatly reduce or
eliminate benefits to substance abusers. Additionally, methadone
is a political hot potato. Some legislators and other elected
officials are reluctant to air their views on methadone publicly.
This is not surprising since insurance companies employ highly
paid lobbyists to promote their best interests. And the drug free
component of the substance abuse treatment industry also has an
interest in the demise of methadone.<br>
<br>
Politicians have declared a &quot;<b><i>war on drugs</i></b>.&quot;
Their answer is to build more prisons. By the same token, they
are aware that many addicts have never committed any crime aside
from possessing their drugs of choice. Another group of addicts,
those who are addicted to legally prescribed medication have
little chance of contact with the criminal justice system. Many
addicts and their families are registered voters. Families are
pleading and crying for treatment for their sons and daughters,
husbands, wives, mothers, and fathers. They are not likely to
vote for someone who wants to incarcerate their loved ones.<br>
<br>
Much to the dismay of the insurance companies, some form of
substance abuse treatment must receive political support. The
drug-free treatment industry has tailored itself to the whims of
Medicaid and other third-party billers. Insurance companies have
a powerful ally in their efforts to squash methadone. Who better
to discredit methadone than the drug free lobby? The drug-free
treatment industry is largely responsible for perpetuating the
myth that methadone is legal dope. Politicians are in bed with
insurance companies and the drug free industry while ranting
about the lack of prison beds. It is ironic that the government's
own literature on the treatment of opiate addiction is pro
methadone.<br>
<br>
One of the most powerful weapons in this battle of politics,
money, and power is the negative appearance of methadone
treatment. The erroneous point of view that methadone is nothing
more than a legal way to control addicts is at the heart of
society's negative impression of the drug. Most successful
methadone patients are aware that methadone, like other legally
prescribed drugs, is sometimes diverted to the street and sold on
the black market. Diversion is one of the government's excuses to
impose stricter controls on methadone. Many methadone clinics are
located in the inner city where police protection is scarce. It
is not difficult for those seeking black market methadone to
loiter near clinics. Methadone opponents attempt to use this fact
to validate methadone mythology. It is necessary to separate fact
from fiction so that the real issues can be resolved. The
majority of methadone patients want nothing to do with those few
who abuse or divert methadone. Recovery is a precious commodity;
no serious patient would jeopardize it.<br>
<br>
The methadone industry in Michigan has been harassed repeatedly
over the past year. Clinics have been raided, government
officials have disrupted the lives of patients by coming to their
homes to question them, and the media has blatantly lied about
methadone treatment. The latest tactic in Michigan's scheme to
dismantle methadone treatment comes from the Michigan Department
of Social Services. Without notifying the clinic involved, DSS
mailed letters to patients of Michigan's largest clinic stating
that the clinic would no longer be eligible to bill Medicaid. The
letter stated that Medicaid patients should begin to transfer to
other programs immediately and that their transfers should be
complete by March 21, 1996. The letters were mailed while the
clinic's administrators were in Washington D.C. to meet with
legislators to discuss the future of methadone in Michigan. The
state has used similar scare tactics in the past without success.
If Michigan succeeds in its efforts to close its largest clinics,
others will follow.<br>
<br>
Contrary to popular belief, recovering addicts are not powerless.
While it is true that addicts have little credibility, it is
surprising how much their credibility improves once they have
written to their legislators. Methadone patients who are not now
registered to vote have been urged to do so by methadone patient
advocacy groups. There are approximately 2,000 methadone patients
in Michigan who have proclaimed their membership in Detroit
Organizational Needs in Treatment (DONT) and The National
Alliance of Methadone Advocates (NAMA). There are also a number
of individuals in Detroit who have joined Methadone as A
Legitimate Treatment Alternative (MALTA), another NAMA affiliate.
In addition to their ongoing voter registration drive, Michigan's
methadone patients are now organizing a letter-writing campaign.
Patients are writing to their legislators to promote the positive
therapeutic aspects of methadone treatment and to voice
disapproval over government harassment of methadone programs.<br>
<br>
Patients can potentially play the most important role in this
battle. Unfortunately, most clinics and their administrative
staffs have not thought to ask their patients to voice their
opinions on the matter. This stems from the archaic,
paternalistic attitude that exists among methadone treatment
providers. But this does not mean that clinics are not concerned.
They simply haven't informed their patients of the problems in
Michigan. Their concern has manifested itself as an attempt to
form a methadone treatment providers association, tentatively
called Michigan Alliance of Methadone Providers (MAMP). The
formation of MAMP is their effort to form a political voice and
to provide a united front against the unrealistic, irrational
demands of managed care organizations. The methadone treatment
providers in this state have tried unsuccessfully to form an
alliance in the past. The attempt failed because few could agree
on anything. Now, as managed care organizations approach clinics
individually to negotiate treatment costs, there is the potential
for a &quot;free for all&quot; whereby Michigan's clinics will
stab each other's backs while competing for funding and patients.
It's the old &quot;divide and conquer&quot; strategy. Michigan's
methadone treatment providers are aware of this and are worried
about their fate. Ask anyone who attended the first two meetings
of MAMP this year. All but two of the states' clinics were
represented. Reports from the meetings indicate that those who
are long-time competitors were concerned enough about Michigan's
problems to sit down to explore possible solutions. One final
note: It is interesting that Michigan's methadone patients are
more politically organized than the state's methadone providers;
they also get along with one another much better. </p>

<p align="center"><a href="#Methadone Today"><img src="arrow.gif"
alt="Top of Page" border="0" width="29" height="39"></a><br>
Top of Page </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr align="left">

<p align="center"><a name="Confidentiality in Treatment"><b>Confidentiality
in Treatment</b></a><b><br>
by Penny</b> </p>

<p align="center">When one signs up as a patient in a methadone
clinic, they are told that all of their information is
confidential. Yet the true question is, &quot;What do they mean
by confidential?&quot; According to Random House Dictionary,
confidential is &quot;a secret or private matter, not to be
divulged or communicated to others.&quot; We assume that our
counselor is the one that is privy to our most personal
information and concerns. The doctor is next, knowing what is
important for our medical concerns; the nurse knows our names and
doses. The person at the front desk knows our financial concerns
and what appointments we have to keep, but how much farther than
that does it go?<br>
<br>
I have been on methadone approximately fifteen years. In those 15
years, I have been in clinics in six states. I have experienced
public clinics, private clinics, and clinics somewhere in
between. Yet, at all of them, they told me that any information
about me was confidential. They told me that also meant they
could not even give information to my husband without my
permission.<br>
<br>
Most clinics have weekly meetings where they discuss clients.
That has meaning for us because other counselors and clinic
employees learn sometimes very intimate information about us.
When we go to counseling and &quot;open up,&quot; we do not think
it should go past our counselor, yet it does. A special conflict
comes up when a married couple is in a clinic. Clinics should not
assume that all information one spouse confides is open to the
other spouse; this even includes medical information. Yet, they
often abuse this confidentiality and sometimes of great detriment
to the couple.<br>
<br>
A clinic in Tennessee that my husband and I entered several years
ago abused our confidentiality to the utmost. During the physical
(blood work) part of our intake, they discovered certain facts
about each of us. They sat my husband and I down in the doctor's
office with our counselors present, and the doctor proceeded to
tell us what they found. The doctor told me I was pregnant and
that my husband had syphilis. This had special meaning for us
because we had spent most of the prior few months apart. As can
be guessed, this caused major problems in our marriage. It turned
out, after seeking our own medical tests, that if the clinic's
lab had done their job appropriately, they would have discovered
that my husband always tests false positive. As for me being
pregnant, it was my place to tell my husband--not theirs. This
major breach of confidentiality almost destroyed my marriage. <br>
<br>
This was not the only incident where methadone clinic employees
caused rifts in our marriage. Recently, results of a breath
analysis on my husband was readily divulged to me. This time, a
formal complaint was filed. After approximately six months, my
husband still has not gotten a reply to his complaint.<br>
<br>
Counselors of married couples also pass information back and
forth about what is discussed in counseling. This information is
sometimes passed on to the other spouse; other times, this
information may be used against the other spouse in some form of
punishment by the clinic. As a general rule, I try to be somewhat
careful as to what I say about my spouse. It might come back to
haunt me.<br>
<br>
Clinic employees need to be very careful about what they say to
other employees and/or patients. After all, they have supposedly
promised &quot;complete confidentiality&quot; to the patient, and
professional ethics demand no less. </p>

<p align="center"><a href="#Methadone Today"><img src="arrow.gif"
alt="Top of Page" border="0" width="29" height="39"></a><br>
Top of Page </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr align="left">

<p align="center"><a name="Methadone Treatment"><b>Methadone
Treatment</b></a><b><br>
by Ken</b> </p>

<p align="center">Methadone is a necessary part of our overall
success in conquering the addiction that holds us firm in its
grasp. Even so, we thoroughly repulsed and disgusted some people
by the way we choose to treat our addiction. Life is a
competition and we, as patients of a methadone clinic, are
competitors. We now have the tools, skills, and support that we
need to overcome one of life's greatest evils, and we must accept
the responsibilities of treatment.<br>
<br>
We pay for each breath we take by a crushed and digested past;
life is a tough business. We have built each of our lives upon a
mountain of painful memories; each of our bodies is a living
monument that positive change can accomplish anything. We live in
a civilization where there are many appointments--some to serve
the greater good, some the greater evil. We, as substance
abusers, have seen both sides of life's appointments and have
survived! We, as addicts, have heard the sound of time beginning
to run out on us. It made us realize that life is important and
that it does matter what happens to us. We are destined to be
free; because once we enter the drug-free world, we are
responsible for everything that we do. Then we are answerable to
ourselves and to the world we cherish most highly--our own! We
can reach no higher than our arms--so do we aim for less than the
most? We have beaten an enemy that is not only our enemy but an
enemy to all people of the world--an enemy of humanity. We walked
brazenly through a kingdom that had not been worth it. We had
walked the mountains and the valleys of life--a shadowed life in
a shadowed world. <br>
<br>
But, now we walk in a free and unrestricted world. We just keep
looking to the horizon and realize that anything can happen
beyond it. All things inevitably lead to the same horizon. The
chief difference between us and the straight world is that we
better recognize the challenges that destiny gives to each
person. Do not let somebody else make a decision for you or stand
in judgement of you. If there is a battle to get through, battle
for what you believe. If someone is to be judged, we must not be
that judge as we are all brothers and sisters and must make our
own decisions.<br>
<br>
Maybe we are throwbacks to another time, of another kind, to
another ideal, but this much we should realize and etch upon our
very souls: we are alive today because of our decision to help
ourselves, and we need not be ashamed of that decision. <b>Forever
Peace!</b> </p>

<p align="center"><a href="#Methadone Today"><img src="arrow.gif"
alt="Top of Page" border="0" width="29" height="39"></a><br>
Top of Page </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr align="left">

<p align="center"><a name="Narcotics Anonymous NA"><b>Narcotics
Anonymous NA</b></a><b><br>
by Nancy R.</b> </p>

<p align="center">I am writing this article in response to Ira
Sobel's article, &quot;Methaphobia,&quot; in Methadone Today
(December 1995, Vol. I, No. III). I would like to comment on his
statement that they do not allow methadone patients to share at
NA meetings. Maybe the NA groups in New York (where Ira is from)
have that policy, but it is not that way at the meetings in
Detroit and the surrounding suburbs! I also read a similar
statement in Larry S.' article, &quot;12-Step Support for
Methadone Patients,&quot; in <b><i>Methadone Today</i></b>
(August 1995, Vol. I, No. I).<br>
Since the summer of 1994, I have been regularly attending NA
meetings, usually four to five meetings a week. I go to some
regular meetings but also try out new ones. I have attended
meetings in Detroit, Oakland County, Macomb County, and St. Clair
County. At all these various meetings, they have never told me I
cannot share at a table because of being a methadone patient
(and, yes, I am honest about it). <b><i>I think it is important I
let methadone patients know this, so they won't be discouraged
from trying NA meetings</i></b>. You see, there are only a few
scattered Methadone Anonymous (MA) meetings (which Larry
mentions), but there are a few hundred AA and NA meetings in the
area!<br>
<br>
If you are interested in trying an NA meeting, GO! If you happen
to attend a meeting where they will not let you share, try a
different meeting! Better yet, remind them of NA's Third
Tradition: &quot;The only requirement for membership is the
desire to stop using!&quot; Also, the Tenth Tradition states,
&quot;NA has no opinion on outside issues. . . &quot; (and
methadone is an outside issue!)<br>
<br>
In fact, I would like to quote from NA's &quot;Basic Text&quot;
(the blue book) part of the writing for Tradition Nine (4th ed.,
p. 50): &quot;Desire is our <b><i>only</i></b> requirement . .
.any addict, regardless of drugs used. . .is free to practice the
NA way of life. . . .All addicted persons are welcome <b><i>and
equal</i></b> in obtaining the relief they are seeking from their
addiction; every addict can recover in this program on an <b><i>equal</i></b>
basis. . . .Membership in NA is not automatic. . .when a newcomer
walks in the door. . .any addict who has a desire to stop using
can become a member of NA.&quot; Self explanatory, yes?<br>
<br>
An even better quotation begins on page 145, under Tradition
Three in NA's book,<b><i> It Works: How &amp; Why:</i></b>
&quot;Any addict who walks into a meeting, <b><i>even a using
addict </i></b>(emphasis mine), displays a level of willingness
that cannot be discounted. . . .<i>still-using</i> addicts are
welcomed into our meetings with special encouragement to keep
coming back . . . .these addicts are members <i>in every respec</i>t
(emphasis mine) as long as they have the desire to stop using,
and they are entitled to the same consideration and support as
any other member.&quot;<br>
<br>
So, at most NA meetings, you will probably have no hassle or
problems about being on methadone. Possibly, someone may suggest
you think about getting off methadone, but you can always tell
that person that methadone is keeping you CLEAN and you will
detox when you and your doctor feel you are ready! We need to
educate some people about methadone, as there is still much
misunderstanding about it.<br>
<br>
To live drug free (with or without methadone), we need to change
our old ways of thinking and our old, using friends. In NA, you
meet new friends--clean, recovering addicts who are learning to
live and enjoy life WITHOUT using drugs. I have even met a number
of people in NA who have successfully detoxed off methadone and
are still drug free.<br>
<br>
I think NA is a wonderful program! It is a spiritual (not
religious) program. I have come to enjoy meetings where we
&quot;share&quot; about our lives, our problems, our successes,
and how we stay clean. Besides meetings, we have NA dances,
picnics, skating parties, barbeques, etc.<br>
<br>
If you can find a Methadone Anonymous or Methadone Awareness
meeting, try that too. I hope more methadone clinics start MA
meetings. Meanwhile, TRY AN NA MEETING! It changed my life! </p>

<p align="center"><a href="#Methadone Today"><img src="arrow.gif"
alt="Top of Page" border="0" width="29" height="39"></a><br>
Top of Page </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr align="left">

<p align="center"><a name="Historical Perspectives"><b>Historical
Perspectives</b></a><b><br>
by Jon</b> </p>

<p align="center">Many in the field of chemical dependency became
aware of the problem as it emerged from the 1960's youth culture.
Because of our training, we now know that the history of
narcotics addiction is long and complex. We are fascinated that
Poe and Freud were addicts and that Edison stayed awake for days
under the influence of cocaine wine while perfecting the
phonograph. We have heard stories of soldiers from the Civil War
to Vietnam returning from the battlefield with opioid
dependencies. We know that drug use flourished in the nineteenth
century with legal morphine, opium, and cocaine. The history of
addiction is well documented, but what about the history of
addiction treatment?<br>
<br>
Those who work with methadone patients have read of the Dole and
Nyswander studies of the 1960's. We know of the U.S. Public
Health Service Narcotic Hospital which opened in Lexington,
Kentucky in 1935. While Lexington represented the first federally
approved attempt at treatment, it did not represent the first
sincere efforts to help addicts. <br>
<br>
At the turn of the century, the treatment of narcotic addiction
was limited to quackery. Treatment was based on the personal
theories of the few physicians willing to address the problem.
Most drugs were legal, and many of the &quot;cures&quot; were
simply opium-based patent medicines. When the Harrison Act of
1914 passed, many addicts turned to the black market for drugs,
others continued to maintain on physician-prescribed heroin,
morphine, or cocaine. A 1919 Supreme Court decision placed
restrictions on physicians, which limited their ability to
prescribe drugs of abuse. This marked the beginning of the clinic
era.<br>
<br>
From 1919 to 1923, thirty-five clinics in 12 states dispensed
morphine to patients. Some of the clinics dispensed heroin and
cocaine. The most well-known clinic of this era was operated by
Dr. Willis Butler. Dr. Butler attempted to detoxify his patients
gradually. He understood that detox was not a realistic goal for
many patients and simply maintained them. This was a tremendous
display of insight more than forty years before Dole and
Nyswander's first experimental clinic. In addition to his
outpatient dispensing clinic, Dr. Butler also operated an
inpatient facility for his patients who were in the final stages
of the detoxification process. Upon completing the program, each
patient received a certificate signed by seven doctors. This may
have been the first employment of the team approach in addiction
medicine.<br>
<br>
In 1923, the government ordered the clinics closed. The study of
addictions' treatment retreated into the dark ages until the
1960's when Dole and Nyswander compiled data similar to that of
Dr. Butler. The first successful therapeutic use of methadone
revolutionized the treatment of narcotics addiction. Methadone
was found to be more effective than morphine maintenance due to
its longer duration. Unfortunately, the chemical treatment of
narcotic addiction continues to be unfairly stigmatized. </p>

<p align="center"><a href="#Methadone Today"><img src="arrow.gif"
alt="Top of Page" border="0" width="29" height="39"></a><br>
Top of Page </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr align="left">

<p align="center"><a
name="Methadone Awareness:  Get Up Stand Up!!!"><b>Methadone
Awareness: Get Up Stand Up!!!</b></a><b><br>
by Ira Sobel (New York City)</b> </p>

<p align="center">For the better part of two decades, I've been
on and off methadone maintenance programs. I've had to deal with
family, friends, co-workers, and those in recovery with their
prejudice and bias against methadone. I've been treated like a
junkie with no will power. I'm sick and tired of having to
explain myself to them. I am proud of my choice of treatment. I
am an opiate addict. My drugs of choice are synthetic narcotics.
I am not on methadone because my drug of choice is crack. I'm on
a methadone program to recover from my powerlessness over
opiates. My active years, before getting back on the program,
were just that: active and out of control.<br>
<br>
People like us on methadone have been stigmatized enough. It's
about time that we get up, stand up, and be proud of our
recovery. We have been unduly classified by some as being a
non-entity in terms of a valid treatment modality. Where have
these people been for the past thirty years? That's how long
methadone has been used to both maintain and detox addicts from
heroin. It was created by Drs. Dole and Nyswander, and Dr. Kreek
and Herman Joseph, to treat opiate addicts using a long-acting
narcotic that when taken as prescribed enables a person to be
capable of doing things like having a job, going to school,
getting job training, and traveling again because when we are
doing dope, we aren't able to do anything. Our drug habit rules
our world. You are on a fence and going nowhere but down. But
with methadone, people can build a foundation for their lives
that is so much better than they had while they were doing heroin
and other narcotics.<br>
<br>
First, people should be taught that you don't feel euphoria or
get &quot;high&quot; when you are on a maintained dose of
methadone. When it's used properly, the person does not achieve a
state of being high. Whereas heroin gives the user a feeling of
ecstasy, methadone keeps a person maintained without the feeling
of doing heroin.<br>
<br>
We have been slurred by people in recovery, those in the field of
addiction, and by people in general. They feel that the entire
methadone concept is just substituting one drug (methadone) for
another (heroin). I've heard that slur one time too many in my
life. Those people should be educated about the mind, addiction,
and what role methadone plays in the treatment of opiate
addiction.<br>
<br>
We on methadone <b><i>must</i></b> continue to fight our
oppressors together. We have to fight for our choices. We have
also been maligned by unbelievers, black-balled by 12-step
programs, and called names. Let's not hide in the closet. We are
not anonymous. We accept the fact that we are on methadone to
save our lives, and we should know all about the medication we
are taking.<br>
<br>
At Methadone Awareness (MA) meetings, we learn to dispel myths
and rumors laid at our feet by the misinformed. I believe that
the only way to share this common knowledge is by indoctrinating
&quot;methadone awareness&quot; meetings. In this setting, people
on methadone can share about their recovery, personal problems,
successes, important health issues, and facts about methadone.
The patients should know the answers to so many questions we
share.<br>
<br>
Methadone awareness is more than just a meeting. It is a learning
experience. People who attend MA meetings learn fact from fiction
and how well methadone has afforded us. Patients who continually
show up at meetings have found something that works for them.
Although Alcoholics Anonymous is 60 years old, the roots of MA
meetings are just beginning. I've gone to many 12-step programs
in my day, but going to methadone awareness meetings makes me
feel real comfortable because it seems so natural. Methadone
awareness meetings feel so freeing in the divine order of things.<br>
<br>
One of the most important things I've said in all of my articles
and stories is in &quot;The Orange Colored Cure.&quot; I wrote
(and still feel this way) that &quot;being on methadone is not
the end of your life but the beginning of your recovery from
active opiate addiction.&quot; MA meetings expand one's thinking
about methadone. We discover together that methadone is a safe
medication and we find out that there are a lot of similarities
between us. We each share many of the same fears. By attending
methadone awareness meetings, we help each other to stem the tide
of adversity and beat the odds that are against us.<br>
<br>
When I attend MA meetings, I speak from my heart and learn to be
honest with myself and people in the meetings. Another aspect is
to share my feelings and facts about methadone. At one meeting I
attended, someone said that methadone was &quot;poison.&quot;
That was that person's feeling about methadone. I shared that
there are so many good points about being in treatment that it
overrides any negativity that is being voiced.<br>
<br>
We must be &quot;aware&quot; of these issues, and this awareness
will unite us in our recovery. In MA meetings, we become positive
and learn to have self-esteem and to have pride in ourselves. We
are not anonymous, nor are we hiding in the wings and going
nowhere. The basis for MA meetings is our common fight to beat
drugs and obtain the best treatment so that together we learn how
to have gratitude and humility for our recovery!!! <b>PEACE.<br>
</b></p>

<p align="center"><a href="#Methadone Today"><img src="arrow.gif"
alt="Top of Page" border="0" width="29" height="39"></a><br>
Top of Page </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr align="left">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_heroin_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../../opiates.htm">Heroin and the opiates</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46357" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>