
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B032-76</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/bradenp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065609 text/html 30198
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:55:59 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:33:13 GMT
Content-length: 29979
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Postscript</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>Postscript</h2>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; <i>&quot;Four o'clock, and all's wrong.&quot;</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; So says the voice on the tape recorder as I listen
to it now. My voice. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Having been reminded often enough of those
schoolmen who would not look through Galileo's telescope, I
participated in a psychedelic experiment on May 16, 1966, at the
Ridgeway psychiatric hospital in Chicago. Present were Dr. A. I.
Jackman, a psychiatrist; Dr. Herbert Maltz, clinical director of
the hospital, and a psychedelic guide I shall refer to here as
Jim. We used Huxley's drug, mescaline, because LSD at that time
had been taken off the legal market. The two produce identical
effects, I was told, the only difference being that a much
stronger dosage is required in the case of mescaline, which is
administered in milligrams rather than micrograms. I was first
given a thorough medical examination, including an
electrocardiogram, and we then retired to a small but pleasantly
furnished consultation room on the second floor of the hospital,
where the drapes were drawn against the afternoon sunlight. At 2
P.M. Dr. Jackman handed me a paper cup of water and five white
capsules, each of them containing seventy milligrams of
mescaline; a half-hour later I took two more capsules, for a
total dose of 490 milligrams. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Nothing happened for more than an hour. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Before going further, I should speak very briefly
about myself and various subjective factors which may have
influenced my reaction to the drug. While I had always been
interested in the implications of religious perception, I was not
normally given to mystical states of mind; some slight
significance might be attached here, however, to a phenomenon I
had experienced occasionally since early childhood. This would
happen once or twice a year, I suppose, and would last ten or
fifteen seconds at most. In moments of abstraction, my immediate
environment would suddenly appear to take on a new and wordless
meaning I could not define; time would stop, all objects would
lose their names, and the world would seem somehow peaceful and
perfect. The landscape would first appear to blur, as if the film
in a movie projector had jumped its track, and then it would come
clear again in a slightly different focus: it would look quite
the same as before, but in some subtle way its meaning would have
changed. Just how is hard to say. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I had always had vivid memories of my infancy,
including a few sunlit memories of the cradle itself in the very
first days of my life, and the experience often reminded me of
those pristine recollections&#151;of that holy time, at the dawn
of life, when I lay innocent in sunbeams. Curiously, certain
pieces of music would often serve to evoke the experience: <i>Clair
de lune</i>, for one, which I always associated with sunlight,
and &quot;Zing Went the Strings of My Heart.&quot; I never
supposed that the experience was important, and I never mentioned
it to anybody, although I did give it a name. I called it
&quot;the Shift.&quot; I had never heard of a peak experience, of
course, and maybe it was something of the sort; maybe it was a
pint-size <i>satori</i>. In any case, it occurred less frequently
as I grew older. I became a newspaperman, and newspapermen are
not very mystical. I was taught to be critical and objective, and
I was prepared to be both when I swallowed the seven capsules. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The atmosphere of a psychiatric hospital was far
from ideal for a psychedelic setting, but I knew at least that I
was in good hands should anything go wrong, and I felt no
apprehension whatever about taking the drug. In fact, I had been
looking forward to it. I had read many accounts of good trips and
bad trips, and I fully expected to experience an ego loss, but
that prospect didn't trouble me. Finally, I should point out that
I had recently been reading a fair amount of Eastern literature,
and indeed I had just reread the <i>Tibetan Book of the Dead</i>.
<br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After about seventy minutes, Jim told me, &quot;You
look different.&quot; I asked him in what way I looked different,
and he said, &quot;You're somehow younger.&quot; I smiled and
pointed to a framed picture hanging on one wall. &quot;That water
stain on the left-hand side of the glass,&quot; I said. &quot;Was
that there before?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;I think something is beginning to happen to
you,&quot; said Dr. Jackman. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Twenty minutes later I felt a numbness creeping
over my body, and I said that I seemed to be losing my muscular
control. &quot;But again, nothing special.&quot; I yawned and
added: &quot;That's interesting. The coffee in this cup looks
green . . . sort of a greenish cast to it.&quot; I had been
chain-smoking cigarettes, and I told Jim apologetically: &quot;I
don't want to put out the last cigarette. I'm such a smoker. I
keep thinking just one more cigarette before . . .&quot; Jim
reached down and switched on a tape recorder, filling the room
with symphonic music set at low volume. That annoyed me for some
reason. It seemed prearranged. &quot;Jim,&quot; I told him,
&quot;your whiskers have got a greenish tint to them.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I had been sitting on a long couch, my knees
crossed, head nodding. I felt so weak and listless, as if I
hadn't slept for days. &quot;Jim,&quot; I said, &quot;did you
usually start with visual things? I've been waiting for
colors.&quot; I looked down at my tweed jacket and my
green-and-white striped shirt, then farther down at my crossed
legs. Black pants, black socks, black shoes. The only trouble
was, the legs weren't mine. They looked alien and somehow
sinister. I knew they were attached to my body, and I knew I
could move them, but they weren't my legs. They weren't me. Or
better yet, I wasn't <i>them</i>. It was just as if I were
looking at the legs of some stranger sitting next to me in a bar,
or on a train. So primly crossed. So black. And the silk-hosed
ankles, so damned self-satisfied. I didn't like them at all.
&quot;I didn't think my legs looked like that,&quot; I said.
&quot;I thought they looked different . . . but the point is, I'm
about one quarter-inch outside myself now. That's how I feel, I
mean. I'm sitting here, but I've also moved about a quarter-inch
outside my body, and that's why I can look at my body now and see
it just the same way other people see it. Funny, too. I'd
expected all these visual things first. Colors . . .
jewels.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; So tired. So numb. Just one more cigarette. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Jim helped me off with my jacket and shoes, and I
stretched out on the couch. I complained again about my lack of
motor control, and Dr. Maltz had me tug at his fingers and then
press my open palm against his palm in an effort to resist it.
&quot;You have not actually lost any strength,&quot; he said.
Then he tested me with a pin, jabbing at the back of my hand with
the dull end and sharp end. I told him each time which end it
was, and finally I said, &quot;That hurt&#151;but so what?&quot;
I felt the pain, but it didn't matter. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Jim had turned up the music. The whole long-playing
tape seemed to be Beethoven, and I didn't like it. The <i>Eroica</i>
in particular sounded ponderous and threatening. Nothing human
there; it was pure mathematics, written on Olympus. &quot;Feel
good,&quot; I said. &quot;Feel different. It's like, ah . .
.&quot; I opened my eyes. &quot;I feel like I got great big
hands. You know? When I open my eyes, I'm back in the room. And
everything looks normal. When I close them, though, I feel sort
of disembodied. And I'm not sure yet which way I want to go.
Maybe I'd rather stay here and watch it happen. I have the
feeling I'd drift off if I closed my eyes. It's just a question
of whether I want to get disembodied or not. I have the feeling
that . . . I have the feeling that . . . It's very relaxing.
Especially in the small of the back. It's like I'm floating in
clouds without any body, and it's very nice to get rid of your
body. I feel this loss of weight and loss of tension, like it all
ran out of me. Especially in the small of the back. That's where
I'd localize it. It's like I drank a hundred martinis without
passing out. Still able to think and remember. It's like being
drunk without being drunk. You know? But just the same, I don't
feel all that great . . . feel different.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I rolled to one side and started to repeat the
first-person pronoun, nominative case. &quot;I, I, I . . . I, I,
I . . . I, I, I . . . Ai, Ai, Ai . . . Yi, Yi, Yi . . .
Ai-Yi-Yi-Yi . . . Yo, Yo, Yo . . . Yo, Yo, Yo . . . Spanish for I
. . . Yo, Yo, Yo . . . Yo-Yo, Yo-Yo . . . capitalized trademark .
. . Duncan Yo-Yo . . . That's it, we're all Duncan Yo-Yos.
Spanish word for I, means we're all a bunch of Yo-Yos. Up and
down on a string. Conclusive proof of Leary's Game Theory.... But
not really, of course.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Struck by a sudden thought, I sat up in alarm. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;What happened?&quot;' I asked. &quot;What
happened to all the other people?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I was still puzzling that over when my gaze fell
again on the cold black dregs in my coffee cup. I stuck a finger
in the coffee and became a continuum with it and the plastic cup.
&quot;Ah, it feels so good . . . so good. I feel real good. Dr.
Jackman, you're a Yo-Yo.&quot; I knew I was being obnoxious, and
I didn't like that, either. &quot;When does everything start to
get exquisite?&quot; I asked. &quot;Nothing I expected has
happened yet. This is a bore, so far.&quot; I fell back
helplessly on the couch, and Dr. Jackman told me, &quot;You're
just at the beginning.&quot; &quot;The beginning?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I drifted off, mumbling incoherently, and the
doctors left. I was alone now with Jim. &quot;Poor little
world,&quot; I said. &quot;Poor little world . . . poor little
world.&quot; Later I opened my eyes and found that Jim had gone,
too. I sat up and looked around for him, rubbing my eyes with my
fists. But the room was deserted. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Jim? Did you go away, Jim, or are you really
here? Maybe you're still here, and I just can't see you. Could it
actually happen? Of course it couldn't. But then, how can I tell?
I'm under the influence of a drug. Oh, you shouldn't have gone
away, Jim. Did you go away, or didn't you? Are you there, Jim?
Where are you?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The door opened. Jim came in. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;I went to the washroom,&quot; he said.
&quot;Is something the matter?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;No,&quot; I said. &quot;Everything's
fine.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A nurse brought us a meal, which we ate at the
desk. Corned beef hash, apricots, sliced pickles, and another pot
of coffee. I shoveled the food down impersonally, much as you
would stoke a furnace, and the process of eating seemed highly
humorous. Biting into the pickles, I could sense their molecular
structure; I had a mouth full of cells and atoms, I thought, and
I could feel my teeth grinding them about. How ridiculous chewing
was. It would have been much easier, I thought, simply to slip
the pickles in through my ribs. I knew it wouldn't work if I
tried it, but I thought nevertheless that it should work. After
all, there was no such thing as a solid; there were only those
spinning atoms, which in turn were only sparks of energy
(whatever that was), and the emptiness of the atomic inner space
must surely be calculated in millions and billions of micromiles.
I stuck my finger in the coffee again&#151;it was hot this time,
but that didn't matter&#151;and I imagined that the end of my
finger had disappeared. I laughed and said that Huxley hadn't
turned into a coffee cup, had he? I, on the other hand, had just
turned into a coffee cup. Which is to say, I and the coffee cup
were the same thing, really; where the one ended, the other
began. The coffee cup, you might say, had turned into me.
Certainly the pickles and hash had turned into me, and those
Hindus clearly had known what they were talking about: it was all
a case of food living on food, and after that becoming food. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After the meal I lay down again and shut my eyes.
In the darkness of my mind I saw a Technicolor display of
weird-looking growths waving about, like plants in a current at
the bottom of the sea. There were stalks and sponges and
fan-shaped objects: pink and green and purple. I thought I might
wander around down there for several centuries, and I wasn't at
all sure that I wanted to. I thought about my family, and it
didn't seem fair to go away so long and leave them
behind&#151;like Rip Van Winkle. What if they needed me for
something, and what if they were all dead when I finally came
back? &quot;Those are organisms,&quot; I said, imagining now that
I had recognized the growths. &quot;I am looking inside my own
eyeball. And those all are parts of my eyeball.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Then I lay still for a time, drifting, and Jim
supposed that I was past the point of no return, comfortable and
happy. Coming up quietly, he slipped a set of stereophonic
earphones onto my head, the big foam-rubber phones snapping over
my ears in a snug fit. A majestic Beethoven chord exploded inside
my brain, and I instantly disappeared. My body no longer existed,
and neither did the world. The world and I had been utterly
annihilated. I could feel the pressure of the earphones; but in
the space between the phones, where my head should have been,
there was absolutely nothing . . . <i>nothing!</i> I was Mind
alone, lost in an icy blue grotto of sound. There was only the
music, and then bright colors that turned out to be musical
notes. The notes danced along a silver staff of music that
stretched from one eternity to another, beyond the planets and
stars and space itself. Red notes. Blue notes. But they had no
substance or dimension, and nothing was real in that empty cavern
between the two earphones. That unbounded abyss. The music rolled
on in orgiastic waves of sound and color, and then I myself was
one of the notes. I was being swept along on the silver staff, at
twice the speed of light, rushing farther and farther away from
my home back there in the Milky Way. In desperation, at the last
possible moment, I reached up with hands I did not own, and I
tore off the earphones. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I was back in the room. But from that point on, it
went wrong. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I sat in a chair, staring at the floor. Jim pulled
back the drapes, filling the room with the last light of day.
Outside in the streets I could hear auto horns honking, and once
a fire engine went by. I felt a terrible depression rising slowly
from the bottom of my soul. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Even out here where I am,&quot; I said,
&quot;I don't know what's going on.&quot; Nobody knew what was
going on. Nobody knew anything. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It seemed to me that my sense of self was
completely gone now. It had been ripped away by the music, and I
had come back without it. Although I knew nothing, I felt that
some awful truth was about to be revealed to me. It was lurking
somewhere just beyond the borders of my comprehension, and very
soon now I should have to come face to face with it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I studied the room, and I realized that I now
formed a continuum with everything in sight. The room seemed to
shimmer in the dying rays of sunlight, and I was aware once more
of the atomic substructure that underlay the visible world of the
senses. It struck me that the visible world was wholly real, and
in no way a deception, but it nevertheless had this underlying
structure which glowed and pulsed like a living force. And it all
ran together in a single composition. This is hard to describe,
and the only analogy I can think of is in painting&#151;for
example, Seurat's huge pointillist canvas, &quot;A Sunday
Afternoon on the Grande Jatte.&quot; The figures on the grass are
real enough, and there is a logic to their placement and
development; if you look closely, however, you will see that the
figures and the grass and the sparkling water are all composed of
tiny dots of color, and these dots all blend together to form a
single scene and a single reality. The lady with her parasol
looks out at the sailboats on the water, and she imagines perhaps
that they are far away and separate; but everything on the canvas
is inexorably locked together in one flowing creation, and the
lady in fact is an extension of the parasol, water, and boats. I
thought of that canvas as I sat in the room, drugged out of my
mind, and it seemed to me that I was locked into my scene just as
inexorably as Seurat's figures were locked into theirs. Dots of
energy or dots of paint, it was all the same. But even this
seemed unsatisfactory, the more I thought of it, and then I
remembered those Van Gogh canvases in which sky and earth swirl
together like magnetic force fields. &quot;That's it,&quot; I
thought. &quot;The reality that flows . . . much better than
dots.&quot; And I pitied poor Van Gogh, if that was his constant
perception. Those raging cypress trees, like tongues of green
flame licking at the heavens&#151;those whirling suns. No wonder
he cut off his ear. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I tried to explain it to Jim. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Instead of trying to figure it out,&quot; he
said, &quot;just try to feel what's happening.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But I didn't like what was happening. I was
starting to remember something, and it seemed to have some
connection with sunlight and a cradle. But what could it be? Then
it came to me that I was gradually remembering my own identity,
like an amnesia victim who slowly recovers his past. Finally it
all fell together, and I remembered who I was. And it was so
simple, really. I was life. I was Being. I was the vibrant force
that filled the room, and was the room. I was the world, the
universe. I was everything. I was that which always was and
always would be. I was Jim, and Jim was me, and we were everybody
else; and everybody else was us, and all of us put together were
the same thing, and that same thing was the only thing there was.
We were not God. We were simply all that there was, and all that
there was wasn't God. It was us, alone. And we were each other,
and nowhere anywhere was there anything else but us, and we were
always the same, the one and only truth. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Jim,&quot; I said, &quot;can you get me out
of this?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Uh-huh. You want to try it another
half-hour?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Yes,&quot; I said. &quot;Let's try it another
half-hour.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Having been reunited with the Ground of my Being, I
wanted urgently to be estranged from it again as quickly as
possible. But I tried to hold on, at least for a while, and I
tried to laugh at the terrifying idea that was building up in my
mind. &quot;I don't want to be God,&quot; I said. &quot;I don't
even want to be city editor.&quot; But it did no good to laugh,
and I stopped trying. Of course I wasn't God, I knew that. But I
was All That There Was, and I didn't want to be that, either. It
was dark now, and I could hear children playing somewhere outside
the hospital&#151; under a street lamp, no doubt&#151;and their
lonely voices filled me with sadness. <i>The children</i>, I
thought. The children, and Jim, and me: we were all the God there
was. And it was sad and awful, because I wanted there to be a
God. For the children at least, if not for me. But the loss of
God was not the worst of it; there was something far worse even
than that. The loss of my little self was not the worst of it;
nor indeed did I regret that at all. It was not what I had lost.
It was what I had gained. I had gained the whole universe, it
seemed, and that was more than I could cope with&#151;more than I
could bear. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I didn't want it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But who was I, who didn't want it? I was Everybody,
the Self. And now I knew what the little selves were for, I
thought. They were a fiction designed to protect the Self from
the knowledge of its own Being&#151;to keep the Self from going
mad. For surely, without them, the Self might be driven to
insanity by the thought of its own audacity, and the thought of
its loneliness, and the thought as well of the danger it was in.
And it <i>was</i> in danger, I knew that perfectly well. Since it
was All That There Was, there was nothing to assure it of its own
immortality. And in fact, I could sense, there was that which
resisted both its Being and Becoming. And this something was
nothing more than Nothingness itself, against which the Self had
exerted its will to Become. Thus the ontic anxiety, as Tillich
expressed it: the ultimate fear of ultimate non-Being. Or so it
seemed, as I struggled with my seven demons; and translating the
Self into selves once more, I imagined that I now understood with
perfect clarity the meaning of a passage that had always haunted
me in Unamuno's story of the good priest Don Emmanuel. That
saintly man had preached to his flock the word of God and the
message of salvation, which gave them great joy. There were
those, however, who perceived that Don Emmanuel himself was a
tormented soul, and one day, while walking in the countryside, a
villager named Lazarus begged the priest to tell him the
truth&#151;the truth above all! And all a-tremble, Don Emmanuel
whispered into the ear of him who had asked: &quot;The truth? The
truth, Lazarus, is perhaps something so unbearable, so terrible,
something so deadly, that simple people could not live with
it!&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Now I thought that I knew this truth: the deadly
and unbearable truth that <i>nobody created us . . . we created
ourselves</i>. That was the horror that we could not live with, I
thought&#151; anything rather than that&#151;and I raved to Jim:
&quot;Tell the truth now, Jim. There is no God, is there? Oh God.
It's awfully hard. Why does life have to be so hard? Why can't
everything be nice? Oh God . . . God. I don't want life to be
this way. Oh God, I can't face this. I'm not ready. I'm not
ready. I don't have what it takes. I don't have the courage to
meet it.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Jim said: &quot;It's an illusion we build up from
the time we're little kids. We don't often encounter&#151;&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; <i>Shut up!</i> &quot;It's too soon, too soon. Too
soon, I tell you. Oh God, we're not supposed to look at this. Not
now. Maybe in a million years, or a billion years, or ten billion
years. But not now, not yet. It was wrong to do this. The drug .
. . not right . . . we shouldn't be fooling with . . .&quot; My
voice trailed off, and I thought about Freud. I thought that
Freud didn't know what he was talking about, and the unconscious
was very simple, really: the unconscious was this knowledge I now
had of ultimate Being, and our repressions of it had their roots
in an existential terror, not neurosis. It was real, and it was
horrifying. It was more than most of us could accept, and thus we
took refuge in smaller identities and well-defined roles,
creating a limited world we could comfortably live in, pretending
all the time there was Something Else. But there was nothing
else, and deep down inside us we knew it, and we suffered. It
took courage to Be, just as Tillich said, and most of us didn't
have that courage. So we rejected our Being&#151;and not by
killing ourselves, because death was impossible, but by denying
our real identity. By refusing to face what we actually were. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Jim,&quot; I said, &quot;we're all there
is.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;That's right, buddy boy.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;God, you're tough. You don't look it, but
you're really tough. I just wish that I . . . Jim . . . Can you
get me out of this?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Sure. Want to try another half-hour
first?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;All right. Another half-hour.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; All That There Was. But even this&#151;<i>even this</i>&#151;was
not the worst of it. I said that I was frightened by what I had
gained, and this was true. But I had lost something, too, and it
was more important to me than my wretched self, and more
important even than God. For along with my own self I had lost
all the other selves as well. I had lost other people. And I
missed them very much. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I wanted there to be someone else. Anyone else. And
if there had been just two of us&#151;really two of us&#151;and
we two were All That There Was, that would not have been so hard.
But there was no one else; there was only the One. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Sitting in that room, I could hear church bells
ringing somewhere, a long way off, and I imagined that they were
Christmas bells. I thought of the holiday season, and the crowds
thronging the downtown streets in the winter night, and the
stores all aglow like boxes of light. Snow falling, and carols
playing on the loudspeakers. And everyone with a home to go to,
and someone there to meet him, and maybe to love him. But someone
else, in any case. I was not feeling sentimental about Christmas
as such; I was thinking rather about the crowds of
people&#151;all of them real, all of them different. And I missed
them so, the people. More than myself, more than God, more than
anything. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It wasn't right, I thought. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Jim,&quot; I said, &quot;get me out of
this.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; So he got the Thorazine, and he got me out of it.
And the doctors let me go home, where there was someone to meet
me. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;I'm not going to hurt anybody,&quot; I said.
&quot;I'm just going to hurt.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I did, too, for several days. Then the mood wore
off, and I went back to the world I knew, and I worked in it.
Sometimes I would catch glimpses of that different world I had
seen in the hospital room, and I would wonder if the experience
was going to start all over again. But it never did. There was
only one time, when I was flying alone in a little airplane, high
over the Illinois prairie. Shut up in the cabin, I felt suddenly
trapped and afraid, and more alone than I cared to be. But I
dropped down out of the clouds to a lower altitude, and I opened
a window, and the feeling passed. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Looking back on the experience, I recall several
things. For one, I never forgot that I was under the influence of
a drug. For another, I was never wholly convinced that the drug's
revelations were true; even during the best moments and worst
moments, a part of me warned that the truth might lie elsewhere,
and I suppose this was my reporter's instinct expressing itself.
For example, the monistic phase might well have been initiated by
my momentary panic when Jim left me alone in the room. And my
pre-experience reading could perhaps explain my failure to detect
any hint of a transcendent reality. Also, I remember a persistent
conviction that the experience itself was wrong. Not false,
necessarily, but wrong. For some unguessed reason, I felt, it
would be better for us not to seek the experience, at least at
this time. And finally, whether my phantoms were real or unreal,
I regret my cowardice in the face of them: I have the feeling
somehow that they might have appeared much friendlier had it been
in my power really to confront them. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I include this epilogue simply as an item of
interest, if it is, and certainly not as a testament. Obviously
there were too many unknown factors involved to draw any
conclusions from the experience, and for my part I have not drawn
any conclusions. Nevertheless, and just the same, it is something
to think about. I shall think about it for the rest of my life. </p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>