
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-72</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-320</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/assassin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044130 text/html 7805
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:41:23 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:58 GMT
Content-length: 7588
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Assassins, The by Philip K. Hitti</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<h1>THE ASSASSINS </h1>

<p><b>by Philip K. Hitti</b> </p>

<p><b>From _The Book of Grass: An Anthology on Indian Hemp_,
edited by George Andrews and Simon Vinkenoog.</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>The Assassin movement, called the &quot;new propaganda&quot;
by its members, was inaugurated by al-Hasan ibn-al-Sabbah (died
in 1124), probably a Persian from Tus, who claimed descent from
the Himyarite kings of South Arabia. The motives were evidently
personal ambition and desire for vengeance on the part of the
heresiarch. As a young man in al-Rayy, al-Hassan received
instruction in the Batinite system, and after spending a year and
a half in Egypt returned to his native land as a Fatimid
missionary. Here in 1090 he gained possession of the strong
mountain fortress Alamut, north-west of Qazwin. Strategically
situated on an extension of the Alburz chain, 10200 feet above
sea level, and on the difficult by shortest road between the
shores of the Caspian and the Persian highlands, this
&quot;eagle's nest,&quot; as the name probably means, gave
ibn-al-Sabbah and his successors a central stronghold of primary
importance. Its possession was the first historical fact in the
life of the new order. </p>

<p>From Alamut the grand master with his disciples made surprise
raids in various directions which netted other fortresses. In
pursuit of their ends they made free and treacherous use of th
dagger, reducing assassination to an art. Their secret
organization, based on Ismailite antecedents, developed an
agnosticism which aimed to emancipate the initiate from the
trammels of doctrine, enlightened him as to the superfluity of
prophets and encouraged him to believe nothing and dare all.
Below the grand master stood the grand priors, each in charge of
a particular district. After these came the ordinary
propagandists. The lowest degree of the order comprised the
&quot;fida'is&quot;, who stood ready to execute whatever orders
the grand master issued. A graphic, though late and secondhad,
description of the method by which the master of Alamut is said
to have hypnotized his &quot;self-sacrificing ones&quot; with the
use of hashish has come down to us from Marco Polo, who passed in
that neighborhood in 1271 or 1272. After describing in glowing
terms the magnificent garden surrounding the elegant pavilions
and palaces built by the grand master at Alamut, Polo proceeds: </p>

<p>&quot;Now no man was allowed to enter the Garden save those
whom he intended to be his ASHISHIN. There was a fortress at the
entrance to the Garden, strong enough to resist all the world,
and there was no other way to get in. He kept at his Court a
number of the youths of the country, from twelve to twenty years
of age, such as had a taste for soldiering... Then he would
introduce them into his Garden, some four, or six, or ten at a
time, having first made them drink a certain potion which cast
them into a deep sleep, and then causing them to be lifted and
carried in. So when they awoke they found themselves in the
Garden. </p>

<p>&quot;When therefore they awoke, and found themselves in a
place so charming, they deemed that it was Paradise in very
truth. And the ladies and damsels dallied with them to their
hearts' content... </p>

<p>&quot;So when the Old Man would have any prince slain, he
would say to such a youth: 'Go thou and slay So and So; and when
thou returnest my Angels shall bear thee into Paradise. And
shouldst thou die, natheless even so will I send my Angels to
carry thee back into Paradise.'&quot; </p>

<p>(from 'The Book of Ser Marco Polo, the Venetian', translated
by Henry Yule, London, 1875.) </p>

<p>The Assassination in 1092 of the illustrious vizir of the
Saljug sultanate, Nizam-al-Mulk, by a fida'i disguised as a Sufi,
was the first of a series of mysterious murders which plunged the
Muslim world into terror. When in the same year the Saljug Sultan
Malikshah bestirred himself and sent a disciplinary force against
the fortress, its garrison made a night sortie and repelled the
besieging army. Other attempts by caliphs and sultans proved
equally futile until finally the Mongolian Hulagu, who destroyed
the caliphate, seized the fortress in 1256 together with its
subsidary castles in Persia. Since the Assassin books andrecords
were destroyed, our information about this strange and
spectacular order is derived mainly from hostile sources. </p>

<p>As early as the last years of the eleventh century the
Assassins had succeeded in setting firm foot in Syria and winning
as convert the Saljug prince of Aleppo, Ridwan ibn-Tutush (died
in 1113). By 1140 they had captured the hill fortress of Masyad
and many others in northern Syria, including al-Kahf, al-Qadmus
and al-'Ullayqah. Even Shayzar (modern Sayjar) on the Orontes was
temporarily occupied by the Assassins, whom Usamah calls
Isma'ilites. One of their most famous masters in Syria was
Rachid-al-Din Sinan (died in 1192), who resided at Masyad and
bore the title shakkh al-jabal', translated by the Crusades'
chroniclers as &quot;the old man of the mountain&quot;. It was
Rashid's henchmen who struck awe and terror into the hearts of
the Crusaders. After the capture of Masyad in 1260 by the
Mongols, the Mamluk Sultan Baybars in 1272 dealt the Syrian
Assassins the final blow. Since then the Assassins have been
sparsely scattered through northern Syria, Persia, 'Uman,
Zanzibar, and especially India, where they number about 150000
and go by the name of Thojas or Mowlas. They all acknowledge as
titular head the Aga Khan of Bombay, who claims descent through
the last grand master of Alamut from Isma'il, the seventh imam,
receives over a tenth of the revenues of his followers, even in
Syria, and spends most of his time as a sportsman between Paris
and London. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>