
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-62</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B033-260</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GENERAL/badboy.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110839 text/html 9332
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:08:31 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:30:26 GMT
Content-length: 9115
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Story Of The Bad Little Boy by Mark Twain</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<h1>The Story Of The Bad Little Boy </h1>

<p><b>By Mark Twain, 1875</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Once there was a bad little boy whose name was Jim - though,
if you will notice, you will find that bad little boys are nearly
always called James in your Sunday-school books. It was strange,
but still it was true that this one was called Jim. </p>

<p>He didn't have any sick mother either - a sick mother who was
pious and had the consumption, and would be glad to lie down in
the grave and be at rest but for the strong love she bore her
boy, and the anxiety she felt that the world might be harsh and
cold towards him when she was gone. Most bad boys in the
Sunday-books are named James, and have sick mothers, who teach
them to say, &quot;Now, I lay me down,&quot; etc. and sing them
to sleep with sweet, plaintive voices, and then kiss them
good-night, and kneel down by the bedside and weep. But it was
different with this fellow. He was named Jim, and there wasn't
anything the matter with his mother - no consumption, nor
anything of that kind. She was rather stout than otherwise, and
she was not pious; moreover, she was not anxious on Jim's
account. She said if he were to break his neck it wouldn't be
much loss. She always spanked Jim to sleep, and she never kissed
him good-night; on the contrary, she boxed his ears when she was
ready to leave him. </p>

<p>Once this little bad boy stole the key of the pantry, and
slipped in there and helped himself to some jam, and filled up
the vessel with tar, so that his mother would never know the
difference; but all at once a terrible feeling didn't come over
him, and something didn't seem to whisper to him, &quot;Is it
right to disobey my mother? Isn't it sinful to do this? Where do
bad little boys go who gobble up their good kind mother's
jam?&quot; and then he didn't kneel down all alone and promise
never to be wicked any more, and rise up with a light, happy
heart, and go and tell his mother all about it, and beg her
forgiveness, and be blessed by her with tears of pride and
thankfulness in her eyes. No; that is the way with all other bad
boys in the books; but it happened otherwise with this Jim,
strangely enough. He ate that jam, and said it was bully, in his
sinful, vulgar way; and he put in the tar, and said that was
bully also, and laughed, and observed &quot;that the old woman
would get up and snort&quot; when she found it out; and when she
did find it out, he denied knowing anything about it, and she
whipped him severely, and he did the crying himself. Everything
about this boy was curious - everything turned out differently
with him from the way it does to the bad James in the books. </p>

<p>Once he climbed up in Farmer Acorn's apple-tree to steal
apples, and the limb didn't break, and he didn't fall and break
his arm, and get torn by the farmer's great dog, and then
languish on a sick bed for weeks, and repent and become good. Oh!
no; he stole as many apples as he wanted and came down all right;
and he was all ready for the dog too, and knocked him endways
with a brick when he came to tear him. It was very strange -
nothing like it ever happened in those mild little books with
marbled backs, and with pictures in them of men with
swallow-tailed coats and bell-crowned hats, and pantaloons that
are short in the legs, and women with the waists of their dresses
under their arms, and no hoops on. Nothing like it in any of the
Sunday-school books. </p>

<p>Once he stole the teacher's pen-knife, and, when he was afraid
it would be found out and he would get whipped, he slipped it
into George Wilson's cap - poor Widow Wilson's son, the moral
boy, the good little boy of the village, who always obeyed his
mother, and never told an untruth, and was fond of his lessons,
and infatuated with Sunday-school. And when the knife dropped
from the cap, and poor George hung his head and blushed, as if in
conscious guilt, and the grieved teacher charged the theft upon
him, and was just in the very act of bringing the switch down
upon his trembling shoulders, a white-haired improbable justice
of the peace did not suddenly appear in their midst, and strike
an attitude and say, &quot;Spare this noble boy - there stands
the cowering culprit! I was passing the school-door at recess,
and unseen myself, I saw the theft committed!&quot; And then Jim
didn't get whaled, and the venerable justice didn't read the
tearful school a homily and take George by the hand and say such
a boy deserved to be exalted, and then tell him to come and make
his home with him, and sweep out the office, and make fires, and
run errands, and chop wood, and study law, and help his wife to
do household labors, and have all the balance of the time to
play, and get forty cents a month, and be happy. No; it would
have happened that way in the books, but it didn't happen that
way to Jim. No meddling old clam of a justice dropped in to make
trouble, and so the model boy George got thrashed, and Jim was
glad of it because, you know, Jim hated moral boys. Jim said he
was &quot;down on them milk-sops.&quot; Such was the coarse
language of this bad, neglected boy. </p>

<p>But the strangest thing that ever happened to Jim was the time
he went boating on Sunday, and didn't get drowned, and that other
time that he got caught out in the storm when he was fishing on
Sunday, and didn't get struck by lighting. Why, you might look,
and look, all through the Sunday-school books from now till next
Christmas, and you would never come across anything like this. Oh
no; you would find that all the bad boys who go boating on Sunday
invariably get drowned; and all the bad boys who get caught out
in storms when they are fishing on Sunday infallibly get struck
by lightning. Boats with bad boys in them always upset on Sunday,
and it always storms when bad boys go fishing on the Sabbath. How
this Jim ever escaped is a mystery to me. </p>

<p>This Jim bore a charmed life - that must have been the way of
it. Nothing could hurt him. He even gave the elephant in the
menagerie a plug of tobacco, and the elephant didn't knock the
top of his head off with his trunk. He browsed around the
cupboard after essence of peppermint, and didn't make a mistake
and drink aqua fortis. He stole his father's gun and went hunting
on the Sabbath, and didn't shoot three or four of his fingers
off. He struck his little sister on the temple with his fist when
he was angry, and she didn't linger in pain through long summer
days, and die with sweet words of forgiveness upon her lips that
redoubled the anguish of his breaking heart. No; she got over it.
He ran off and went to sea at last, and didn't come back and find
himself sad and alone in the world, his loved ones sleeping in
the quiet churchyard, and the vine-embowered home of his boyhood
tumbled down and gone to decay. Ah! no; he came home as drunk as
a piper, and got into the station-house the first thing. </p>

<p>And he grew up and married, and raised a large family, and
brained them all with an axe one night, and got wealthy by all
manner of cheating and rascality; and now he is the infernalist
wickedest scoundrel in his native village, and is universally
respected, and belongs to the Legislature. </p>

<p>So you see there never was a bad James in the Sunday-school
books that had such a streak of luck as this sinful Jim with the
charmed life.<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>