
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B024-316</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/testneg.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124413 text/html 11548
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:44:03 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:36 GMT
Content-length: 11330
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Test Negative A look at the &quot;evidence&quot;
justifying illicit-drug tests</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h1><font size="3">Test Negative A look at the
&quot;evidence&quot; justifying illicit-drug tests</font></h1>

<p><font size="3">SCIENCE and the CITIZEN</font></p>

<p><font size="3">SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN March 1990, p. 18</font></p>

<p><font size="3">John Morgan</font></p>

<p><font size="3">More than eight million working Americans had
their urine tested for illegal drugs in 1989, and as many as 15
million will undergo such testing this year, according to the
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). The fraction of
companies that subject employees or job applicants to testing has
jumped from 21 percent in 1986 to more than 50 percent last year,
according to the American Management Association. The trend seems
likely to continue: a majority of the respondents to a recent
Gallup poll favored random drug testing of all workers.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">What underlies the broad acceptance of a
practice that conservative Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia
has called a &quot;needless indignity?&quot; One factor may be
the alarming statistics cited by testing advocates to demonstrate
the high costs of drug abuse. Examination of some of these claims
suggests that they do not always accurately reflect the research
on which they are based. In fact, some of the data could be used
to &quot;prove&quot; that drug use has negligible or even
beneficial effects. Consider these examples.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Last year President George Bush declared that
&quot;drug abuse among American workers costs businesses anywhere
from $60 billion to $100 billion a year in lost productivity,
absenteeism, drug-related accidents, medical claims and
theft.&quot; Variants of this statistic abound in discussions
about drug abuse and are commonly repeated without qualification
by the media. Yet all such claims derive from a single study, one
that &quot;was based upon assumptions which need additional
validation,&quot; according to an assessment last year by NIDA,
the chief federal agency sponsoring research on substance abuse.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The study grew out of a survey of some 3,700
households by the Research Triangle Institute (RTI) in 1982. The
RTI group found that the average reported income of households
with at least one person who admitted to having ever used
marijuana daily (20 days or more in a 30-day period) was 28
percent lower than the average reported income of otherwise
similar households. The RTI researchers defined that difference
in income as &quot;loss due to marijuana use&quot;; the total
loss, when extrapolated to the general population, came to $26
billion. The researchers then added on the estimated costs of
drug-related crime, health problems and accidents to arrive at a
grand total of $47 billion for &quot;costs to society of drug
abuse.&quot; This figure-- &quot;adjusted&quot; to account for
inflation and population increase -- represents the basis of
Bush's statement, according to Henrick J. Harwood, who headed the
RTI study and is now in the White House drug-policy office.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The RTI survey included questions on current
drug use (at least once within the past month). Yet according to
Harwood there was no significant difference between the income of
households with current users of any illegal drug -- including
marijuana, cocaine and heroin -- and the income of otherwise
similar households. Does this mean that current use of even hard
drugs -- as opposed to perhaps a single marijuana binge in the
distant past -- does not lead to any &quot;loss&quot;? &quot;You
would be on safe ground saying that,&quot; Harwood replies.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Officials of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce have
testified before Congress and at national conferences on drug
abuse that employees who use drugs are &quot;3.6 times more
likely to injure themselves or another person in a workplace
accident....[and] five times more likely to file a workers'
compensation claim.&quot; The pharmaceutical giant Hoffmann-La
Roche, which is leading an antidrug campaign among businesses
(and has a big share of the drug-testing market), also
promulgates this claim in &quot;educational&quot; literature.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In fact, the study on which the claim is based
has &quot;nothing to do with [illegal] drug users,&quot;
according to a 1988 article in the University of Kansas Law
Review by John P. Morgan of the City University of New York
Medical School. Morgan, an authority on drug testing, has traced
the Chamber of Commerce claim to an informal study by the
Firestone Tire and Rubber Company of employees undergoing
treatment for alcholism.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In an interview with SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, J.
Michael Walsh, who heads NIDA's applied research division and is
a strong supporter of workplace testing, singled out two studies
that he said showed drug users are more likely to cause
accidents, miss work and use health benefits. The studies were
done at two utilities: the Utah Power and Light Company and the
Georgia Power Company. The 12 workers in Utah and the 116 in
Georgia who served as the primary research subjects were tested
&quot;for cause&quot;: they had either been involved in
accidents, exhibited other &quot;problem&quot; behavior
(commonly, high absenteeism) or submitted to treatment for
alcoholism or drug abuse. Critics point out that it should not be
terribly surprising if these subjects exhibited the cited traits
at a higher-than-average rate.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">What may be surprising is that, according to a
report published by NIDA last year, Utah Power and Light actually
&quot;spent $215 per employee per year less on the drug abusers
in health insurance benefits than on the control group.&quot;
Those who tested positive at Georgia Power had a higher promotion
rate than the company average. Moreover, Georgia workers testing
positive only for marijuana (about 35 percent of all the
positives) exhibited absenteeism some 30 percent lower than
average. Nationwide, Morgan says, marijuana accounts for up to 90
percent of all positive findings, both because it is by far the
most widely used illegal drug and because it persists in urine
for up to a month (compared with two days for most other drugs).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Perhaps the study most publicized of late by
testing proponents involves employees of the U.S. Postal Service.
The service tested 4,396 new hirees in 1987 and 1988 and --
keeping the test results confidential -- tracked the performance
of positives (9 percent of the total) and negatives. By last
September, the service reported, 15.4 percent of the positives
and 10.5 of the negatives had been fired: the positives had also
taken an average of six more sick days a year.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This study may be distorted by more subtle
biases --related to race, age or gender --than those displayed by
the utility studies, according to Theodore H. Rosen, a
psychologist and a consultant on drug testing. Indeed, Jacques L.
Normand, who headed the study, acknowledges that minority postal
workers tested positive at a much higher rate than nonminority
workers and that previous studies have shown minorities to have
higher absenteeism.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Morgan points out, moreover, that the Postal
Service study (like all those cited above) has not been published
in a peer-reviewed journal. In fact, he says, only one study
comparing the work of drug-test positives and negatives has
passed peer review. Last year, in the JOURNAL OF GENERAL INTERNAL
MEDICINE, David C. Parish of the Mercer University School of
Medicine in Georgia reported on a study of 180 hospital
employees, 22 of whom had tested positive after being hired.
Parish examined supervisor evaluations and other indexes and
found &quot;no difference between drug-positive and drug-negative
employees&quot; at the end of one year. He noted, however, that
11 of the negatives had been fired during that period and none of
the positives.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Proponents of testing often imply that drug use
among workers is growing. A Hoffman-La Roche brochure, for
example, quotes Walsh pronouncing that &quot;the problem of drug
abuse has become so widespread in America that every company must
assume that its employees will eventually be faced with a
substance abuse problem.&quot; Yet in 1989 NIDA reported that
illegal drug use has been decreasing for 10 years and that the
decline has accelerated over the last five years. From 1985 to
1988 the number of current users (at least once in the last
month) of marijuana and cocaine dropped by 33 and 50 percent,
respectively.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">To be sure, a subset of this group of current
users is increasing: NIDA estimated that from 1985 to 1988 the
number of people using cocaine at least once a week rose from
647,000 to 862,000 and daily users increased from 246,000 to
292,000. NIDA found that addiction to cocaine (including
&quot;crack&quot;) is particularly severe among the unemployed --
who are beyond the reach of workplace testing.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Clearly, the U.S. has a drug-abuse problem.
Could it be that neither indiscriminate testing of workers --
which could cost upward of $500 million this year -- nor the
dissemination of alarmist information by testing advocates is
helping to resolve that problem? </font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>