
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-33</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B008-294</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/downshow.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040246 text/html 13114
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:02:34 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:02 GMT
Content-length: 12896
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>America Held Prisoner by Hugh Downs</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h2 align="center">AMERICA HELD PRISONER </h2>

<p align="center"><b>by Hugh Downs</b> </p>

<p align="center"><b>Recorded: April 14, 1994</b> </p>

<p align="center">&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>I received a letter from Mr. Clifford A. Schaffer recently.
Clifford Schaffer is the co-author of the Resolution for a
Federal Commission on Drug Policy, the now famous Hoover
Resolution that seeks to end the violence caused by the infamous
war on drugs. </p>

<p>I long ago realized that a shooting war waged against a
medical condition is inappropriate. I have never really
understood why it is that so many individuals in the government
could have chosen such an ill-advised and disastrous course, and
perhaps I never will understand. But Mr. Schaffer tells me that
the situation is worse than I had imagined. </p>

<p>I should say at the outset that I learned that Clifford
Schaffer is the man who coined that most quotable of quotes,
&quot;More Colombians die from American tobacco than the number
of Americans who die from Colombian cocaine.&quot; I have found
this particular fact a sobering notion to ponder and have
repeated it, even on this program. Now that I know the source, he
should get credit. His letter contained many such startling facts
about the bloody and unjust &quot;war against drugs&quot; --
facts that made me stop and wonder why we continue to fight it.
Mr. Schaffer tells me that in six short years, in the year 2000,
the United States of America will have a prison population bigger
than all the Nazi concentration camps put together. </p>

<p>Let's put this projection into perspective. Mr. Schaffer says,
&quot;Right now we have about 1.3 million people in prison. More
than 600,000 of them are there for non-violent drug offenses. For
every person who died from illegal drugs last year, 150 people
went to prison. Most of them were black men.&quot; </p>

<p>The expense of maintaining a prison population is staggering.
If nearly half of them don't belong there, then something is
terribly wrong. </p>

<p>As the drug war escalates, more prisoners will be taken and
more dead and wounded will litter our streets. Remember, by the
year 2000 we will have more prisoners than all the Nazi
concentration camps combined. Mr. Schaffer's prediction seems
almost incredible, but one look down the street will convince
almost anybody that America is a dangerous place. Many foreign
governments routinely issue warnings to their traveling citizens
that America is a dangerous place. We are, after all, at war. </p>

<p>Drug warriors justify their war against the American people by
claiming that certain illegal drugs are killing our children,
killing adults, and generally ruining our society. But look at
the figures on drugs and death. In a typical year, the
approximate number of people who die from taking cocaine hovers
around 2,500 people. Heroin deaths are less than that, at about
2,000. To give some perspective to these numbers, it's useful to
bear in mind that 2,000 people die every year from taking
aspirin, too. Aspirin can cause catastrophic intestinal bleeding
and death. And can be easily used to that effect, legally, by
suicides. </p>

<p>Tobacco which, so far, is still a legal drug, kills around
400,000 people every year. The government supports tobacco
production, and helps to sell American tobacco products around
the world. Another 50,000 people die from sidestream tobacco
smoke. These deaths occur in people who don't smoke at all; they
just happen to inhale other people's smoke. Ironically, tobacco
is considered such an acceptable drug that, according to Peter
McWilliams, four major tobacco companies (in other words, drug
dealers) became &quot;partners&quot; in the anti-drug group
Partnership for a Drug-Free America. </p>

<p>Every year, approximately 10,000 people die from prescription
drugs. Some of these deaths are due to miscalculated
self-medication; others are due to interaction with existing
medical conditions (or with other drugs) that were unforeseen or
ignored by the prescribing physician; and I'd guess that some of
these deaths were intentional suicides too. </p>

<p>The total number of deaths due to all the illegal drugs
combined is about 4,500 people. Now compare 4,500 deaths with the
number of deaths due to prescription drugs, alcohol (which is
about 80,000 people), tobacco, over-the-counter aspirin, and
sidestream smoke. The total number of deaths due to these legal
drugs is well over 500,000 people -- every year. The
multi-billion dollar drug war ignores the half-a-million deaths
due to legal drugs and instead makes the illogical claim that
4,500 deaths due to illegal drugs justifies a multi-billion
dollar shooting war. </p>

<p>So far, I have not mentioned marijuana. Marijuana is illegal
and tens of thousands of non-violent people are in prison because
of it. There are no deaths attributed to marijuana use. Nobody
dies. In fact, Mr. Schaffer tells us that &quot;Even the DEA
itself says that there has not been a recorded death due to
marijuana in the history of the United States.&quot; </p>

<p>Apparently, millions of Americans continue to smoke marijuana
regardless of the law and regardless of the war waged against
them. Neither prohibitive law nor official brutality seems to
have it's intended effect. </p>

<p>There is something else about marijuana which grabs our
attention. Marijuana is also a pharmaceutical drug that has
established therapeutic use in a variety of medical conditions.
But, since it is caught up in the hysteria of the drug war,
doctors are prohibited from conducting research on marijuana and
patients are deprived of its benefits. </p>

<p>A recently published book called Marihuana, the Forbidden
Medicine tells all. The authors of this book are Lester Grinspoon
and James Bakalar. Dr. Grinspoon is a medical doctor and an
associate professor of psychiatry at the Harvard Medical School.
Mr. Bakalar is an associate editor of the Harvard Mental Health
Letter and a lecturer in law in the Department of Psychiatry at
Harvard. </p>

<p>The authors record a surprising number of therapeutic uses for
marijuana -- the list considers more than twenty years of
research. Marijuana counteracts the violent effects of
chemotherapy used in cancer treatment --- and to those who say
that marijuana must be bad because it is smoked and smoking is
bad, Dr. Grinspoon points out that the more powerful strains of
marijuana found today actually require less smoking to obtain
therapeutic levels. Patients consistently report that synthetic
versions do not work. </p>

<p>The pressure on the eyes resulting from glaucoma is relieved
with marihuana use. The amelioration of other conditions, too,
are on record; and conditions that include epilepsy, multiple
sclerosis, paraplegia and quadriplegia; AIDS; chronic pain;
migraine; pruritis; menstrual cramps and labor pain; and even
depression and other mood disorders. </p>

<p>It makes you stop and think. Here is a weed, growing wild that
millions use whether there is a law against it or not. It kills
no one. It has been in continuous use for about 5,000 years that
we know of, and it has recognized medical applications. And yet
the government is waging a deadly and expensive war against it. </p>

<p>This mystery deepens considerably when we learn that the
government sits on an impressive pile of studies that recommend
the decriminalization of, not only marijuana, but of several
other drugs as well. </p>

<p>In 1944, there was the LaGuardia Committee Report; in 1967
there was the Baroness Wootton Report published by the government
of Great Britain. In 1969, the Canadian government published the
Report of the Canadian Government Commission of Inquiry into the
Non-Medical Use of Drugs. In 1972, there was Dealing with Drug
Abuse: A Report to the Ford Foundation. Also in 1972 the
Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs came out. </p>

<p>In 1973, the US Federal Government itself published the Report
of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. In 1980,
the United States Drug Abuse Council published The Facts About
Drug Abuse. In 9182 there was An Analysis of Marijuana Policy and
most recently, the state of California's study titled, The Report
of the California State Research Advisory Panel. </p>

<p>All of these official studies urge decriminalization. The also
add the sensible caution that all drugs are dangerous drugs. Many
drug war proponents are aware of these studies but mysteriously,
they continue a reign of bloodshed in spite of the evidence. They
continue to panic the nation with myths and half truths about
drug use. Based on fictions, and fallacies, the drug warriors
extract billions of dollars from the public treasury and ruin the
lives of people who, in many cases, are already in ruinous
condition and need medical attention. </p>

<p>At the beginning of their book, Dr. Grinspoon and Mr. Bakalar
quote another, earlier Harvard professor, Alfred North Whitehead.
Whitehead said, &quot;The rejection of any source of evidence is
always treason to that ultimate rationalism which urges forward
science and philosophy alike.&quot; </p>

<p>Many Americans are in step with this sentiment and condemn
those people who champion violence and drug hysteria as
committing precisely this kind of treason. The evidence that
urges use to decriminalize drugs and stop the violence is
plentiful. </p>

<p>I find it hard to imagine that the drug warriors are really so
dull-witted that they cannot grasp this evidence or that they
cannot grasp the findings of their peers. In fact, it is entirely
possible that some of them actually do grasp the facts and
dishonestly argue against them. But why would anyone do that? </p>

<p>Dr. Grinspoon and Mr. Bakalar make a fascinating suggestion as
to why this could be true. They say, &quot;Attitudes toward
minorities, work, worldly success and failure, sex and family
life may be the real issues in the controversy about drugs. Drugs
are symbols charged with cultural tension. Repressed anxieties
may be displaced onto drug users as a form of scapegoating.&quot;
</p>

<p>The authors point out that &quot;We do not fine or jail the
patients of someone who practices medicine without a license, or
the customers of a manufacturer who disobeys consumer protection
laws, yet mere possession of cannabis and other illicit
psychoactive drugs is a Federal crime. The metaphor of war is
rarely invoked in the name of consumer protection but constantly
used in the assault on psychoactive drugs. The reason is that
laws controlling these drugs are ultimately aimed not at consumer
protection but at containing what is believed to be a threat to
the social fabric and moral order.&quot; </p>

<p>But, in light of all the government studies, and the growing
number of Americans who have signed the Hoover Institution's
Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy, it is right
to wonder if the drug soldiers themselves might not have fallen
over on the wrong side of the moral fence. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>