
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-89</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B019-30</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044804 text/html 15563
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:47:57 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:15 GMT
Content-length: 15345
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Statement of Clinton M. Hester, Assistant General Counsel,
Treasury Dept.</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->

<h1>Statement of Clinton M. Hester, </h1>

<p><b>Assistant General Counsel, Treasury Department</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>MR. HESTER: The purpose, Mr. Chairman, of H.R. 6906 s to
employ the Federal taxing power to raise revenue by imposing
occupational and transfer taxes upon dealings in marihuana and to
discourage the widespread use of the drug by smokers and drug
addicts. </p>

<p>The flowering tops, leaves, and seeds of the hemp plant
contain a dangerous drug, known as marihuana. The drug is used
only to a negligible extent by the medical profession. In fact,
last year only 4 out of every 10,000 prescriptions contained
marihuana. The drug is prescribed as a sedative, but is used very
rarely by the medical profession because the effect of the drug
is so variable that a physician cannot tell how his patient will
react to the drug and because there are so many better
substitutes. </p>

<p>The plant also has many industrial uses. From the mature stalk
fiber is produced which in turn is manufactured into twine, and
other fiber products. From the seeds, oil is extracted which is
used in the manufacture of such products as paint, varnish,
linoleum, and soap. From hemseed cake, the residue of the seed
after the oil has been extracted, cattle feed and fertilizer are
manufactured. In addition, the seed is used as special feed for
pigeons. </p>

<p>Marihuana is often used illicitly by smoking it in crudely
prepared cigarettes which are readily procurable in almost all
parts of the country at prices ranging from 10 to 25 cents each.
Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed and all
power of directing and controlling thought is lost. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: Do you mean that the cigarettes cost 25 cents
each?<br>
MR. HESTER: They are manufactured illicitly and that is the price
that the peddlers actually get for them. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: That is per cigarette and not per package? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is per cigarette. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: For one cigarette? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is right. </p>

<p>Inhibitions are released. As a result of these effects, many
violent crimes have been and are being committed by persons under
the influence of this drug. Not only is marihuana used by
hardened criminals to steel them to commit violent crimes, but is
also being placed in the hands of high-school children in the
form of marihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Its
continued use results many times in impotency and insanity. </p>

<p>Two objectives have dictated the form of H.R. 6906, first, the
development of a plan of taxation which will raise revenue and at
the same time render extremely difficult the acquisition of
marihuana by persons who desire it for illicit uses, and second,
the development of an adequate means off publicizing dealings in
marihuana in order to tax and control the traffic effectively. </p>

<p>This bill is modeled upon both the Harrison Narcotics Act and
the National Firearms Act, which were designed to accomplish
these same general objectives with respect to opium and coca
leaves, and firearms, respectively. </p>

<p>Under the provisions of this bill all legitimate handlers of
marihuana, are required to pay occupational taxes as follows:
Manufacturers, compounders, and importers, $24 per year;
producers, $5 per year; dealers, $3 per year; practitioners
(doctors, dentists, veterinarians, and other of like character),
and persons who use marihuana for experimental purposes, $1 per
year. These persons, in addition to paying the occupational tax,
must register with the collector of Internal Revenue and file
information returns as to their dealings in marihuana. </p>

<p>However, as an additional means of bringing the traffic in
marihuana into the open, the bill requires all transfers of
marihuana to be made in pursuance of the official order forms
issued by the Secretary of the Treasury, upon which the details
of the transaction are set forth. In order to raise additional
revenue and to prevent transfers to persons who would use
marihuana for undesirable purposes, a transfer tax is imposed
upon each transfer of marihuana. Upon transfer to registered
persons, this tax is $1 per ounce, while, upon transfers to
non-registered persons, who under ordinary circumstances will be
the illicit users of marihuana, a heavy tax off $100 is imposed.
Heavy criminal penalties are provided for the manufacturing,
producing, or dealing in marihuana without registering and paying
the special taxes, for transferring marihuana not in pursuance of
an order form, and for acquiring marihuana without payment of the
transfer tax. </p>

<p>Thus, the bill is designed, through the occupational tax and
the order form procedure, to publicize legitimate dealings in
marihuana and through the $100 transfer tax to prevent the drug
from coming into the hands of those who will put it to illicit
uses. </p>

<p>The production and sale of hemp and its products for
industrial purposes will not be adversely affected by this bill.
In general, the term &quot;marihuana&quot; is defined in the bill
as to include only the flowering tops, leaves, and seeds of the
hemp plant, and to exclude the mature stalk, oil, and meal
obtained from the seeds of the plant, and sterilized seed,
incapable of germination. </p>

<p>Under this definition of &quot;marihuana&quot; the hemp
producer will pay a small occupational tax but his fiber products
will be entirely exempt from the provisions of the bill,
including the order form and transfer tax provisions. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: This means the farmer will pay $5? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is right. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: That is all he will have to pay? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is all he will have to pay. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: And it makes no difference how extensive his
acreage is? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: No, $5 is the limit. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: It is $5 whether he cultivates an acre or 10
acres? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is right. </p>

<p>The same is true of seed produced by the hemp grower for sale
for the further production of the plant, for the manufacture of
oil or for birdseed, except that such transfers will be made
subject to regulations designed to prevent diversion of the seed
for illegal purposes. </p>

<p>Similarly, the manufacturers of oil and the byproducts of
seed, such as hemp seed cake and meal, will pay an occupational
tax, but their purchases of seed and sales of such oil, cake, and
meal will be entirely exempt from the provisions of the bill
except that the purchasers of such seed will be subject to
regulation designed to prevent diversion. </p>

<p>Manufacturers of birdseed will also pay an occupational tax,
but their purchases of seed will be exempt from the transfer tax
and order form provisions of the bill, if carried out in
accordance with regulations. Further, under the definition of
marihuana, the bill will not apply to their sales of birdseed, if
the hemp seed contained therein is sterilized so as to be
incapable of germination. </p>

<p>I might say at this point that this provision with respect to
the birdseed was worked out with the birdseed people, and those
who appeared before the Ways and Means Committee approved that
provision. </p>

<p>Now, this is an important provision, this particular provision
right here that we are discussing. </p>

<p>Notwithstanding, as already shown, that under the bill the
producers of hemp will only pay a small occupational tax and make
their purchases and sales of seed subject to regulations, some
suggestion has been made that the producers be entirely
eliminated from the bill. Such an exemption, however, is believed
to be impossible. </p>

<p>The imposition of an occupational tax enables the Government
constitutionally to make it illegal to engage in the occupation
without payment of the tax. Thus, unless the Congress in this
bill imposes an occupational tax on the producer of the hemp,
Congress cannot make the production of hemp for illicit purposes
illegal. Hence, if the occupational tax is not imposed upon
producers, marihuana may be legally produced for illicit
purposes. Furthermore, the imposition of an occupational tax
enables the Government to require the taxpayer to furnish
information in connection with the business taxed. This would
permit the Government to ascertain where the legitimate
production of hemp is being carried on, and having this
information, it can stamp out the illicit production more
effectively. Obviously, therefore, the legitimate producers of
hemp cannot be further exempted from the provisions of the bill.
Otherwise, the bill cannot be enforced. </p>

<p>Aside from the reasons stated as to why it is believed to be
impossible to further exempt the producers of hemp from the
provisions of the bill, attention is invited to the fact that the
primary purpose of this legislation is to raise revenue. </p>

<p>That completes my statement, and we have witnesses present. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: Do I understand you to say that the primary
purpose of the bill is to raise revenue? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: The primary purpose of this legislation must be to
raise revenue, because we are resorting to the taxing clause of
the Constitution and the rule is that if on the face of the fill
it appears to be a revenue bill, the courts will not inquire into
any other motives that the Congress may have had in enacting this
legislation. </p>

<p>This bill is modeled on the Harrison Narcotics Act and the
National Firearms Act. The Harrison Narcotics Act has been
sustained by the Supreme Court, the first time by a 5-to-4
decision, and a second time by a 6-to-3 decision. The Supreme
Court in March of this year sustained the constitutionality of
the National Firearms Act, insofar as it related to the
occupational tax. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: The Harrison Narcotics Act you say was before
the Supreme Court twice. Was there a change in the judges between
the time of the first decision and the time of the second
decision? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: I do not know whether there was a new judge placed
upon the bench at that time or not, but the vote was 6-to-3 the
second time. That was some years later. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: What was the date of the 6-to-3 decision? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: 1927 </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: Justice Stone went on the Supreme Court at that
time? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: He went on the Court in the Coolidge
administration. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: That is right. </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: Yes, he was on. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: When was the first decision? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: The first decision was about 1918. I think it was
about that time. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Mr. Hester, will you give us a summary of the
history of the state legislation respecting marihuana? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: Every state in the Union has legislation
regulating the traffic in marihuana. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Is there fairly uniform law on the subject
among the states? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: Yes, it is fairly uniform. In some states they
prohibit entirely all production of marihuana. I think there are
six states that prohibit the production of marihuana, and it
probably could be constitutionally done by the Congress. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: That is, there could be a prohibition? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is right. But you would have to prohibit it
entirely and of course you would put all of these legitimate
industries out of business. The Supreme Court has held that where
on the face of the act it appears to be a taxing measure, the
fact that it happens to be prohibitive in character will not
affect the constitutionality of it. But we have tried throughout
this measure not to interfere materially with the production of
marihuana, but to permit it, and to do it in a manner which will
enable the Government to stamp out this illicit traffic in the
sale of it. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Say you are in this situation: You have a plant
that produces several articles that are valuable commercially. </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is right. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: At the same time, as a byproduct the leaves and
the seeds can be used for marihuana? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is right. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: That is the deleterious part of it. </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is correct. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: As Senator Davis suggests, I think it would be
valuable if you would summarize the state legislation, first
informing us as to what the fairly uniform general legislation is
upon the subject, and then giving us the names of the states that
have prohibited the use of marihuana. </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: May we present a memorandum for inclusion in the
record on that because we really do not have that at the moment? </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Yes. </p>

<p>(included table) </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: We have with us this morning Commissioner
Anslinger, of the Bureau of Narcotics, who is in charge of the
enforcement of the Harrison Narcotics Act, and who will have
charge of the enforcement of this act if this legislation be
enacted into law. He is prepared to testify on the necessity of
the legislation and the practical situations. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: All right. Thank you, Mr. Hester. We will hear
from Mr. Anslinger. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>