
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-63</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B008-10</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/dpf91.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035951 text/html 16829
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:59:45 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:57 GMT
Content-length: 16611
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>My Seven-Point Plan for Post-Prohibition Drug Policy</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<h1 align="center">A SEVEN-POINT POST-PROHIBITION DRUG POLICY </h1>

<p align="center"><font size="2">by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD </font></p>

<h1 align="center">Summary of My 1989 Paper and Some Retractions </h1>

<h4><font size="2">SUMMARY OF THE 1989 PAPER</font> </h4>

<p><font size="2">In Chapter 6 of <i>Drug Policy 1989-1990</i>
(1), I made two important points: (1) according to strict logic,
drugs are already legal; i.e., the laws against drugs are
unconstitutional, and (2) prohibited drugs have many valid uses
and do not constitute a threat to society. The laws against drugs
violate the rights to liberty and the pursuit of happiness as
retained by the people in accordance with the Ninth Amendment and
they violate the freedom of religion clause in the First
Amendment because: (i) taking or not taking drugs is a moral
choice and moral choices are religious choices and (ii) taking
drugs can be construed to be a religious ritual. The idea that
the illegal drugs have no legitimate uses and are a threat to
society is an unstated assumption of prevention and treatment
proponents. Even if it is stated, it is incorrect and invalidates
arguments based upon it, as shown in my 1990 paper (2).</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In the 1989 paper, I impugned the motives of
some of the anti-drug crowd, I enumerated some of the lies told
by drug prevention people, and I expressed skepticism of
treatment programs. I pointed out that psychiatrists, psychiatric
assistants, psychologists, social workers, counselors,
therapists, etc. have a great deal to lose if the drug problem
goes away. </font></p>

<h4><font size="2">SOME RETRACTIONS</font> </h4>

<p><font size="2">But, some of my ideas on the drug problem have
evolved over the past years. I no longer believe that the
government should be entrusted with the task of disseminating
information or educating the public on drugs. Look what
government has done with the public schools, where teachers and
prevention specialists tell terrible lies about drugs and
promulgate biased political, economic, and metaphysical views of
life (2). The job of informing can be handled adequately by
private groups of drug users who are in a position to teach the
responsible, safe, and rewarding uses of drugs, to warn of the
dangers of drugs, and to counteract the propaganda of other
private organizations who wish to limit freedom. Also, whereas I
said that the repeal of prohibition &quot;would return many
talented people to the workplace&quot;, I am now convinced that
the workplace will have to change substantially, creating
opportunities for all kinds of people rather than exclusively for
clones of the &quot;ideal worker&quot;, before talented people
possessed of genuine individuality will return.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In 1989, I said that people must be allowed to
take drugs &quot;in the privacy of their own homes or in other
places set aside for that purpose&quot;. Many people labor under
the incorrect assumption that people use drugs merely to get
high, whereas, in many cases, they use drugs to achieve an
important goal. I now believe the using of drugs must be
facilitated nearly everywhere (so long as the rights of
nonsmokers are protected), particularly in workplaces, schools,
concert halls, museums, etc. Isn't it a little hypocritical to
enjoy, in a place where drugs are prohibited, the works of people
who took drugs to produce art!</font> </p>

<h1 align="center">The Defeat of Prevention and Treatment
Proponents at the 1990 Meeting of the Drug Policy Foundation </h1>

<p><font size="2">Alex Stuart (3) wants to re-instill moral
values but couldn't name one. His arguments that drugs are
morally wrong were refuted soundly by a young Harvard student.
Christina Johns (4), Raymond Brown (5), Jerri Husch (6), and
Ellen Luff (7) pointed out, independently, that most prevention
and treatment efforts divert much needed attention from festering
social problems that result in anomie, as Art Hilgart (8) termed
it. (Anomie is the breakdown of social norms due to the
incapacity of people to meet them.) This view was supported to a
certain extent by Clark Hosmer (9) as well. Rufus King declared
&quot;drug abuse&quot; to be a &quot;nonproblem&quot;.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Behavior modification and other authoritarian
methods advocated by Ray Jeffery (10), Patricia Ritter (11), and
Ronald Farrell (11) were not accepted by the audience, whereas
the papers by Wayburn (2) and Luff (7) could not be refuted.
Farrell himself expressed serious doubts about what he is doing.
The &quot;cult of ibogaine&quot; as represented by Howard Lotsof
(12) is discussed below. One of Lotsof's &quot;cured&quot;
&quot;drug addicts&quot; interrupted the meeting repeatedly to
protest that the &quot;cure&quot; had been found and all further
discussion was unwarranted. I didn't get a chance to tell her
that not everyone wants to be &quot;cured&quot;. The cult-like
behavior of the &quot;cured&quot; person probably harmed Lotsof's
case more than it helped it.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The public-health model gained some credibility
from the independent remarks of Steve Jonas and Mary Lynn Mathre
(13), but it is clear that many disease theorists intend to pose
as public-health workers. Henry Blansfield (14) claimed that
there is some scientific evidence that the use of drugs causes
irreversible physiological changes. I pointed out that, even if
&quot;drug abuse&quot; were a disease, and it's not at all clear
that it is, the etiology might belong to medicine, but the
treatment not, particularly if there is none, due to the
irreversible nature of the damage. On the other hand, if science
can supply us with a work-around drug, i.e., a drug that provides
a new mechanism for the body to achieve whatever it could not
previously achieve because of the irreversible damage, we will
take it, but first let's see the drug. In the meantime, any
doctor who claimed to be reversing an irreversible condition,
i.e., curing &quot;drug addiction&quot;, was a quack. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">The political-economic-social system of the
U.S. creates ghastly conflicts in living. Every quack, grifter,
and flim-flam artist wants a piece of the action. Granted, a few
sincere and generous souls, free of the desire for private gain,
wish to help, but political problems don't have long-range
personal or psychological solutions. Of course, those who are
able to ignore the general suffering might improve their own lot
marginally. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Bruce Alexander (15) and Jeffrey Schaler (16)
completed the rout of the disease theory of &quot;drug
addiction&quot;, while Robert Goodman (17) called into question
the concept of &quot;addiction&quot; itself. If there is a gene
for &quot;drug addiction&quot;, let's find it quickly so that
those of us who don't carry it can use drugs without worrying
about &quot;getting hooked&quot;.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Thus, in the 1990 meeting of the Drug Policy
Foundation (DPF), advocates of prevention by authoritarian means
rather than by transforming society and advocates of treatment
were fairly well defeated in debate by those who don't accept the
popular notion that drug use is a problem that needs to be
prevented or an illness that needs to be treated. Therefore, the
DPF should abandon its policy of advocating prevention and
treatment as an alternative to law enforcement. One of the
plenary speakers actually addressed the problem of the limits of
what a political person can say publicly. I would have liked to
ask, &quot;Are these talks (the plenary talks), then, to be taken
as true or false? I mean, do you people really believe what
you're saying or are you saying what is merely politically
expedient?&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I believe that the important thing is to
produce a body of statements that have meaning and to approach
the truth (the congruence of statements with events) as closely
as possible. This, then, will be disseminated into the collective
consciousness of humanity and affect the way people think and
act. When enough people think and act appropriately, appropriate
change will be inevitable. We must always refer to an ideal to
know what to think and do. It doesn't help to create a politics
with no philosophical basis. Being &quot;realistic&quot; is just
an excuse for being wrong. We need to understand without worrying
about what is &quot;acceptable&quot; and what is not. Then, we
need to find a felicitous way to speak the truth recognizing that
we are fallible.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Instead of accepting the monopoly of the
control of drugs by the medical profession, we should say we will
never accept such a state of affairs and would rather see no
change in national policy until that eventuality is swept out of
the collective mind. In the meantime, we can lend our own
personal aid to those who are the most abused in the most acute
ways by the status quo, whether our help lies inside or outside
the law. Presumably, what some members of the ACLU are doing
renders aid within the law as far as it can be rendered in case a
person's liberty be violated.</font> </p>

<h1 align="center">My Seven-Point Plan </h1>

<p><font size="2">My new plan for post-prohibition society
consists of the following: (1) an equal-rights amendment for drug
users, (2) teaching people how to live with drugs, to choose them
wisely, and to use them properly (to get the most out of them and
to prevent accidents, disease, and unpleasant side-effects), (3)
new opportunities for drug users, heteroclites, and other people
who are &quot;different&quot; to make contributions to society in
appropriate nonstandard settings including settings where one can
work while using drugs, (4) during the transition, reparations
for victims of the laws against drugs amounting to whatever they
need to live abundantly, and (5) free informal counseling for
troubled or troublesome drug users <i>by</i> drug users. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Since, it must be admitted, some people who are
taking drugs might like to stop - even in a normalized society, I
propose two additional &quot;points&quot;: (6) institutions like
commercial hotels that cost no more than hotels and that have all
the amenities of hotels and more, e.g, VCRs and videotape
libraries and books, except that the (voluntary) guest may not
leave for a fixed period of time agreed upon in advance (by the
guest) nor indulge in certain drugs beyond agreed upon limits,
which might be monotonically decreasing. Rural locations might
provide better settings with lower real estate costs offset by
higher transportation costs. Only one &quot;medical&quot;
&quot;professional&quot; per shift would be needed, namely, to
dispense medicine. I can say truthfully that I would trust any
drug dealer I have known to perform that job - except for one,
who was generous to a fault. Vouchers could be provided for those
who can't pay. And, finally, (7) new drugs that prevent
withdrawal symptoms and cravings may be used (voluntarily), if
they exist. Such claims have been made lately for the drug
ibogaine (12), but, unless the costs are reduced or borne by the
state, it will not be widely used. Also, the claims may not be
true - or not true in an acceptable mode; i.e., the effectiveness
of ibogaine may depend on &quot;religious&quot; faith, which
might diminish the humanity of the patient. Moreover, those who
have been &quot;cured&quot; by ibogaine may have merely
transferred their allegiance to a new drug, which, in the case of
ibogaine, is long lasting (six months or longer) - at first, but
which, after repeated doses, might &quot;need&quot; to be used
more frequently. Lately, similar effects have been ascribed to
the South American drug yage or one of its derivatives. Actually,
the possibility of switching to a new drug is included under
points (2) and (5) above.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Houston, Texas</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">May 28, 1991</font> </p>

<h1 align="center">References </h1>

<p><font size="2">1. Wayburn, Thomas L., &quot;No One Has a Right
To Impose an Arbitrary System of Morals on Others&quot; in <i>Drug
Policy 1889-1990, A Reformer's Catalogue</i>, Arnold S. Trebach
and Kevin B. Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington,
D.C. (1989). (Abbreviated DPFC) </font></p>

<p><font size="2">2. Wayburn, Thomas L., &quot;Fallacies and
Unstated Assumptions in Prevention and Treatment&quot; in <i>The
Great Issues of Drug Policy</i>, Arnold S. Trebach and Kevin B.
Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington, D.C. (1990).
(Abbreviated GIDP) </font></p>

<p><font size="2">3. Stuart, A. J., &quot;Character and Drug
Policy,&quot; Paper read at 1990 DPF Conference, Preprint
available from National Character Laboratory, Inc., 4635 Leeds
Ave., El Paso, TX 79903. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">4. Johns, Christina Jacqueline,
&quot;Legalization at any Cost&quot; in GIDP. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">5. Brown, Ray M., &quot;The Black Community and
the &quot;War on Drugs&quot;&quot; in GIDP. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">6. Husch, Jerri, &quot;Of Work and Drugs: Notes
on Prevention&quot; in DPFC. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">7. Luff, Ellen, &quot;Political Implications of
Drug/Alcohol Treatment Program Ideologies&quot; in GIDP. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">8. Hilgart, Art, &quot;The Real Drug Menace Is
George Bush&quot; in GIDP. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">9. Hosmer, Clark, &quot;Does Calling Illegal
Drugs Evil Become a Trap&quot; in GIDP. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">10. Jeffery, C. Ray, &quot;A Research Program
for the Early Identification and Treatment of Drug/Alcohol
Addiction&quot; in GIDP. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">11. Farrell, Ronald A., Patricia Ritter, and
Randall G. Shelden, &quot;Notes on a Proposed Substance Abuse
Prevention Program for High-Risk Youth&quot; in GIDP. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">12. Lotsof, Howard, &quot;Ibogaine: An Open
Letter,&quot; Truth Seeker, Vol.117, No.5 (1990). </font></p>

<p><font size="2">13. Mathre, Mary Lynn, &quot;New Treatment
Options after Repeal: Variety and Availability of Treatment for
Clients&quot; in DPFC. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">14. Blansfield, Henry N. and Jane M.,
&quot;Addiction: Crime or Disease&quot; in GIDP. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">15. Alexander, B. K., and L. S. Wong,
&quot;Adverse Effects of Cocaine on the Heart: A Critical
Review&quot; in GIDP. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">16. Schaler, Jeffrey, &quot;Drugs and Free
Will,&quot; Accepted for publication in <i>Society</i>. </font></p>

<ol>
    <li><font size="2">Goodman, Robert, &quot;Addiction?&quot; in
        GIDP.</font> </li>
</ol>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>