
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-78</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B007-342</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/dpf90rev.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035938 text/html 31351
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:59:26 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:06 GMT
Content-length: 31133
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>A Review of the 1990 Drug Policy Foundation Conference</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<h1 align="center">A REVIEW OF THE 1990 DRUG POLICY FOUNDATION
CONFERENCE </h1>

<p align="center"><font size="2">by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD </font></p>

<h1 align="center">The Plenary Sessions </h1>

<p><font size="2">The plenary sessions are elitist. Moreover, I
didn't hear anything new or insightful in the plenary sessions
that I attended. This is to be expected from elitism. The idea of
effecting social change by influencing important people who will
then make their influence felt is not a good idea, in my opinion.
It always seems to involve the institutionalization of at least a
little falsehood because important people got to be important by
embracing falsehood, usually, at least the falsehood, as
distinguished by me according to my philosophy, that it is valid
for one person to enjoy more importance than another. Perhaps, in
order to practice what I preach, I ought to write anonymously. A
nice precedent for that is N. Bourbaki, which is the pseudonym
for a group of (highly elite (!)) mathematicians who wrote an
entire collection of math books covering almost all of basic
advanced math in a French that is accessible to nearly everyone.
One of the plenary speakers actually addressed the problem of the
limits of what a political person can say publicly. I would have
liked to ask, &quot;Are these talks, then, to be taken as true or
false? I mean, do you people really believe what you're saying or
are you saying what is merely politically expedient?&quot; </font></p>

<p><font size="2">I believe (and I think Bruce Alexander said
this too) that the important thing is to produce a body of
statements that have meaning and to approach the truth (the
congruence of statements with events) as closely as possible.
This, then, will be disseminated into the collective
consciousness of humanity and affect the way people think and
act. When enough people think and act appropriately, appropriate
change will be inevitable. We must always refer to an ideal to
know what to think and do. It doesn't help to create a politics
with no basis. Being &quot;realistic&quot; is just an excuse for
being wrong. We need to understand without worrying about what is
&quot;acceptable&quot; and what is not. Then, we need to find a
felicitous way to speak the truth recognizing that we are
fallible. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">If money, for example, is a harmful and
unnecessary institution, it will not help to say otherwise, but
it might be helpful to admit that my proof (and I do have a
proof) is based on assumptions that may not be correct and that
we ought not to dispense with money suddenly but rather favor
measures that lead to its eventual disappearance. So, instead of
saying we will accept the monopoly of the control of drugs by the
medical profession, we should say we will never accept such a
state of affairs and would rather see nothing done (other than
the speaking of the truth) until that eventuality is swept out of
the collective mind. We, on the other hand, can lend our own
personal aid to those who are the most abused in the most acute
ways by the status quo, whether our help lies inside or outside
the law. Presumably, what some members of the ACLU are doing
renders aid within the law as far as it can be rendered in case a
person's liberty be violated. The view that law enforcement
should be replaced by prevention and treatment was fairly well
discredited in the workshops I attended. I shall discuss the
workshops next. </font></p>

<h1 align="center">National Drug Strategy Network </h1>

<p><font size="2">Someone explained the network and handed out
copies of the newsletter, which apparently has some good
late-breaking information. We need reasoning more than we need
news however. The Hemp Tour representative, a young woman,
complained about elitism and certain barriers at the meeting they
(the Hemp Tour) had difficulty dealing with, but, actually, she
held the floor longer than anyone.</font> </p>

<h1 align="center">Health and Science Committee </h1>

<p><font size="2">Lester Grinspoon stated that Kevin Zeese had
asked him to confine our mission to (i) a public-health plan and
(ii) information. Grinspoon and the co-chair, a person whose name
escapes me, thought we ought to forget about the public-health
plan for now and only Jeffrey Schaler was not content to confine
our mission to information. We began with a tremendous amount of
confusion, though, because everyone had a different idea about
who our target should be and what sort of information was
relevant. Someone said we should address ourselves to other
scientists first and I seconded that reminding the room that that
would provide a natural filter for unscientific information. I
neglected (or was afraid) to ask how many of us were
&quot;real&quot; scientists, i.e., people who apply mathematics
to the analysis of models of nature (mathematicians, physicists,
physical chemists, and engineering scientists). (Oh heck, maybe
biologists, psychologists, and some MDs are scientists after all,
but the &quot;real&quot; progress in science has come from
physicists and mathematicians. The Salk vaccine is not to be
compared to the quantum theory or functional analysis.) Timidly I
suggested that if there was a body of valid scientific
information we ought to identify it and protect it from the
infiltration of scientific drivel. Robert Goodman suggested that
we eschew generalities and embrace specifics and I agree that
that's the only way it can be done.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">We agreed that a letter would be written
refuting a recent article in <i>Science</i> and people got
together afterward to arrange to do that. (The more signatures by
famous people, the greater the chance of publication,
regrettably.) Art Leccese wants to get together with me to try to
start a truth squad. I know how to do that in a valid way,
although it sounds scary on the face of it. Actually, Lester was
the one that suggested that one be formed, although, clearly,
that was the import of my suggestion. So from great confusion a
sort of consensus was formed, but it is unclear how our consensus
will have a practical effect. I think if Art and I (and Robert if
he's willing) get together and start a drug literature abstracts
service with thorough specific discrediting of invalid research,
we will have done a great deal. Obviously, we could only survey a
small fraction of the scientific literature at first until we got
institutional help. We might restrict ourselves to pharmacology
and toxicology, omitting epidemiology, and also restrict
ourselves to the journals with the widest circulation. We need an
expert statistician to help us, because &quot;figures don't lie,
but liars figure&quot;.</font> </p>

<h1 align="center">Why Marijuana Should Be Treated Separately </h1>

<p><font size="2">I think they are right about one thing at
least. Marijuana will be treated separately. Dale Gieringer
betrayed a genuine bias against other drugs. &quot;Our drug is
cool, but your drug is bad.&quot; I talked about that in my first
drug paper. Also, Don Fiedler said &quot;other drugs&quot; twice
but &quot;harder drugs&quot; once, without saying in what sense
&quot;harder&quot;. I would never agree to separate treatment for
marijuana, but, if they want to treat marijuana separately, they
must announce that this is a compromise. If they do not, I will
fight them just hard as I would fight someone who wants to treat
alcohol separately. Gieringer used a specious argument about
marijuana having a constituency and, since heroin addicts don't
demand rights, they are not entitled to any. Richard Cowan, the
libertarian, claiming to speak the absolute truth, spoke what is
almost certainly an untruth, namely, that marijuana is the least
dangerous drug. Now, there are millions, perhaps an infinite
number if we count the undiscovered drugs, so the probability
that marijuana is the least harmful is nearly zero. I suggested
yohimbine (an aphrodisiac discussed in <i>The Naked Lunch</i>) as
a better candidate. Mary Lynn Mathre said that the persistence of
marijuana in the urine might induce some users to switch to
cocaine, say, and, I must admit, I never thought of that. Also,
she defined an addict as anyone who says he (or she) is. I
already commented that this definition is easy to apply but,
perhaps, not too useful, as many people are swayed by their
imaginations. (Maybe this is a good time to interject the
Christian Science interpretation, which, I believe, is
unfalsifiable and, therefore, may not be introduced into
scientific discussion, but it still deserves our attention. (To
be falsifiable means that an experiment or a chain of reasoning
could prove it false if it were false.) Maybe it really is all in
our heads or in the heads of others. In Christian Science, the
reason infants get ill is that they are influenced by the
thinking of those around them. This is what Christian Scientists
call &quot;malpractice&quot;. It is not clear that the infant
experiences the disease or only the adults who observe it do.) </font></p>

<h1 align="center">Alternative Models for Reform </h1>

<p><font size="2">Christina Johns said that no one has addressed
the underlying social causes, but she didn't read last year's
Catalog. I addressed them. She said she would reference me next
time, but she ought to reference Ellen Luff's paper given this
year too. We'll see. I'm going to describe Wasserman's very
interesting paper, which, by the way, contains the first
reference I have ever seen to the work of Joel Feinberg, my Aunt
Mildred's brother. Wasserman points out a number of
inconsistencies and other legal difficulties arising from
half-way measures like excusing the buyer and prosecuting the
seller, non-enforcement, and under-enforcement. Then he gets into
a hot topic - culpability for crimes committed under the
influence. He makes an ambiguous statement, namely, &quot;It is
undisputed that a high proportion of violent crimes are committed
under the influence of alcohol and other drugs.&quot; Does he
means that the drugs influenced the commission of the crime or
that some other aspect of the criminals state or behavior was
influenced by the drug? If the latter, the answer is &quot;So
what&quot;. If the former, the answer is &quot;How would you
know?&quot; All we can do is identify the coincidence of the
events committed, namely, a violent crime and having taken a
drug. No inference about cause and effect can be drawn, nor will
it ever be able to be drawn - in my opinion. Then, he questions
the validity of DWI laws. I have questioned them orally, but this
is the first time I have seen them questioned in print. Good for
him. Potsdam State College (part of SUNY) did an experiment. They
had a bunch of drivers take a skills test sober, then get drunk
and repeat the test. Most subjects did much worse, but the guy
who scored highest sober also scored higher drunk than anyone
else scored sober. True, he hit one pylon when he was drunk, but
he still drove better than any sober person - in the test.
Wasserman likes the Fletcher model whereby the intoxicated
defendant is treated like an accomplice to his own misconduct. He
seems to find fault with other models. But my (ideal) approach
adds this. If the perpetrator does not buy into the moral basis
for the law she (or he) has broken, she cannot be regarded as
having committed a crime. She is a prisoner of war and must be
accorded all the rights and privileges of a captive sovereign
head of state. In particular, if a poor person steals from a rich
person or even commits a violent act upon her (or him), it isn't
a crime if the crime followed naturally from the difference in
wealth, according to my theory. This is war! </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Todd Mikuriya discussed the idea of a drug
cooperative. I don't think it is tenable and the audience wasn't
too receptive either, noting its elitist character. Art Hilgart,
though, thinks more like Luff, Johns, and I (do). He discussed
anomie, the incompatibility of social norms and the incapacity to
meet them. He advocated a public health policy for certain drugs,
but I haven't read his paper. I don't see why we can't make
epidemiological data available to everyone (graphically for those
incapable of dealing with abstractions) and take care of the sick
regardless of how they got sick, given that no one really knows,
except in the most trivial cases (you hit a man over the head
with a hammer ). Hilgart dared to bring up the declining power of
the unions as a possible cause of anomie. Good for him. Clark
Hosmer is not a bad man. (You know I'm going to find fault,
right?) BUT, he wants us to study physiology and to create more
jobs without recognizing what a drag jobs are under the
capitalist system. He makes a nice point, though, about
benefit/cost ratio, but it probably won't wash quantitatively.
It's nice to see a retired army officer espouse a liberal view.
Horst Senger is pushing Say's Law (Say is a competitor of Smith,
Keynes, and Marx). He got hooted down somewhat, mainly because he
just wants to stop people from taking drugs. His advice: let the
government provide them free. But, which drugs? how much? etc. To
conclude, I don't know if the audience was moving toward (i)
let's fix society and (ii) no half-way measures. Maybe.</font> </p>

<h1 align="center">Preventing Drug Abuse with Education </h1>

<p><font size="2">This was better than I thought it would be.
Sandy Burbank, whom I got to know much better, just wants to tell
the truth and Mary Lynn Mathre just wants to heal the sick, never
mind how they got sick (I think), but I haven't read the paper
for bias and falsehood. Alex Stuart wants to re-instill moral
values but couldn't name one. He got put down hard by a young
Harvard student. I felt sorry for him, but I didn't show mercy
either. I stepped out to the john and got back in time for the
discussion. Paul Kelly exercised his prerogative as a Black to
speak at length, which he did at every workshop that we both
attended, while I rushed through my three sentences with my heart
beating wildly because I was unable to distinguish my &quot;right
to be heard&quot; or expected to be treated like a madman. The
Narconon guy was there, but I believe he didn't mention the bad
part about what they are doing. I don't remember what Roberts
said, if I even heard him. </font></p>

<h1 align="center">New Issues in Drug Treatment </h1>

<p><font size="2">Ray Jeffery was thoroughly rejected as was
Patricia Ritter. Ronald Farrell saved himself by expressing
serious doubts about what he is doing, but, if you read his
paper, you hear some ominous terms, cf., conformity, behavior
modification, deviance. After the workshop I commended Jefferey
on the importance of identifying the harm done by heavy metals,
but the appropriate course of action is to prevent - not to
&quot;tag&quot; the victims. I think, by rejecting all the things
that are not permissible, I set up Luff's call for political
action, if I am not jumping too far ahead. The Cult of Ibogaine
was a little disruptive (this is discussed in my contribution to
the 1991 papers) and a young man named Dana thought that it was
hypocritical for people who wear suits and ties to try to change
society when, presumably, only he can change society, but I
sensed a move toward rejecting the disease theory and behavior
modification and recognizing that we need political change. Of
course, as I said, once we get the quacks off our backs, we will
still have to contend with the clergy. Even if there were
supernatural events involved, which, if you read Chapter 3
(available on request) of my book <i>Beyond Competitionism</i>
(working title for work in progress), doesn't make much sense (in
my opinion), the mainstream and fundamentalist clergy aren't
going to be helpful. So, the &quot;new issues&quot; were either
(i) it won't work or shouldn't be done except for ibogaine, IF
ibogaine works and (ii) we can't ignore the political
implications. If Luff's paper, and mine too, are not referenced
next year, it will tell us that something is wrong. [My hope for
ibogaine has cooled considerably since I wrote this.]</font> </p>

<h1 align="center">Addiction: Is It a Disease? </h1>

<p><font size="2">As we all know, this session was in trouble
before it started as &quot;addiction&quot; is undefined and was
never defined, so the use of the word at all begs the question.
Poor Henry Blansfield meant well, but, like us poor sexists, he
revealed his biases by the inadvertent use of one word rather
than another or by the use of a give-away term, cf.,
&quot;unfortunate people&quot;. It reminds me of the Sidney Lumet
film &quot;The Pawnbroker&quot;, wherein the pawnbroker referred
to the black derelict as a &quot;poor creature&quot;, which,
admittedly, is worse. &quot;Don't pity me. Sometimes I wish I
weren't me, but I sure as hell am glad I'm not you.&quot; As I
pointed out, even if it were a disease, and it's not at all clear
that it is, the etiology might belong to medicine, but the
treatment not, particularly if there is none, due to the
irreversible nature of the damage. On the other hand, if medicine
can supply us with a work-around drug, i.e., a drug that provides
a new mechanism for the body to achieve whatever it could not
previously achieve because of the irreversible damage, we will
take it, but first let's see the drug. Medicine wants hegemony
over the resolution of all conflicts in living because it's a
good business. As Shaw said, &quot;Every profession is a
conspiracy against the laity.&quot; I said that any doctor who
claimed to be reversing an irreversible condition, i.e., curing
&quot;drug addiction&quot; would be a quack and I offered as
corroboration the fact that Houston's Dr. George S. Glass
relegates his &quot;patients&quot; to non-medical personnel. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">I agree with Jeffrey Schaler. I didn't hear him
say anything that I think is wrong. Jonas sketched a reasonable
picture of the public health model and made me regret my use of
the term to describe the treatment industry in my paper. As I
said above, they should patch up any bad effects of drugs and,
perhaps, advise when advice is requested without losing sight of
the fact that there are many things in this life worth a little
harm to the health. Bruce Alexander's discussion was very helpful
to me, but I think, when he says there are three choices, he is
leaving out a multitude of other options. But, I would like to
quote his statement &quot;There is nothing more practical than
straight thought.&quot; Reworded it could have been the title of
my paper. These dialectical distinctions are not mere quibbling.
We could end up providing an acceptable life for a few thousand
miserable people now and end up with a totalitarian
therapeutocracy in a thousand years. I liked Robert Goodman's
talk, but I didn't completely understand his paper. Also, his
experiment with the purple triangle is silly. Once it begins
whistling &quot;Dixie&quot;, it is no longer a triangle, so you
can't imagine it. But, the point is well taken. We can't imagine
hunger when we are full. So, that promise to quit tomorrow is
meaningless today.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I think we have seen the disease theory pretty
well discredited even if there is some physiological changes due
to taking drugs. People are going to have to develop a better
dialectic and, finally, the public health model is acceptable as
long as it doesn't get mixed up with values and decisions. I
think that was the consensus I saw being formed.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Paul Kelly was outrageous and Steve Jonas's
action in assuming that he could be the representative of every
black person who wasn't there but should have been there equally
outrageous. Why, then, wasn't I permitted to speak for every
speed and heroin devotee, as opposed to former devotee, who
couldn't be there? [The initial remarks that were in this
paragraph are confidential, but the concluding remarks concerning
the validity of spiritual intuition may be worth passing on -
even out of context.] Chemical and spiritual transformations
occur and may be dual to one another without invoking the
supernatural. The spirit is part of nature too, is it not? My
main point, I guess, is that a person's intuitive feelings about
what happened to him or her cannot be introduced into public
policy because they are not verifiable. Strangely, we want to
pick science's pocket for all the little doodads that are in it,
but we are unwilling to accept the scientific philosophy in
conducting our affairs. That seems a little hypocritical. </font></p>

<h1 align="center">Racism in the War on Drugs </h1>

<p><font size="2">The talks by Siegel, De Vidts, and Aldrich were
informative. Myers brought the focus over to economics, where I
think it belongs, and the moderator, Raymond Brown, mentioned
&quot;all those shiny towers&quot; (skyscrapers) or something
like that. I mentioned to him afterward that, in America, we
imagine that we can have a high standard of living without
producing anything. We are supposed to have an information
economy, which means that we will live by business alone. Take a
look at the section on the work ethic in my separation paper,
&quot;The Separation of the State from the Christian Church&quot;
[1], to see what I think of that. Blacks can produce things that
we need to live, but they are being excluded from the information
economy, because it's based on membership in a club or class of
people who have IT. Meanwhile, the residual minimum-wage or
less-than-living-wage jobs are growing in number and are open to
anyone. I, personally, would not accept a job that required me to
take orders from someone I did not recognize as qualified. The
truth is very nearly this: No one is qualified. As William Morris
said, &quot;No one is qualified to be someone else's boss.&quot;
I reject bosses and I certainly don't blame anyone who elects a
life of crime in preference to taking orders from an unqualified
boss - for peanuts.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Paul Kelly was there to complain about all the
Blacks who are dying and the under-representation of Blacks at
the conference. I have a hard time accepting the idea that the
situation is different for me and for a black user, but, if you
force me to make the distinction, I have to say that this is a
conference to legalize drugs for white middle-class users.
Perhaps, Blacks should have their own conference, especially if
they are not for full legalization, i.e., government off our
backs. They are pissed off that so many black men are in jail,
but they don't want to legalize. It's up to the bright black
people to show their communities that the laws against drugs are
a problem for them too and that getting rid of the laws will
improve things - at least in the long run. They had better get
the &quot;reverends&quot; out of their politics too. I think the
smart black people know that they have an economic and political
problem and the sooner they realize that a few black
millionaires, whether they became millionaires from drug
trafficking or the usual capitalist crimes, are not going to help
them. It won't help to be exploited by a black man. Black bosses
and business tycoons may be more cruel than whites, since they
have less guilt to bear. That's what I think; I don't know what
the audience thinks. I know we get pretty foggy-brained when it
comes to thinking about Blacks. We imagine that a different
system of logic applies.</font> </p>

<h1 align="center">Summary of the Conference </h1>

<p><font size="2">Paul Kelly returned my call after the
conference and we talked for about a half an hour on his
&quot;nickel&quot;. I told him all the bad things I said about
him (above). Despite that, I think we ended up as friends. I
pointed out the inconsistency of resenting the large number of
black prisoners and still not wanting legalization. He said there
was nothing for them to do even if they weren't in jail. I
pointed out that I had many friends who had done time and it was
very unpleasant in some ways but not because you couldn't get
drugs. Apparently, one can get used to homosexual activities
easily too without becoming &quot;abnormal&quot;, although I
didn't mention this to Paul as it is not relevant. I attacked the
twelve-step plans and he defended them mainly by reminding me
that I didn't know much about them. We agreed that it was wrong
to force someone into a plan, but he wasn't so sure that offering
it as an alternative to prison constituted force. It was a
well-organized and constructive dialogue in which I was able to
interject a little of my political position and, also, to sound
once again the warning about possible future genocide if it is
not already too late. We ended by agreeing that he would call me
when he comes to Houston later this year or early next year and I
would try to audit a twelve-step meeting to get a better idea of
how they work. I did say I was anti-Christian but not an atheist.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">So, to summarize, a drug network bulletin is
useful and a drug science abstract and truth squad service would
be useful. The marijuana devotees probably have a better chance
to get their drug of choice legalized sooner because they feel
better about their drug than users of other drugs feel about
theirs, correctly or incorrectly. We recognize the usual
intolerance of behavior that is not congruent with our own. The
public health model seems to be replacing the disease model, but
many disease-model therapists and God-squad therapists will
continue to masquerade as public health defenders. The political,
social, and economic causes of people taking more drugs than are
good for them are beginning to be recognized and I think we shall
soon begin questioning the onerousness of most jobs. I saw a news
(?) item on TV where an American factory worker was saying that
his biggest problem is boredom on the job. Of course, the
pharmacological, toxicological, and other physiological aspects
of drugs should continue to be investigated by people who have
nothing to do with the treatment industry. Also, the harmful
effects of heavy metals and other toxic chemicals should be
studied and steps should be taken to contain them and keep them
out of the food chain. Meanwhile, the jurisprudential
difficulties of dealing with people who break laws after taking
alcohol or drugs, or, for that matter, take alcohol or drugs to
give themselves the false courage, badly-termed &quot;Dutch
courage&quot; by one contributor (!), to commit crimes (or acts
of war against the establishment), will continue to be debated
for some time without anyone recognizing that the legal system
has no moral standing as it itself, as a character in a movie
said, is &quot;out of order&quot;. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">The prevention racket will continue to be
pervaded by lies despite Sandy Burbank and MAMA, but an
interesting breakthrough was noted in the news: the Dutch have
decriminalized sex among twelve- to sixteen-year-olds. I daresay
you get the connection. The aforementioned &quot;truth
squad&quot; could make itself felt on the education scene, but
I'm not sure how. This is hooked up with the efforts to prevent
school prayer and the infiltration of religion into the schools
in other ways. Also, we would like to identify (most) forms of
patriotism as irrational quasi-religion. Last night I was asked
to call in on an American Atheists (AA) radio program on the
local Pacifica Radio station here. I'm not sure I said anything
useful, but AA might be able to mount a small effort to get truth
in to ( and falsehood out of) the schools. I think one has to do
this through the courts as there is no public consensus for it.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">I think most of the participants at the
conference are against 1984-style behavior modification and would
be willing to try to keep the medical profession in its place. I
do not believe the supernatural may be introduced into public
policy, but, clearly, many people still think that something
supernatural plays a role in the process of changing one's
behavior with respect to drugs. I think that, if it does, it
should get re-classified as natural. I mentioned the
inconsistency in the viewpoint of most of the black community,
but I think that many black intellectuals are ready to reject the
stupid dichotomy between Capitalism that is not capitalism and
Communism that is not communism. Hopefully, all Americans will be
open to new ideas soon.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Houston, Texas</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">May 28, 1991 </font></p>

<h1 align="center">Reference </h1>

<ol>
    <li><font size="2">Wayburn, Thomas L., &quot;On the
        Separation of the State from the Christian Church&quot;, <i>Truth
        Seeker Supplement</i>, <b>117</b>, Nos. 2,4,6 (1990).
        Remainder of paper available from author on request.</font>
    </li>
</ol>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>