
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-76</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B007-1</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/haans1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035555 text/html 81192
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:43 GMT
Content-length: 80974
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Why is There a 'War on Drugs'?</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h1>Why is There a 'War on Drugs'?</h1>

<p>by Dave Haans </p>

<p>Note: This essay was written for a graduate level course
called &quot;Sociology of Addiction&quot; at the University of
Toronto. The professor of the course was Patricia Erickson (see
the Bibliography). It was completed on December 23, 1994. You may
distribute this document freely, however please do not change it
in any way. Thanks. </p>

<hr>

<p>INTRODUCTION </p>

<p>To ask the question &quot;why is there a 'War on Drugs'?' must
seem to some to be a bit like asking 'why are there laws against
murder?' Such a large amount of popular wisdom exists to support
an effort to stop the use, trafficking and production of illicit
drugs that such a question must be at best facetious. </p>

<p>Images of the drug war, pouring forth across media from the
radio to popular movies, convey a sense of evil and brutality
that beckons for immediate, and brutal, retaliation. Once the
question is asked, however, the onus is immediately on the one
asking the question to provide evidence that is contrary to the
accepted norm. This person who dares ask the question, even if
s/he is sincere and honest, may quickly find that they are
clearly outside of the 'norm' in society, and that few people
will bother to help them in answering their own question. The
question, then, carries with it a great weight, and often times
remains unasked, both at the public and governmental levels.</p>

<p>It is the question 'why', however, that will be the purpose of
this paper, with regards to the War on Drugs. Answering this
question will of course necessitate using all of the tools
currently used to define, describe and evaluate the War on Drugs.
For example, it will have to be shown that there actually is a
War on Drugs; that legislation has been enacted that makes the
War on Drugs a reality; that the War on Drugs is not a necessary
fact of legal or social life in this country; and that plausible
alternatives have been largely ignored. What will be of ultimate
interest, however, is why, given the realities of its social
uselessness, there is a War on Drugs. </p>

<p>IS THERE A 'WAR ON DRUGS'? </p>

<p>The American Experience </p>

<p>Most of our Canadian conceptions of the War on Drugs are the
result of the American War on Drugs. Ronald and Nancy Reagan's
1986 'declaration' of the War on Drugs mixed metaphors of war,
illness, crusades and religious righteousness in order to
galvanize a nation into action against illicit drugs. George
Bush, carrying the same theme, further made the issue both a
domestic and international one (Elwood, 1994). While this
reaction to the perceived problem of drugs typifies the most
recent reaction to illicit drug use, it is certainly not the
product of the 1980's. In early 20th Century America,
international concern over opium trading was reflected by the
Unites States legislating the Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914,
which put in place a taxation on the trade of opium into the U.S.
(Brecher, 1972). Aside from its rather benign face, the Harrison
Act contained a clause that law enforcement officials viewed as
being justification for the arrest and imprisonment of physicians
who prescribed opiates to their patients. This led to the almost
overnight creation of a black market, and caused those addicted
to opiates to reduce their quality of life substantially in order
to maintain their addiction. It is this affiliation with a
criminal element which allowed for more punitive laws to be put
in place, in the mistaken belief that drug use led to crime. By
many accounts, even of the time, the laws and not the drugs
themselves, forced many addicted individuals to turn to crime to
maintain their addictions (Brecher, 1972). </p>

<p>The Canadian Experience </p>

<p>In Canada, a similar scenario had unfolded parallel (and
previous) to the American experience. Concern over the
international trade of opium had made necessary the first of the
anti-opium legislation that sought to criminalize its use and
movement outright. The result was the Opium Act of 1908, and the
Opium and Drug Act of 1911 (Giffen, Endicott and Lambert, 1991).
These acts sought to at first reduce, then eliminate opium
traffic inside Canada, in order to complement efforts to stop
international trading in this substance. As Giffen, et al (1991)
describe, the 1911 Act was influenced by far more than simply a
wish to help China with its opium problem -- at the time, a
strong moralistic tide was washing over the country, and opium
and a host of other drugs were blamed for crime, immorality and
the like. More importantly, hostility towards the Chinese which
manifested itself in the 1907 anti-Asiatic demonstration, and
further publicity about Chinese opium use, led to the creation of
the beliefs of extreme negative effects of opium (p. 53). </p>

<p>In 1986, just two days after President and Mrs. Reagan's
declaration of war on drugs, Prime Minister Mulroney deviated
from a prepared speech to announce that &quot;drug abuse has
become an epidemic that undermines our economic as well as our
social fabric&quot; (Erickson, 1992, p. 248). However, Prime
Minister Mulroney neither said this in a dramatic address to
Canada's public, nor further elaborated on his remark. While his
remark resulted in the creation of &quot;Canada's Drug
Strategy&quot;, by most accounts very little has changed with
respect to the Federal Government's treatment illicit drugs
(Fischer, 1994; Erickson, 1992). </p>

<p>Does This Constitute a 'Drug War'? </p>

<p>In early United States and Canada, then, the factors which
brought about prohibition of illicit drugs were a concern with
international opium trade to China (and, seemingly, how that
trade could be replaced with trade in U.S. and Canadian
products), an increasingly racist (and very public) attitude
toward immigrants from the Pacific Rim, and a new moralistic tide
sweeping both countries. The effects of these factors was
prohibition of most psychoactive drugs (save for alcohol and
tobacco), and almost immediate police involvement in the control
of the newly-illicit drugs. </p>

<p>Whether this constitutes a &quot;drug war&quot; is debatable.
On one hand, there seems to be no explicit declaration of war
against drugs to be found at the turn of the century. On the
other hand, there are many facets of what Bruce Alexander (1990)
calls &quot;warlike aspects of current drug-control policy&quot;
(p. 50). For example, Alexander writes that a War on Drugs may be
defined by its war language, violent imagery, legal violence,
illegal police violence, spying, and its casualties. A closer
look at the evidence available from the era of early illicit drug
prohibition satisfies some of these requirements. For example,
public action against drugs such as cocaine in 1910-11 was
defined as a &quot;fight&quot; against cocaine, and cocaine users
were typified as &quot;fiends in human guise&quot; (Giffen et al,
1991, p. 83). </p>

<p>As well, the Opium and Drug Act of 1911 set down several
measures that were very much war-like. First, the police were
given extensive powers which allowed them to seize, confiscate,
and destroy drugs (Giffen, et al, 1991, p. 80). The 1911 Act also
shifted the burden of proof from the police to the defendant,
forcing the charged to prove that any illicit drugs seized were
for scientific or medical purposes. Finally, the 1911 Act closed
off the chance for any appeal on the grounds of technicalities
(Giffen, et al, 1991). </p>

<p>The casualties in the early War on Drugs were mainly Chinese
labourers who had legally entered the country to peaceably work
for wages that could not have been earned in their own country.
The actual use of the 1911 act was to imprison, and later (after
a 1922 amendment) deport Chinese opium users, until a diminishing
number of Chinese targets for the illicit drug laws caused a
newer focus on Caucasian drug users (Giffen, et al, 1991, p. 97).
</p>

<p>Back to the Present </p>

<p>Alexander (1990) argues that the whole of the illicit drug
laws set the stage for an all-out war on drugs, even if the
Canadian public is not as aware of the situation as the American
public is. Even though no dramatic pronouncement of a drug war in
Canada was ever made, Canadian drug laws reflect a War Measures
mentality which reduces the legal rights of the accused, and
strengthens the power, scope and role of the police forces. For
example, police have almost unrestricted powers of search and
seizure in drug cases (Alexander, 1990, p. 36). Police also have
the right to break into premises, destroy any property therein,
&quot;manhandle and beat the occupants, and to punch and choke
people who are suspected of trying to swallow drugs&quot;
(Alexander, 1990, p. 36). These rights of the police, which
clearly come at the expense of the rights of the individual, are
effected only when illicit drugs are, or are suspected of being,
involved. </p>

<p>A drug war also contains language that clearly sets the stage
for the public's acceptance of these types of power. This is
certainly not a new turn of events -- since the very beginning of
drug prohibition, drugs were associated with words and phrases
that were meant to elicit visions of the public combating
&quot;evil imported from the Orient&quot;, the &quot;curse of
cocaine&quot; (Giffen et al, p. 82, p. 84) and even &quot;the
downfall of the white race [by the Chinese]&quot; (Alexander, p.
31). President Reagan's drug war declaration conveyed an image of
illicit drugs &quot;menacing our society&quot; and
&quot;threatening our values and undercutting our
institutions&quot; and &quot;threat[ening] ... our national
security&quot; (Reagan, 1986, pp. 1184-1186). These statements
elicit images of an all-out attack on the United States by a
foreign power. Prime Minister Mulroney echoed very much these
same sentiments with regard to Canada two days later. </p>

<p>Even today, utterances such as cocaine being &quot;a
substantial evil in our society ... It ruins lives and destroys
families and is directly responsible for the commission of other
crimes,&quot; (Oakes, 1994a, p. A8) and &quot;cocaine is
undoubtedly an insidious and dangerous drug which undermines the
very fabric of our society&quot; (Oakes, 1994b, p. A11) can be
found in the daily newspaper. </p>

<p>Obviously, with these images firmly implanted in the psyche of
a nation, any steps taken to eradicate the 'enemy' will be met
with little resistance. Any resistance that is proffered is bound
to be met with a uninformed retort such as this: &quot;I think
half the children born are put to death by the sale of these
cordials and yet some gentlemen say the law is too strict&quot;
(Senate Debates, Canada, 1910-1911, italics mine). </p>

<p>Yes, Virginia, There is a 'War on Drugs' This discussion
presented in the previous section did not touch upon images in
the modern media of an inner-city battleground, movie images of
evil organized drug rings or the tendency of the media to report
the government's, rather than researchers' views on the drugs,
both licit and illicit. However, the intent in the previous
section was to show that the governments in both Canada and the
United States have waged a war on drugs that has existed, largely
unabated, for over 80 years. The next two sections will focus on
whether or not that war is justified, and whether alternatives
could be used. </p>

<p>IS THE 'WAR ON DRUGS' JUSTIFIED? </p>

<p>In the Persian Gulf War that pitted a number of countries
against Iraq, President Bush went to lengths to ensure that
people believed that a war against Iraq was indeed a 'just' war.
However, many researchers, asking whether the war on drugs is
justified, have come to the conclusion that this particular war
is not (see Alexander, 1990, pp. xi-xii for a list of dissenters
from the government's position). Further, there seems to be no
effort on the part of the Canadian Government to evaluate whether
the War on Drugs is necessary. The recent tabling of Bill C-7,
which seeks harsher penalties for illicit drug users and sellers,
overshadows any effort on the part of the Government to seek a
re-evaluation of the effects of the laws on those affected by
them. Even though a large number of groups have voiced their
concerns regarding Bill C-7 (Erickson and Smart, 1994), the Bill
is presently in its third reading, and stands a fair chance of
being passed. The Bill also largely goes against Canada's Drug
Strategy, a program that was initiated after Prime Minister
Mulroney's off-hand comment on the 'problem' of illicit drugs in
Canada. Canada's Drug Strategy has an explicit 'harm reduction'
emphasis (see the section entitled &quot;Harm Reduction as an
Alternative to the War on Drugs&quot;, below) that was to guide
Canada's drug policy (Fischer, 1994). </p>

<p>This being the case, it is now the task of this paper to
explore the drug problem, and to ascertain whether there really
needs to be a drug war. This question is important because one of
the main assumptions of a War on Drugs is that illicit drugs do
so much harm that they must be outlawed. As we shall see, this is
largely a fallacy, and the presence of a War on Drugs in the face
of the facts of the consequences of illicit drugs is made even
more ironic by the Government's long-standing commitment to its
prohibitionary policies. </p>

<p>Back to the Beginning </p>

<p>The previous section of this paper showed that the early drug
laws in Canada formed the basis for a long-standing
prohibitionary approach to the use and trafficking of opium. Not
discussed at length however, were the social conditions that
preceded these laws. It is useful to describe these social
conditions, and in doing so the gulf between drug laws and the
reality of the effects of the drugs in question can be
illuminated. </p>

<p>In the latter half of the 19th Century, Canadian
industrialists on the West Coast encouraged immigration of
Chinese labourers, mainly because they were willing to work for
less than their Caucasian counterparts (Alexander, 1990, p. 30),
and they were seen as being &quot;conscientious, thrifty, and
law-abiding&quot; (Solomon and Green, 1988, p. 89). The Chinese
also brought with them the habit of smoking opium (Boyd, 1982).
This remained a non-issue with most people, until Chinese
immigration was seen to be threatening the livelihood of white
workers (Boyd, 1982), who were feeling the effects of decline in
railway employment and the gold rush in British Columbia (Solomon
and Green, 1988). </p>

<p>This sentiment came to a peak in September of 1907, when
anti-Asian feeling resulted in the Anti-Asiatic riot in
Vancouver's Chinatown (Alexander, 1990, p. 30). After being sent
to British Columbia to investigate claims for damage incurred by
several Asians in the riot, then Deputy Minister of Labour
Mackenzie King was 'shocked' to find that a Chinese opium
industry was in place. He recommended in his official report that
this trade, which was not subject to taxes, be immediately halted
(Solomon and Green, 1988, p. 91). In 1908, the Opium Act was made
into law, and for the first time the sale, importation and
manufacture of opium was prohibited (Alexander, 1990). </p>

<p>The social backdrop of this period was increasing anti-Asiatic
sentiment, and the fear that Asians were likely to influence
Caucasians to use opium. At this time, a mythology was being
created which helped to set the tone for further legislation. </p>

<p>Opium itself seemed not to be the problem, but opium smoking
was seen to &quot;exemplify the alien, inferior and unassimilable
nature of the Chinese&quot; (Giffen et al, 1991, p. 57). The
prevailing fear was not of opium itself, but of whites being
encouraged by the Chinese to use opium. Solomon and Green add
that the success of this law, and the failure of other laws that
sought to suppress alcohol, tobacco and other substances at the
time, was due to the fact that (p. 88): it was directed against
Chinese opium smokers and Chinese opium factories, but at the
same time posed no threat to the larger number of predominantly
middle-class and middle-aged Caucasian users who were addicted to
the products of the established pharmaceutical industry With an
emphasis on racial factors, and a complete mythology regarding
the social effects of opium, the stage was set for newer and more
punitive laws regarding opium and other drugs, such as morphine,
heroin and cocaine. </p>

<p>In the next number of years, culminating in the 1929 Opium and
Narcotic Drug Act, Canada saw a shift in its policies. Solomon
and Green (1988) write of how the newly created Department of
Health was given responsibility for the supervision of Canada's
Federal drug laws, through the creation of the Narcotics Division
(p. 97). At the same time, the RCMP was founded, and charged with
the execution of Federal laws. The RCMP's 'raison d'etre' soon
became the enforcement of drug laws, and was a great influence on
the Narcotics Division, which found little resistance when
requesting special powers be given to the RCMP to penalize drug
users and traffickers. These special powers included police
officers being able to search dwellings without a warrant, the
onus on the defendant to prove s/he had no knowledge, consent, or
authority in possession cases, and the police being able to
prosecute doctors who were prescribing maintenance doses to
addicts. Penalties were stiffened to include whipping, and
deportation of immigrants who had been charged and had served
their sentences. </p>

<p>During this time, warnings about the perils of drug use
abounded. The anti-Asiatic campaign was also on an up-swing. In
1922, a highly influential and inflammatory book was published.
It was written by Emily Murphy, an early feminist and jurist.
Through it, Mrs. Murphy gave &quot;a thorough introduction to the
War on Drugs mentality in its modern form&quot; (Alexander, 1990.
p. 31). Included were racist epithets, and an image of the drug
'addict' (all illicit drug users were addicts, in Mrs. Murphy's
opinion) that was so evil and depraved that s/he begged for swift
and harsh discipline. </p>

<p>In the 1920s then, the RCMP and the courts were given enormous
powers to stop the 'menace' of drugs. However, by the end of the
decade, convictions had fallen rapidly, mainly due to the fact
that the majority of Chinese drug offenders had either died out
or been deported (Solomon and Green, 1988, p. 99). The image of
the drug user had changed from a morally weak individual to that
of a &quot;fiendish criminal, obsessed with the need to addict
others and motivated by lust and greed&quot; (Solomon and Green,
1988, p. 100). This set the stage for continued criminal
sanctions for the rest of the century. </p>

<p>Rather than a focus on race, which typified early anti-drug
measures, the focus today is on moral, social, economic and
health concerns (Alexander, 1990, p. 33). However, this change in
emphasis does not make the War on Drugs more justifiable by any
means. Rather, it simply reflects a change in who is to be
charged with drug offences. </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The Effects of Illicit Drugs </p>

<p>The personae of the War on Drugs is a frantic one. With images
of the drug user as criminal, the police being given massive
powers, a huge criminal network in place to supply illicit drugs
to an unwitting populace, and 'crack babies' being born at the
mercy of their delinquent mothers, one is hard pressed to find
evidence in the popular media that would suggest that the War on
Drugs doesn't need to exist. At the very base of the drug war is
the assumption that illicit drugs do social and medical harm, and
they must be stopped at any cost. It is this assumption which
will be examined next. </p>

<p>Opium and Related Drugs </p>

<p>Opium was the first drug to be made illicit in Canada, largely
due to anti-Asian sentiment. However, even at the time, there
were questions as to the medical effects of the drug. During
Senate debate on the 1908 Opium Act, Dr. Joseph Sullivan was the
only person to question its alleged effects. In part, he stated: </p>

<p>I fail to find in statistics anything about the injurious
effect of Opium on the Chinese. Above all things, the Chinese
having this habit ought to be treated with a great deal of
consideration (quoted in Giffen, et al, 1990, p. 72) </p>

<p>Dr. Sullivan's remark is borne out by the fact that, aside
from physical addiction often present in continual users of
opiates, there are no serious side effects of the continued use
of them. Health and Welfare Canada's (1989) &quot;Licit and
Illicit Drugs in Canada&quot; reveals that (p. 11): </p>

<p>Despite media dramatizations of heroin withdrawal, cessation
is rarely fatal and is similar to a bad case of influenza.
Observations of heroin-addicted individuals who have been
maintained on daily doses under medical supervision show no
significant psychological or physical negative effects from the
drug. However, many adverse effects of heroin use are related to
the addiction lifestyle and methods of drug administration. </p>

<p>Marijuana </p>

<p>Popular reports of the effects of other drugs also do not hold
up when examined more closely. Marijuana was thought by Mrs.
Murphy to drive its users insane, make them become &quot;raving
maniacs&quot;, and lead them to a premature death (Solomon,
Single and Erickson, 1988, p. 370). However, if this were true,
adverse psychological effects would be well known by now. </p>

<p>Instead, there have been few cases of patients reporting to
treatment facilities with these kinds of effects. Health and
Welfare Canada seems to indicate that this is surprising, given
the high rates of usage in some populations (1989, p. 10). </p>

<p>Cocaine </p>

<p>Cocaine is another drug that was (and is) widely reported to
have severe effects on the individual. While lethal in very high
doses, cocaine actually is reasonably safe in moderate doses
(Alexander, 1990, p. 202-203). Similarly, crack cocaine's label
as &quot;the most highly addictive form of all drugs ever known
in history&quot; has been countered with research reports that
more or less simply report that &quot;cocaine does not produce
physical dependence&quot; (Akers, 1991, pp. 783-784). </p>

<p>This list could be extended, but the point can be summed up by
stating that (as Alexander (1990) does) &quot;a large body of
careful research shows that recreational use of illicit drugs,
including marijuana, cocaine, and heroin, does not lead to
addiction or other harm for the majority of users&quot; (p. 64).
But what of the other popular edict of the anti-drug
organizations and police and Presidents Reagan and Bush and Prime
Minister Mulroney, etc., which states that there is nothing less
than an epidemic of illicit drug use, which tears at the very
fabric of society? </p>

<p>The final section of this consideration of whether or not a
war on drugs is justified will focus on the proportion of people
in our society which actually use drugs, and what the effects of
this use actually are. </p>

<p>Use of Illicit Drugs </p>

<p>Some of the best trend data on drug use come from the
Addiction Research Foundation, which has surveyed self-reported
drug use among Ontario students since 1968, and Ontario adults
since 1977. These surveys have been conducted once very two years
in the case of students, and once every three years in the case
of adults (Smart and Adlaf, 1990). In general, the use of drugs
has dramatically declined among both students and adults. With
respect to cannabis, the percentage of students who reported
using the drug at least once in the previous year peaked in 1979
at a rate of 31.7%, and then fell gradually to a low of 11.7% in
1991. Students' use of heroin in the previous year had peaked in
1979 at 2.3%, then fell to 1% in 1991. Following the same trend,
use of cocaine for students peaked at 5.1% in 1979, then
gradually fell to 1.6% in 1991 (Smart, Adlaf and Walsh, 1991, p.
13). </p>

<p>For adults, the trends have been somewhat similar, however the
peak years for use in the previous year come somewhat later
(possibly because the students who continued using were now
classified as 'adults', in other words, a cohort effect was
observed). The peak year for cannabis use in the previous year
for Ontario adults was 1984, with a percentage of 11.2% adults
reporting the use of cannabis at least once. This percentage fell
to 6.8% in 1991. With respect to cocaine, use rates remained
relatively constant, with between 1.7 (1984) and 2.1% (1989) of
adults reporting having used cocaine in the previous year (Adlaf,
Smart and Canale, 1991, p. 7). </p>

<p>Although self-reported rates are not always the most reliable
indicator of drug use (and with respect to the above studies, do
not include teenagers outside of the education system), these
data show that at least in Ontario, the vast majority of students
and adults are non-users of marijuana, cocaine and heroin. </p>

<p>Taking a national perspective, we find that the percentage of
those individuals in Canada fifteen years of age or older that
have never used marijuana or hashish is 80%. For cocaine, the
percentage of people who have never used is 97% (Single, Williams
and McKenzie, 1994, p. 113). </p>

<p>These data do not support in any way the claims made by Prime
Minister Mulroney two days after President Reagan declared the
American War on Drugs. If drugs had become an
&quot;epidemic&quot; in Canada in 1986, use rates certainly do
not reflect this. As for Prime Minister Mulroney's comment that
drug use was eroding the social and economic fabric of the
country also bears closer scrutiny, although it should be noted
that it is impossible to define what, exactly, Prime Minister
Mulroney meant by this comment. The focus of the next section of
this paper, however, will be a discussion of the effects of drugs
on people who use them. This focus will not be a pharmacological
one, but a social one, taking into account a more important
effect of drug use--the social sanctions that accompany those who
decide to use illicit drugs. </p>

<p>The Effects of the War on Drugs </p>

<p>Anti-drug sentiment comes complete with a whole selection of
'facts' and 'figures' which support the 'fact' that drug use
causes severe social upheaval. This is evidenced by many of the
previously quoted remarks of even well-intentioned groups and
individuals who fear that the use of drugs has severe social,
economic and psychological effects on the individual, those
around the individual, and society in general. While this may be
the popular response to the problems of drug use, there is much
more evidence to support the view that anti-drug legislation
itself is the cause of the plight of drug users, and not the
other way around. Brecher (1972) is certainly one of the first
documenters of the history of drug legislation to espouse this
view, and may in fact have been one of the creators of a paradigm
shift in drug research that has carried through to this day. In
Licit &amp; Illicit Drugs, Brecher illustrates the history of all
types of licit and illicit drugs, and documents anti-drug
legislation in the United States and Canada. The first effects of
the early narcotic legislation were almost immediate; Brecher
writes that the result of these laws was that &quot;the door was
opened wide to adulterated, contaminated and misbranded narcotics
of all kinds&quot; (p. 47). Previously law-abiding addicts were
forced to turn to the black market in order to secure their
maintenance doses of these drugs. Just six weeks after the
passage of the 1914 Harrison Act in the United States, Brecher
quotes an editor in the New York Medical Journal as writing that
the immediate effect was seen in the flocking of drug users to
hospitals and sanitoriums, an increase in violence due to addicts
looking to obtain drugs (some in a delirious state due to
withdrawal), and that time would show further effects, in the
failure of promising careers, the disruption of families, the
commission of crimes, and the influx into hospitals of those who
would have otherwise led normal lives (p. 50). </p>

<p>In Canada, predictably, anti-opium legislation also resulted
in the creation of covert smuggling operations, which resulted in
the price of opium rising dramatically. In a society founded upon
capitalist principles, drug traffickers sprang up to reap the
monetary rewards of the early opium legislation. As a result,
enforcement of the opium laws became more zealous, which
increased the profitability of the black market trade, which then
increased the likelihood that the trade would continue (Giffen,
et al, 1991, p. 117). In later years, morphine and heroin were to
replace opium, mainly because they were easier to conceal due to
the fact that they are more powerful, and take up less space. The
opium users, in order to maintain their addictions, had to
intermingle with and develop contacts with the criminal world
(Giffen, et al, 1991, p. 118). </p>

<p>Before opium legislation, users could carry on useful,
prosperous lives (as many Chinese did at the turn of the
century), while addicted to opium. After anti-opium legislation,
however, irresistible profits were to be made on the black
market, causing users to be involved in the same violence, crime
and corruption that typifies accounts of the illegal drug trade
today. Persistent calls for harsher legislation were made because
often, the defenders of these laws mistook &quot;the violent
side-effects of prohibition for the effects of the drugs
themselves&quot; (Alexander, 1990, p. 60). </p>

<p>This pattern of anti-drug laws and sustained attainability of
drugs through the black market typifies the 20th century
experience with drug prohibition. These laws also have other
consequences that are directly related to the criminalization of
drug use in modern times. These consequences form the main part
of the public image of the drug user, and are used to further
support the notion that tougher laws and police powers are
needed. Erickson (1993) summarizes several finding of researchers
who have studied this problem in relation to opiates (p. 1169): </p>

<p>Forced to obtain opiates illegally and at a much inflated
price, addicts/users formed a deviant and sometimes criminal
subculture; money went to purchase drugs rather than to food and
personal hygiene; sharing and using dirty needles led to high
rates of infection with diseases such as hepatitis; contaminated
drugs and unknown potency contributed to high morbidity and
mortality; criminalization further reduced legitimate economic
opportunities. </p>

<p>Of course, not all illicit drug use in our society is of
opiates, nor of an addictive nature. Even with illicit drugs
commonly thought of as being non-addictive, however, the law has
effects on the user that seem to overshadow the relatively
harmless direct consequences of the actual use. The consequences
of the law regarding marijuana (which in Canada today can be as
severe as those applied in cases of opiates and cocaine) manifest
themselves in reduced opportunities for employment (Erickson and
Goodstadt, 1979), the offender wishing to remain more secretive
to both his or her family, and disrespect for cannabis laws
(Erickson and Murray, 1986). The stigmatizing effect of even the
lightest of punishments on the 'cannabis criminal' have
implications, therefore, on the user's self-image and the user's
place in society, and are largely an unintended effect of the
law. </p>

<p>An Answer to The Question </p>

<p>The genesis of anti-drug legislation, as presented above, was
racist attitudes towards the Chinese labourers who were seen to
be a threat to the Caucasian work force. The focus in those times
was not on the effects of the drugs themselves, as there was, and
is, ample evidence to support the theory that illicit drugs are
not generally harmful in and of themselves. Nor, as is frequently
argued, are there expansive social consequences arising from the
use of these drugs. If anything, the market in illicit drugs
benefits the police by keeping them busy, and allowing an easy
outlet for their influence in anti-drug laws. </p>

<p>As for an epidemic in drug use, there seems to be few
statistics to substantiate even a minor threat to the health of
Canadians based upon the numbers of Canadians who do use illicit
drugs. </p>

<p>Finally, the major negative impact of drugs on their users is
the result of the drug laws themselves, and not drugs per se. </p>

<p>In short, the War on Drugs is in no way justified by any
evidence gathered to date. </p>

<p>As will be discussed below, there are alternatives to the War
on Drugs. In particular, a model of 'harm reduction' will be
examined closely, and the evidence which would support an effort
of this type presented. As well, 'Canada's Drug Strategy', a
program based on harm reduction principles and announced in 1987,
will be critiqued. </p>

<p>HARM REDUCTION AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO THE WAR ON DRUGS </p>

<p>Harm reduction is a broad classification of proposals which
shift the focus from prohibiting the use of drugs to dealing with
the problems associated with drug use. As discussed earlier, the
War on Drugs has brought about its own set of problems associated
with drug use. Therefore, a successful program of harm reduction
would also have to deal with the problems of the War on Drugs as
well (Nadelmann, 1994, p. 35). </p>

<p>True harm reduction approaches were developed fairly recently
through programs in the Netherlands, the U.K. and Australia (Des
Jarlais and Friedman, 1994). The focus of harm reduction is on
reducing the problems associated with drug use on a community and
individual level, rather than an effort to prohibit drug use at a
societal level. Harm reduction also focuses on the realistically
attainable goals of reducing the negative consequences of drug
use, such as the supplying of clean equipment to injection drug
users (IDUs) in order to reduce the prevalence of AIDS and HIV
infection in the IDU population. It is these immediately
'treatable' aspects of drug use which are targeted first, so that
the use of drugs can be as risk-free as possible. A further
consideration is the reduction of drug use, although abstinence
is only an option when it would be clearly appropriate (Riley,
1994, p. 1). </p>

<p>Clearly then, there is a stark contrast between harm reduction
and prohibition as models of dealing with drug use. Harm
reduction assumes that there are effects of drug use that can
benefit the user (as in the case of life-saving medication), and
that there are also harmful and even neutral effects. Harm
reduction offers a pragmatic means for the analysis of whether
these effects are harmful or not (Riley, 1994, p. 1), a far cry
from prohibitionist models, which assume that all illicit drug
use is inherently harmful. Also, the emphasis is not on drug use
per se (as in the prohibitionist model), but solely on the
negative consequences of such use. </p>

<p>The concept of harm reduction is not entirely new, however. It
can be traced back to the 'British System', which emerged in
answer to a set of recommendations by the Rolleston Committee
which was formed in the 1920s in the U.K. (Riley, 1994, p. 1). </p>

<p>The committee argued that in certain cases &quot;maintenance
on drugs may be necessary to help drug abusers lead useful
lives&quot; (Riley, 1994, p. 1). The modern-day model for the
harm reduction approach is located in Merseyside, near Liverpool.
In response to the rising use of drugs such as heroin in the
early 1980s, the Merseyside clinics, along with doctors,
pharmacists and the police worked together to establish a
harm-reduction model. </p>

<p>Their efforts concentrate on treating users on an individual
basis, supplying them with either the drugs they needed or
effective substitutes, and exchanging syringes, all of which may
help the user to lead more healthy, productive and fulfilling
life (Riley, 1994). </p>

<p>The effects on the social problems in Merseyside as a result
of the harm reduction program there have been encouraging. Riley
(1994) writes that of all the English Regions, Merseyside had the
lowest rate of HIV-positive IDUs, and the Merseyside police were
the only force in 1990 and 1991 to register a decrease in crime
rates (p. 5). The success of Merseyside is partly due to the fact
that it is a collaborative effort between clinicians, police,
pharmacists and doctors. Another factor which sets Merseyside's
harm reduction strategy apart from other prohibitionary models is
the fact that it is community based, and not a set of rules
imposed from the government at the Federal level (as
prohibitionary models are). Reducing harm in one's own community
gives immediate and tangible benefits that can be appreciated by
all concerned. This helps to ensure the continuation of the
program which gives those benefits, and encourages the
participation of people who enjoy its benefits. </p>

<p>Several examples of a harm reduction approach exist in Canada
as well, especially with reference to alcohol. Single (1994)
writes that the Alberta Liquor Control Board allowed for the
special early opening of a downtown Edmonton liquor store, in
order to allow for a supply of potable alcohol to Skid-row
inebriates who were previously using other substances, such as
shoe polish, which were easily attainable in the morning (pp.
2-3). Other programmes informed by the harm reduction model are
available, and include such things as special training to owners
and employees of bars and taverns that allow them to encourage
moderation, designated driver programs, the promotion of 'light'
beers and wines (Single, 1994), and making available information
regarding the alcohol content of different beverages (Riley,
1994). Also, more than 30 needle exchange programs have been run
in several major Canadian cities, which help to reduce the spread
of AIDS through the use of dirty needles and works (Riley, 1994).
</p>

<p>Unfortunately, it is the spread of AIDS that is the driving
force behind many harm reduction programs, such as needle
exchanges. In the United States, over one-third of all AIDS cases
are related to injection drug use (Des Jarlais and Friedman,
1994, p. 82). IDU is strongly associated with AIDS because the
relatively easy transmission path from one user to another when
needles and other injecting equipment (such as cotton, and the
water used to clean the equipment) are shared. </p>

<p>Also at risk are the partners of injection drug users, even
when the partner is a non-user. </p>

<p>The problem exists because many injection drug users find
obtaining clean needles and other 'works' impossible, difficult
or inconvenient. In New York, where needle exchange programs are
illegal, the incidence of HIV (the retrovirus thought to cause
AIDS) among injection drug users is approximately 60 per cent
(Riley, 1994). Although it is presently difficult to find strong
evidence that needle exchange programs help to prevent AIDS and
HIV because of the time lag between infection and detection,
researchers point to percentage of IDU related AIDS in cities
such as New York, which have not instituted such programs (Riley,
1994). As well, those cities that responded early to the spread
of AIDS and HIV show IDU related cases to be much lower than
those that didn't (Des Jarlais and Friedman, 1994). </p>

<p>The harm reduction model, then, is an effective answer to
controlling the problems associated with drug use. The emphasis
on getting many different members of the community involved helps
to give those people the feeling that they are helping to solve a
serious problem, which benefits them and the community. </p>

<p>The objective standpoint offered by the harm reduction model
is helpful in getting beyond the rhetoric of the War on Drugs as
well, since harm reduction focuses on objective (and
non-judgmental) information about drugs and their effects (Riley,
1994, p. 11). The harm reduction model reduces the conflict
between the drug user and the community, by trying to erase the
boundaries between these two groups, and by getting the drug user
to be more a part of the community. </p>

<p>Canada's Drug Strategy -- Kinder, Gentler Repression </p>

<p>The examples of harm reduction shown above are primarily
community based. As a result of Prime Minister Mulroney's
aforementioned comment, a national strategy was announced in
1987, which was termed &quot;Canada's Drug Strategy&quot;
(Erickson, 1992). Canada's Drug Strategy has an explicit harm
reduction emphasis, and an emphasis on reducing drug-related harm
to individuals and communities (Fischer, 1994, p. 71). The
Strategy allocated the sum of $210 million in its first five
years (and an additional $270 million in 1992) mainly to the
prevention and treatment of drug use, while 30 per cent of this
money was intended for the traditional area of law enforcement
(Fischer, 1994). </p>

<p>This national effort would seem to indicate a shift in
Canada's policy on illicit drugs, but seemingly little evidence
of that shift is apparent. Soon after the announcement of
Canada's Drug Strategy, laws were enacted (in 1988 and 1989
respectively), which prohibited the sale of drug paraphernalia
and increased the power of police to seize the assets of arrested
drug offenders (Erickson, 1992, p. 249). </p>

<p>Bill C-85, introduced at the end of the Conservative
Government's reign (in 1992), clearly sought to strengthen the
prohibition of drugs in Canada, at the expense of the drug user. </p>

<p>The proposed law, coming under attack by opposition members
and from the drug policy research and practice community, was
dropped (Fischer, 1994). (Also, while several external drug
policy and research agencies were present during the debate of
the Bill, one group, the Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse, was
not invited. This was quite surprising, because of the fact that
this centre had been created solely out of Canada's Drug Strategy
itself to serve as an 'arm's length' agency to the Federal
Government for drug research and policy development (Fischer,
1994, p. 77).) </p>

<p>As a further shock to those in drug policy and research
agencies, the new Liberal government (which had criticized
Bill-85 extensively during Parliamentary debates) tabled Bill
C-7, which was almost a word-for-word simulation of Bill C-85. </p>

<p>This Bill continues the repressive prohibition policies, and
is currently in its third reading in Parliament. </p>

<p>Further, no shift was to be observed with respect to drug
related offences since the Strategy's inception. The number of
drug-related offences reported by police hovered around 60,000
for the first three years of the Strategy's implementation
(Jensen and Gerber, 1993, p. 457). </p>

<p>Finally, money allocated to the provinces by the Federal
Government for the creation and/or continuation of prevention and
treatment programs has not been utilized -- due mainly to the
structure of the program. Provinces have had to put up 100 per
cent of the cost of these types of programs before receiving half
of these funds from the Federal government. As a result, over 50
per cent of the allocated money has not been used by the
provinces (Fischer, 1994). </p>

<p>Despite being based on a harm reduction approach then,
Canada's Drug Strategy seems to be more like prohibition in harm
reduction's clothing. Rather than focus solely on reducing the
harmful consequences of drug use, and the even more harmful
aspects of the effects of drug prohibition, Canada's Drug
Strategy neither balances enforcement and prevention / treatment,
nor effects a new outlook on drug policy in Canada. </p>

<p>WHY IS THERE A 'WAR ON DRUGS'? </p>

<p>Having explained that Canadian policy with respect to the use
of illicit drugs constitutes a War on Drugs, that the initial
impetus for prohibitionary policies were borne out of
misinformation, mistrust and sensationalism both out and inside
of Parliament, and that there are well-known and effective
alternatives to the War on Drugs, this paper will now explore its
main question. There are numerous explanations for the reason
that a War on Drugs exists. These explanations will be discussed
in turn, in the hope that a more comprehensive view (one that
covers both psychological and sociological explanations) will be
attained. </p>

<p>Psychological Explanations </p>

<p>Ethan Nadelmann (1994), writes (p. 43): </p>

<p>Indeed, the only way to explain and justify many current
policies is by reference to the fears, prejudices and primitive
moralisms of those who have transformed drug control policy into
a modern version of an authoritarian crusade. </p>

<p>This quote is taken somewhat out of context (as Nadelmann was
writing about harm reduction), but serves as a good introduction
to a psychological explanation of why there is a War on Drugs.
This quote is correct to a point, as illustrated in previous
sections of this paper. Many aspects of the current policies came
out of the fear of the effects of these drugs, prejudice towards
the Chinese at the turn of the century, and the moralistic tide
that was sweeping our country. However, this quote simplifies the
problem somewhat, and doesn't allow for an explanation of why
people continue to use illicit drugs in the face of prohibition,
why prejudices were rarely explicitly stated in the course of the
making of (even the early) Canadian laws regarding drugs. Nor
does it explain the active role of Federal and local law agencies
almost consistently being a part of drug legislation (in short,
if they were afraid, why would they want to be so closely
involved in the War on Drugs?). And why does the prohibition
model continue to dominate Canada's agenda with respect to drugs
in our increasingly secular and liberal society? </p>

<p>Alexander (1990) offers a psychological explanation of his
own, drawn from years of research and interviews with people from
both sides of the issue. The two main groups, he argues, are the
'drug warriors', who spearhead the War on Drugs, and the
'resisters' who defy the War on Drugs by using illicit drugs, or
are simply appalled by it, although they may have little interest
in the War on Drugs itself (p. 327-328). Other groups are also
involved in the War on Drugs. A small group, whom Alexander calls
the 'villains', go to extremes to either carry out or resist the
War on Drugs, and in doing so promote the kinds of violence that
typify the worst consequences of drugs and the war against them.
There are also 'double-standard bearers', who both promote the
War on Drugs, and yet are resisters as well. Finally, the largest
group Alexander calls the 'neutrals', who fund the War on Drugs
and have their opinions swayed to varying degrees by both
warriors and resisters (pp. 328-329). </p>

<p>In Alexander's eyes, the drug war is not being fought over the
drugs themselves, but centres itself around the need to blame
others for societal ills, and a power conflict regarding personal
freedom and social control (p. 329). </p>

<p>Blaming Others </p>

<p>Throughout history, people have pointed their finger at
different groups, in order to fulfil three psychological needs
that blaming serves. The first is that blaming helps one to feel
that one is doing something in the face of a bad situation. </p>

<p>Second, blaming helps one to escape blame themselves. Finally,
blaming helps to rally other members of society around that
person. Societal ills become more tolerable when one group can be
blamed for these ills (Alexander, 1990, p. 330-331). For the
resisters, blaming the Government for repressive policies can
help one to feel that s/he is doing something about the problem,
and isn't implicated in the creation and continuance of other
societal ills. Drug warriors perhaps get more of a benefit for
blaming, however, as they also have been successful throughout
the 20th Century in rallying the public around their cause. </p>

<p>Conflict Over Power </p>

<p>The drug warriors, Alexander (1990) argues, &quot;embrace the
need to reinforce societal power and suppress personal
autonomy&quot; (p. 336). Their concern over illicit drugs, then
is that these substances may reduce the individual's compliance
with social conventions. Drug warriors, interestingly, are not
concerned with drugs which enhance the social order (p. 337).
They have no objection to caffeine, little objection to nicotine
and alcohol, and little concern for those in hospitals being
given any sort of pharmaceutical agent. Resisters, on the other
hand, place individual autonomy well above societal control. They
believe they should be free to consume illicit drugs as long as
that consumption does not hurt other people. Resisters are very
much concerned with legal drugs that are used to control people
in mental hospitals and in military applications (p. 339). </p>

<p>The Psychological Explanations -- A Summary </p>

<p>Alexander (1990) fills in many of the blanks left by
Nadelmann's succinct comment on the reasons for the War on Drugs.
For example, a reason why resisters continue to defy the War on
Drugs is put forth, as is the reason why a War on Drugs continues
to this day. Alexander admits that his explanation is a
psychological, and not a political one (p. 326). Alexander's
explanation is perhaps made more valid by the fact that he chose
to conscientiously interview drug warriors and try to place
himself in their shoes, so to speak. Alexander's explanation also
elicits elements of a major sociological perspective that has
been applied to the laws which are the expression of the War on
Drugs. This perspective, called 'conflict theory' will be
discussed next. </p>

<p>Sociological Explanations </p>

<p>Conflict Theory </p>

<p>Conflict theory arose out of a concern that structural
functionalism neglected conflict in society, was politically
conservative, and failed to account for change in society
(Ritzer, 1992, p. 61). This theory has evolved to include
elements of structural functionalism (for example, the functions
that conflict serves) and a traditional Marxist focus on dominant
and subordinate groups. In the sociology of law, conflict theory
often depicts a: </p>

<p>polarization of the forces of 'law and order' on the one hand
and left wing political activists and minority group members
reacting to what they saw as excessive police repression of
political protests and urban riots on the other (Giffen, et al.,
1991, pp. 8-9) </p>

<p>This aspect of conflict theory assumes, however, that the
dominant and subordinate groups are more or less homogenous in
nature. Most research in the field of drug policy recently,
however, deals with power being located in &quot;institutional
structures in society (economic, governmental, religious,
etc.)&quot; (Giffen, et al., 1991, p. 10), which does not
presuppose homogenous groups. Both views have problems (Giffen,
et al., 1991), however for the purposes of this paper both views
will be considered, and discussion will focus on what may be
termed a 'naive' view of conflict theory, one which allows for
some oscillation between the two different views of conflict
theory. This view is one that presupposes that the powerful in
society may selectively criminalize actions of those who are
subordinate to them. </p>

<p>Given this bracketing, conflict theory has quite a bit of
explanatory value. It also is supported (albeit sometimes more
implicitly than explicitly) by a number of people involved in
drug policy research (for a strong example, see Johns, 1991,
below), although it seems to be clear that this theory is being
explored more in the United States than here in Canada. A
rational reason for this is that the United States has a much
bigger problem with lines being drawn between races and cultures
than we do in Canada. After attending a conference on drug issues
in the United States, Riley (1994b) remarked that many
researchers felt the real reason for the war on drugs in that
country was that it helped to suppress blacks and minorities. </p>

<p>Of course, conflict theory then allows for a certain amount of
speculation on the motives of those in power. For example, it is
thought by some that rhetoric in the U.S. war on drugs helps
presidents construct policies which are: </p>

<p>... targeted toward blacks and minorities without reference to
race [and] polariz[e] the electorate among racial lines and ...
weaken the traditional economic divisions between Democrats and
Republicans ... without communicating overt bigotry or anti-black
effect to whites. (Edsall and Edsall, 1991, pp. 138-139) </p>

<p>Johns (1991) under the heading &quot;Race: The Creation of an
Enemy Class,&quot; writes bluntly: &quot;The enforcement tactics
of the War on Drugs are focused on minority populations&quot; (p.
155). In her paper, Johns (1991) posits that the War on Drugs
takes attention away from the factors which underlie the problems
of drugs and trafficking, partly because the &quot;more powerful
segments in society&quot; (p. 150) do not want attention focused
the poor job they are doing to cure the ills of society. Johns
also expands the group being oppressed include the poor, who have
been hit with massive housing and health care cuts under the
Republican Presidencies. The dichotomy between those in power and
minorities and the poor is self-perpetuating, in that these
groups have a limited upward mobility (and, therefore crimes like
trafficking in illicit drugs becomes appealing), and when they do
try to increase their wealth through illicit means, those in
power see that as justification for minorities and the poor being
in the position they are in. </p>

<p>Canadians have quite a bit of historical experience with
racism as being one of the factors which precipitated much of the
early prohibition laws. However, one of the failings of conflict
theory becomes apparent when researchers in the history of this
legislation find little in the actual discussion of the laws that
pertains to race. Giffen, et al. (1991) write that the early
legislation's principle proponents had the &quot;altruistic aims
of supporting the international anti-opium movement&quot; despite
the anti-Chinese sentiment of the times (p. 525). The fact that
the laws were used solely against the Chinese at first is
indicative of this anti-Chinese sentiment, and not the creation
of the laws themselves. Later legislation was driven mainly by
enforcement officials, as there was little in the way of public
outcry for more rigorous anti-opium legislation (p. 525). </p>

<p>In the United States as well, early marijuana legislation came
as a result of increased crime in the jurisdiction of enforcement
officials, who found marijuana to be an easy scapegoat in their
explanation of the problems. It was only during a campaign to
have anti-marijuana laws established that anti-Mexican sentiment
was used to create an ominous mythology surrounding marijuana
use. This complicates a simple conflict theory explanation,
because the real focus was initially on marijuana, and not on a
minority group. </p>

<p>Thus, conflict theory is problematic in describing why there
is a war on drugs. It may help to explain (as Johns (1991)
successfully does) why a War on Drugs continues in the U.S., but
leaves unanswered questions when applied to the Canadian
situation. In the United States, perhaps, there is a stronger
mythology of a racial link with drugs, and if that is so, it
could be that those with power in the U.S. have bought wholly
into the mythology created by their predecessors. It is the
creation of mythology and the social construction of drug
problems and threats that will be discussed next. </p>

<p>Social Construction of a Drug Problem </p>

<p>In the above discussions of the effects of drugs on the user,
it becomes clear that there are two arguments to be made. The
first is that drugs pose a threat that is almost unlimited in its
scope. This group elicits images of 'crack babies', evil, crime,
death and insanity to describe the problem with drugs. </p>

<p>The other group (usually more calmly) sees this as a case of
the Emperor's New Clothes, and points to low self-reported use,
and documented evidence that the 'problem' is created mainly from
the effects of the repressive drug laws themselves. Some in this
second group illustrate how members of the first group may
benefit from their calls of alarm. By doing so, they point out
that the gains to be made from alarming the public are such that
the alarmists actually go out of their way in order to largely
create a social perception of a problem when there is actually no
problem to begin with. This is often referred to as the
construction of a social problem, and will be discussed in this
section. </p>

<p>Jensen and Gerber (1993) write about Prime Minister Mulroney's
statement that &quot;drug abuse has become an epidemic that
undermines our economic as well as our social fabric&quot; (p.
455) as a failed attempt at the social construction of a drug
problem, in order to increase support for his leadership at the
polls. They cite statistics (similar to the one cited above) that
suggest that no epidemic was actually taking place. In their
words, &quot;neither self-reports, official statistics, nor
health-related statistics provide consistent evidence that there
was an epidemic in illicit drug use during the 1980s&quot; (p.
458). </p>

<p>In short, Prime Minister Mulroney had no objective
justification to call Canadians' use of drugs, or the
consequences thereof, an epidemic that suddenly manifested itself
in 1986. What makes this effort a failed one, according to the
authors, was that the drug issue was not high on the agenda of
many Canadians (previous to the PM's speech), and widespread
scepticism of the claims made by the Prime Minister prohibited
any significant social problem to be effectively constructed. </p>

<p>In the United States, however, President Reagan's call for a
War on Drugs seemed to be wildly successful. By 1989, drugs were
seen by 64 per cent of the U.S. population as the leading problem
in the country (Goode, 1990, p. 1088). In periodical literature,
however, a peculiar trend in emphasis on drugs occurred. Articles
on drugs rose almost exponentially in the few years leading up to
President Reagan's announcement, and subsided in the years
following (pp. 1088-1089). Newspapers reflected public concern in
that the number of articles in The New York Times concerning
drugs and drug trafficking increased in 1986, fell slightly in
1987, and then rose dramatically in 1988 and 1989 (p. 1089). It
was clear to Goode that the U.S. was experiencing a moral panic
over the use of drugs. Several researchers, himself included,
asked 'why?, and why now?' and answered that America's problem
with drugs was indeed a social construction (Goode, 1990, p.
1090). This answer was often based on the fact that self-reported
drug use declined in nearly every drug and age category, and was
&quot;strikingly lower than was true for the late 1970s and early
1908s&quot; (P. 1091). </p>

<p>However, Goode also noted that every other objective measure
of the drug problem in the U.S. did rise during the 1980s. These
included personal use of cocaine (and crack) once a week or more,
larger numbers of overdoses, multiple illicit drug use problems
of a medical nature, larger number of arrests where drugs were
concern, and increase in the number of police officers killed in
drug-related incidents, and increase in drug-related homicides,
and a higher number of babies born to cocaine addicted mothers
(pp. 1091-1093). Goode uses this data to argue that social
problems are constructed, but that they can be constructed of
both objective and subjective factors. </p>

<p>Goode's argument that the construction of social problems are
not created out of whole cloth points out the trouble with social
construction theory in certain instances. In the case of Jensen
and Gerber's (1993) study described above, little evidence is
given for the assumption that the PM specifically sought to
increase his standings in the polls, other than reporting that
the public did not support him enough to win an election at that
time. However, two years later, he was re-elected on a
single-issue platform, but that platform was not the drug war.
Perhaps his statement reflects more his reaction to President
Reagan's call for the War on Drugs two days earlier, and a feeble
attempt to test the waters of the opinion of Canadians on the
subject. Also, it seems to be clear (from Goode's data on
periodical publications and newspapers) that Americans were far
more concerned with the problem of drugs shortly before President
Reagan called for a War on Drugs, while Canadians did not share
this concern before PM Mulroney made his remark. </p>

<p>One last point that needs to be discussed is the fact that
deaths and illness resulting from licit drug use are far more
numerous than they are for illicit drug use (Goode, 1991, p.
1094). This points to a question regarding the overwhelming
concern with illicit drugs, especially when that concern is
brought about so dramatically, as was the case with President
Reagan, and somewhat so in the case of PM Mulroney. Johns (1991)
explains this as an effort to keep the mind of the public off the
damage that licit drugs (including alcohol, tobacco and
pharmaceuticals) are doing, by constantly calling for a
continuation of the War on Drugs. </p>

<p>Moral Entrepreneurs and Status Politics </p>

<p>The concepts of moral entrepreneurs and status politics are
closely linked, and are themselves closely linked with the
construction of social problems. Each of these two concepts
requires that one person (in the case of the moral entrepreneur)
or any segment of society (in the case of status politics)
attempts to create rules that others must follow. In doing so,
the rules define who is deviant in a society and who is not. </p>

<p>Boyd (1983) writes that Becker (1963) argued that a study of
deviance should not only study those labelled as deviant, but
also study those who create the label of deviance. The societal
creation of rules can be attributed to the work of a moral
entrepreneur (Boyd, 1983, p. 260). Again, this sometimes requires
a certain amount of speculation on the interests and motives of
the moral entrepreneur. For example, was Mackenzie King a moral
entrepreneur? He certainly thought that he had a great deal of
influence on the early anti-opium legislation, and he depicted
himself as a lone force in getting this legislation passed
(Giffen, et al., 1991, p. 74). Whether this was entirely true
seems, for the most part, to be debatable. Also, his motives seem
to be more in line with legislating a form of social control,
rather than specifically creating a definition of deviance. There
seems to be more data on other groups' attempts to create a
definition of deviance, however. Boyd (1983) points out that
individuals, and not groups or social institutions can be thought
of as moral entrepreneurs (p. 260). </p>

<p>The concept of status politics accommodates groups as well as
individuals. Status politics also merges smoothly with conflict
theory. Status politics deals well in cases where there are few
tangible gains to be made by the dominant group. The gain,
rather, is a symbolic one, in which a particular life style (the
one of the dominant group) is embodied in legislation, whether it
is enforceable or not (Giffen, et al., 1991, p. 17). An example
of this is the legislation which added marijuana to the list of
banned drugs in 1923, even though little, if any, marijuana was
currently in the country. In effect, banning marijuana legislated
a culture and a life style that was free from the crime that had
been associated with marijuana use in the United States at the
time. </p>

<p>CONCLUSION </p>

<p>The politics of drug legislation is a complex web of class,
power, race, fears, social conditions and law. In asking 'why is
there a War on Drugs?', we are also asking a question that begs
for psychological and sociological answers. However, these
answers become more complex the deeper one travels into the
literature, and uncovers more factors which seem to vary over
both time and space. </p>

<p>Alexander's (1990) psychological explanation attempts to
uncover the universal 'truths' that guide the impulses and
emotions of both the drug warriors and the resisters. Here, the
battle is over social control and individual freedom, a problem
J.S. Mill (1859/1978) wrote as having &quot;divided mankind
almost from the remotest ages&quot; (p. 1). Alexander's theory
can help explain that a certain segment of the population wants
very much to curtail individual freedom, by in effect legislating
their morality and fears onto the rest of society. This has much
in common with several of the sociological theories (for example,
conflict theory), but where conflict theory in particular offers
no explanation for (and indeed, neglects) drug use among those in
the dominant group, Alexander's theory allows both for
hypocritical actors, and for the changing roles of the groups
over time. Alexander, in this sense, is quite aware of the fact
that people's motives are independent of their actions, and that
their actions have over time been focused against different
groups, while their motives remain consistent. As well, since the
psychology of the situation is considered, actions can easily be
irrational, and because of this account for actions which have
little material benefit for the drug warrior or the resister. </p>

<p>Conflict theory, on the other hand, has much in common with
Alexander's theory, at least in that there are opposing sides. We
see the same pattern of us-against-them, except that the sides
are more stringently defined. Conflict theory also fills in what
Alexander leaves out, and that is the political and sociological
environment in which these actions take place. </p>

<p>Within conflict theory, the reasons for the drug war are that
the dominant group in society wants to legislate their life style
and culture on others, in order to maintain their hegemony. In
much of the American research, this hegemony comes at the expense
of the minority groups, and the poor. In Canadian research, these
lines of power are much harder to define, and in it there is
little explicit feeling that drug legislation is specifically
directed towards one race or another. The effects of the
legislation were certainly felt by early immigrants to this
country, but the emphasis changed as that members of that group
were no longer available to be persecuted. There is a feeling,
however, that a class distinction is made, in that (as in the
United States) these laws penalize the poor more than they do the
rich. </p>

<p>Also, if the War on Drugs is a social construction, one must
have to consider that it is a superbly constructed one, and one
that has resisted all attempts to disarm it. The temptation to
say that the War on Drugs is simply a social construction,
brought about by status politics is a strong one, however the
motivations of those who successfully created it are sometimes
misinterpreted or misreported. Other times they are simply not
known. Social construction also neglects the way in which a
society can be moved to support even the most preposterous
measures of the War on Drugs. Societal opinions are seen to be
tied by a string of unknown size to the person, or persons doing
the constructing. Again, it is a psychological explanation that
may help to shed light on this process, by examining the ways in
which people's fears and prejudices are manipulated. </p>

<p>At the heart of it all, though, is the intense amount of
morality that is present in any questioning of the reasons that a
War on Drugs is taking place. Even though the War on Drugs takes
place in a largely secular, liberal society such as ours, there
is never a dearth of people who seem to want to fight to the end
to keep prohibitionist laws in place. The statements made by the
drug warriors, or the dominant group (or even the hypocrites who
both decry the use of drugs in others, yet use drugs themselves),
are the only consistent factor that pervades the history of the
War on Drugs. This takes the form of the rhetoric that has been
written and spoken from the earliest times, and it takes many
forms, including drug 'education', flyers, tracts, sermons,
public service announcements, posters... even arcade games flash
out the same messages to arcade-addicted youth. The rhetoric is
the result of the dogma of the War on Drugs, and need not be
associated with any religion in order to prove effective. </p>

<p>Of course, early prohibition laws were not based entirely (or
in some cases, at all) on an explicitly moral basis. But it is
interesting to note that in every case, the morality of drug use
sprang up as justification for the early laws, and the laws that
followed. Conflict theorist have tried to explain at times that
morality, whether in the form of racist attitudes or religious
influence, have caused legislation to be enacted, which is not
always the correct interpretation of the situation. However,
their focus on the legislation as validating the life style and
culture of the dominant group is not without cause, because
imposing the life style and culture on another group is
essentially a moral decision. Indeed, even when the early
legislation focused on suppressing the international trade of
opium, it was a moral decision to curtail one form of economic
activity to benefit another. </p>

<p>Conflict theory also helps to identify the groups that benefit
from anti-drug legislation, whether it be the economic gains made
by multi-national pharmaceutical companies (as Johns (1991)
argues), or symbolic gains made by the dominant group in society,
or even just the satisfaction of seeing some of these laws affect
only a certain, despised group in society. When these gains are
made, unintended effects of the laws (which may be much more
punitive than the laws themselves) are justified through a
feeling of moral superiority that often comes entirely at the
expense of those who suffer as a result. </p>

<p>In sum, morality takes on many faces. It can take the shape of
cultural or economic superiority, and often manifests itself in
the rhetoric of the War on Drugs. It serves many purposes, as
well. It justifies authority and power of those making the laws,
it justifies the economic superiority of those corporations which
make money through the sale of licit drugs, and it justifies
prejudice against subordinates in society. The most interesting
aspect of this morality, though, is that drugs themselves aren't
the focus. The focus is on a large-scale battle between real
people and their core beliefs, and not on evidence, rationality,
or humanity. The War on Drugs, therefore, is at its heart a
battle over a morality that is pervasive on a societal level,
very well-entrenched, and deflects arguments of evidence,
rationality and humanity at the societal level. What may be
needed to defuse the War on Drugs, then, is a grass roots
approach that calls for a re-defined culture and morality
regarding drug use based on the Canadian tradition of a peaceable
society. </p>

<p>BIBLIOGRAPHY </p>

<p>Adlaf, E.M., R.G. Smart, and M.D. Canale (1991) Drug Use Among
</p>

<p>Ontario Adults, 1977-1991. Toronto: Addiction Research
Foundation. </p>

<p>Akers, R.L. (1991) &quot;Addiction: The Troublesome
Concept.&quot; The </p>

<p>Journal of Drug Issues, 21, 4, pp. 777-793. </p>

<p>Alexander, B.K. (1990) Peaceful Measures: Canada's Way Out of </p>

<p>the 'War on Drugs'. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. </p>

<p>Becker, H.S. (1963) Outsiders. New York: MacMillan Publishing.
</p>

<p>Cited in: Boyd, N. (1982) &quot;The Dilemma of Canadian
Narcotics </p>

<p>Legislation: The Social Control of Altered States of </p>

<p>Consciousness.&quot; Contemporary Crises, 7, pp. 257-269. </p>

<p>Boyd, N. (1982) &quot;The Dilemma of Canadian Narcotics
Legislation: </p>

<p>The Social Control of Altered States of Consciousness.&quot; </p>

<p>Contemporary Crises, 7, pp. 257-269. </p>

<p>Brecher, E.M. (1972) Licit and Illicit Drugs. Mount Vernon,
New </p>

<p>York: Consumers Union. </p>

<p>Edsall, T.B. and M.D. Edsall (1991) Chain reaction: The impact
</p>

<p>of race, rights and taxes on American politics. New York: W.W.
</p>

<p>Norton and Company. cited in: Elwood, W.N. (1994) Rhetoric in </p>

<p>the War on Drugs. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger, p. 3. </p>

<p>Elwood, W.N. (1994) Rhetoric in the War on Drugs. Westport, </p>

<p>Connecticut: Praeger. </p>

<p>Erickson, P.G. (1992) &quot;Recent Trends in Canadian Drug
Policy: </p>

<p>The Decline and Resurgence of Prohibitionism.&quot; Daedalus,
121, </p>

<p>pp. 239-267. </p>

<p>Erickson, P.G. (1993) &quot;The Law, Social Control, and Drug
Policy: </p>

<p>Models, Factors and Processes.&quot; The International Journal
of </p>

<p>the Addictions, 28, 12, pp. 1155-1176. </p>

<p>Erickson, P.G. and M.S. Goodstadt (1979) &quot;Legal Stigma
for </p>

<p>Marijuana Possession.&quot; Criminology, 17, 2, pp. 208-216. </p>

<p>Erickson, P.G. and G.F. Murray (1986) &quot;Cannabis Criminals
</p>

<p>Revisited.&quot; British Journal of Addiction, 81, pp. 81-85. </p>

<p>Erickson, P. and R. Smart (July 11, 1994) &quot;U.S.-style
drug </p>

<p>policy isn't the answer.&quot; Toronto: Toronto Star, p. A12. </p>

<p>Des Jarlais, D. and S.R. Friedman (1994) &quot;AIDS and the
Use of </p>

<p>Injected Drugs.&quot; Scientific American, February 1994, pp.
82-88. </p>

<p>Fischer, B. (1994) &quot;'Maps and Moves'&quot; The
International Journal </p>

<p>of Drug Policy, 5, 2, pp. 70-81. </p>

<p>Giffen, P.J.; S. Endicott and S. Lambert (1991) Panic and </p>

<p>Indifference. The Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. A Study in </p>

<p>the Sociology of Law. Ottawa: Canadian Centre on Substance
Abuse. </p>

<p>Goode, E. (1990) &quot;The American Drug Panic of the 1980s:
Social </p>

<p>Construction or Objective Threat?&quot; The International
Journal of </p>

<p>the Addictions, 25, 9, pp. 1083-1098. </p>

<p>Health and Welfare Canada (1989) Licit and Illicit Drugs in </p>

<p>Canada. Edited by Marc Eliany. Ottawa: Minister of Supply and </p>

<p>Services. </p>

<p>Jensen,, E.L. and J. Gerber (1993) &quot;State efforts to
construct a </p>

<p>social problem : The 1986 war on drugs in Canada.&quot;
Canadian </p>

<p>Journal of Sociology, 18, 4, pp. 453-462. </p>

<p>Johns, C. (1991) &quot;The War on Drugs: Why the
Administration </p>

<p>Continues to Pursue a Policy of Criminalization and </p>

<p>Enforcement.&quot; Social Justice, 18, 4, pp. 147-165) </p>

<p>Mill, J.S. (1859/1978) On Liberty. Indianapolis: Hackett </p>

<p>Publishing Company, Inc. </p>

<p>Nadelmann, E.A. (1994) &quot;Progressive Legalizers,
Progressive </p>

<p>Prohibitionists and the Reduction of Drug-related Harm.&quot;
in </p>

<p>Heather, N., et al, (1994) Psychoactive Drugs and Harm </p>

<p>Reduction: From Faith to Science. London: Whurr Publishers,
pp. </p>

<p>34-45. </p>

<p>Oakes, G. (1994a) &quot;Judge jails doughnut shop owner 18
months.&quot; </p>

<p>Wednesday, December 14. Toronto: Toronto Star, p. A8. </p>

<p>Oakes, G. (1994b) &quot;Drug importer jailed 9 years in
$80,000 </p>

<p>bust.&quot; Thursday, December 15. Toronto: Toronto Star, p.
A11. </p>

<p>Reagan, R. (1986, September 14) &quot;National Campaign
Against Drug </p>

<p>Abuse: Address to the Nation.&quot; Weekly Compilation of </p>

<p>Presidential Document, 22, 38, pp. 1133-1187. As quoted in </p>

<p>Elwood, W.N. (1994) Rhetoric in the War on Drugs. Westport, </p>

<p>Connecticut: Praeger. pp. 28-29. </p>

<p>Riley, D. (1994) The Harm Reduction Model. Ottawa: Canadian </p>

<p>Centre on Substance Abuse. </p>

<p>Riley, D. (1994b) Notes from the November 21, 1994 lecture on </p>

<p>harm reduction, ATOPS Program. Toronto: Addiction Research </p>

<p>Foundation. </p>

<p>Ritzer, G. (1992) Classical Sociological Theory. Toronto:
McGraw </p>

<p>Hill, Inc. </p>

<p>Senate Debates, Canada (1910-1911) As quoted in Giffen, P.J.,
S. </p>

<p>Endicott and S. Lambert (1991) Panic and Indifference. The </p>

<p>Politics of Canada's Drug Laws. A Study in the Sociology of
Law. </p>

<p>Ottawa: Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse. p. 86. </p>

<p>Single, E. (1994) &quot;Toward a Harm Reduction Approach to
Alcohol </p>

<p>Prevention.&quot; 5th International Conference on the
Reduction of </p>

<p>Drug-related Harm. Toronto, March 1994. </p>

<p>Single, E., B. Williams and D. McKenzie (1994) Canadian </p>

<p>Profile--Alcohol, Tobacco and Other Drugs, 1994. </p>

<p>Smart, R.G. and E.M. Adlaf (1990) &quot;Drug Use in Ontario,
Canada.&quot; </p>

<p>Bulletin of PAHO, 24, 1, pp. 22-29. </p>

<p>Smart, R.G., E.M. Adlaf and G.W. Walsh (1991) The Ontario </p>

<p>Student Drug Use Survey: Trends Between 1977-1991. Toronto: </p>

<p>Addiction Research Foundation. </p>

<p>Solomon, R.R. and M. Green (1988) &quot;The First Century: The
</p>

<p>History of Non-medical Opiate Use and Control Policies in </p>

<p>Canada, 1870-1970.&quot; in Blackwell, J.C. and P. Erickson
(eds) </p>

<p>Illicit Drugs in Canada: A Risky Business. Scarborough: Nelson
</p>

<p>Canada, pp. 88-116. </p>

<p>Solomon, R.R., E. Single, and P.G. Erickson (1988) &quot;Legal
</p>

<p>Considerations in Canadian Cannabis Policy.&quot; in
Blackwell, J.C. </p>

<p>and P.G. Erickson, eds (1988) Illicit Drugs in Canada: A Risky
</p>

<p>Business. Scarborough: Nelson Canada, pp. 370-391. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>