
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B32-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B046-279</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_app1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131947 text/html 9945
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:19:37 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:16:16 GMT
Content-length: 9728
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Appendix 1. The Medicinal Uses of Cannabis</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_leg_op_cannabis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="CANNABIS.HTM">Legislative
Options for Cannabis</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="33799" -->

<p><b>APPENDIX 1. </b></p>

<h1>THE MEDICINAL USE OF CANNABIS (19) </h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The medicinal use of cannabis in the ancient world has been
well documented (Abel 1980). In the United States, cannabis was
first mentioned as a medicinal drug in 1843 and by 1852 it was
included in the US dispensatory list of medicines. It was thought
to be beneficial in the treatment of 'neuralgia, gout, tetanus,
hydrophobia, cholera, convulsions, chorea, hysteria, depression
and insanity' (Wood &amp; Bache 1854, cited in [1]Abel 1980,
p182). In Australia, tincture of cannabis was used in medicine
until the 1960s, when it was declared a prohibited drug
([2]Cartwright 1983). </p>

<p>Since the introduction of legislation prohibiting the
recreational use of cannabis, its use for medicinal purposes has,
in most Western countries, not been popular. However, recently
the therapeutic benefits of cannabis have received close
attention in the United States. In 1991, Doblin and Kleiman
conducted an anonymous survey of the members of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology measuring the attitudes and
experiences of American oncologists concerning the use of
cannabis to treat nausea in cancer chemotherapy patients. They
found that, of those oncologists who replied to the survey (43
per cent), more than 44 per cent of them reported recommending
the illegal use of cannabis for the control of nausea to at least
one cancer patient. Some 48 per cent said that they would
prescribe cannabis to some of their patients if it were legal
([3]Doblin &amp; Kleiman 1991). </p>

<p>Cannabis has been used as an anti-emetic in the treatment of
AIDS patients and as a painkiller for those suffering from
chronic pain ([4]Grinspoon 1991). It has also been regarded by
some medical practitioners as being effective in reducing
intra-ocular pressure in glaucoma patients ([5]Caswell 1992) and
in treating epilepsy ([6]Cartwright 1983), Huntington's chorea
([7]Moss et al. 1989) and Parkinsonian tremor ([8]Frankel et al.
1990). </p>

<p>Despite the attention that the medical use of cannabis has
received in recent times, legislation in the United States does
not permit the medical use of marijuana. In the Federal
Controlled Substances Act, cannabis is categorised as a Schedule
1 drug, and as such is described as having a high potential for
abuse, no currently accepted medical use and no acceptable safe
level of use under medical supervision. </p>

<p>In 1989, organisations such as the (US) National Organization
for Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML), the Alliance for Cannabis
Therapeutics (ACT) as well as various individuals,20 applied to
have cannabis rescheduled so that it could be used for medical
purposes. The Administrator of the Drug Enforcement
Administration rejected these claims and stated that: </p>

<p>It is clear that cannabis cannot meet the criteria ... for
safety under medical supervision. The chemistry of cannabis is
not known and reproducible. The record supports a finding that
marijuana plant material is variable from plant to plant. The
quantities of the active constituents, the cannabinoids, vary
considerably. In addition, the actions and potential risks of
several of the cannabinoids have not been studied ... (US
Government, Federal Register, vol. 54, no. 249, 29 December 1989,
p53,734). </p>

<p>This position has recently been restated by Robert C. Bonner,
a later Administrator of the US Drug Enforcement Agency, when he
responded to a subsequent petition lodged by NORML (US
Government, Federal Register, vol. 57, no. 59, 26 March 1992,
pp10,499-10,508). </p>

<p>Those in favour of rescheduling the drug argue that, for some,
the denial of cannabis as a medicine is particularly cruel.
Grinspoon argues that 'sick people are forced to suffer anxiety
about prosecution in addition to their anxiety about the illness
... Doctors are afraid to recommend what they know to be the best
treatment because they might lose their reputation or even their
licence' ([9]Grinspoon 1991). </p>

<p>The Australian medical community has not been as enthusiastic
about the therapeutic benefits of cannabis although many argue
that where the drug has been demonstrated to be effective its use
should be permitted. A study done at the Royal Children's
Hospital in Melbourne found that THC (the psychoactive ingredient
in cannabis) was an effective anti-emetic for some children
undergoing chemotherapy ([10]Cartwright 1983). Dr Lorna
Cartwright, a lecturer in Pharmacology at Sydney University
stated: </p>

<p>I think there are probably better drugs for medical uses. The
point is, though, I think it should be allowed to be used for
conditions in which it has been shown to have effect, such as for
glaucoma, for children having chemotherapy and for epilepsy. I
always feel that if something is good even for a small percentage
of patients, it should be allowed to be used (cited in
[11]Caswell 1992, p498). <br>
</p>

<p>Another pharmacologist, Dr Greg Chesher, argues that cannabis
clearly has therapeutic benefits but that research into the
possible uses of the drug is being hampered by the fact that
cannabis is a prohibited drug (cited in [12]Caswell 1992). The
position in Australia is different from that in the USA in that
in this country there is no legislation or binding administrative
ruling specifically stating that no medical use exists for
cannabis.21 Neither does the United Nations Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, to which Australia is a party, specifically
forbid the medical use of cannabis. In fact the Convention
recognises that some otherwise illicit drugs may have medical
purposes and states that cannabis use should be 'subject to the
provisions of this Convention, to limit exclusively to medical
and scientific purposes the...use and possession of drugs'
(Article 4(1) (c)). Given that the United Nations Conventions do
not specifically proscribe the medical uses of cannabis,
introducing legislation that allowed the use of the drug for
medical purposes in Australia would be relatively simple. Clauses
authorising the therapeutic use of the drug could simply be
inserted into relevant drug legislation and therapeutic products
scheduling. Politically, however, such a change in policy could
be difficult. </p>

<p>As an illicit drug, cannabis has a negative image and is seen
as an being an inherently dependence producing, damaging drug
that has no possible benefits. Recognition of the medical
benefits of the drug may challenge this dominant view of
cannabis. </p>

<h2>References </h2>

<p>Abel, E. 1980, Marihuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years,
Plenum Press, New York. </p>

<p>Cartwright, L. 1983, 'Marihuana', Current Affairs Bulletin,
vol. 59, no. 10, pp19-31. </p>

<p>Caswell, A. 1992, 'Marijuana as medicine', The Medical Journal
of Australia, vol. 156, pp497-498. </p>

<p>Doblin, R. E. &amp; Kleiman, M. 1991, 'Marijuana as
anti-emetic dedicine: A survey of oncologists experiences and
attitudes, Journal of Clinical Oncology, vol. 9, pp1314-1319. </p>

<p>Frankel, J.P., Hughes, A., Lees, A.J. &amp; Stern, G.M. 1990,
'Marijuana for Parkinsonian Tremor', Journal of Neurological
Neurosurgical Psychiatry, vol. 53, pp436-442. </p>

<p>Grinspoon, L. 1991, 'Marijuana in a time of
psychopharmalogical McCarthyism' in Searching for Alternatives:
Drug Control Policy in The United States, eds </p>

<p>M.B. Krauss &amp; E.PLazear, pp379-389, Hoover Institution
Press, Stanford, California. </p>

<p>Moss, D.E., Manderscheid, P.Z. &amp; Montgomery, S.P. 1992,
'Nicotine and cannabinoids as adjuncts to neuroleptics in the
treatment of Tourettes Syndrome and other motor disorders', Life
Science, 1989, vol. 44, pp1521-1525. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_leg_op_cannabis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="CANNABIS.HTM">Legislative
Options for Cannabis</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="33799" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>