
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-37</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B028-139</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/sanfranopium1892.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095823 text/html 7433
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:58:14 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:59 GMT
Content-length: 7218
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>San Francisco Opium Joints - 1892</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">The Review of Reviews 5 June (1892), p. 604</font></p>

<p><font size="3">SAN FRANCISCO OPIUM JOINTS</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The CALIFORNIA ILLUSTRATED MAGAZINE for May
prints a valuable article on &quot;Opium and Its Votaries,&quot;
by F. J. Masters, who has studied the subject in San Francisco at
first hand. An added air of authority is given to the paper by
the illustrations of opium dens and smokers in various phases of
dilapidation. These pictures are copies of flash-light
photographs taken in the underground joints of San Francisco by a
party which the magazine sent out for that purpose, and who,
backed up by a crack detective, accomplished their end in spite
of John Chinaman's vigorous remonstrances against being
&quot;took&quot; in such circumstances.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">While the opium evil is a huge one and dreadful
in its consequences, the immediate physical effects of the drug,
Dr. Masters tells us, has been greatly exaggerated. &quot;It is a
mistake to suppose that when a man begins to smoke the drug he
begins to lose strength and waste away. Opium is no doubt
responsible for the widespread misery and destitution seen in
many of the poorer districts of China; but the concomitant evils
have to be distinguished from the direct effects upon the
individual.&quot; There are degrees of opium, and the penurious
Chinaman can often only afford to smoke a vile adulteration,
which is doubly ruinous.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Masters describes in very interesting
detail the manner of carrying on the San Francisco joints, of
which there are a great number: &quot;In China the most unbiased
and trustworthy opinions give thirty per cent of those who are
addicted to the habit and ten per cent of confirmed opium sots. I
am inclined to believe that the same figures will hold good for
the Chinese in San Francisco, though Colonel Bee, the Chinese
Consul, places the percentage much lower.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Nor is it only the Chinese who use the
demoralizing drug. The vice is spreading among Americans to a
serious extent. But they do not go to the joints. &quot;If done
at all,&quot; says Dr. Masters, &quot;it must be very secretly.
The movements of white people about Chinatown are so carefully
watched, and the different hells under almost half-hourly
surveillance, that it would be impossible for them to frequent
these places without soon attracting the attention of the police.
There is plenty of smoking done by American people, but it is
carried on in private houses or in rooms secretly kept by white
people.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Notwithstanding the constant increase of the
tax on opium it continues to come into the country in greater and
greater quantities; and last year, under the $12 per pound tax of
the McKinley tariff, the importations amounted to 63,189 pounds
of prepared opium. Crude opium is not imported in such a
proportion as formerly, because the heavy duties make it
impossible to manufacture or &quot;cook&quot; the product in this
country and compete with the foreign prepared variety. But this
fact fosters numerous illicit establishments, which now and then
come to light.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In San Francisco a city ordinance attempts to
regulate the selling of smoking opium by a high license
proportional to the gross business done, and in 1889 another
ordinance made it &quot;illegal to sell any extract of opium
except on a written order of a practicing physician, and
requiring that the amounts sold, with the name, sex, color and
residence of the purchaser, and the name of the prescribing
physician, be entered in a book. The City Council thus passes an
ordinance practically declaring a business illegal which it has
already legalized, and from which it is not ashamed to draw a
revenue.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The right way to deal with the problem, Dr.
Masters thinks, is to follow the advice of the better class of
Chinese, and remove prepared opium from the tariff list, declare
it contraband, and confiscate it wherever found.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;For the last thirty years,&quot; he says,
&quot;from pulpit, platform and press, we have been thundering
denunciations against Great Britain for importing crude opium
into China and deriving a revenue therefrom, which some have
called a revenue of blood, and yet during the last eight years we
have been importing, at this port alone, half a million pounds of
opium, prepared only for smoking purposes, and which have brought
to our national treasury a revenue drawn from human vice
amounting to five millions of dollars. Yet this is only for the
last eight years, and this a period, it will be observed, marked
by the exaction of heavy import duties, and added to this a
steadily decreasing Chinese population.&quot; The disgusting and
horrible effects of regular opium smoking are too well known
already, and that part of the article before us which deals with
them scarcely adds to the reputation of the pernicious drug. But
the thought of the introduction of the habit among Americans must
be a potent factor in our &quot;Chinese Question,&quot; and it is
an added reason why that problem must be largely solved by the
Americans of the Pacific Coast.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">[NOTE: The article from which this file was
excerpted may include additional text and accompanying
illustrations.]</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>