
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B025-204</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/redfern/rf2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140639 text/html 11793
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:06:29 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:55:25 GMT
Content-length: 11577
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Beyond Prohibition - History of the Project</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_redfern_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="rftoc.htm">Beyond
Prohibition</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="52020" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="4">Beyond Prohibition</font><font size="5"> </font></p>

<p><font size="2"><strong>Report of the Redfern Legal Centre Drug
Law Reform Project</strong></font><strong> </strong></p>

<p><font size="2">September 1996</font> </p>

<p><font size="4">1 . History of Project</font><font size="5"> </font></p>

<p><font size="2"><strong>Background</strong></font><strong> </strong></p>

<p><font size="2">The Redfern Legal Centre Drug Law Reform
Project began in mid 1994. Its objectives were to promote
informed public discussion about drug law reform, and to
contribute to bringing forward reform of the drug laws.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Redfern Legal Centre provided funding to pay
one part-time worker to coordinate the Project and to carry out
many of its tasks. The Project was oversighted by a small but
typically enthusiastic committee, which reported to the Centre's
Management Committee. The funding for the Project came (until
February 1996) from the Centre's own resources, primarily
litigation costs. From March until September 1996, the Project
was funded by a grant from the Law Foundation of NSW</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Redfern Legal Centre undertook this Project for
several reasons:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">1. Drug prohibition fosters crime (because
prohibition artificially inflates prices for drugs on the black
market). Abandoning prohibition would be the simplest single way
to achieve a noticeable reduction in property crime, and to a
lesser but still important extent, violent crime.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">2. Those affected by drug-inspired crime are
primarily the socially disadvantaged. Drug law reform is
desirable as a social equity measure.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">3. Prohibition contributes to police
corruption. It is no accident that the clear majority of police
named adversely in evidence before the Wood Royal Commission into
police corruption are in some way connected to drugs - police
stealing drugs or money from drug suppliers, police selling
drugs, police planting drugs on suspects as false evidence.
Prohibition makes the drug trade so extravagantly profitable (it
is the second largest trade in the world) that it creates
enormous temptations for police and other officials. We cannot
hope to significantly reduce the opportunities for police
corruption while the drugs prohibition continues.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">4. Prohibition has a significant negative
impact on the legal system. Dealing with people facing drug
charges, or charges of property crime generated by the drugs
black market, creates an enormous drain on the courts, and in
particular on public funds available to provide legal services
for the poor and disadvantaged. Reducing drug-related crime would
free up law enforcement resources for other activities, and would
improve the resource capacity of the Legal Aid Commission and
community legal services to pursue other matters, such as
consumer claims and antidiscrimination cases.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">5. Public health outcomes are compromised by
laws which drive drug use underground. In particular, the drug
laws hamper efforts to contain the spread of HIV and Hepatitis B
and C.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">6. Despite years of community debate and the
strength of the case for reform, prohibition has been fiercely
resilient . Reliance on the criminal law to control behaviour in
other areas of moral or personal choice gambling, sex work,
abortion, censorship - has generally receded in recent decades,
with the drug laws the notable exception. The demise of
prohibition is not as inevitable as it perhaps once appeared to
be.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">We believe that meaningful reform of our drug
laws necessarily involves reconsidering the laws about supply as
well as possession and use of drugs, and laws about other drugs
as well as cannabis.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Harm reduction is a pragmatic approach which
emphasises reducing the personal and social harms associated with
drug use, while accepting that eliminating drug use is
impossible. Harm reduction has been officially the central goal
of Australian drugs policy since the mid 1980s, although most
public resources devoted to the drug problem continue to promote
prohibition (eg, funds to police and customs services and
unrealistic, wholly negative drug education). We believe that
harm reduction (in any meaningful definition) is incompatible
with prohibition. The Project has attempted to develop coherent
harm reduction strategies, focusing on measures which would
reduce or eliminate the drugs black market. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Community Forums</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Project convened a series of community
forums at which service providers in the health and community
sectors in particular were invited to identify, from their
perspective, the ways in which existing legal approaches to drugs
impacted on their work, and to identify which legal framework
could best support drug treatment and education programs. These
forums were held in both South Sydney, where the Legal Centre is
located, and in Cabramatta, Sydney's major heroin distribution
point. The discussion at these forums was invaluable in assisting
the Project to developing strategies and proposals for change.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Publications</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Two discussion papers were written and
distributed in the course of the Project.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Harm Reduction Model of Controlled Drug
Availability, published in May 1995, attempted to tackle
concretely the question of what exactly drug law reform could
look like. Most previous proposals for law reform were either
inadequate (eg, the on-the spot fine model adopted in various
forms in South Australia, the ACT and the Northern Territory), or
airy generalisations about the possibility of regulating or
deregulating the drugs market (with the idea of controlled
availability little more than a slogan). We considered it a
priority to do the work of systematically applying harm reduction
principles to all aspects of drug consumption, production and
distribution - in an open-minded but hopefully not fanciful way.
The Harm Reduction Model therefore represents a detailed
projection of what controlled availability might look like in
practice.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Harm Reduction Model was widely circulated
and was endorsed by a number of community organisations and
individuals. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">An updated and expanded second edition of The
Harm Reduction Model was published in July 1996. Importantly, the
second edition included a set of Principles for Controlled Drug
Availability to complement the essentially practical proposals
illustrating some possible means of regulating drug supply and
consumption. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">The Project's other discussion paper was Steps
to Harm Reduction. A companion document to the Harm Reduction
Model, this paper addressed the present and short-term future. It
provided an analysis of the possible immediate steps which could
and should be taken in drugs policy and drug law reform. Again,
the value of the paper lay in its attempt to be detailed and
specific. The paper is a blueprint for reform, providing a list
of proposals to achieve a graduated replacement of prohibition
with harm reduction. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">These two papers form the major part of this
report.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Project also produced:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Two very popular bumper stickers (slogans End
Prohibition: Support Drug Law Reform and Break the Crime Cycle:
Support Drug Law Reform)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">A full colour poster, a graphic presentation of
what the future of drugs policy might look like.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">A series of Fact Sheets with statistics and
other information detailing the social impact of existing drug
laws. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Discussions with politicians</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Throughout the Project, we held discussions
with a number of NSW Parliamentarians, including Ministers and
their advisors. It must be said that the political climate proved
to be not conducive to change on drug policy, despite some early
encouraging if ambiguous statements from the incoming Carr
Government. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Issues discussed included many of the issues
dealt with in this report, including the desirability of
introducing a trial of legal safe injecting spaces, and a
possible Parliamentary motion on prioritising harm reduction in
drugs policy.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Inquiries</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Project also provided formal, detailed
submissions on proposals for law reform to the following
inquiries.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Wood Royal Commission into the NSW Police
Service</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Victorian Premier's Drug Advisory Council
(Pennington Committee)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Commonwealth Access to Justice Inquiry.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Conference papers</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">During the life of the Project, we participated
in a number of conferences and seminars. Perhaps the most
significant conference papers we presented were a paper in
September 1995 to the NSW Corrective Health Services Symposium on
Drug-Related Crime, and the two papers to the 7th International
Conference on the Reduction of Drug Related Harm, in Hobart in
March 1996. <br>
</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_redfern_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="rftoc.htm">Beyond
Prohibition</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="52020" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>