
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-61</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B019-145</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/potency.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052836 text/html 45444
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:28:27 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:09:12 GMT
Content-length: 45226
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Cannabis, 1988, Old Drug, New Dangers, The Potency
Question</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="../medical/medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="42660" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<h1>Cannabis 1988 Old Drug, New Dangers The Potency Question</h1>

<p>TOD H. MIKURIYA, M.D.* &amp; MICHAEL R. ALDRICH, PH.D.** </p>

<p>*Psychiatrist and Substance Abuse Therapist, 41 Tunnel Road,
Berkeley, California 94705. </p>

<p>**Curator, Fitz Hugh Ludlow Memorial Library, San Francisco,
California.</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>The story of the new, allegedly stronger and more dangerous
marijuana was rebirthed in January 1986 by the late Sidney Cohen,
M.D., Professor of Psychiatry at UCLA: ``. . . material ten or
more times potent than the product smoked ten years ago is being
used, and the intoxicated state is more intense and lasts
longer.&quot; In addition, Cohen (1986) asserted that ``the
amount of THC [tetrahydrocannabinol] in confiscated street
samples averaged 4.1 percent THC during 1984. </p>

<p>The sinsemilla varieties were about 7 percent with some
samples reaching 14 percent. . . . all marijuana research to date
has been done on 1 or 2 percent THC material and we may be
underestimating present day smoking practices.&quot;</p>

<p>The average potency of marijuana samples seized by the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) increased from 0.5 percent THC
in 1974 to 3.5 percent in 1985-1986, with sinsemilla (seedless
marijuana) at 6.5 to 12 percent, announced Dr. Richard Hawks of
NIDA later that year (Kerr 1986: 1). ``Parents who experimented
in their youth are not aware that the potency is much
higher,&quot; added Donald M. Delzer, Chairman of the National
Federation of Parents for Drug Free Youth (Kerr 1986: 18).</p>

<p>``Now perceived as a hard drug, marijuana has increased 1,400
percent in potency since 1970,&quot; proclaimed the flyer of a
national conference on marijuana (Henry Ohlhoff Outpatient
Programs 1986). Drug abuse treatment professionals soon
elaborated on the outcry. Tennant (1986) asserted that the drug
of the 1970's contained one to three percent THC, while that of
the 1980's contained five to 15 percent. Furthermore, the brain
registers the difference exponentially, so the difference between
one percent and 10 percent THC was not nine percent, but more
like 900 percent (Garcia 1986: 3). Smith (1987) stated that Cohen
``taught us that marijuana was a lot more dangerous than we
originally thought, particularly with the use of more potent
preparations by young people.&quot; Inaba (1987) added that
``this new, stronger marijuana has a more disruptive effect on
brain chemistry and body physiology than we had imagined
previously,&quot; and mentioned heretofore undescribed side
effects among athletes: ``Baseball players who get beaned a lot
admit to smoking marijuana. It impairs their ability to follow
the ball.&quot;</p>

<p>In a column for drug abuse counselors, Meyers (1987) advised
``supportive therapy&quot; for the effects of the ``new&quot;
marijuana, which were described as ``depersonalization,
disorientation, derealization, changes in perception, and
alterations in body image . . . acute brain syndromes with
temporary clouding of mental processes . . . a change of time
sense---where minutes seem like hours---slowed thinking, and
feared perception of brain damage.&quot; Schick Shadel Health
Services drug abuse treatment clinics (Unsigned 1987) now
advertise that ``marijuana has increased THC content from one
percent THC in 1975 to six to fourteen percent THC in 1985 due to
hybridization techniques. . . . </p>

<p>For those who have become addicted to marijuana, whether it
was years ago, or recently, treatment is necessary---even more
critical today.&quot;</p>

<p>Despite the respectability of these authorities, none of these
alarming claims are new, and neither is the potency issue. There
are several claims intertwined: (1) that the marijuana available
today is much stronger than that available previously,
particularly since the early 1970's; (2) that the effects of this
so-called new marijuana are different from effects known earlier;
and (3) that all previous marijuana research has been done with
weak material and is therefore irrelevant. Before leaping on the
bandwagon, one should examine the validity of these assertions.</p>

<p>HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE</p>

<p>Extremely potent marijuana has been described for 150 years by
Western scientists and (with the possible exception of the
bean-ball syndrome) so have the effects of the new marijuana.
There has been a great deal of research on high-potency cannabis
in many countries. </p>

<p>In the paper that introduced cannabis to Western medicine,
O'Shaughnessy (1839) discussed the widespread social and medical
uses of ganja (sinsemilla) in India and noted symptoms of
``delirium which the incautious use of the Hemp preparations
often occasions, especially among young men first commencing the
practice.&quot; Cannabis tinctures soon appeared in Europe and
America (Robertson 1847; Savory 1843) and Fitz Hugh Ludlow (1857)
described florid psychedelic trips after their oral ingestion,
including all the symptoms mentioned by Meyers (1987). The Ohio
State Medical Society (McMeens 1860) reviewed some 15 years of
clinical experience with the drug and acknowledged the intense
but physiologically benign mental effects caused by high doses or
idiosyncratic sensitivity.</p>

<p>Wood (1869) reported the subjective effects of a tincture made
from North American marijuana, experiencing a distortion in time
sense, convulsions and memory loss, but no adverse aftereffects.
He reported considerable success with it in the treatment of
severe neuralgia. However, 15 years later Wood and Smith (1884)
commented on the variable potency of cannabis and outlined
appropriate treatment for overdoses in medical practice.</p>

<p>Early investigators (McMeens 1860; Bell 1857) attributed this
variability to ``defective pharmaceutic processes&quot; employed
in foreign countries, and recommended that extracts prepared at
home would be preferable. However, extreme variations in locally
manufactured preparations were soon recognized in the
Dispensatory of the United States (Wood &amp; Bache 1868:
379-382). A practical bioassay technique was gradually perfected
starting from the systematic observations of Hare (1887),
followed by Evans (1894) and Marshall (1898), to compensate for
batch-to-batch potency variations.</p>

<p>Pragmatically, the solution to the overdose/potency problem in
both the United States (Wood &amp; Bache 1868: 382) and England
was to titrate the dose. In London, a patient who signed a letter
to the editors of Lancet, W.W. (1890) reported a typical case:
W.W. had inadvertently been given an overdose of cannabis for
treatment of neuralgia by his doctor and had suffered perceptual
distortion, agitation, mood swings, and fear of death. Sir J.
Russell Reynolds, M.D., F.R.S., physician to Queen Victoria's
household, responded with a recommendation based on 30 years of
experience with the drug (Reynolds 1890), stating ``that Indian
hemp, when pure and administered carefully, is one of the most
valuable medicines we possess. . . . a minimum dose should be
given to begin with, and . . . the dose should be very gradually
and cautiously increased.&quot; </p>

<p>During the nineteenth century, social and scientific research
on marijuana, as well as tinctures, were conducted with much
stronger material than is available on the illicit market today.
For example, the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission of 1893-1894
investigated the social, religious and medical uses of bhang
(marijuana), ganja (sinsemilla) and charas (hashish). The
potencies of varieties from different parts of the subcontinent
were evaluated by government chemists and botanists (Evans 1894;
Hooper 1894), using the ``acknowledged superiority&quot; of
Bengal ganja as the standard. The Commission found that the
moderate use of even highly potent marijuana caused no
significant physical, mental or moral damage (Kaplan 1969;
Mikuriya 1968).</p>

<p>In the 1890's, at the peak of medical interest in the drug,
British chemists (Wood, Spivey &amp; Easterfield 1899) isolated
an impure active principle, cannabinol, using a ``red oil&quot;
distilled from Indian cannabis as a starting point, which was
considered to be the active ingredient until the 1930's (Work,
Bergel &amp; Todd 1939; Cahn 1931). In 1909, Marshall
demonstrated that oxidation during storage was the primary cause
of the drug's variable potency. With this advance the
pharmaceutical industry shifted its attention to the production
of standard extracts that could be used to assay medicinal
compounds (Colson 1920). Because it had long been known that
ganja and charas produced the most reliable extracts (Wallich
1883; Robertson 1847), in practical terms this meant the European
and American producers had to learn how to grow ganja.</p>

<p>Sinsemilla cultivation by the Indian technique of culling male
plants from the fields before female plants could set seeds---the
very process to which recent researchers attribute the potency of
the new marijuana---was exhaustively described by the British
government in India (Kaplan 1969: 59-84; Prain 1893; Kerr 1877).
In an effort to promote Bengali ganja, the British Raj imposed an
export duty on inferior Bombay ganja at the turn of the century,
and pharmacognosists in Europe and the U.S. began learning
sinsemilla cultivation (Mair 1900).</p>

<p>Holmes (1900) discussed the potencies of Calcutta and Bombay
ganja and recommended that the former be used for pharmaceutical
preparations, either by home cultivation of ganja according to
the Bengal methods he outlined (Holmes 1902a) or by extracting it
immediately in Bengal and shipping it in tightly closed
containers (Holmes 1902b). Comparing the potency of cannabis from
Uganda, France and India, Holmes (1905) urged that only Indian
sinsemilla preparations be admitted to the British Pharmacopoeia.</p>

<p>Likewise, Whineray (1909) and Hooper (1908) described ganja
cultivation and manufacture, pointing out that cannabis grown in
North America by the Indian methods could be as fully potent as
Indian hemp. The National Standard Dispensatory of 1909, which
included medicines from the pharmacopoeias of the U.S., Britain
and Germany, gave the details of sinsemilla cultivation and
featured a drawing of a perfect Calcutta ganja flower top (see
Figure 1) as an example to be emulated by Western cultivators
(Hare, Caspari &amp; Rusby 1909: 374). </p>

<p>In the U.S., Hamilton and his colleagues (Hamilton 1918;
Hamilton 1915; Hamilton, Lescohier &amp; Perkins 1913; Houghton
&amp; Hamilton 1908) demonstrated that if care was exercised in
cultivating and processing the plant for extraction,
American-grown ganja and its extracts were as reliable as those
from India and would not deteriorate significantly if stored
properly. Information on cultivation of extremely potent seedless
marijuana was thus widely disseminated to Western pharmaceutical
producers during the first two decades of the twentieth century.</p>

<p>The U.S. government ignored these sensimilla cultivation
techniques at the first federal marijuana farm established in
1904 on the Potomac Flats (where the Pentagon now sits) in
Washington, D.C. (Silver 1979: 262-263), and as a result the
10-foot marijuana plants grown there and elsewhere in America
proved to be much less potent than good samples of Indian hemp
(Eckler &amp; Miller 1912). However, private pharmaceutical firms
were more successful. The Eli Lilly and Parke-Davis companies ran
a cooperative venture at Parkedale (Parke-Davis's farm near
Rochester, Michigan) from 1913 until 1938 to develop cannabis
extracts for medical use, at first from Cannabis indica, but
later standardized on a highly potent strain they developed that
they called Cannabis Americana (Wheeler 1968). </p>

<p>Pharmaceutical companies were marketing cannabis extracts that
were uniformly effective at 10 mg dose levels (Parke-Davis &amp;
Company 1930: 82) 11 years before its official removal from
medicinal availability. </p>

<p>In 1941, cannabis was removed from the United States
Pharmacopoeia (USP) at the behest of the Federal Bureau of
Narcotics, which suddenly claimed that marijuana had no medical
uses (Mikuriya 1973: xx). Yet even the removal of cannabis from
the USP did not end scientific and social research on highly
potent forms of cannabis, ranging from the red-dirt marijuana of
the Midwest to the red oil of the laboratories. Adams, Pease and
Clark (1940) described improved procedures for preparing purified
red oil from Minnesota wild hemp, and comparison of the potencies
of Minnesota marijuana and red oil was of significant interest to
Loewe, pharmacological director of the LaGuardia Committee
(Mayor's Committee on Marihuana 1944: 186ff). Red oil
concentrates were used along with marijuana in the LaGuardia </p>

<p>Committee's experiments on prisoners, under Loewe's personal
direction (Mayor's Committee on Marihuana 1944: 32); for a
subjective account see Mezzrow and Wolfe (1946: 317ff). In the
1940's, Adams and Loewe in the U.S. and Todd in England isolated
other cannabinoids, including THC, which Adams (1940) postulated
as the active principle.</p>

<p>Such isolates were the mainstay of marijuana research during
the 1940's and 1950's. A potent marijuana oil created as a truth
drug for interrogation purposes by the Office of Strategic
Services during World War II (Lee &amp; Shlain 1985: 3-5) was the
forerunner of later clandestine experiments conducted by the CIA
and the Department of Defense at the Edgewood Arsenal in Maryland
from the 1950's to the 1970's (Mikuriya 1973: xxii). Experiments
with the designer drug synhexyl, a potent analog of delta3-THC,
were conducted from the 1940's (Adams et al. 1941) until the
mid-1970's (Lemberger 1976; Pars &amp; Razdan 1976), but were
abandoned before its potential was fully explored.</p>

<p>In the 1960's, the identification of pure delta9-THC as the
active principle in cannabis (Gaoni &amp; Mechoulam 1964) made it
possible to assay the relative potencies of cannabinoids directly
in human subjects (Isbell et al. 1967). Although Weil, Zinberg
and Nelsen (1968) demonstrated the safety of human marijuana
research, much of the U.S. research of the 1970's was conducted
with low-potency marijuana because the government would not
approve human research with high-potency strains. Indeed, in one
early study (Jones &amp; Stone 1970), a THC concentrate was
removed from Mexican marijuana and then redistributed back into
the bulk marijuana to return its potency to 0.9 percent THC.
Outside the U.S., these strictures did not apply: The fact that
cannabidiol interferes with the effects of delta9-THC was
discovered in Brazil, using both purified cannabinoids on humans
(Karniol et al. 1974).</p>

<p>The 1960's and 1970's saw a worldwide flowering of cannabis
research, including its social, psychological, chemical,
botanical and legal aspects as well as covering an enormous range
of potencies and dosages. Major botanical work involved potency
questions: observing phenotypes at the University of Mississippi
(Fetterman et al. 1971) and in Canada (Small 1979); establishing
a lectotype for Cannabis sativa L. (Stearn 1974); distinguishing
C. sativa from C. indica and C. ruderalis (Schultes et al. 1974);
and cultivation techniques for increased THC production (Clarke
1981; Frank &amp; Rosenthal 1978). </p>

<p>Thus the claim by Cohen (1986) that ``all marijuana research
to date has been done on 1 or 2 percent THC material&quot; is not
accurate for the 1970's or for any other decade going back to
1839. It ignores much of the laboratory research in the U.S. that
was summarized by Cohen himself (Cohen &amp; Stillman 1976),
Hollister (1986) and the National Academy of Sciences (1982), and
all of the social research on high-potency marijuana in Jamaica
(Rubin &amp; Comitas 1975; Bowman &amp; Pihl 1973), Costa Rica
(Carter &amp; Doughty 1976), Greece (Fink et al. 1976) and Africa
(DuToit 1980). It is difficult to think of any country in which
the claim is true.</p>

<p>RECENT ESTIMATES OF POTENCY</p>

<p>Since the advent of quantitative analysis technology, there
has been sporadic reportage of the percentage of delta9-THC and
other cannabinoids in natural and semisynthetic cannabis
products. Notwithstanding the psychophysical effects of other
cannabinoids, the amount of THC present in a marijuana sample is
believed to determine the drug's potency (National Commission on
Marihuana and Drug Abuse 1972: 50), and potency is usually
expressed in percent THC by weight. The results of quantitative
analyses performed on street samples of marijuana have been
published since the late 1960's. These results are generally
higher than the alleged 0.5 percent THC content of marijuana
cited for the early 1970's.</p>

<p>Lerner and Zeffert (1968) described the development of
quantitative analysis for the determination of THC content, and
noted much variation among samples of marijuana, hashish, and red
oil (still being used experimentally in the 1960's). The THC
content of confiscated Mexican marijuana was 0.8 to 1.4 percent,
hashish averaged eight percent and red oil 31 percent in 1968.</p>

<p>Quantitative analyses of street samples of marijuana and
hashish conducted by Canadian laboratories in 1971 for the
Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs (1972:
28-29) showed a range of 0.02 to 3.46 percent THC (median=0.93%)
for marijuana, with hashish ranging from 1.0 to 14.3 percent THC
(median=4.82%). Samples seized in police raids were less potent:
marijuana was 0.05 to 1.65 percent THC (median=0.21%), while
hashish was 0.0 to 8.6 percent THC (median=1.3%). The reported
difference between confiscated police seizures and street samples
submitted to laboratories for analysis may be due to the
voluntary samples being submitted precisely because of their
extraordinary potency, or that storage conditions in police
evidence lockers are hardly optimal for potency stability.</p>

<p>This has a bearing on the potency question because the low
potency cited by both Cohen (1986) and Hawks (see Kerr 1986)
referred to samples confiscated by the DEA. It has been known
since the early days of its isolation (Wollner et al. 1942) that
THC oxidizes to cannabinol rapidly in samples stored at room
temperature (24oC). Lerner (1963) reported that the concentration
of THC in marijuana decreased at a rate of three to five percent
under normal room conditions, and Razdan (1970) reported a rate
of 10 percent per month. </p>

<p>The influence of temperature, light and age on potency was
addressed by Starks (1977: 13-15). The low-baseline percentage of
THC reported for the early 1970's may be due to this
deterioration in confiscated, stored samples. In any case, the
low baseline makes the difference in the THC content of
later-reported samples appear much greater than it may have been
in actuality, assuming that the marijuana smoked by consumers was
fresher than stored police seizures.</p>

<p>For a short while in the early 1970's, PharmChem Laboratories
in Palo Alto, California, tested and reported the percent of the
THC content in anonymously submitted marijuana samples. For 1973,
PharmChem reported an average THC content of 1.62 percent in
marijuana, compared with hashish at 4.6 percent and hash oil (a
refined extract of hashish) at 13.5 percent (Ratcliffe 1974). </p>

<p>In 1974, the DEA published guidelines that no longer allowed
laboratories to provide quantitative results directly to the
sample donors. This, in effect, restricted public access to
analysis information to whatever government officials wished to
reveal. However, nonspecific summaries of THC percentage ranges
were allowed to be published (Unsigned 1974).</p>

<p>The results of an independent examination of gas-liquid
chromatographs of street samples of marijuana from California
that were submitted to PharmChem during 1973 and 1974 are shown
in Table I. </p>

<p>Seeded varieties ranged in THC from an average of 2.2 percent
(Mexican) to 4.9 percent (Panama Red), while sinsemilla averaged
2.8 percent for Big Sur ``Holy Weed&quot; to above six percent
for Thai Sticks and Hawaiian ``Maui Wowie.&quot; This would
appear to be a much more representative sample of the types of
marijuana available in California in 1973-1974 than the
half-percent grade cited by Cohen (1986) and Hawks (see Kerr
1986), or the one to three percent grade cited by Tennant (1986).</p>

<p>A retrospective summary of street-drug analysis trends from
1969 through 1975 published by PharmChem (Perry 1977) confirms
the fact that quite potent forms of cannabis were available on
the illicit U.S. market by 1975: ``Early quantitative work showed
a range of 1.0-2.5 percent THC for average marijuana. In 1975,
the range was 1.0-2.5 percent; samples in the range of 5.0-10.0
percent were not uncommon, and some contained as much as 14.0
percent THC. . . . Hash oil (concentrated from hash, usually
amber or red in color) and grass oil (from marijuana, dark green
or black in color) . . . vary greatly in potency, some samples
[containing] up to 40 percent THC.&quot; Abundant information on
the comparative potencies of cannabis grown in the U.S. and other
countries in the mid-1970's was summarized by Starks (1977:
41-87).</p>

<p>In the spring of another election year, 1980, Cohen and DuPont
launched a similar campaign, stating that confiscated marijuana
in 1975 contained only 0.4 percent THC, while in 1979 the average
was four percent, a 10-fold increase (Brody 1980: C1). This data
conflicts directly with that published by PharmChem for 1975
street samples (Perry 1977) and that shown in Table I. Perhaps
one should be thankful that, according to these estimates,
marijuana potency dropped from four percent THC in 1979 to 3.5
percent THC in 1986 (Kerr 1986). </p>

<p>The most recent comparison of cannabis potencies was compiled
from published sources from 1972 through 1981 by the National
Academy of Sciences (1982: 16), and is summarized in Table II. It
again demonstrates the great range of products available legally
(i.e., NIDA samples) and illegally during that decade, and may in
fact underestimate some potencies. For example, the 2.8 percent
THC content cited for Jamaican ganja (Marshman, Popham &amp;
Yawney 1976) is slightly lower than the mean 2.96 percent THC
material studied by Rubin and Comitas in 1970 through 1972
(Unsigned 1973), and significantly lower than the four to eight
percent THC Jamaican ganja cited by the National Commission on
Marihuana and Drug Abuse (1972: 50).</p>

<p>The government ``research harvests&quot; in Table II
(Rosenkrantz 1981) are considerably less potent than the
sinsemilla samples that averaged three to 11 percent THC (Turner
1981, 1980). Perhaps this is because cultivators at the
government marijuana farm at the University of Mississippi, like
their predecessors in 1904, never learned proper sinsemilla
cultivation (Turner et al. 1979), while illicit cultivators in
California and Hawaii were making it standard for the industry
(Frank &amp; Rosenthal 1978: 258-259). If so, this alone could
explain the wide discrepancies between the potency of marijuana
reported by government sources and that actually being grown in
the U.S. during the 1970's and 1980's.</p>

<p>SELF-ADJUSTMENT OF DOSE</p>

<p>An important consideration in regard to the potency issue is
autotitration, the adjustment of dose by the individual user to
obtain optimal effects and avoid unpleasant ones. As noted above,
cautious titration of dose was standard practice when cannabis
preparations were used in medicine. Smoking marijuana, customary
in present social use of the drug, requires knowledge of when to
stop in order to avoid symptoms of overdose. The smoked route
gives rapid feedback to the user with regard to levels of effect
because the drug goes directly to the brain from the lungs,
unimpeded by the gut or the liver.</p>

<p>Researchers for the Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944: 13)
were among the first to notice that experienced marijuana smokers
in the ``tea-pads&quot; of Harlem routinely practiced
autotitration. The confirmed user, they noted, ``appears to be
quite conscious of the quantity he requires to reach the effect
called `high.' Once the desired effect is obtained he cannot be
persuaded to consume more. He knows when he has had enough . . .
and is ever-conscious of preventing himself from becoming `too
high.'&quot; Similarly the Commission of Inquiry into the
Non-Medical Use of Drugs (1972: 48) observed that ``great
variations in potency are usually accommodated by the experienced
user through a `titration' of dose (intake is reduced or stopped
when the smoker reaches the preferred level of
intoxication).&quot; For U.S. users, the National Commission on
Marihuana and Drug Abuse (1972: 166) commented: ``. . . whatever
the potency of the drug used, individuals tend to smoke only the
amount necessary to achieve the desired effect.&quot;</p>

<hr>

<p>SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS</p>

<p>Observation of the real world of social marijuana use, where
autotitration is the norm, renders the scare tactics of the new
marijuana proponents not only inaccurate but irrelevant. There is
much published evidence about the availability of highly potent
varieties of cannabis from the nineteenth century through the
present day. The effects attributed to the new marijuana are the
same ones debated for centuries in many different cultures. The
assertion that ``all marijuana research to date has been done on
1 or 2 percent THC material&quot; (Cohen 1968) ignores several
thousand years of human experience with the drug. The old medical
cannabis extracts were stronger than most of the forms now
available, though the potency of illicit hash oils by the
mid-1970's was approaching the level of medicinal preparations
available before their removal from the USP.</p>

<p>While it may be true that sinsemilla is more widely available
than 10 or 15 years ago, its potency has not changed
significantly from the 2.4 to 9.5 percent THC materials available
in 1973-1974 (see Table I), or the five to 14 percent sinsemilla
of 1975 (Perry 1977). </p>

<p>The range of potencies available then (marijuana at 0.1% to
7.8% THC, averaging 2.0% to 5.0% THC by 1975) was approximately
the same as that reported now. With such a range, the evidence
simply cannot support the argument by Cohen (1986) that marijuana
is ``ten or more times more potent than the product smoked ten
years ago.&quot; And to say that marijuana potency has increased
1,400 percent since any date in history is patent nonsense.</p>

<p>It is not legitimate to imply that average low potencies
represent the full range of potencies available in reality.
Neither is it valid to cite the low end of the range then as a
baseline to compare with the high end of the range now. The
claimed baseline for THC content in the early 1970's would appear
to be too low, probably because confiscated, stored police
samples were utilized; and this low baseline makes the claimed
difference in potency appear to be greater than it has been in
reality.</p>

<p>In sum, the new marijuana is not new and neither is the
hyperbole surrounding this issue. The implications of the new
disinformation campaign are serious. Many people, particularly
the experienced users of the 1960's and their children, will once
again shrug off the warnings of drug experts and not heed more
reasonable admonishments about more dangerous drugs. This is not
only abusive to those who look to science, the medical
profession, and government for intelligent leadership, but will
sully the reputations of drug educators who wittingly cry wolf,
and will inevitably diminish the credibility of drug abuse
treatment professionals who pass on such flawed reports. </p>

<hr>

<p>REFERENCES</p>

<p>Adams, R. 1940. Marihuana. Science Vol. 92: 115-119.</p>

<p>Adams, R.; Loewe, S.; Jelinek, C. &amp; Wolff, H. 1941. </p>

<p>Tetrahydrocannabinol homologs with marihuana activity. IX.
Journal of the American Chemical Society Vol. 63: 1971-1973.</p>

<p>Adams, R.; Pease, D.C. &amp; Clark, J.H. 1940. Isolation of
cannabinol, cannabidiol and quebrachitol from red oil of
Minnesota wild hemp. </p>

<p>Journal of the American Chemical Society Vol. 62: 2194-2196.</p>

<p>Aldrich, M.R. 1974. Comparative range of delta1-THC in
California cannabis samples at PharmChem, 1973-74. Unpublished
manuscript. </p>

<p>Bell, J. 1857. On the haschisch or Cannabis indica. Boston
Medical and Surgical Journal Vol. 56(11): 209-216.</p>

<p>Bowman, M. &amp; Pihl, R.O. 1973. Cannabis: Psychological
effects of heavy use. A controlled study of intellectual
functioning in chronic users of high potency cannabis.
Psychopharmacologia Vol. 29(2): 159-170. </p>

<p>Braenden, O.J. 1972. United Nations reference samples of
cannabis. In: Paton, W.D.M. &amp; Crown, J. (Eds.). Cannabis and
Its Derivatives. New York: Oxford University Press.</p>

<p>Brody, J.E. 1980. The evidence builds against marijuana. New
York Times May 21.</p>

<p>Cahn, R.S. 1931. Cannabis indica resin. Part II. Journal of
the Chemical Society (1931): 630-638.</p>

<p>Carter, W.E. &amp; Doughty, P.C. 1976. Social and cultural
aspects of cannabis use in Costa Rica. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences Vol. 282: 2-16.</p>

<p>Clarke, R.C. 1981. Marijuana Botany. Berkeley, California:
And/Or Press.</p>

<p>Cohen, S. 1986. Marijuana research: Selected recent findings.
Drug Abuse and Alcoholism Newsletter Vol. 15(1): 1-3.</p>

<p>Cohen, S. &amp; Stillman, R.C. (Eds.). 1976. The Therapeutic
Potential of Marihuana. New York: Plenum.</p>

<p>Colson, H.C. 1920. Cannabis. Journal of the American
Pharmaceutical Association Vol. 9: 302.</p>

<p>Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs. 1972.
</p>

<p>Cannabis: A Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the
Non-Medical </p>

<p>Use of Drugs. Ottawa: Information Canada.</p>

<p>Dominguez, R. 1987. Marijuana trends and trafficking update:
Whatever happened to marijuana? Street Pharmacologist Vol. 11(2):
1.</p>

<p>DuToit, B.M. 1980. Cannabis in Africa, a Survey of Its
Distribution in Africa, and a Study of Cannabis Use and Users in
Multi-ethnic South Africa. Rotterdam: A.A. Balkema.</p>

<p>Eckler, C.R. &amp; Miller, F.A. 1912. A study of American
grown cannabis in comparison with samples from various other
sources. American Journal of Pharmacy Vol. 84: 488-495.</p>

<p>Evans, J.F. 1894. Report by Surgeon-Captain J.F. Evans,
Chemical Examiner to the Governor of Bengal, regarding
physiological investigations concerning hemp drugs. In: Report of
the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. Appendix Vol. 3: 206-227.
Simla, India: Government Central Printing Office.</p>

<p>Fetterman, P.S.; Keith, E.S.; Waller, C.W.; Guerrero, O.;
Doorenbos, N.J. &amp; Quimby, M.W. 1971. Mississippi-grown
Cannabis sativa L.: </p>

<p>Preliminary observations on chemical definition of phenotype
and variation in tetrahydrocannabinol content versus age, sex,
and plant part. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences Vol. 60(8):
1246-1249. </p>

<p>Fink, M.; Volavka, J.; Panayiotopoulos, C. &amp; Stefanis, C.
1976. Quantitative EEG studies of marihuana,
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol, and hashish in man. In: Braude, M.
&amp; Szara, S. (Eds.). Pharmacology of Marihuana. New York:
Raven Press.</p>

<p>Frank, M. &amp; Rosenthal, E. 1978. Marijuana Growers' Guide.
Berkeley, California: And/Or Press.</p>

<p>Gaoni, Y. &amp; Mechoulam, R. 1964. Isolation, structure, and
partial synthesis of an active constituent of hashish. Journal of
the American Chemical Society Vol. 86: 1646-1647.</p>

<p>Garcia, D. 1986. Stronger pot creating addicts, doctor says.
San Francisco Chronicle October 4.</p>

<p>Hamilton, H.C. 1918. The stability of Cannabis sativa and its
extracts. Journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association Vol.
7: 333-336.</p>

<p>Hamilton, H.C. 1915. Cannabis sativa. Is the medicinal value
found only in the Indian grown drug? Journal of the American
Pharmaceutical Association Vol. 4: 448-451.</p>

<p>Hamilton, H.C.; Lescohier, A.W. &amp; Perkins, R.A. 1913. The
physiological activity of Cannabis sativa. Comparison of extracts
from Indian and American-grown drug upon human subjects. Journal
of the American Pharmaceutical Association Vol. 2: 22-30.</p>

<p>Hare, H.A. 1887. Clinical and physiological notes on the
action of Cannabis indica. Therapeutic Gazette Vol. 11: 225-228.</p>

<p>Hare, H.A.; Caspari, C., Jr. &amp; Rusby, H.H. 1909. Cannabis
indica. The National Standard Dispensatory. Philadelphia: Lea
&amp; Febiger. </p>

<p>Henry Ohlhoff Outpatient Programs. 1986. Promotional flyer for
``Marijuana Dependence: A National Conference.&quot; San
Francisco, October 3-4.</p>

<p>Hollister, L.E. 1986. Health aspects of cannabis.
Pharmacological Reviews Vol. 38(1): 1-20.</p>

<p>Holmes, E.M. 1905. Notes on Cannabis indica. Pharmaceutical
Journal Vol. 74: 550-551.</p>

<p>Holmes, E.M. 1902a. Cannabis indica. Pharmaceutical Journal
Vol. 69: 129-131.</p>

<p>Holmes, E.M. 1902b. Notes on Cannabis indica. Pharmaceutical
Journal Vol. 68: 342.</p>

<p>Holmes, E.M. 1900. Cannabis indica. Pharmaceutical Journal
Vol. 64: 522-523.</p>

<p>Hooper, D. 1908. Charas of Indian hemp. Pharmaceutical Journal
Vol. 81: 347-349.</p>

<p>Hooper, D. 1894. Report by Mr. David Hooper, Government
Quinologist, Madras, on the results of analysis of hemp drugs.
In: Report of the </p>

<p>Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. Appendix Vol. 3: 197-199. Simla,
India: Government Central Printing Office.</p>

<p>Houghton, E.M. &amp; Hamilton, H.C. 1908. A pharmacological
study of Cannabis Americana (Cannabis sativa). American Journal
of Pharmacy Vol. 80: 16-20.</p>

<p>Inaba, D. 1987. Marijuana '87---a new drug. Recovering Vol.
1(1): 16.</p>

<p>Isbell, H.; Gorodetzky, C.W.; Jasinski, D.; Claussen, U.;
Spulak, F. von &amp; Korte, F. 1967. Effects of
(--)delta9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. Psychopharmacologia
Vol. 11: 184-188.</p>

<p>Jones, R.T. 1980. Human effects: An overview. In: Petersen,
R.C. (Ed.). Marijuana Research Findings: 1980. NIDA Research
Monograph 31. Rockville, Maryland: NIDA.</p>

<p>Jones, R.T. &amp; Stone, G.C. 1970. Psychological studies of
marijuana and alcohol in man. Psychopharmacologia Vol. 18:
108-117.</p>

<p>Kaplan, J. 1969. Marijuana: Report of the Indian Hemp Drugs
Commission 1983-1894. Silver Spring, Maryland: Thomas Jefferson.</p>

<p>Karniol, I.G.; Shirakawa, I.; Kasinki, N.; Pfeferman, A. &amp;
Carlini, E.A. 1974. Cannabidiol interferes with the effects of
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in man. European Journal of
Pharmacology Vol. 28: 172-177.</p>

<p>Kerr, H.C. 1877. Report of the cultivation of, and trade in,
ganja in Bengal, by Mr. Hem Chunder Kerr, Deputy Collector, on
special duty. In: Papers Relating to the Consumption of Ganja and
Other Drugs in India. Simla, India: Government Central Printing
Office.</p>

<p>Kerr, P. 1986. Increases in potency of marijuana prompt new
warnings for youths. New York Times September 25.</p>

<p>Lee, M.A. &amp; Shlain, B. 1985. Acid Dreams: The CIA, LSD and
the Sixties Rebellion. New York: Grove Press.</p>

<p>Lemberger, L. 1976. Clinical pharmacology of natural and
synthetic cannabinoids. In: Cohen, S. &amp; Stillman, R.C.
(Eds.). The Therapeutic Potential of Marihuana. New York: Plenum.</p>

<p>Lerner, M. 1963. Marihuana: Tetrahydrocannabinol and related
compounds. Science Vol. 140: 175-176.</p>

<p>Lerner, M. &amp; Zeffert, J.T. 1968. Determination of
tetrahydrocannabinol isomers in marijuana and hashish. Bulletin
on Narcotics Vol. 20(2): 53-54.</p>

<p>Ludlow, F.H. 1857. The Hasheesh Eater: Being Passages from the
Life of a Pythagorean. New York: Harper &amp; Row. (Ludlow
Library edition, 1974. San Francisco: Level Press.)</p>

<p>Mair, W. 1900. The cultivation and manufacture of the official
Cannabis indica. Pharmaceutical Journal Vol. 65: 732-733.</p>

<p>Marshall, C.R. 1909. Experiments on the cause of the loss of
activity of Indian hemp. Pharmaceutical Journal Vol. 82: 418.</p>

<p>Marshall, C.R. 1898. A contribution to the pharmacology of
Cannabis indica. Journal of the American Medical Association Vol.
31: 882-891. </p>

<p>Marshman, J.A.; Popham, R.E. &amp; Yawney, C.D. 1976. A note
on the cannabinoid content of Jamaican ganja. Bulletin on
Narcotics Vol. 26: 63-68.</p>

<p><a href="../../Library/studies/lag/lagmenu.htm">Mayor's
Committee on Marihuana.</a> 1944. The Marihuana Problem in the
City of New York. Lancaster, Pennsylvania: Jacques Cattell.</p>

<p>McMeens, R.R. 1860. Report of the Ohio State Medical Committee
on Cannabis indica. Transactions of the Fifteenth Annual Meeting
of the Ohio State Medical Society June 12-14: 75-100.</p>

<p>Meyers, M.J. 1987. More about the ``new&quot; marijuana.
Professional Counselor Vol. 1(6): 3.</p>

<p>Mezzrow, M. &amp; Wolfe, B. 1946. Really the Blues. New York:
Random House.</p>

<p>Mikuriya, T.H. (Ed.). 1973. Marijuana: Medical Papers
1839-1972. Oakland, California: Medi-Comp.</p>

<p>Mikuriya, T.H. 1968. Physical, mental and moral effects of
marijuana: The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission report. International
Journal of the Addictions Vol. 3(2): 253-270.</p>

<p>National Academy of Sciences. 1982. Marijuana and Health:
Report of a Study by a Committee of the Institute of Medicine.
Division of Health Sciences Policy. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.</p>

<p>National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. 1972. <a
href="../../Library/studies/nc/ncmenu.htm">Marihuana: A Signal of
Misunderstanding</a>. Washington, D.C.: U.S. GPO.</p>

<p>O'Shaughnessy, W.B. 1839. On the preparations of Indian hemp,
or gunjah. Transactions of the Medical and Physical Society of
Bengal. 1838-1840: 421-461.</p>

<p>Parke-Davis and Company. 1930. Physicians' Catalog of
Pharmaceutical and Biological Products. In: Mikuriya (1973: 66).</p>

<p>Pars, H.G. &amp; Razdan, R.K. 1976. Heterocyclic analogs of
the cannabinoids. In: Cohen, S. &amp; Stillman, R.C. (Eds.). The
Therapeutic Potential of Marihuana. New York: Plenum.</p>

<p>Perry, D.C. 1977. Street drug analysis and drug use trends
1969-1975. Part II. PharmChem Newsletter Vol. 6(4): 1-3.</p>

<p>Prain, D. 1893. Report on the Cultivation and Use of Ganja.
Calcutta, India: Bengal Secretariat Press.</p>

<p>Ratcliffe, B. 1974. Summary of street drug results---1973.
PharmChem Newsletter Vol. 3(3): 1-3.</p>

<p>Razdan, R.K. 1970. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences Committee on Problems of Drug Dependence. 32nd meeting.
Toronto, February 17-20.</p>

<p>Reynolds, J.R. 1890. Therapeutic uses and toxic effects of
Cannabis indica. Lancet Vol. 1: 637-638.</p>

<p>Robertson, A. 1847. On extract of Indian hemp. Pharmaceutical
Journal Vol. 6: 70-72.</p>

<p>Rosenkrantz, H. 1981. In: Report of an Addiction Research
Foundation/World Health Organization (ARF/WHO) Scientific Meeting
on Adverse Health or Behavioral Consequences of Marijuana Use.
Toronto: ARF/WHO.</p>

<p>Rubin, V. &amp; Comitas, L. 1975. Ganja in Jamaica: A Medical
Anthropological Study of Chronic Marihuana Use. The Hague:
Mouton. </p>

<p>Savory. 1843. Extractum Cannabis indicae. Pharmaceutical
Journal Vol. 3: 80.</p>

<p>Schultes, R.E.; Klein, W.M.; Plowman, T. &amp; Lockwood, T.E.
1974. Cannabis: An example of taxonomic neglect. Botanical Museum
Leaflets, Harvard University Vol. 23(9): 337-367.</p>

<p>Silver, G. (Ed.). 1979. The Dope Chronicles 1850-1950. San
Francisco: Harper &amp; Row.</p>

<p>Small, E. 1979. The Species Problem in Cannabis. Science and
Semantics. Volume 1: Science. Toronto: Corpus.</p>

<p>Smith, D.E. 1987. In memoriam (Sidney Cohen, M.D.). Journal of
Psychoactive Drugs Vol. 19(2): ii.</p>

<p>Starks, M. 1977. Marijuana Botany. Berkeley, California:
And/Or Press.</p>

<p>Stearn, W.T. 1974. Typification of Cannabis sativa L.
Botanical Museum Leaflets, Harvard University Vol. 23(9):
325-336.</p>

<p>Tennant, F.S., Jr. 1986. The clinical syndrome of marijuana
dependence. Psychiatric Annals Vol. 16(4): 225-234.</p>

<p>Turner, C.E. 1981. Personal communication to National Academy
of Sciences.</p>

<p>Turner, C.E. 1980. Chemistry and metabolism. In: Petersen,
R.C. (Ed.). Marihuana Research Findings: 1980. NIDA Research
Monograph 31. Rockville, Maryland: NIDA.</p>

<p>Turner, C.E. 1974. Active substances in marijuana. Archivos de
Investigacion Medica Vol. 5(Suppl.): 135-140.</p>

<p>Turner, C.E.; Cheng, P.C.; Lewis, G.S.; Russell, M.H &amp;
Sharma, G.K. 1979. Constituents of Cannabis sativa. XV. Botanical
and chemical profile of Indian variants. Planta Medica Vol. 37:
217-225.</p>

<p>Unsigned. 1987. Marijuana Questions and Answers. Los Angeles:
Schick Shadel Health Services.</p>

<p>Unsigned. 1974. Effectiveness of drug analysis curbed.
PharmChem Newsletter Vol. 3(4): 1.</p>

<p>Unsigned. 1973. Study of chronic use of marijuana demonstrates
no chromosome breaks, brain damage, or untoward effects. Medical
Tribune Vol. 14(39): 1.</p>

<p>Wallich, G.C. 1883. Cannabis indica. British Medical Journal
Vol. 1: 1224.</p>

<p>Weil, A.T.; Zinberg, N.E. &amp; Nelsen, J.M. 1968. Clinical
and psychological effects of marihuana in man. Science Vol. 162:
1234-1242.</p>

<p>Wheeler, L.M. 1968. Personal communication. In: Mikuriya 1973:
67-68.</p>

<p>Whineray, E. 1909. A pharmaceutical study of Cannabis sativa.
The Equinox Vol. 1(1). Reprinted in Regardie, I. (Ed.). 1968.
Roll Away the Stone. St. Paul: Llewellyn.</p>

<p>Wollner, H.J.; Matchett, J.R.; Levine, J. &amp; Loewe, S.
1942. Isolation of a physiologically active tetrahydrocannabinol
from Cannabis sativa resin. Journal of the American Chemical
Society Vol. 64: 26-29. </p>

<p>Wood, G.B. &amp; Bache, F. 1868. Extractum Cannabis.
Dispensatory of the United States of America. 12th ed.
Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. </p>

<p>Wood, H.C. 1869. On the medical activity of the hemp plant, as
grown in North America. Proceedings of the American Philosophical
Society Vol. 11: 226-232.</p>

<p>Wood, H.C. &amp; Smith, R.M. 1884. Poisoning by Cannabis
indica. Therapeutic Gazette Vol. 5: 514-515.</p>

<p>Wood, T.B.; Spivey, W.T.N. &amp; Easterfield, T.H. 1899.
Cannabinol. Part I. Journal of the Chemical Society Vol. 75:
20-36.</p>

<p>Work, T.S.; Bergel, F. &amp; Todd, A.R. 1939. The active
principles of Cannabis indica resin. I. Biochemical Journal Vol.
33: 123-127. </p>

<p>W.W. 1890. Toxic effects of Cannabis indica. Lancet Vol. 1:
March 15. In: Mikuriya, T.H. (1973: 144). </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="../medical/medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="42660" -->

<p> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>