
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B014-37</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/pidcms.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120654 text/html 43345
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:06:47 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:06 GMT
Content-length: 43127
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>PREVENTING ILLEGAL DIVERSION OF CHEMICALS:</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p>U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE </p>

<p> OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS </p>

<p> NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE </p>

<p> NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE </p>

<p> RESEARCH IN BRIEF </p>

<p> NOVEMBER 1993 </p>

<p> PREVENTING ILLEGAL DIVERSION OF CHEMICALS: </p>

<p> A MODEL STATUTE </p>

<p> BY SHERRY GREEN </p>

<p> Letter from Michael J. Russell, Acting Director, National
Institute of </p>

<p> Justice: </p>

<p> Chemicals diverted from legitimate commerce are used in the
production of </p>

<p> illicit drugs such as cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine, PCP,
and LSD. </p>

<p> Controlling illegal diversion and use of such chemicals is
essential to </p>

<p> limiting illicit drug production. Recent efforts to address
this problem are </p>

<p> based on the belief that illicit drug production can be
traced from the </p>

<p> records of chemical manufacturers and dealers of raw
materials in the same </p>

<p> way that laundered money can be traced through financial
records. </p>

<p> The principal U.S. statute to control chemical diversion is
the Chemical </p>

<p> Diversion and Trafficking Act of 1988, which established
record keeping </p>

<p> requirements and enforcement activities, initially for 20
chemicals. </p>

<p> The Act has already proven effective in limiting the
international illicit </p>

<p> diversion of the identified chemicals and controlling some
domestic </p>

<p> manufacturing. However, illicit drug production in the United
States has been </p>

<p> rising at an alarming rate, with illegal domestic
laboratories now capable of </p>

<p> producing enough stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens, and
narcotics to </p>

<p> satisfy demand for these substances. </p>

<p> Adequate record-keeping ensures that there are paper trails
on chemicals sent </p>

<p> to illegal laboratories that make drugs. Thirty-two States,
however, do not </p>

<p> require record-keeping of transactions involving chemicals
identified as </p>

<p> necessary for producing illegal drugs. Criminals camouflage
diversion of </p>

<p> chemicals by moving shipments through States without
record-keeping </p>

<p> requirements. </p>

<p> To focus attention on the need for all State law enforcement
agencies to </p>

<p> supplement Federal controls over chemical traffic and its
diversion into </p>

<p> illicit drug manufacturing, the National Institute of Justice
sponsored a </p>

<p> project to create a Model State Chemical Control Act. The
Model Act seeks to </p>

<p> balance and accommodate the interests of law enforcement and
legitimate </p>

<p> commerce. This Research in Brief explains how the Model Act
can be used to </p>

<p> help halt the growth of illegal domestic drug manufacturing
by stopping the </p>

<p> diversion of chemicals from legitimate to illegitimate
purposes. </p>

<p> [End letter] </p>

<p> Law enforcement agencies around the world are using a variety
of methods to </p>

<p> attack the illegal and deadly &quot;industry&quot; of illicit
drugs. Enforcement </p>

<p> officials seize contraband substances, break up distribution
networks, </p>

<p> disrupt money-laundering operations, and destroy crops. A
critical part of </p>

<p> this multifaceted attack on drug trafficking is the control
of specific </p>

<p> chemicals that are necessary to produce illegal drugs. </p>

<p> The United States is one of the world's leading producers and
distributors of </p>

<p> the chemicals that are used to make controlled substances.
Each year our </p>

<p> Nation exports more than 50,000 metric tons of chemicals to
Latin America, </p>

<p> many of which find their way into the clandestine
laboratories of cocaine- </p>

<p> and heroin-producing countries. In fact, seizures of illegal
labs in Colombia </p>

<p> and other Latin American countries often uncover chemical
containers with US. </p>

<p> company logos. Until 1989 much of the cocaine entering our
country was </p>

<p> produced using chemicals originating in the United States. </p>

<p> Although there has been a decline in the export of chemicals
for </p>

<p> manufacturing illegal drugs, there has been an increase in
the chemicals' </p>

<p> distribution at home. Illegal domestic laboratories are now
capable of </p>

<p> producing enough illicit drugs to satisfy U.S. consumers'
demand. </p>

<p> In 1991 the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) supported a
project to help </p>

<p> the States develop a legislative response to the problem of
distribution of </p>

<p> chemicals and their manufacture into illegal drugs. To
prepare the Model </p>

<p> State Chemical Control Act of 1992 (the Model), the American
Prosecutors </p>

<p> Research Institute (APRI), the research arm of the National
District </p>

<p> Attorneys Association, brought together investigators and
prosecutors from </p>

<p> Arizona, California, Oklahoma, Texas, and Washington State.
In addition, APRI </p>

<p> solicited comments from the Department of Justice and the
Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration (DEA) on the lessons they had learned at the
Federal level and </p>

<p> sought to understand the concerns of the chemical and
pharmaceutical </p>

<p> industries. </p>

<p> This Research in Brief describes how chemicals are used to
make illicit </p>

<p> drugs, discusses existing Federal and State legislation to
curtail the </p>

<p> diversion of chemicals for illicit drug production, and
reviews the Model </p>

<p> statute. </p>

<p> DOMESTIC ILLICIT DRUG PRODUCTION </p>

<p> --Essential and precursor chemicals: All major illicit drugs
except marijuana </p>

<p> are either extracted or synthesized in a process requiring
chemicals that are </p>

<p> categorized as either &quot;essential&quot; or
&quot;precursor.&quot; Essential chemicals are </p>

<p> used to extract drugs, such as cocaine, from plants. Although
these chemicals </p>

<p> do not become part of the drug's molecular structure, they
are crucial to the </p>

<p> manufacturing process. Precursor chemicals are used to
synthesize drugs (such </p>

<p> as PCP), which are not naturally derived. These chemicals do
become part of </p>

<p> the drug's molecular structure. </p>

<p> --Clandestine Labs: Highly sophisticated laboratory
operations are sometimes </p>

<p> necessary to manufacture drugs. For example, producing
marketable quantities </p>

<p> of cocaine requires large-scale operations to handle the
enormous amounts of </p>

<p> coca leaves and solvents required. On the other hand, illegal
drug production </p>

<p> is often a simple process, without need of complex
technology, sophisticated </p>

<p> education, or training. Many synthetic drugs such as
methamphetamine and PCP </p>

<p> can be produced in someone's home with readily available
laboratory </p>

<p> equipment. In fact, with equipment and precursor chemicals
worth $200, a </p>

<p> criminal can in 18 hours produce a batch of methamphetamine
with a street </p>

<p> value of $98,000.(ref. 1) </p>

<p> In the 1980's States faced an outbreak of clandestine
laboratories because </p>

<p> chemicals were readily available on the open market or were
easily diverted </p>

<p> from legitimate commerce. In 1986 the Oklahoma Bureau of
Narcotics (OBN) </p>

<p> seized 28 labs, an almost 100 percent increase over the 16
labs seized in </p>

<p> 1985. Another 100 percent increase in seizures occurred in
1988 when OBN </p>

<p> seized 62 laboratories, compared to the 30 labs seized the
previous year. </p>

<p> From 1985 to 1987, Texas narcotics officers seized more than
twice the number </p>

<p> of labs as OBN. </p>

<p> Clandestine laboratories range from small crude operations in
sheds, </p>

<p> bathtubs, mobile homes, boats, and motel rooms to highly
sophisticated </p>

<p> operations with professional quality laboratory glassware and
equipment. </p>

<p> More than 80 percent of the clandestine labs in the United
States produce </p>

<p> methamphetamines.(ref. 2) With a knowledge of chemistry
equivalent to that </p>

<p> learned in high school, illicit lab operators are believed to
produce 25 tons </p>

<p> of methamphetamines annually with a street value of $3
billion. Less than 1 </p>

<p> percent of that amount is spent on the chemicals needed for
production.(ref. </p>

<p> 3) </p>

<p> CHEMICAL DIVERSION AND TRAFFICKING ACT </p>

<p> In 1988 Congress enacted the Chemical Diversion and
Trafficking Act (CDTA), </p>

<p> Subtitle A of the Anti-Drug Abuse Amendments of 1988
(codified as amendments </p>

<p> to the Federal Controlled Substances Act). CDTA established
record-keeping </p>

<p> and reporting requirements and authorized enforcement
activities for domestic </p>

<p> and international transactions in designated precursor and
essential </p>

<p> chemicals. Originally CDTA regulated machines for making the
drugs into </p>

<p> tablets or capsules, 12 precursor chemicals, and 8 essential
chemicals. Now, </p>

<p> 27 precursor and 7 essential chemicals are on the CDTA list.
Chemicals may be </p>

<p> added or deleted under standard Federal rule making
procedures. </p>

<p> CDTA applies to any individual or legal entity that
manufactures, distributes </p>

<p> domestically, imports, or exports any of the listed
chemicals. The Act makes </p>

<p> the unauthorized trade in these listed chemicals equivalent
to trafficking in </p>

<p> illegal drugs. </p>

<p> Each chemical has been assigned a threshold amount, by volume
or weight, or a </p>

<p> threshold number of monthly transactions. Once the threshold
has been reached </p>

<p> or exceeded, regulated individuals and entities must comply
with Federal </p>

<p> record-keeping, reporting, and identification requirements.
However, </p>

<p> threshold quantities do not apply to machinery; distribution
of a single </p>

<p> tableting or encapsulating machine triggers CDTA provisions. </p>

<p> Among the provisions are requirements that purchasers supply
proof of </p>

<p> identity in all regulated transactions. The type of
identification required </p>

<p> depends on whether the customer is new, is an individual or
established </p>

<p> business, is paying in cash, or is exporting the chemical to
another country. </p>

<p> Records of regulated domestic transactions involving a
precursor chemical or </p>

<p> a tableting or encapsulating machine must be kept for 4
years. For an </p>

<p> essential chemical, the record must be kept 2 years. Records
must be readily </p>

<p> retrievable either at the business where the transaction
occurred or some </p>

<p> other central location. Each record must contain specific
information about </p>

<p> the transaction and is subject to inspection and photocopying
by the Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Administration. </p>

<p> CDTA requires that regulated individuals and entities report
some </p>

<p> circumstances both orally and in writing to DEA. These
include uncommon </p>

<p> methods of payment, loss or disappearance of a chemical, and
suspicion that a </p>

<p> chemical has been diverted for illegal purposes. As with
records, reports </p>

<p> must contain the date of the transaction, quantity of the
chemical purchased, </p>

<p> name and address of each party, method of transfer, and other
descriptive </p>

<p> details. On the basis of the reports or a lapse in
record-keeping, DEA has </p>

<p> the authority to stop chemical shipments. Receipt of the
required advance </p>

<p> notice of shipments can trigger DEA suspension when an
illicit transfer is </p>

<p> suspected. </p>

<p> --The effect of Federal control: Shortly after implementation
of CDTA, DEA </p>

<p> noted a downward trend in domestic illegal lab activity as
measured by the </p>

<p> number of lab seizures. Of the 1,000 projected DEA lab
seizures for 1989, 807 </p>

<p> materialized. A sharper decline occurred the following year
when DEA seized </p>

<p> 521 laboratories. This decline was the first time seizures
had dropped </p>

<p> significantly since 1981. </p>

<p> CDTA has also been successful in controlling exports of
essential chemicals </p>

<p> to Latin America. But as the pathways to foreign buyers have
narrowed, some </p>

<p> U.S. exporters have turned their attention to the domestic
market. </p>

<p> Opportunities for diversion exist all along the domestic
commercial chain. </p>

<p> Although CDTA's strict requirements help safeguard the legal
transfer of </p>

<p> chemicals above the threshold levels, illicit operators are
restructuring </p>

<p> their businesses to avoid Federal regulations. They are
focusing their </p>

<p> efforts on States that do not have effective mechanisms for
controlling </p>

<p> chemicals. </p>

<p> --Closing the door: The Office of National Drug Control
Policy has estimated </p>

<p> that the world supply of cocaine in 1990 was 1,000 metric
tons, or about 2.2 </p>

<p> million pounds. To produce this amount of cocaine, millions
of pounds of </p>

<p> essential chemicals were required for processing. But many of
these chemicals </p>

<p> such as hydrochloric acid also have hundreds of legitimate
uses, and for this </p>

<p> reason, they are common substances in international trade. </p>

<p> Criminals obtain these substances from manufacturers through
theft, bribery </p>

<p> of employees, or even legal purchase, especially in areas
that lack chemical </p>

<p> control laws or do not enforce them. Poor plant security can
increase theft, </p>

<p> and some retail purchasers are actually &quot;front
companies&quot; set up by producers </p>

<p> to disguise the illicit drug trade. </p>

<p> In addition, the vast international network of freight
forwarders, brokers, </p>

<p> and agents provides access to chemicals through multiple
sales transactions, </p>

<p> similar to money-laundering operations. In ports and free
trade zones, </p>

<p> criminals can obtain the desired chemicals by repacking or
re-labeling </p>

<p> materials. </p>

<p> CDTA has greatly decreased U.S. exports of essential
chemicals to Latin </p>

<p> America. This Federal statute has added to costs borne by
criminals, and the </p>

<p> new regulation and record-keeping requirements of the Act
make it </p>

<p> increasingly likely that illicit operators are restructuring
their businesses </p>

<p> to avoid Federal regulations. They are focusing their efforts
on States that </p>

<p> do not have effective mechanisms for controlling chemicals. </p>

<p> THE NEED FOR EFFECTIVE STATE CONTROLS </p>

<p> State regulatory and enforcement efforts are needed to
supplement Federal </p>

<p> controls over the movement of chemicals into illegal
channels. If State </p>

<p> officials can follow the trail of precursor and essential
chemicals from the </p>

<p> chemical manufacturer to the illicit drug producer, then
producers can be </p>

<p> identified and apprehended before they manufacture illegal
drugs. Controlling </p>

<p> these chemicals, therefore, is a potent strategy that can
help identify drug </p>

<p> criminals and interfere with their operations. </p>

<p> Effective regulation of chemical transactions could dry up
the sources that </p>

<p> supply illegal labs. However, clandestine drug production is
a nomadic </p>

<p> business. When chemicals become difficult to obtain in one
locale, illegal </p>

<p> lab operators simply move their operations to a location
where acquisition of </p>

<p> chemicals is less complicated. Differences in the extent of
control exercised </p>

<p> by the States currently make that a fairly easy process. More
consistent </p>

<p> State laws could curtail movement of illegal labs from State
to State. </p>

<p> EXISTING VARIATIONS IN STATE CONTROLS </p>

<p> To date 18 States have sought to control the existence of
clandestine labs by </p>

<p> enacting their own detailed chemical tracking requirements.
Some </p>

<p> jurisdictions have incorporated these requirements into their
controlled </p>

<p> substances acts already on the books, while others have
adopted new, distinct </p>

<p> statutes. </p>

<p> --Number of chemicals: Colorado controls the largest number
of chemicals (35) </p>

<p> while Montana regulates 9. The differences reflect each
State's experience or </p>

<p> policy regarding diversion, abuse, and the potential illicit
use of a </p>

<p> chemical. Nearly all of the States that have controls exclude
prescription or </p>

<p> over-the-counter drugs, or both, from chemical requirements,
with special </p>

<p> exemptions for ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,
norpseudoephedrine, and </p>

<p> phenylpropanolamine. </p>

<p> --Registration: All 18 States require a license or permit to
lawfully </p>

<p> manufacture or transfer a regulated chemical. Only a few
regulate the </p>

<p> purchase or possession of chemicals. Registration renewal
generally happens </p>

<p> annually and involves a reasonable fee; the definition of
reasonable varies </p>

<p> from a maximum of $25 in Arkansas to a minimum of $250 in New
Mexico. Grounds </p>

<p> for denial, suspension, or revocation include fraud; drug law
violations and </p>

<p> convictions; and denial, suspension, or revocation of Federal
registrations. </p>

<p> --Record-keeping: Differences also occur in the requirements
for </p>

<p> record-keeping. For example, several jurisdictions mandate
that chemical </p>

<p> transfer records be kept for 2 years after the transaction
date, but </p>

<p> Minnesota requires that records be kept for 5 years. Texas
requires that </p>

<p> records of sales of laboratory apparatus also be kept. Hawaii
and Missouri </p>

<p> maintain the confidentiality of information obtained through
records. </p>

<p> Pennsylvania penalizes wrongful use of the information. </p>

<p> --Reporting: Required reporting of intrastate transfers and
out-of-State </p>

<p> purchases also varies among States. In several States the
regulatory agency </p>

<p> must be given 21 days advance notice of any chemical
delivery. Some States </p>

<p> provide a monthly reporting alternative for individuals and
entities with a </p>

<p> history of lawful use, a regular relationship with a
recipient, or both. </p>

<p> While California and Montana require notice of receipt of
chemicals within 3 </p>

<p> days after delivery, Oregon allows 10 days. Ten States
require that special </p>

<p> reports be submitted within 3 days after discovery of a theft
or loss of </p>

<p> chemicals, and eight require reports within 3 days for a
discrepancy in </p>

<p> quantities shipped and received. Iowa and Washington extend
these deadlines </p>

<p> to 7 days. </p>

<p> --Exemptions: Medical professionals, agents, and licensed
entities such as </p>

<p> common carriers are traditionally exempt from licensing or
reporting </p>

<p> obligations. Some States expand the exemptions to include
college chemistry </p>

<p> students, government employees, or researchers. </p>

<p> --Purchaser identification: Most jurisdictions mandate that
individual </p>

<p> purchasers identify themselves with a photograph, proof of
street or </p>

<p> residential mailing address, and signature. Some
jurisdictions ask for the </p>

<p> purchaser's birth date, driver's license or other
State-issued identification </p>

<p> number, year in which the purchaser's vehicle was
manufactured, and vehicle </p>

<p> license tag number. Most business recipients must furnish an
authorization </p>

<p> letter listing an identification number, an address, a phone
number, and a </p>

<p> description of the chemical's intended use. </p>

<p> --Responsibility: Finally, there is no consensus among the
States on which </p>

<p> government agency should be given regulatory responsibility.
The 18 States </p>

<p> assign this duty to a wide variety of health, pharmaceutical,
commerce, and </p>

<p> enforcement agencies. </p>

<p> ILLEGITIMATE USES FOR LEGITIMATE PRODUCTS </p>

<p> Many people recognize ephedrine as an ingredient in sinus
medications. </p>

<p> However, consumers are often unaware that ephedrine is also
the primary </p>

<p> precursor used to illegally produce methamphetamine (meth).
In 1990, 53 </p>

<p> percent of the clandestine meth labs seized by the Drug
Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration used the ephedrine reduction method to produce
the drug.(ref. </p>

<p> 4) </p>

<p> State officials report that illicit meth laboratories in the
West and </p>

<p> Southwest began using ephedrine after phenylacetic acid came
under State </p>

<p> regulation. In northern California 85 percent of the seized
meth labs used </p>

<p> single-ingredient ephedrine tablets. In Oregon officials
discovered that </p>

<p> over-the-counter ephedrine tablets sold in the Portland area
had become a </p>

<p> source of ephedrine for northwest meth lab operators.(ref. 5)
</p>

<p> For this reason, ephedrine has been included in the list of
chemicals </p>

<p> targeted for regulation under the Model State Chemical
Control Act. </p>

<p> MODEL STATE CHEMICAL CONTROL ACT </p>

<p> In developing the Model State Chemical Control Act of 1992,
the drafters </p>

<p> sought to close loopholes in existing Federal and State
legislation and to </p>

<p> foster greater consistency among State regulations. Unlike
most criminal </p>

<p> laws, the Model is a preventive measure. Its goal is to stop
drug offenses </p>

<p> before they occur by preventing precursor and essential
chemicals from being </p>

<p> diverted to illegal channels. It seeks to protect the
interests of legitimate </p>

<p> commerce without limiting the ability of law enforcement to
stop illicit </p>

<p> chemical transactions. </p>

<p> Monitoring every transaction involving a regulated chemical.
The Model </p>

<p> creates a monitoring system that tracks 35 chemicals from
source to use. It </p>

<p> covers a comprehensive range of chemicals controlled by
States and the </p>

<p> Federal Government. </p>

<p> The Model's reporting and record-keeping requirements apply
to every </p>

<p> transaction involving a regulated chemical, not just those
exceeding a legal </p>

<p> threshold. Under Federal law, manufacturers and distributors
do not have to </p>

<p> report or keep records on individuals or businesses who buy
chemicals in </p>

<p> amounts below the legal threshold. Individuals can circumvent
the law by </p>

<p> making multiple purchases of small quantities, thereby
accumulating large </p>

<p> amounts of chemicals for clandestine production.
Unfortunately, Federal </p>

<p> officials have no way of obtaining information about such
transactions. The </p>

<p> Model permits State and local officials to address this type
of diversion </p>

<p> activity, which would otherwise escape detection until after
illegal use of </p>

<p> the chemicals. </p>

<p> The list of regulated chemicals can be modified by rule in
response to </p>

<p> changes in diversion or use. Under the Model, State officials
may regulate a </p>

<p> chemical on an emergency basis while awaiting completion of
normal </p>

<p> rule-making procedures. </p>

<p> Emergency regulation is sometimes necessary to prevent
imminent hazards to </p>

<p> public health and safety. Some chemicals are flammable or
toxic and their use </p>

<p> must be controlled as soon as possible to prevent explosions,
environmental </p>

<p> damage, or illness. </p>

<p> Registering manufacturers and distributors. Responsibility
for the control of </p>

<p> regulated chemicals rests primarily with manufacturers and
distributors. </p>

<p> Therefore, the Model requires that they annually furnish law
enforcement with </p>

<p> detailed information about the sources, location, and amount
of chemicals </p>

<p> available for sale. The purpose of annual registration is
threefold: </p>

<p> --To convey to manufacturers and distributors an
understanding of the </p>

<p> critical role they play in eliminating illegal chemical
transfers. </p>

<p> --To help government officials determine if the chemicals
found at </p>

<p> clandestine lab sites have been supplied by a legal or
&quot;underground&quot; source. </p>

<p> --To help government officials more accurately assess the
extent of illegal </p>

<p> diversion. </p>

<p> The drafters anticipate that the number of annual
registrations to be </p>

<p> processed will be manageable. For example, in California
officials currently </p>

<p> register only 40 to 45 companies per year. </p>

<p> Requiring permits to possess a regulated chemical. Permits
identify which </p>

<p> persons intend to use specific quantities of chemicals for a
specific </p>

<p> purpose. </p>

<p> With certain exceptions, every applicant for a permit must
provide detailed </p>

<p> personal information, including a criminal history and
notarized fingerprint </p>

<p> card. Based on this information, government officials
ascertain the fitness </p>

<p> of a potential chemical recipient and ensure that the
intended use is lawful. </p>

<p> The permit provision is modeled after Oklahoma's chemical
control statute, </p>

<p> which extends the law beyond the traditional
&quot;receiving&quot; category of </p>

<p> purchasers to individuals who want to &quot;possess&quot; a
regulated chemical. By </p>

<p> requiring that they obtain a permit each time they seek to
possess a </p>

<p> regulated chemical, the Model eliminates a significant
loophole in many </p>

<p> existing statutes. For example, some illegal
&quot;cookers&quot; manufacture controlled </p>

<p> substances using chemicals produced in their own clandestine
laboratories. </p>

<p> They are not subject to existing regulation and liability
provisions, which </p>

<p> apply solely to purchasers, because they do not buy the
chemical from an </p>

<p> outside source. Under the Model statute, &quot;cookers&quot;
would be subject to the </p>

<p> law because although they do not &quot;receive&quot; the
chemicals, they nonetheless </p>

<p> &quot;possess&quot; them. </p>

<p> The Model's permit process protects legitimate commerce in
two ways. First, </p>

<p> it exempts the owners and officers of publicly held
corporations (those with </p>

<p> 35 shareholders or more) from the disclosure requirements of
permit </p>

<p> applications. These corporations are often fairly sizable
businesses or are </p>

<p> headquartered out-of-State. Their shareholders and officers
lack the personal </p>

<p> access necessary to illegally use or transfer regulated
chemicals. The Model </p>

<p> assumes that there is no need for detailed background
information or </p>

<p> fingerprint cards for such persons. </p>

<p> Second, the Model includes a reporting alternative for
possessors who </p>

<p> demonstrate a history of regular, legitimate use. The risk of
these </p>

<p> possessors diverting chemicals for unlawful purposes is less
than with other </p>

<p> possessors. Therefore, they may submit retrospective monthly
reports of </p>

<p> actual chemical use in lieu of obtaining permits. The Model
prevents </p>

<p> unnecessary duplication by accepting copies of Federal
reports containing </p>

<p> information about threshold amounts of regulated chemicals. </p>

<p> --Exempting individuals from regulation: The Model exempts
common carriers </p>

<p> pharmacists, physicians, and other authorized practitioners
from the </p>

<p> statute's requirements. Manufacturers can obtain a special
exemption to </p>

<p> continue marketing bona fide drug products such as over-the
counter sinus and </p>

<p> asthma medications. A special exemption is granted upon a
finding by State </p>

<p> officials that a product is manufactured and distributed in a
manner that </p>

<p> prevents its diversion. In making the finding, State
officials consider the </p>

<p> product's packaging, advertising, and actual or potential for
diversion.(ref. </p>

<p> 6) </p>

<p> --Safeguarding possession of regulated chemicals: The Model
contains a number </p>

<p> of safeguards to prevent unauthorized or unscrupulous persons
from gaining </p>

<p> access to regulated chemicals. It specifies that the
following persons are </p>

<p> ineligible to apply for a registration or permit: </p>

<p> Convicted drug offenders. </p>

<p> Persons who have had a prior registration or permit </p>

<p> Minors </p>

<p> Because juveniles are subject to milder penalties than
adults, they </p>

<p> frequently have been recruited to become participants in
criminal activity. </p>

<p> Therefore, making minors ineligible should preclude drug
balers from using </p>

<p> juveniles to acquire chemicals for illegal purposes. </p>

<p> The Model also provides for denial, suspension, or revocation
of a </p>

<p> registration or permit. Violation of the statutory rules,
falsification of a </p>

<p> document, and similar acts are grounds for denial of
authorized access to </p>

<p> regulated chemicals. </p>

<p> Spotting discrepancies in the flow of chemicals. The Model
establishes four </p>

<p> information-gathering mechanisms to help State officials spot
possible </p>

<p> diversion activities. </p>

<p> First, the Model requires manufacturers, distributors, and
possessors to </p>

<p> report any suspicious transaction or circumstance. cash
payments, </p>

<p> discrepancies between quantities shipped and received, and
theft or loss of </p>

<p> chemicals are all examples of suspicious circumstances. </p>

<p> Second, the Model requires manufacturers, distributors,
brokers, and traders </p>

<p> to provide monthly reports detailing every transaction
involving a regulated </p>

<p> chemical. The reports allow officials to identify the true
purchaser of </p>

<p> chemicals and ascertain whether the actual chemical use is
consistent with </p>

<p> the stated intended use. </p>

<p> Third, the Model requires purchasers to submit information
about themselves, </p>

<p> their permit or other authorization, and their vehicles prior
to receiving or </p>

<p> distributing a regulated chemical. This provision, which
incorporates </p>

<p> California's purchaser identification requirements, also
facilitates </p>

<p> determination of the ultimate purchaser and the chemical's
use. </p>

<p> Fourth, manufacturers and distributors are required to take
inventory </p>

<p> annually and to keep all transaction records readily
accessible for 4 years. </p>

<p> --Providing for enforcement: The Model vests State officials
with the </p>

<p> authority to identify and respond to situations of
noncompliance. It </p>

<p> authorizes limited warrantless inspections during regular
business hours and </p>

<p> allows State officials to routinely inspect inventories,
storage facilities, </p>

<p> records, papers, files, and equipment.(ref. 9) It also grants
State officials </p>

<p> the power to subpoena witnesses and require document
production. The Model </p>

<p> provides for stiff fines and terms of imprisonment for
noncompliance. </p>

<p> To eliminate the economic incentive for this type of criminal
activity, the </p>

<p> Model applies a State's drug forfeiture procedures to money
and property used </p>

<p> in violation of the chemical diversion statute. </p>

<p> --Recovering expenses: As with any proactive regulatory
scheme, the Model </p>

<p> requires a continuing investment of time and money. To
prevent financial </p>

<p> strain on scarce State resources, a system of nonrefundable
application fees </p>

<p> is recommended to help offset the cost of administering the
program. </p>

<p> In addition, the Model imposes a special civil assessment on
violators of the </p>

<p> statute to be used for cleanup of illegal laboratory sites.
Seizure of </p>

<p> clandestine laboratories often reveals significant amounts of
hazardous or </p>

<p> toxic waste and other byproducts that have been found. Under
Federal law, law </p>

<p> enforcement agencies become liable for various cleanup and
transporting </p>

<p> operations, damage to natural resources, and subsequent
health risks that </p>

<p> remain after the lab is dismantled.(ref. 10) </p>

<p> Last year Oklahoma spent approximately $6,000 to clean up
illegal labs, and </p>

<p> for several years California has spent more than $1 million a
year for </p>

<p> similar tasks. However, these expenses were only for removing
bulk </p>

<p> contamination. In the future site restoration through
hazardous waste removal </p>

<p> may require even larger sums of money. The civil assessment
will prevent </p>

<p> violators from escaping financial liability for the
environmental damage they </p>

<p> cause and help States address the issue of long-term
hazardous waste or </p>

<p> residual contamination. </p>

<p> APPLYING THE MODEL </p>

<p> The chemical control legislation in California, Oklahoma,
Texas, and </p>

<p> Washington served as guides for creating the Model. Oklahoma
and Texas </p>

<p> officials have already noted the positive effect of their
legislation on the </p>

<p> struggle to eliminate illegal drug production. The Oklahoma
Bureau of </p>

<p> Narcotics and Texas Department of Public Safety indicate that
their States' </p>

<p> precursor laws significantly reduced the availability of
chemicals throughout </p>

<p> Oklahoma and Texas. The reduction in supply has led to a
decrease in </p>

<p> clandestine laboratory activity in both States. The Texas
Department of </p>

<p> Public Safety reports that the availability of illicit
amphetamine and </p>

<p> methamphetamine in Texas decreased about 50 percent during
the 3-year period </p>

<p> since passage of its statute.&quot; </p>

<p> Despite the success of these States' efforts, the lack of
adequate chemical </p>

<p> controls in many states provides illegal drug manufacturers
with </p>

<p> opportunities to expand their production of controlled
substances. The toll </p>

<p> in health, welfare, enforcement, and safety costs as well as
human suffering </p>

<p> is incalculable. The Model is designed to help State
policymakers and </p>

<p> criminal justice professionals develop legislation that will
severely curtail </p>

<p> domestic illegal drug production while protecting legitimate
commercial </p>

<p> interests. </p>

<p> COPING WITH CHEMICAL HAZARDS </p>

<p> Seizures of clandestine labs pose special problems for law
enforcement </p>

<p> officers because many of the chemicals used in drug
manufacturing are </p>

<p> dangerous. For example, acids and solvents are corrosive and
flammable, and </p>

<p> some are highly explosive. About one-fifth of clandestine lab
seizures result </p>

<p> from reports of fires caused by chemical processes.(ref. 7) </p>

<p> In addition, many precursor and essential chemicals are
corrosive and can </p>

<p> cause lung and eye damage, even upon exposure to vapors
emanating from the </p>

<p> lab. Furthermore, according to a study in California,
one-tenth of seized </p>

<p> labs were booby-trapped with explosives or with disfiguring
and poisonous </p>

<p> chemical devices.(ref. 8) </p>

<p> For these reasons, law enforcement experts recommend that
police officers in </p>

<p> all areas of the criminal justice system be given special
training in </p>

<p> handling these substances. They note that rural police
agencies are just as </p>

<p> likely to encounter clandestine labs as urban police. Highway
patrols and </p>

<p> other agencies in jurisdictions with large railroad and other
transportation </p>

<p> hubs are likely to find such substances en route to a
clandestine location. </p>

<p> NOTES </p>

<p> 1. Impact of Clandestine Drug Laboratories on Small Business,
1988: Hearing </p>

<p> Before the Subcommittee on Regulation and Business
Opportunities of the House </p>

<p> of Representatives Committee on Small Business, 100th
Congress, 2d Session, </p>

<p> 1988 (Statement of David Frohnmayer, Attorney General of the
State of </p>

<p> Oregon). </p>

<p> 2. Drug Enforcement Administration. Guidelines for the
Cleanup of Clandestine </p>

<p> Drug Laboratories. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Justice, Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Administration, 1990. </p>

<p> 3. Laszlo, A.T. &quot;Clandestine Drug Laboratories:
Confronting a Growing </p>

<p> National Crisis.&quot; National Sheriff, 41 (1989): 9-14. </p>

<p> 4. American Prosecutors Research Institute, Highlights of the
Model State </p>

<p> Chemical Control Act. Alexandria, Virginia: American
Prosecutors Research </p>

<p> Institute, 1991: 6-7. </p>

<p> 5. American Prosecutors Research Institute, Highlights, pp.
6-7. </p>

<p> 6. This provision is based on draft CDTA amendments
negotiated between DEA </p>

<p> and chemical and drug manufacturers. </p>

<p> 7. National Institute of Justice. Controlling Chemicals Used
to Make Illegal </p>

<p> Drugs: The Chemical Action Task Force and the Domestic
Chemical Action Group. </p>

<p> Research in Brief. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Justice, January </p>

<p> 1993: 3. </p>

<p> 8. Laszlo, &quot;Clandestine Drug Laboratories,&quot; 9-14. </p>

<p> 9. This provision complies with New York v. Burger, 107 S.
Ct. 2636 (1987). </p>

<p> 10. These requirements result from provisions of the
Comprehensive </p>

<p> Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act [42
U.S.C. 9601-9657 </p>

<p> (1982), amended by 42 U.S.C. 9601-9675 (1988)] and the
Resource Conservation </p>

<p> and Recovery Act [42 U.S.C. 6901-6992 (1988)]. Also, the
Superfund Amendments </p>

<p> and Reauthorization Act [Public Law 99-499] makes owners of
contaminated </p>

<p> property responsible for decontamination before it is sold.
Thus, if a </p>

<p> property is confiscated by a local jurisdiction, seized
through asset </p>

<p> forfeiture laws, and subsequently sold, the jurisdiction may
still be </p>

<p> responsible for cleanup. </p>

<p> 11. Jolley, Inspector Jerrell, and Inspector Kenneth Hailey.
Chemical </p>

<p> Precursor Legislation: Texas Reduces the General Availability
of Illicit </p>

<p> Amphetamine and Methamphetamine. Unpublished report, March
1991. </p>

<p> REFERENCES </p>

<p> American Prosecutors Research Institute. State Drug Laws for
the '90s. </p>

<p> Alexandria, Virginia: American Prosecutors Research
Institute, 1991. </p>

<p> Duncan, John. Clandestine Labs on Decline. Oklahoma Bureau of
Narcotics </p>

<p> Enforcement. Unpublished report, 1991-1992. </p>

<p> Duncan, John. Surviving Clandestine Labs. Oklahoma Bureau of
Narcotics </p>

<p> Enforcement. Unpublished report, 1991-1992. </p>

<p> Drug Enforcement Administration. Report summarizing State
precursor control </p>

<p> laws. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug
Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. Unpublished, 1991-1992. </p>

<p> General Accounting Office. Briefing report on the Drug
Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration's implementation of the Chemical Diversion and
Trafficking Act </p>

<p> of 1988. B-243007, April 1991. </p>

<p> Findings and conclusions of the research reported here are
those of the </p>

<p> author and do not necessarily reflect the official position
or policies of </p>

<p> the U.S. Department of Justice. </p>

<p> The National Institute of Justice is a component of the
Office of Justice </p>

<p> Programs, which also includes the Bureau of Justice
Assistance, Bureau of </p>

<p> Justice Statistics, Office of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention, </p>

<p> and the Office for Victims of Crime. </p>

<p> Sherry Green was a senior attorney at the American
Prosecutors Research </p>

<p> Institute in Alexandria, Virginia, when she worked on this
project to develop </p>

<p> the Model (supported by NIJ grant #91-IJ-CX-K002). She
currently serves as </p>

<p> executive Director of the President's Commission on Model
State Drug Laws, </p>

<p> which is reviewing the Model for possible inclusion in its
report to the </p>

<p> States on recommended model laws. </p>

<p> Drafters of the Model in addition to Ms. Green were Steve
Brookman, Oklahoma </p>

<p> State Bureau of Investigation, Mark Faull, Crime Strike,
Phoenix, Arizona; </p>

<p> William Holman, San Diego District Attorney's Office; John
Duncan Oklahoma </p>

<p> Bureau of Narcotics Enforcement; Katina Kypridakes,
California Bureau of </p>

<p> Narcotics Enforcement; Harry Matz, U.S. Department of
Justice; Michael Scott, </p>

<p> Texas Department of Public Safety; Richard Wintory, Oklahoma
County District </p>

<p> Attorney's Office; and Ken Ronald, Drug Enforcement
Administration. Katina </p>

<p> Kypridakes and Mark Faull assisted with the development of
this Research in </p>

<p> Brief. </p>

<p> Readers who wish to learn more about how States can address
the chemical </p>

<p> diversion issue may request a special information package
that includes a </p>

<p> copy of the Model and accompanying commentary; sample State
statutes, </p>

<p> regulations, and forms; and a chart of State chemical control
requirements. </p>

<p> Interested persons should write the American Prosecutors
Research Institute, </p>

<p> National Drug Prosecution Center, 99 Canal Center Plaza,
Suite 510, </p>

<p> Alexandria, VA 22314, or call 703- 549-6790. </p>

<p> NCJ 142974 </p>

<p> [NOTE: The published report from which this information was
input contains </p>

<p> accompanying charts and tables.] <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>