
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B015-40</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/meduse.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051236 text/html 97249
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:12:08 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:26 GMT
Content-length: 97031
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Medical Uses of Illicit Drugs by Dr. Lester Grinspoon and
James Bakalar</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<h2>Medical Uses of Illicit Drugs</h2>

<p><b>by </b></p>

<p><b>Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalar </b></p>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"><br>
</p>

<p><b>INTRODUCTION</b> </p>

<p>Most of the psychoactive drugs banned or severely restricted
by law in modern industrial societies have had significant
medical uses at some places and times. In the case of natural
plant drugs like opium, coca, cannabis, mescaline, and
psilocybin, this medical history usually reaches back thousands
of years and through a variety of cultures. The general tendency
has been to restrict the uses of these drugs as their dangers are
more strongly emphasized and substitutes become available.
Although the trend toward greater precision in the use of drugs
and greater concern for safety is a medical advance, there is a
danger that legal and social restrictions will prevent the
realization of some genuine medical potential. As we suggest in
this chapter, establishing the balance is a difficult process
that has not yet been worked out adequately. (The use of illicit
drugs also raises other issues, such as individual freedom of
choice, that are outside the scope of this essay.) </p>

<p>Different drugs are assigned to different social categories in
different cultures. The spectrum includes magic, religion,
medicine, recreation, disease, vice, crime, and madness. in
modern industrial societies, we put great emphasis on keeping
these categories separated, and that is one reason why
psychoactive drugs are so difficult for us to deal with. For
industrial societies, medicine or therapy is one thing, fun
another, religious ritual still another-an attitude reflected in
separate formal and informal institutions. The distinctions among
magic, religion, and medicine have not always been so clear as we
make them, or at least profess to make them. The words health and
holiness have a common root meaning &quot;whole.&quot; In
preindustrial societies medical diagnosis and prognosis have an
aura of the occult, something resembling divination, and disease
is usually considered an instrument of gods or evil spirits. </p>

<p>By the early nineteenth century, healers in Europe and in the
United States no longer attributed illness to spirits or
consciously identified the power of drugs as magical. The
scientific revolution had convinced physicians that most diseases
had physical and chemical causes, but a medical science created
in the image of physics remained only a hope. This uncertain
situation, together with the growth of manufacturing, capitalist
entrepreneurship, and the spirit of liberal individualism, made
the nineteenth century a great age of self-medication and
competing medical authorities. The patent medicine industry
therefore flowered in the late nineteenth century United States.
Many of the proprietary medicines contained psychoactive
drugs-alcohol, opium, cocaine, or cannabis. Orthodox physicians
used them extensively as well; as late as 1910, morphine was the
fourth most commonly used drug, and alcohol was the fifth. I
These drugs were not specific cures for specific diseases, and
little was known of their mechanism of action, but they provided
relief from suffering in varied situations. They were the classic
panaceas. Opium, alcohol, or cocaine, like faith in some
pharmacologically inactive proprietary nostrum, actually reduced
the pain while nature took its course, often toward a restoration
of health. </p>

<p>It was a familiar fact that psychoactive drugs, like most
strong medicine, could also be powerfully poisonous. Alternative,
often synthetic drugs, with less apparent abuse potential, were
developed in the late nineteenth century, and consciousness of
the dangers of the familiar natural drugs became more intense.
Problems were magnified by the isolation of drug substances in
pure form and the development of such technologies as the
hypodermic syringe. But the public and medical professionals also
began to mistrust psychoactive drugs because of their
indeterminate and apparently uncontrollable powers. Alcohol, for
example, lost its status as a medicine in the first two decades
of the twentieth century. </p>

<p>Psychoactive drugs had been used too freely in the nineteenth
century, and often the distinction between use for health and use
for pleasure was not carefully made. This ambiguity now began to
seem dangerous, just as the primitive ambiguity between health
and holiness had long been obsolete. Taking opium to relax or
cocaine to feel vigorous would no longer be regarded as a cure or
treatment. The common man's right to make choices about these
substances (even, for a time, alcohol) was repudiated. The
government and organized medicine took control over their
manufacture and distribution, carefully restricting their medical
uses and rejecting almost all other uses. This was part of the
process by which nineteenth century liberal capitalism
transformed itself into a more &quot;orderly&quot; state
corporate system; at the same time, the organized medical and
pharmaceutical professions and the larger drug companies
consolidated their power. In what is now known as the Progressive
Era, the Pure Food and Drug Act, the Harrison Narcotic Act, and
the Volstead Act were as much characteristic legislation as the
Federal Reserve Act. </p>

<p>The impulse to clean up society and reduce disorder was
hostile to free self-medication and chaotic small-scale
entrepreneurial competition. Professional hygiene required new
standards for medical and pharmaceutical practice, and
intellectual hygiene required clear and enforceable categories
for psychoactive drugs. Changes in medicine itself were also
important. Synthetic chemistry, experimental physiology, and
bacteriology advanced. The promise of a materialist medicine
based on the recognition of specific agents for specific diseases
seemed about to be fulfilled. Psychoactive drugs, with their
nonspecific and merely palliative effects, became more suspect. </p>

<p>The system established during the Progressive Era has
persisted until the present. As the medical and allied
professions expand, divide, and send out new branches, they
incorporate more and more social functions. This has sometimes
been called &quot;moral entrepreneurship&quot; or &quot;medical
imperialism.&quot; More recently, the right of medical
professionals to interpret the meaning of psychoactive drug use
has been challenged by scholars and social critics as well as
illicit drug users. In some cases they have advocated an openly
religious conception of psychoactive drug use, a recommendation
that we apply the standards of preindustrial cultures. The
practical merit of this idea may be dubious, but it does raise
two interesting issues: the dangers of technological advance and
the protective function of ritual. </p>

<p>Technical advances in science and manufacturing have increased
the danger of drug abuse by producing chemicals in pure form and
permitting their production on a vast scale. On the other hand,
these products of modern industry have powers commensurate with
their dangers: the face of Dr. Jekyll as well as Mr. Hyde. It
could be argued that in modern industrial societies the medical
profession has to provide the same kind of ritual or
quasi-religious context that makes drug use relatively safe in
primitive cultures. The priestly role of doctors in prescribing
occasions for drug use and warning against possession by the
demons in these drugs may sometimes seem arrogant, but it is
doubtful whether nineteenth century individualism or a return to
preindustrial cultural and technological forms would be better,
even if they were possible. </p>

<p>Physicians are now in a good position to examine rationally
how and when to use their authority in controlling psychoactive
drugs. They do not have to regard the complex powers of these
drugs as a challenge to their own domination of territory they
have legitimately staked out. Psychoactive drugs are still an
important part of the medical armamentarium, although most of
those in use today are synthetic. The doctrine of specific
etiology, based on infectious and dietary deficiency diseases, is
the source of modern medicine's great triumphs, and yet it
remains inadequate. For the vaguely defined functional problems
that still account for many visits to doctors, we often still
have no clear explanations and no better remedies than drugs that
affect the mind. This situation naturally causes much unease.
Doctors are accused by lay people and accuse one another of using
pills to resolve problems of living that demand more complex and
difficult adjustments. These fears are reasonable. On the other
hand, there remains a large area in which diseases and problems
of living overlap. What a doctor does in prescribing a
tranquilizer is not always different in a fundamental way from
what lay persons do in prescribing a beer or marijuana cigarette
for themselves. </p>

<p>Twentieth century societies have kept increasing government
control of therapeutic drugs on the ground that authoritative
knowledge about their efficacy and safety makes free individual
choice illusory. Psychoactive substances used as pleasure drugs
were the first to be restricted, but all prescription medicines
now have to go through an elaborate procedure of testing and
certification before they are approved for medical use. Of all
federal drug laws, only the Pure Food and Drug Act (1906) was
designed to encourage free choice by consumers, because it was
aimed at simple fraud-false statements about the contents of the
package. Since the passage of the Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act of
1938, the power to decide the availability of most drugs has
gradually been transferred, first from consumers to doctors and
then from doctors to the government. Before allowing a drug on
the market, the federal government must now judge whether it is
effective as well as whether it is safe. </p>

<p>Although most drugs are now illicit except when taken by
prescription, the common understanding of the term &quot;illicit
drugs&quot; includes only psychoactive drugs used for pleasure,
most of which are covered by the federal criminal provisions of
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 and similar state laws. It
would be impossible to discuss all of them here. Some are among
the most commonly used drugs and have a variety of medical
applications-notably the benzodiazepine tranquilizers, the
barbiturates, and the synthetic and natural opioids. We will
concentrate here on four classes of drugs that have much more
limited medical acceptability. All four are placed in the two
most restricted schedules under the Controlled Substances Act.
Cocaine and amphetamines have currently accepted medical uses;
marijuana and psychedelic drugs do not. We will explore the past
and present, potential and actual, experimental and established,
legal and illegitimate therapeutic uses of these drugs. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>COCA AND COCAINE</b> </p>

<p>Cocaine is an alkaloid extracted from the leaves of the shrub
Erythroxylon coca, which has long been cultivated in Bolivia and
Peru as a stimulant and for medicinal purposes. For thousands of
years, inhabitants of the Peruvian and Bolivian highlands and the
western Amazon region have been mixing coca leaves with ash or
lime, putting the wad in a cheek, and letting the juice trickle
into their stomachs. In many parts of the Amazon and the Andes
today, coca is the everyday stimulant drug, used more or less as
coffee, tea, chewing tobacco, and khat are used in other areas of
the world. </p>

<p>In one study of a mountain village in Peru, coca was found to
be the standard remedy for symptoms of hunger and cold and for
two folk illnesses: el soka, a condition of weakness, fatigue,
and general malaise; and el fiero, a chronic wasting illness.
Coca was also the treatment of choice for stomach upset and
stomachache and for colic, or severe gastrointestinal distress
including diarrhea, cramps, and nausea. 2 </p>

<p>In the form of leaf powder or tea, coca is taken for
toothache, ulcers, rheumatism, asthma, and even malaria. Coca tea
is often served to tourists arriving in hotels and inns in the
high Andes as a remedy for the nausea, dizziness, and headache of
soroche (altitude sickness). Unlike other stimulants, coca is
also a local anesthetic. The juice of the leaf can be applied to
soothe eye irritations or gargled for hoarseness and sore throat.
Coca leaves are also used as a topical anesthetic for mouth
sores. Coca contains minerals, vitamin C, and some B vitamins,
and it is sometimes said to be an important source of these
nutrients in the Andean diet. </p>

<p>An American physician, Andrew Weil, has recently been trying
to revive interest in the therapeutic uses of coca, which he
believes have been neglected because of the medical profession's
fascination and subsequent disillusionment with the pure alkaloid
cocaine. He has found coca useful in the symptomatic relief of
indigestion, gastritis, constipation, motion sickness,
laryngitis, and other ailments. He believes that it could serve
as a substitute for coffee in persons who find that their
stomachs are upset by that stimulant. He also proposes its use as
an appetite-reducing drug and as an energizer for physical labor,
and he suggests that it might serve as a relatively safe
substitute in treating amphetamine and cocaine dependence. He
points out that coca differs from cocaine in several ways. It
contains a number of related alkaloids rather than a single one,
and it is less subject to abuse because it enters the body by the
normal gastrointestinal route rather than intranasally,
intravenously, or through the lungs. He believes that coca might
best be administered in the form of a chewing gum. </p>

<p>Ever since the Spanish conquest there has been controversy
about the health effects of habitual coca use. The evidence is
unreliable, contradictory, and heavily colored by the political
and social biases of observers. A number of studies have
suggested that coca chewers are apathetic, subnormal in
intelligence, or subject to various physical illnesses because
they are weakened by the drug.' But even these results are
ambiguous and inconclusive.' The biggest problem is separating
cause from effect. If coca users in the high Andes seem
undernourished, demoralized, and unhealthy, that is easily
explained by the miserable physical and social conditions under
which many of them live-conditions for which coca use apparently
gives them some relief. It is significant that many Indians in
the Amazon who use coca are reported to be strong and healthy.'
In any case, the people of the Andes themselves, including those
who do not use coca, usually reject the suggestion that it is a
drug problem, a threat to health, or a danger to their community.
</p>

<p>Cocaine was isolated from the coca leaf in 1860. Throughout
the late nineteenth century, both coca itself (that is, an
extract from the leaf including all of its alkaloids) and the
pure chemical cocaine were popular as medicines in Europe and
North America. In 1863 Angelo Mariani, a Corsican chemist,
patented a preparation of coca extract and wine, which he called
Vin Mariani; it became one of the most popular prescription
medicines of the era, and was used by such celebrities as Thomas
Edison, Ulysses Grant, Henrik Ibsen, Pope Leo XIII, Emile Zola,
Jules Verne, and the Prince of Wales. Mariani wrote several
articles and monographs on coca in which he combined historical,
botanical, and medical information with the promotion of his
company's product; he could list thousands of physicians who
recommended it.' </p>

<p>By 1878 coca was being promoted in advertisements in the
United States for young persons suffering from shyness and as a
stimulant. In the same year, an American physician, W. H.
Bentley, began to recommend coca as a cure for morphine
addiction. Extract of coca was admitted to the United States
Pharmacopoeia in 1882. In July 1884, Sigmund Freud published a
famous paper, &quot;On Coca,&quot; in which he recommended
cocaine or coca extract for a variety of illnesses including the
syndrome of fatigue, nervousness, and minor physical complaints
then known as neurasthenia.' Referring to Freud's writings, the
Parke-Davis Company declared in its pamphlet &quot;Coca
Erythroxylon and Its Derivatives&quot;: &quot;If these claims are
substantiated . . . [cocaine] will indeed be the most important
therapeutic discovery of the age, the benefit of which to
humanity will be incalculable.&quot;' </p>

<p>This article and later articles by Freud were influential, but
the rediscovery of cocaine's local anesthetic properties by his
colleague Karl Koller proved to be of more permanent importance.
Koller introduced topical cocaine in eye operations, and soon
cocaine was being used in many other forms of surgery. William
Halsted of Johns Hopkins University invented nerve block or
conduction anesthesia by injecting cocaine into nerve trunks.
Soon regional anesthesia and spinal anesthesia were introduced.
It was not until the early twentieth century that synthetic local
anesthetics without the stimulant properties of cocaine were
developed. </p>

<p>Meanwhile, cocaine was triumphing as what would now be
disparagingly called a panacea. It was recommended for exhaustive
and irritative conditions of the central nervous system,
seasickness, trigeminal neuralgia, hay fever, head colds, and
what was then called &quot;catarrh.&quot; In 1901 the American
physician W. Golden Mortimer published an encyclopedic volume,
History of Coca, in which he recommended coca wine, coca extract,
or cocaine for a great variety of purposes. In an appendix he
cited the responses to a letter he had sent to &quot;a selected
set&quot; of more than 5,000 physicians asking for their
observations on coca. Of the 1,206 replying, 369 said that they
had used coca in their own practices. They commonly observed that
it increased appetite, raised blood pressure, stimulated
circulation, strengthened the heart, improved digestion,
stimulated the mind, and worked as an aphrodisiac. The most
popular therapeutic uses were for exhaustion, overwork, and
neurasthenia. Few thought there was a dangerous tendency to form
a coca habit.10 </p>

<p>One of the most popular drinks containing cocaine was
CocaCola, first concocted in 1886 by a Georgia pharmacist. The
Coca-Cola Company was founded in 1892, and throughout the 1890s
CocaCola was advertised as a headache remedy and stimulant as
well as an enjoyable drink. In 1903 coca extract was removed from
Coca-Cola and replaced with caffeine. A de-cocainized extract of
the coca leaf is still used for flavoring. </p>

<p>In the medical use of coca and cocaine, it is hard to separate
the central stimulant from the digestive, respiratory, and local
anesthetic effects. A singer or actor who drank Mariani's wine
could hardly know how much of the improvement he or she noticed
was caused by local anesthesia or constriction of blood vessels
in the throat and how much by euphoria and a feeling of mastery.
As for stomach and intestinal problems, the gastrointestinal
system is probably the most common site of psychosomatic
symptoms. The use of coca or cocaine in convalescence from
long-lasting debilitating diseases represents a similar
combination of central and peripheral effects. </p>

<p>Abuse and dependence became problems almost as soon as cocaine
was introduced into medicine. Cocaine dependence first appeared
in morphine addicts who took the cocaine cure recommended by
Bentley and Freud. Halsted, the inventor of nerve block
anesthesia, appears to have cured himself of a craving for
cocaine by taking up morphine and paying the price of physical
addiction. In his last paper on cocaine, published in 1887, Freud
admitted that the cocaine habit could be more dangerous to health
than morphine addiction.&quot; Later in life he seldom referred
to cocaine. </p>

<p>The growing fear of cocaine changed attitudes toward coca.
Advocates of coca then began to fight a rear-guard action in its
defense, insisting that coca never caused the kinds of problems
that were ruining the reputation of cocaine, and even saying that
the effects of coca might be caused primarily by other chemicals
in the leaf. But by 1900 public and medical opinion had begun to
turn against both coca and cocaine. In 1906 the Pure Food and
Drug Act banned food and drinks containing cocaine, and further
legal restrictions soon followed, culminating in the Harrison Act
of 1914, which regulated cocaine as well as opiates. Cocaine and
the coca leaf were still prescribed occasionally through the
1920s for many of the same purposes as in the late nineteenth
century, although criminal laws and other restraints made it less
easily available. But its use gradually declined until, by 1930,
it was rarely being used except as a surgical anesthetic and an
illicit pleasure drug. </p>

<p>Today cocaine is used in medicine mainly as a topical
anesthetic in eye, ear, nose, and throat surgery and fiber tube
optical examinations of the upper respiratory and digestive
tracts. It has a combination of properties that cannot be
duplicated by any of the synthetic local anesthetics: intense
constriction of blood vessels (important whenever bleeding must
be prevented), long duration of anesthesia (one hour), and low
toxicity. Cocaine is no longer used in infiltration anesthesia
(subcutaneous injection), in nerve block anesthesia, or in spinal
anesthesia. 12 Recently topical application of cocaine to the
upper palate has been recommended as a way of aborting the severe
pain of cluster headaches. 13 </p>

<p>Other medical uses are rare. Cocaine is an ingredient in
Brompton's mixture, a preparation used in Great Britain for
treating the chronic pain of terminal cancer, but controlled
studies at a hospice in England have suggested that the cocaine
in this drink provides no advantage over morphine alone.&quot;
Cocaine was never tested seriously as a treatment for severe
depression, but this idea is unlikely to be revived because the
pharmacologically similar amphetamines have proved a failure for
that purpose. Today substitutes have been found for most
therapeutic uses of cocaine, and in most cases its dangers are
believed to outweigh its potential benefits. Despite the recent
and so far uncertain signs of reviving interest, coca and cocaine
will never again be so widely used in medicine as they once were.
</p>

<p>Legally, the coca leaf and all its derivatives containing
cocaine are classified under the Controlled Substances Act as
Schedule 11 drugs: This means that there is a currently accepted
medical use but also a high potential for abuse and dependence.
Schedule 11 drugs may be prescribed under special restrictions;
hospitals and pharmacies are required to keep them in a locked
place. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>AMPHETAMINES </b></p>

<p>Amphetamines and amphetamine congeners are a large group of
chemically related central stimulant drugs; among the best known
are dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), methamphetamine (Methedrine)
and methylphenidate (Ritalin). Racemic amphetamine sulfate
(Benzedrine) was first synthesized in 1887, but it was not
introduced as a medicine until 1932, when the Benzedrine inhaler
became available over the counter in drugstores as a treatment
for nasal congestion and asthma. In late 1937 the new drug was
introduced in tablet form to treat narcolepsy and
postencephalitic parkinsonism. It was also recommended for
depression and to heighten energy and capacity for work. Soon
amphetamine was receiving sensational publicity with numerous
references to &quot;brain,&quot; &quot; pep,&quot; and
&quot;superman&quot; pills. Even when phrased as warnings, these
reports served mainly to arouse curiosity. </p>

<p>But amphetamine use spread mainly because the medical
profession was so enthusiastic about the drugs. Many doctors
regarded amphetamines as remedies with extraordinary scope,
efficacy, and safety. By 1943 more than half the sales of
Benzedrine went to fill prescriptions written for people who
wanted to lose weight, obtain a temporary lift in spirits, or
stay awake for extended periods. In 1946 W. R. Bett asserted that
amphetamine had thirty-nine clinical uses, including treatment
for epilepsy, postencephalitic parkinsonism, schizophrenia,
alcoholism, behavior problems in children, migraine, muscular
rigidity and spasm, head injuries, dysmenorrhea, and
hypotension.15 </p>

<p>Although not all these uses were generally adopted, by 1971
the total production of amphetamines had reached the equivalent
of more than 10 billion 5 mg tablets. Until 1971, amphetamines
were sold freely over the counter without prescription in the
form of inhalers such as the Dristan inhaler. They were also easy
to obtain in the form of pills, capsules, or injectable liquids,
with or without a visit to the doctor for a prescription. The
Army used amphetamines heavily during the Vietnam War, and
amphetamine abuse became a problem among the troops. 16 From the
mid-1960s on there was also a growth in both illicit bathroom
laboratory synthesis of amphetamines and black market diversion
of legitimately produced drugs. </p>

<p>Since 1970 use and abuse of amphetamines have declined because
of legal restrictions and a better understanding of their
dangers, which include weight loss, psychosis, severe dependence,
and depression on withdrawal. It is as though the career of
amphetamines from 1940 to 1970 recapitulated the career of
cocaine in the late nineteenth century. Not having learned from
history, we were condemned to repeat it. Although chemically
different from cocaine, the amphetamines have similar stimulant
effects and similar liabilities. After the first flush of
enthusiasm, the range of accepted medical uses for amphetamines
narrowed, just as it had for cocaine a generation earlier. The
only present widely accepted medical uses for amphetamines are in
treating narcolepsy and attention deficit disorder. They are
occasionally used as an adjunct to tricyclic antidepressants in
the treatment of depression. They are also still prescribed for
weight loss, but this practice is becoming less and less common
because of wellfounded doubts about their safety and
effectiveness. </p>

<p>The amphetamines used in medicine are placed in Schedule 11
under the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 as later amended.
Like cocaine, they are regarded as drugs having a currently
accepted medical use but a high potential for abuse, which may
lead to severe psychological or physical dependence. An applicant
to manufacture such drugs must register with the attorney
general. The attorney general establishes production quotas, and
there are special restrictions on prescriptions. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Weight Loss</b> </p>

<p>Until the early 1970s, amphetamines were overwhelmingly the
drug of choice in treating overweight by appetite reduction.
Their anorectic effect is apparently secondary to the stimulating
effect. Controlled studies have found that amphetamines increase
weight loss, at least in the first few months, by making it easy
to adhere to a diet. But the user rapidly grows tolerant to the
anorectic effect, and it can rarely be sustained more than a few
months without an increase in the dose. 17 It also appears that
most patients, once they stop using amphetamines or become
tolerant to them, go back to their former eating habits and
regain the weight they have lost. </p>

<p>The favorable results of clinical studies on the appetite
reducing effects of amphetamines must also be balanced by a
consideration of adverse effects, including the danger of abuse.
Even if the intention is to expose the patient to amphetamine
only for a short period, compulsive eaters who have a need for
constant gratification may find it hard to put aside a medication
that makes them feel good. They may also discover, when they no
longer have the magic potion that protects them from themselves,
that a psychological vacuum has developed that needs to be filled
with food. </p>

<p>Appetite is governed by physiology, habit, and emotional
state. Tension and depression, inability to delay gratification,
and the substitution of food for other forms of pleasure, all of
which are common in cases of overweight, increase the danger of
drug dependency. A drug that reduces appetite without requiring
any solution to emotional problems may seem to be a reasonable
alternative at first, but the short-term weight loss may cause
patients to avoid the issue of changing their eating and exercise
habits. (The same problem, of course, often occurs when drugs are
administered for other emotional problems and habitual behavior.)
</p>

<p>It is doubtful whether amphetamines should be used for weight
reduction under any circumstances. All anorectic drugs, and
especially amphetamines, have a limited value in the treatment of
obesity; because of their potential for dependence and abuse,
they should be used with extreme care, if at all. The
prescription of amphetamines for weight loss has properly
declined in the last decade. </p>

<p><b>Narcolepsy</b> </p>

<p>Narcolepsy, first described ninety years ago, is a disorder
marked by an uncontrollable desire for sleep or sudden attacks of
sleep during the daytime. It usually begins in adolescence, and
it never completely remits. Narcolepsy is considered rare, but it
is not clear just how common it is, and in any case, it is a
complicated problem. It may involve either REM (dreaming) sleep
or non-REM sleep, and it may be complicated by cataplexy (loss of
muscle tone), sleep paralysis, or hypnagogic hallucinations.
Tricyclic antidepressants are used to treat these symptoms, but
they do not eliminate the sleep attacks themselves. There is no
evidence of brain pathology in narcolepsy, but heredity may be a
factor. </p>

<p>Amphetamine was first introduced as a treatment for narcolepsy
in 1935, and one or another amphetamine congener continues to be
the drug treatment of choice. Dextroamphetamine or
methylphenidate may be necessary for a narcoleptic person whose
work is dangerous, but most victims of narcolepsy can perform
satisfactorily without drugs if they take at least one nap a day.
The risk of dependence, toxic reactions, and psychosis must be
weighed against the advantages of drug-induced wakefulness. </p>

<p><b>Depression</b> </p>

<p>Depression is probably the most common complaint of adults.
Its symptoms are both physical and emotional: loss of appetite
and energy, insomnia, fatigue, difficulty in concentration,
feelings of worthlessness and self-reproach, thoughts of death
and suicide, anxiety and irritability. Amphetamines were one of
the first classes of drugs to be used in the treatment of
depression, beginning in 1936. Early studies sometimes led to
excessive enthusiasm, because they were not controlled and the
clinical symptoms of depression show a strong tendency to
spontaneous remission. Even in the early stages, amphetamines
were generally found to be ineffective in severe depressions and
in treating the depressed phase of bipolar (manicdepressive)
illness. Early studies of less serious depressions demonstrated
some effectiveness but raised questions about possible dangers.
Even at that time researchers mentioned the possibility of
increasing the risk of suicide by heightening energy and
mobility. Suicide attempts may also occur during the severe
depression that sometimes follows withdrawal. Nevertheless, as
late as 1958, C. D. Leake strongly recommended amphetamines for
depression in an authoritative book. 18 </p>

<p>As the dangers of insomnia and anxiety became more apparent,
interest developed in using amphetamines together with sedatives
such as the barbiturate sodium amytal. Each drug, it was thought,
would counteract the unfortunate side effects of the other.
Although doubt soon developed about the effectiveness of these
combinations, they were marketed for years under various trade
names and soon became sources of a new kind of drug abuse. </p>

<p>By the 1950s, new amphetamine congeners with fewer side
effects, such as methylphenidate, had been developed, but they
proved to be no more effective in treating depression. Eventually
two new groups of drugs, the monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors
and the tricyclics, revolutionized the field. Tricyclic
derivatives, along with lithium for manic-depressive illness, are
now believed to be the most effective drug treatment for
depression. Controlled studies comparing tricyclic
antidepressants to amphetamines or placebo have found
amphetamines ineffective in the treatment of all types of
depression.&quot; But amphetamine-related stimulants may
potentiate the effects of the tricyclics by slowing their
metabolism in the body; and they may also evoke an immediate
response that encourages the depressed patient to keep taking a
tricyclic whose effects do not become apparent for a few weeks.20
</p>

<p>A few other uses for amphetamines in the treatment of
depression are still occasionally recommended. Methylphenidate
has been proposed to treat depression in patients who are
medically ill or recovering from surgery and therefore unable to
tolerate the side effects of tricyclic antidepressants. This is
especially true of heart patients and elderly people with organic
brain disease.&quot; Amphetamines taken intravenously in
combination with morphine have also been recommended in the
treatment of postoperative pain.&quot; in some studies
amphetamines seem to be effective in obsessive-compulsive
disorder, but other drugs are available for this purpose as
well.&quot; </p>

<p>Drugs should not be used as a substitute for reassurance and
exploration of the patient's concerns in cases of mild
depression, fatigue, or anxiety. If amphetamines are used to
relieve symptoms that are often indistinguishable from the
tensions of everyday life, they may make the patient feel good
but they will only mask the underlying problem. A patient
complaining of fatigue, nervousness, anxiety, or insomnia may be
asking for a kind of short-term psychotherapy from a person
believed to be trustworthy. When a doctor responds with a
stimulant pill, he or she may be depriving the patient of a
service that should be provided and may perpetuate a pattern of
drug use as a substitute for coping with the problems of daily
life. Fortunately, most physicians have come to recognize this,
and amphetamines are no longer commonly used in treating
depression. </p>

<p><b>Attention Deficit Disorder</b> </p>

<p>The most controversial remaining medical use of amphetamines
is the treatment of the syndrome known variously as
hyperactivity, hyperkinesis, minimal brain dysfunction, and, most
recently, attention deficit disorder. It is probably the most
common behavioral disorder of childhood; boys are affected five
to ten times as often as girls. The main symptoms are extreme
physical restlessness (hyperactive children move more, even in
sleep) and short attention span; other symptoms are poor
coordination, intolerance for frustration, aggressive and
impulsive behavior, and learning disabilities. The problem
usually begins in infancy, but it becomes especially troublesome
in the classroom. Hyperactive children do not usually outgrow
their problems, although the symptoms may change. In adolescence
they are often academic underachievers with poor social skills
and low self-esteem, who may become juvenile delinquents. Many of
the symptoms also persist in adult life. </p>

<p>Attention deficit disorder overlaps in its symptoms with
disorderly behavior and more serious developmental disorders of
childhood. Symptoms found in hyperactive children are also found
in some children with known brain injuries and are often
associated with neurological signs of central nervous system
malfunction. The term &quot; minimal brain dysfunction&quot;
suggests an organic cause, but so far no specifically
characteristic neurological disorder or brain pathology has been
found. The current term &quot;attention deficit disorder&quot;
suggests that the problem reflects the way activity is organized
in response to social demands as much as it involves physical
motion. Hyperactivity is probably a mixture of symptoms with
different origins in different children; in many cases a genetic
factor may be involved. </p>

<p>The use of amphetamines in treating hyperactive children began
in 1937, when Charles Bradley observed that it produced striking
effects on a number of schoolchildren showing various kinds of
disturbance. Their problems, aside from hyperactive behavior,
included specific learning disabilities, aggressiveness
associated with epilepsy, and schizoid withdrawal. The drug
reduced their motor activity and impulsive behavior, improved
their attention, diminished mood swings, increased their interest
in the surroundings, made them less anxious and irritable, and
improved their school achievement. 24 Studies on the amphetamine
treatment of disturbed children with a variety of diagnoses
reported a substantial improvement in behavior and school
performance as judged by parents, teachers, and caregivers .25 </p>

<p>There is still much confusion about what symptoms respond to
amphetamines. Some studies suggest that children who show signs
of a neurological disorder do better on amphetamines than other
restless children who do not show such signs. Others find that
amphetamines contribute to relieving the symptoms of disturbed
children in general, whether or not there is evidence of a
learning disorder or brain injury.26 The apparent calming effect
of these stimulant drugs on hyperactivity in children has been
called paradoxical, with the implication that the effect is
specifically related to the disorder. But it turns out that
single doses of amphetamine affect normal boys the same way they
affect hyperkinetic boys-increasing attention span and reducing
motor activity.27 </p>

<p>Amphetamines have serious limitations and dangers. The results
of treatment are more variable and less spectacular than they may
appear. Amphetamines probably do not help hyperkinetic preschool
children or improve specific learning disorders such as reading
problems .28 The symptoms usually return when the drug is
withdrawn, and in any case its benefits seem to occur mainly in
the first few months; long-term treatment does not lead to a
better outcome.29 Attention problems, impulsiveness, and academic
failure persist in adolescence among children diagnosed as
hyperactive whether or not they have taken amphetamines. </p>

<p>Some hyperactive children even get worse on amphetamines; in
one study, 16 percent of the children showed an exaggeration of
the original symptoms.&quot; A few serious adverse reactions have
also been reported, including an amphetamine psychosis and
movement disorders.&quot; Even children who are benefited by
amphetamines may suffer from loss of appetite, dizziness, pallor,
and digestive troubles. These symptoms usually diminish or
disappear after the first week, and they can usually be minimized
by adjusting the dose. (Methylphenidate has fewer toxic
side-effects than do other forms of amphetamine.) A more serious
problem is that some amphetaminetreated hyperactive children fail
to achieve expected gains in weight and height. The effect is
statistically significant but generally not large. It might be
neutralized by the spurt in growth that begins in adolescence;
the evidence is not yet available. In any case, the growth of
children taking stimulant drugs must be carefully
monitored.&quot; </p>

<p>For educational psychologists who found that many disturbed
children did not respond to psychotherapy and for educators
interested in the relationship between learning disabilities and
behavior problems, amphetamines have suggested new approaches to
treatment. But children should not be given drugs as soon as they
become restless or unruly. Often the problem lies in the school
or home as much as in the child. Children need an educational
environment that will help them come to grips with their problems
without using pharmacological shortcuts unless they are
absolutely necessary. Teachers, parents, and physicians should
try other methods before resorting to amphetamines. Physicians
must be certain that their diagnoses are accurate. At one time
amphetamines may have been used excessively in treating
hyperactivity because of imprecise diagnosis and overzealous
promotion by drug companies and educators, but it is our
impression that physicians and educators now have a better
understanding of the limitations as well as the advantages of
amphetamines and are using them with more care. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>PSYCHEDELIC DRUGS</b> </p>

<p>The psychedelics or hallucinogens are a large group of drugs,
some natural and some synthetic, with a variety of chemical
structures. The best known are mescaline, derived from the peyote
cactus; psilocybin, found in over a hundred species of mushrooms;
and the synthetic drug lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), which is
chemically related to certain alkaloids found in morning glory
seeds, the lysergic acid amides. This class of drugs also
includes the natural substances harmine, harmaline, ibogaine, and
dimethyltryptamine (DMT), as well as a large number of synthetic
drugs that are chemically described as tryptamines or
methoxylated amphetamines. A few of these are diethyltryptarnine
(DET), 3,4,-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), and
2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine (DOM, also known as STP). </p>

<p>The natural hallucinogens have long been used by preindustrial
cultures, especially in Mexico and South America, for magical,
religious, and healing purposes, and today the peyote cactus is
the sacrament of the Native American Church, a religious
organization with branches in all western states of the United
States. Peyote became known in industrial society toward the end
of the nineteenth century, and many other plant hallucinogens
have been discovered since. LSD was first synthesized in 1938 and
its psychoactive properties were discovered in 1943; since then
many other synthetic psychedelic drugs have been developed in
laboratories. </p>

<p>The psychedelic drugs differ somewhat in their subjective
effects and greatly in the effective dosage. LSD is the most
potent and produces the widest range of effects; it can be taken
as a prototype. Although the response to LSD varies with
personality, expectations, and setting, it almost always produces
profound changes in perception, mood, and thinking. Perceptions
become unusually brilliant and intense; normally unnoticed
details capture the attention and ordinary things are seen with
wonder. Synesthesia, changes in body image, and alterations in
time and space perception are common. Vivid dreamlike imagery
appears before closed eyes. True hallucinations are rare, but
visual distortions and pseudohallucinations are common. Emotions
become unusually intense and may change abruptly and often.
Suggestibility is greatly heightened. The experience is suffused
by a heightened sense of reality and significance, and it often
produces feelings of religious and philosophical insight. The
sense of self is greatly changed, sometimes to the point of
merging with the external world, separation from the body, or
dissolution in mystical ecstasy. </p>

<p>The most common adverse effect of LSD and related drugs is the
&quot;bad trip,&quot; which occasionally produces a true
psychotic reaction. </p>

<p>Another common effect is the flashback, a spontaneous
transitory recapitulation of drug-induced experience in a
drug-free state. Prolonged adverse reactions, which are
considerably less common, include anxiety reactions, depressive
reactions, and psychoses. They are most likely to occur in
schizoid and prepsychotic personalities with barely stable egos
who cannot cope with the mind alterations produced by the drug
trip. There is a close resemblance between people hospitalized
for LSD reactions and those hospitalized for psychoses not
produced by drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>A persistent issue has been possible genetic damage and birth
defects. The available evidence suggests that LSD produces no
chromosome damage in reproductive cells of a kind that is likely
to cause birth defects; the same is true of other psychedelic
drugs to the extent that they have been tested. There is also no
evidence that LSD is teratogenic in human users at normal doses. </p>

<p>Ever since experimentation with psychedelic drugs began, some
users and psychotherapists have maintained that a single
psychedelic experience or several such experiences can provide
religious insight, heightened creative capacity, psychological
insight, or relief from neurotic symptoms. From 1950 to the
mid-1960s, psychedelic drugs especially LSD, mescaline, and
psilocybin-were used extensively in experimental psychiatry. The
drugs were studied as a chemical model for natural psychoses and
also used extensively in psychotherapy. More than a thousand
clinical papers were published discussing forty thousand
patients; there were several dozen books and six international
conferences on psychedelic drug therapy. It was recommended at
one time or another for a wide variety of problems, including
alcoholism, obsessional neurosis, and childhood autism. Beginning
in the mid-1960s, with the increase of illicit use, it became
difficult to obtain the drugs or get funding for research, and
professional interest declined. There is now only one legally
approved project in the United States involving the therapeutic
use of psychedelic drugs; it is located at the Maryland
Psychiatric Research Institute in Baltimore. Maybe those two
decades of psychedelic research will eventually be written off as
a mistake that has only historical interest, but it might be
wiser to see if something can be salvaged from them. </p>

<p>One source of the therapeutic interest was the belief of some
experimental subjects after taking a psychedelic drug that they
were less depressed, anxious, and guilty, and more
self-accepting, tolerant, or sensually alert. Interest also arose
from the possibility of making therapeutic use of the powerful
psychedelic experiences of regression, abreaction, intense
transference, and symbolic drama to improve the results of
psychodynamic psychotherapy. Two kinds of therapy emerged, one
making use of the mystical or conversion experience and the other
exploring the unconscious in the manner of psychoanalysis.
Psychedelic therapy, as the first kind was called, involved the
use of a large dose (200 micrograms of LSD or more) in a single
session; it was thought to be potentially helpful in reforming
alcoholics and criminals as well as improving the lives of normal
people. The second type, psycholytic (literally, mind-loosening)
therapy, required relatively small doses and several or even many
sessions; it was used mainly for neurotic and psychosomatic
disorders. In practice, many combinations, variations, and
special applications with some of the features of both
psycholytic and psychedelic therapy evolved. </p>

<p><b>Neurotic Disorders</b> </p>

<p>In a book about her LSD treatment, one woman described the
result this way: </p>

<p>I found that in addition to being, consciously, a loving
mother and a respectable citizen, I was also, unconsciously, a
murderess, a pervert, a cannibal, a sadist, and a masochist. In
the wake of these dreadful discoveries, I lost my fear of
dentists, the clicking in my neck and throat, the arm tensions,
and my dislike of clocks ticking in the bedroom. I also achieved
transcendent sexual fulfillment.... </p>

<p>At the end of nine sessions over a period of nine weeks I was
cured of my hitherto incurable frigidity, and at the end of five
months I felt that I had been completely reconstituted as a human
being. I have continued to feel that way ever since.&quot; </p>

<p>These passages were written three years after a five-month
period during which this woman took LSD twenty-three times.
Before that she had had four years of psychoanalysis, but it was
only after LSD that she became convinced of the value of Freud's
theories. </p>

<p>The literature contains a number of such impressive case
histories, but these anecdotal accounts can always be questioned;
placebo effects, spontaneous recovery, special and prolonged
devotion by the therapist, and the therapist's and patient's
biases in judging improvement must be considered. The most
serious deficiencies in psychedelic drug studies were absence of
controls and inadequate follow-up. And psychedelic drug effects
are so striking that it is difficult to design a double-blind
study, in which neither the person administering the drug nor the
person taking it knows whether it is the active substance or a
placebo. No form of psychotherapy for neurotics has ever been
able to justify itself under stringent controls, and LSD therapy
is no exception. </p>

<p>Furthermore, psychiatrists did not agree about details. Should
the emphasis be on expression of repressed feelings or on working
through a transference attachment to the psychiatrist? How much
therapy is necessary in the intervals between LSD treatments?
Because of the complexity of psychedelic drug effects, there are
no general answers to these questions. It appeared that LSD
treatment sometimes produced spectacular improvement in neurotic
symptoms, but no reliable formula for success was derived from
these results. But again, in these respects psychedelic drug
therapy seems to be in no better or worse position than most
other forms of psychotherapy. </p>

<p><b>Alcoholism</b> </p>

<p>Psychedelic therapy for alcoholism is based on the assumption
that one overwhelming experience sometimes changes the
self-destructive drinking habits of a lifetime, and the hope that
psychedelic drugs can consistently produce such an experience. In
one reported case, a 40-year-old black, unskilled laborer was
brought to a hospital from jail after drinking uncontrollably for
ten days. He had been an alcoholic for four years, and he was
also severely anxious and depressed. He described his experiences
during an LSD session as follows: </p>

<p>I was afraid. I started to run, but something said &quot;Stop!
Stop!&quot; then I felt as if ten tons had fallen from my
shoulders. I prayed to the Lord. Everything looked better all
around me.... I changed my mind from alcohol toward Christ and
the rose came back into my life.... As I sat up and looked in the
mirror I could feel myself growing stronger. I feel now that my
family and I are closer than ever before and I hope that our
faith will grow forever and ever. </p>

<p>One week later his score on a questionnaire testing neurotic
traits had dropped from the 88th to the 10th percentile. Six
months later his psychological tests were within normal limits;
he had been totally abstinent from alcohol for all that time and
despite a temporary relapse when he lost his job, he was still
sober after twelve months .36 LSD undoubtedly produces powerful
effects on alcoholics; the question is whether they can be
reliably translated into enduring change. Early studies reported
dazzling success. About 50 percent of severe chronic alcoholics
treated with a single high dose of LSD were said to be recovered
and sober a year or two later. 37 But the early studies proved to
be inadequate. When the patients were randomly assigned to drug
and control groups it proved difficult to demonstrate any
advantage for LSD treatment, even in studies conducted by
advocates of the drug .38 The problem is that many alcoholics
will improve, at least temporarily, after any treatment because
excessive drinking is often sporadic and periodic relapses are
common. The alcoholic who arrives at a clinic or hospital is
probably at a low point in the cycle and has nowhere to go but
up. </p>

<p>It would be wrong to conclude that a psychedelic experience
can never be a turning point in the life of an alcoholic. As
William James said, &quot;Religiomania is the best cure for
dipsomania.&quot; Unfortunately, psychedelic experiences have the
same limitations as religious conversions. Their authenticity and
emotional power are not guarantees against backsliding when the
old frustrations, constraints, and emotional distress have to be
faced in everyday life. Even when the revelation does seem to
have lasting effects, it might have been merely a symptom of
readiness to change rather than a cause of change. </p>

<p>The fact remains that there is no proven treatment for
alcoholism. </p>

<p>Where so little is known, it may not make sense to give up
entirely on anything that has possibilities. In the religious
ceremonies of the Native American Church, periodic use of high
doses of mescaline in the form of peyote is regarded as, among
other things, part of a treatment for alcoholism. Both the
Indians themselves and outside researchers believe that those who
participate in the peyote ritual are more likely to abstain from
alcohol. Peyote sustains the ritual and religious principles of
the community of believers, and these sometimes confirm and
support an individual commitment to give up alcohol. Even federal
alcoholism clinics for Indians now recognize that peyote might
have some value.&quot; If, for whatever reasons, psychedelic
drugs work for at least some Indians some of the time, they might
also help some non-Indian alcoholics. </p>

<p><b>Dying</b> </p>

<p>There is a new consciousness today of the significance of
dying as part of life. As we look for ways to change the pattern,
so common in chronic illness, of constantly increasing pain,
anxiety, and depression, the emphasis is shifted away from
impersonal prolongation of physical existence toward a conception
of dying as a psychiatric crisis, or even, in older language, a
religious crisis. The purpose of giving psychedelic drugs to the
dying might be stated as reconciliation: reconciliation with
one's past, one's family, and one's human limitations. </p>

<p>Beginning in 1965, the experiment of providing a psychedelic
experience for the dying was pursued at Spring Grove State
Hospital in Maryland and later at the Maryland Psychiatric
Research Institute. Walter Pahnke, the director of the project
from 1967 until 1971, was a Doctor of Divinity as well as a
psychiatrist, and he first reported on his work in an article in
the Harvard Theological Review in 1969. When terminal cancer
patients received LSD or DPT after appropriate preparations,
about one-third were said to have improved
&quot;dramatically,&quot; one-third improved
&quot;moderately,&quot; and one-third were unchanged; the tests
of improvement were reduced tension, depression, pain, and fear
of death.&quot; Later experiments with </p>

<p>terminal cancer patients produced similar results.&quot; There
were no control groups in these studies, and there is no certain
way to separate the effects of the drug from those of the special
therapeutic arrangements and increased attention that were part
of the treatment. Nevertheless, the case histories are
impressive, and it would be interesting to renew the research;
the present work at the Maryland Psychiatric Research Institute
is an attempt to do that. </p>

<p><b>Complications and Dangers</b> </p>

<p>Like any probing psychotherapy, psychedelic drug therapy
presents the danger that unconscious material will come up and be
neither accepted and integrated nor totally repressed; in that
case, symptoms will become worse. Psychosis and even suicide have
been reported in the course of psychedelic drug treatment. On the
other hand, some people who have worked with psychedelic drugs
consider them more likely to prevent suicide than to cause it,
and most studies questioning psychiatrists about adverse
reactions to psychedelic drugs in experimental or therapeutic
research have revealed a low rate of serious complications .42 </p>

<p>All such studies have limitations. Some psychiatrists may have
minimized the dangers out of therapeutic enthusiasm or reluctance
to admit mistakes; some may have exaggerated the dangers under
the influence of bad publicity; long-term risks may have been
underestimated if follow-up was inadequate. The studies provide
no basis for comparison with patients who were not treated with
psychedelic drugs or not treated at all. But the fact remains
that psychedelic drugs were used for more than fifteen years by
hundreds of psychiatrists who considered them reasonably safe as
therapeutic agents. </p>

<p><b>Conclusion</b> </p>

<p>When a new kind of therapy is introduced, especially a new
psychoactive drug, events often follow a pattern of spectacular
success and enormous enthusiasm followed by disillusionment. But
the rise and decline of psychedelic drug therapy took a somewhat
unusual course. From the early 1960s on, the revolutionary
proclamations and religious fervor of the nonmedical advocates of
psychedelic drugs began to evoke hostile incredulity rather than
simply the natural skeptical response to extravagant claims
backed mainly by intense subjective experiences. Twenty years
after their introduction, psychedelics were pariah drugs, scorned
by the medical establishment and banned by the law. In rejecting
the absurd notion that these drugs were a panacea, we have chosen
to treat them as entirely worthless and extraordinarily
dangerous. Maybe the time has come to find an intermediate
position. If the therapeutic results have been erratic and
inconsistent, that is partly because of the complexity of
psychedelic drug effects. For the same reason, we may simply not
yet have had enough time to sort out the best uses of these
drugs. </p>

<p>An informal kind of research continues anyway. Illicit
psychedelic drug use is an underground spring that continues to
feed the stream of interest in systematic, publicly controlled
experimentation. Ironically, the illicit drug use that was one of
the reasons for the interruption of legitimate research now
serves to keep alive efforts aimed at resuming that research.
Interest also persists among some psychologists and
psychiatrists. We quote a letter written in 1979 by Hanscarl
Leuner of the University of Gottingen: </p>

<p>Though in several European countries therapists in this field
could apply for licenses to continue using the drugs, the
government authorities over the years started to make things
difficult.... I myself was convinced that science does not depend
on ideologies. This seems to be an error. The continuation of
psycholytic therapy during the last years led us to new
techniques and conceptions. The results in practical therapy are
even more convincing than before. We would like not to stop doing
psycholytic therapy. Optimistically, I hope that in time we can
publish these results. For so many patients there is a tremendous
need for deep probing and intensity in psychotherapy which
psycholytic and related therapies could fill.&quot; </p>

<p>There are now dozens of known psychedelic drugs, some of them
synthesized only in the last twenty years. Few have been tested
seriously in human beings. Their effects are sometimes different
from those of LSD and other familiar substances. These
differences may be significant for the study of the human mind
and for psychotherapy, but we cannot analyze them properly
without more controlled human research. A Chilean psychiatrist,
Claudio Naranjo, has pioneered in the use of psychedelic drugs
that do not produce the same degree of perceptual and emotional
change as does LSD. He has worked especially with MDA and a
related shorter-acting amphetamine, MMDA, which give a heightened
capacity for introspection and intimacy along with a temporary
freedom from anxiety and depression.44 These and related drugs
might be useful in marital counseling, in diagnostic interviews,
and in helping patients decide whether they want to go through
the process of psychotherapy. 45 </p>

<p>It is a misunderstanding to regard psychedelic drug therapy as
a form of chemotherapy, like giving lithium to manic patients.
Patients are not maintained for a long time on psychedelic drugs,
and these drugs do not produce dependence or addiction. On the
other hand, the claims of psychedelic drug therapy are subject to
the same doubts as those of psychoanalysis or religious
conversions. The mixture of mystical and transcendental claims
with therapeutic ones is an aspect of psychedelic drug therapy
troubling to our culture. The pronouncements of drug enthusiasts
are sometimes too much like religious testimonials to please
either psychiatrists or priests and ministers. Preindustrial
cultures seem to tolerate more ambiguity in this matter, and
there is now a growing interest in the ideas and techniques
shared by primitive shamans, Eastern spiritual teachers, and
modern psychiatrists. The word &quot;cure,&quot; after all, means
both treatment for disease and the care of souls. </p>

<p>The role of the guide on a psychedelic drug trip, which has
both religious and medical aspects, is spontaneously reproduced
in all cultures where psychedelic drugs come to be used. Much of
the controversy about psychedelic drugs in the 1960s was in
effect concerned with the question of who was qualified to be a
guide. For the moment we have made the curious decision that no
one in modern industrial society is qualified for this position.
Nevertheless, psychedelic drug therapy apparently still goes on
underground, in one form or another. Many have regarded it as an
experience worth having, some as a first step toward change, and
a few as a turning point in their lives. They might be deceiving
themselves, but we do not know enough to be certain; the field
has potentialities that are not being allowed to reveal
themselves. </p>

<p><b>A Note on Legal Status</b> </p>

<p>The publicly familiar psychedelic drugs are classified in
Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act; they are regarded as
having a high potential for abuse, no current medical use, and a
lack of safety for use under medical supervision. They are
available for medical experimentation as investigational drugs,
but present research is confined almost entirely to animals. A
number of psychedelic drugs that were recently synthesized or
that have never been available in any quantity on the illicit
market are not scheduled. It is legal for physicians to work
clinically with these substances, although experimental research
in human beings is not permissible until animal tests have been
done. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>CANNABIS</b> </p>

<p>Marijuana is derived from the hemp plant (Cannabis sativa).
Its most important psychoactive chemical,
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-l-tetrahydrocannabinol in
another nomenclature), is contained in a resin that covers the
flower clusters and top leaves of the plant; the resin also
contains many chemically related substances with lesser effects.
Cannabis preparations vary widely in quality and potency
depending on the type of plant, climate, soil, and methods of
cultivation and manufacture. The resin can be ingested in the
form of a drink or in foods, but usually the leaves and flowering
tops are smoked, either in a pipe or in a cigarette called a
joint. </p>

<p><b>History</b> </p>

<p>Like cocaine and other psychoactive drugs derived from natural
plant sources, marijuana has been used for thousands of years as
a medicine as well as an intoxicant. It was listed in an herbal
published by a Chinese emperor that may go back to 2800 B.C. In
Jamaica, where it was introduced in the seventeenth century by
African slaves, it has become the most popular folk medicine.
Cannabis in the form of an alcoholic tincture was commonly used
in nineteenth-century Europe and the United States as an
anticonvulsant, sedative, and analgesic, and also in tetanus,
neuralgia, uterine hemorrhage, rheumatism, and other conditions.
It was thought to be a milder but less dangerous sedative than
opium, and it was also considered an appetite stimulant. Between
1839 and 1900 more than a hundred articles appeared in scientific
journals on the therapeutic uses of marijuana. After the
introduction of injectable opiates in the 1850s and synthetic
analgesics and hypnotics in the early twentieth century, the
medical use of cannabis declined. But even as late as 1937,
extract of cannabis was still a legitimate medicine marketed by
drug companies. The Marijuana Tax Act of 1937 imposed a
registration tax and record keeping requirements that made
medical use of cannabis so cumbersome that it was dropped from
the U.S. Pharmacopoeia and National Formulary. </p>

<p>The Marijuana Tax Act was introduced under the influence of a
growing concern about the use of marijuana as an intoxicant,
especially among blacks and Mexican-Americans in the South and
Southwest. The law passed after a strong campaign by the Federal
Bureau of Narcotics, despite a lack of empirical evidence on the
harmfulness of marijuana. The legislative counsel for the
American Medical Association at the time objected to the law,
saying that future investigations might show substantial medical
uses for cannabis. But the American Medical Association soon
changed its stance and for the next thirty years maintained a
position on marijuana very similar to that of the Federal Bureau
of Narcotics. Recent years have seen some relaxation of legal
restrictions and increasing clarification of the medical
potential of cannabis and cannabis derivatives, but considerable
obstacles remain and considerable research still has to be done. </p>

<p><b>Safety</b> </p>

<p>The greatest advantage of cannabis as a medicine is its
unusual safety. The ratio of lethal dose to effective dose is
estimated on the basis of extrapolation from animal data to be
about 20,000 to one. Huge doses have been given to dogs without
causing death, and there is no reliable evidence of death caused
by cannabis in a human being. Cannabis also has the advantage of
not disturbing any physiological functions or damaging any body
organs when it is used in therapeutic doses. It produces little
physical dependence or tolerance; there has never been any
evidence that medical use of cannabis has led to habitual use as
an intoxicant. </p>

<p>Whole cannabis preparations have the disadvantages of
instability, varying strength, and insolubility in water, which
makes it difficult for the drug to enter the bloodstream from the
digestive tract. Another problem is that marijuana contains so
many ingredients with possible disadvantageous effects, including
too high a degree of intoxication. This multitude of ingredients
is also an opportunity, since it suggests the manufacture of
different cannabinoids, synthetic or natural, with properties
useful for particular purposes; some of these have now become
available.&quot; </p>

<p><b>Depression and Pain Relief</b> </p>

<p>Cannabis and synthetic cannabis derivatives have been tested
as treatments for depression, so far without good evidence of
effectiveness .47 It might be possible to develop synthetic
cannabis preparations with a higher euphoriant-to-sedative ratio
than the drugs that have been tested so far. </p>

<p>There are many anecdotal reports of marijuana smokers using
the drug to reduce pain: postsurgery pain, headache, migraine,
menstrual cramps, and so on. The disadvantage is its inconsistent
effect; sometimes it actually heightens sensitivity to pain. It
is possible that cannabis acts by mechanisms different from those
of other analgesics, but the literature does not indicate a
specific effect of cannabis on pain pathways or suggest that it
is likely to be more effective than other analgesics. Again, some
new synthetic derivative might prove useful as an analgesic, but
this is not an immediate prospect. </p>

<p><b>Alcohol Dependence</b> </p>

<p>Because of reports that some people use less alcohol when they
smoke marijuana, cannabis has been proposed as an adjunct to
alcoholism treatment. But so far it has not been found useful .48
Most alcoholics neither want to substitute marijuana nor find it
particularly useful. But there might be some hope for use of
marijuana in combination with disulfiram (Antabuse), which
protects alcoholics by producing uncomfortable symptoms when they
drink.&quot; Certainly a cannabis habit would be preferable to an
alcohol habit for anyone who could not avoid dependence on a drug
but was able to substitute one drug for another. </p>

<p><b>Spasticity and Seizures</b> </p>

<p>About 20 percent of epileptics do not get much relief from
conventional anticonvulsant medications. Cannabis has been
explored as an alternative, at least since a case was reported in
which marijuana smoking, together with the standard
anticonvulsants phenobarbital and diphenylhydantoin, was
apparently necessary to control seizures in a young epileptic
man.50 Marijuana also reduces muscle spasm and tremors in some
people who suffer from cerebral palsy or multiple
sclerosis.&quot; But the effects of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(hereafter called THC itself are inconsistent; it can actually
heighten susceptibility to some types of seizures. The cannabis
derivative that is most promising as an anticonvulsant is
cannabidiol. In one controlled study, cannabidiol in addition to
prescribed anticonvulsants produced improvement in seven patients
with grand mal seizures; three showed great improvement. Of eight
patients who received a placebo instead, only one improved. 52 </p>

<p><b>Asthma</b> </p>

<p>Asthma is a breathing disorder that arises when bronchial
muscles go into spasm and the pathway to the lungs is blocked by
mucus and swelling. A number of antiasthmatic drugs are
available, but they all have drawbacks-limited effectiveness or
side effects. Because marijuana dilates the bronchi and reverses
bronchial spasm, cannabis derivatives have been tested as
antiasthmatic drugs. Smoking marijuana would probably not be a
good way to treat asthma because of chronic irritation of the
bronchial tract by tars and other substances in marijuana smoke,
so recent research has sought a better means of administration.
THC in the form of an aerosol spray has been investigated
extensively.&quot; Other cannabinoids such as cannabinol and
cannabidiol may be preferable to THC for this purpose. An
interesting finding for future research is that cannabinoids may
affect the bronchi by a different mechanism from that of the
familiar antiasthmatic drugs. </p>

<p><b>Glaucoma</b> </p>

<p>A promising new medical use for cannabis is in treating
glaucoma, the second leading cause of blindness in the United
States. In this disease, fluid pressure within the eyeball
increases until it damages the optic nerve. About a million
Americans suffer from the form of glaucoma (wide angle) treatable
with cannabis. Marijuana causes a dose-related, clinically
significant drop in intraocular pressure that lasts several hours
in both normal subjects and those with the abnormally high ocular
tension produced by glaucoma. Oral or intravenous THC has the
same effect, which seems to be specific to cannabis derivatives
rather than simply a result of sedation. Cannabis does not cure
the disease, but it can retard the progressive loss of sight when
conventional medication fails and surgery is too dangerous. </p>

<p>It remains to be seen whether topical use of THC or a
synthetic cannabinoid in the form of eyedrops will be preferable
to smoking marijuana for this purpose. So far THC eyedrops have
not proved effective, and in 1981 the National Eye Institute
announced that it would no longer approve human research using
these eyedrops.55 Studies continue on certain synthetic cannabis
derivatives and other natural cannabinoids. Smoking marijuana is
a better way of titrating the dose than taking an oral
cannabinoid, and most patients seem to prefer it. Unfortunately,
many patients, especially elderly ones, dislike the psychoactive
effects of marijuana. </p>

<p><b>Cancer Treatment</b> </p>

<p>Cannabis derivatives have several minor or speculative uses in
the treatment of cancer, and one major use. As appetite
stimulants, marijuana and THC may help to slow weight loss in
cancer patients.&quot; THC has also retarded the growth of tumor
cells in some animal studies, but results are inconclusive, and
another cannabis derivative, cannabadiol, seems to increase tumor
growth.&quot; Possibly cannabinoids in combination with other
drugs will turn out to have some use in preventing tumor growth. </p>

<p>But the most promising use of cannabis in cancer treatment is
the prevention of nausea and vomiting in patients undergoing
chemotherapy. About half of patients treated with anticancer
drugs suffer from severe nausea and vomiting. In about 30 percent
to 40 percent of these, the commonly used antiemetics do not
work.&quot; The nausea and vomiting are not only unpleasant but a
threat to the effectiveness of the therapy. Retching can cause
tears of the esophagus and rib fractures, prevent adequate
nutrition, and lead to fluid loss. </p>

<p>The antiemetics most commonly used in chemotherapy are
phenothiazines like prochlorperazine (Compazine). The suggestion
that cannabis might be useful arose in the early 1970s when some
young patients receiving cancer chemotherapy found that marijuana
smoking, which was of course illegal, reduced their nausea and
vomiting. In some studies, oral THC has proved effective where
the standard drugs were not.59 In other studies the two types of
drugs seemed to be equally effective.60 In one study nabilone, a
synthetic cannabinoid, was found more effective than a
phenothiazine.61 But nabilone tests have been discontinued
because of animal deaths and adverse reactions in human beings. </p>

<p>It is generally agreed that THC is a good antiemetic, but as
in the case of glaucoma, many patients reject it because they
find the psychoactive effects unpleasant. There is some
controversy about whether THC is best taken orally or smoked in
the form of marijuana. Marijuana is related to THC in much the
same way that coca is related to cocaine; it contains a variety
of chemicals instead of one and enters the body by a different
route. Smoking generates quicker and more predictable results in
both glaucoma and cancer treatment, because it raises THC
concentration in the blood more easily to the needed level. Also,
it may be hard for a nauseated patient in chemotherapy to take
oral medicine. But many patients dislike smoking or cannot
inhale. </p>

<p><b>Conclusion</b> </p>

<p>A committee of the Institute of Medicine of the National
Academy of Sciences remarked in a report in 1982: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Cannabis shows promise in some of these areas, although
    the dose necessary to produce the desired effect is often
    close to one that produces an unacceptable frequency of toxic
    [undesirable] side effects. What is perhaps more encouraging
    ... is that cannabis seems to exert its beneficial effects
    through mechanisms that differ from those of other available
    drugs. This raises the possibility that some patients who
    would not be helped by conventional therapies could be
    treated with cannabis.... It may be possible to reduce side
    effects by synthesizing related molecules that could have a
    more favorable ratio of desired to undesired actions; this
    line of investigation should have a high priority. 62 </p>
</blockquote>

<p><a name="last">The committee recommended further research,
especially in the treatment of nausea and vomiting in
chemotherapy, asthma, glaucoma, and seizures and spasticity.</a> </p>

<p>Under federal and most state statutes, marijuana is listed as
a Schedule I drug: high potential for abuse, no currently
accepted medical use, and a lack of accepted safety for use under
medical supervision. It cannot ordinarily be prescribed and may
be used only under research conditions. </p>

<p>But public pressure has begun to change the situation. Several
individuals have successfully argued the rare defense of medical
necessity in response to criminal charges of marijuana
possession; in one case glaucoma was involved and in another
multiple sclerosis. Now the National Cancer Institute, the Drug
Enforcement Agency, and the Food and Drug Administration have
agreed to a program whereby the National Cancer Institute is
making THC available through the pharmacies of about five hundred
teaching hospitals and cancer centers to physicians who want to
use it for chemotherapy. The legislatures of twenty-three states
have also authorized special research programs that supply
cannabis for the management of nausea and vomiting in
chemotherapy. In effect these programs provide means for the
seriously ill to gain legal access to marijuana. Physicians
acting on their own can apply for permission to use marijuana,
but the regulations are so complicated that physicians who want
help for one or two patients may advise them to get the marijuana
on the streets instead. State programs, in effect, assume
responsibility for completing the paperwork required by the
federal government and relieve the physician of this burden. The
states make use of confiscated marijuana or marijuana cigarettes
or THC pills supplied by the federal government. </p>

<p>The Food and Drug Administration does not approve of efforts
to publicize therapies that have not gone through the standard
legal process of new drug testing. Advocates of medical marijuana
use want to circumvent not only the Controlled Substances Act but
also the Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act of 1938 and its amendments
that establish procedures for testing and marketing new drugs.
The FDA says that marijuana will never be an approved medicine
because it contains so many chemicals and its composition is so
variable. The requirement of a -standardized dose alone may
prevent the marketing of marijuana in the ordinary way as
medicine. This obstacle does not stand in the way of THC in pill
form. A special form of THC in a gelatin capsule with sesame seed
oil has recently been transferred to Schedule II under the
Controlled Substances Act, and hearings are being held to
determine whether THC in other forms should also be placed in
Schedule II. </p>

<p>The potential of cannabis as a medicine is yet to be realized,
partly because of its reputation as an intoxicant, ignorance on
the part of the medical establishment, and legal difficulties
involved in doing the research. Recreational use of cannabis has
affected the opinions of physicians about its medical potential
in various ways. When marijuana was regarded as the drug of
blacks, Mexican-Americans, and bohemians, doctors were ready to
go along with the Bureau of Narcotics, ignore its medical uses,
and urge prohibition. For years the National Organization for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML) and other groups have been
petitioning the government to change this classification.
Although that has not happened, cannabis derivatives have become
more available for medical purposes through various devices. Now
that marijuana has become so popular among a broad section of the
population, we have been more willing to investigate its
therapeutic value. Recreational use now spurs medical interest
instead of medical hostility. </p>

<p>The struggle over medical marijuana use illustrates some of
the issues discussed earlier: self-medication versus government
control, pure chemicals versus natural drugs, the historical
direction of drug policy and the present minor challenges to it,
the need to find a better balance in making rules about drugs.
The potential dangers of marijuana when taken for pleasure and
its possible usefulness as a medicine are historically and
practically interrelated issues: historically, because the
arguments used to justify public and official disapproval of
recreational use have had a strong influence on opinions about
its medical potential; practically, because the more evidence
accumulates that marijuana is relatively safe even when used as
an intoxicant, the clearer it becomes that the medical
requirement of safety is satisfied. Most recent research is
tentative, and initial enthusiasm for drugs is often disappointed
after further investigation. But it is not as though cannabis
were an entirely new agent with unknown properties. Studies done
during the past ten years have confirmed a centuries-old promise.
With the relaxation of restrictions on research and the further
chemical manipulation of cannabis derivatives, this promise will
eventually be realized. The weight of past and contemporary
evidence will probably prove cannabis to be valuable in several
ways as a medicine. </p>

<hr>

<h2>Footnotes and References</h2>

<p>1. Mickey C. Smith and David Knapp, Pharmacy, Drugs, and
Medical Care (Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1972), p. 161. </p>

<p>2. Horacio Fabrega and Peter K. Manning, &quot;Health
Maintenance Among Peruvian Peasants,&quot; Human Organization 31
(1973): 243-56. </p>

<p>3. Andrew Weil, &quot;The Therapeutic Value of Coca in
Contemporary Medicine,&quot; Journal of Ethnopharmacology 3
(1981): 367-76. </p>

<p>4. Carlos Gutierrez-Noriega, &quot;El Cocaismo y la
Alimentacion en el Peru,&quot; Anales de la Facultad de Medicina
31 (1948): 1-90; J. C. Negrete, &quot;Psychological Deficit in
Chewers of Coca Leaf,&quot; Bulletin on Narcotics 19, no. 4
(1967): 11-13; H. B. M. Murphy, 0. Rios, and J. C. Negrete,
&quot;The Effects of Abstinence and Retraining on the Chewer of
Coca Leaf,&quot; Bulletin on Narcotics 21, no. 2 (1969): 41-47;
Alfred A. Buck et al., &quot;Coca chewing and Health: An
Epidemiological Study Among Residents of a Peruvian
Village,&quot; American Journal of Epidemiology 88 (1968):
159-77. </p>

<p>5. Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalar, Cocaine: A Drug and
Its Social Evolution (New York: Basic Books, 1976), pp. 120-29;
Andrew T. Weil, &quot;Coca and Brain Damage,&quot; April 1978
(unpublished). </p>

<p>6. Weil, &quot;Therapeutic Value of Coca,&quot; p. 374. </p>

<p>7. Angelo Mariani, Coca and Its Therapeutic Applications (New
York: Jaros, 1890). </p>

<p>8. Sigmund Freud, &quot;On Coca,&quot; in Robert Byck, ed.,
The Cocaine Papers (New York: Stonehill, 1974), pp. 49-73. </p>

<p>9. Parke Davis and Company, &quot;Coca Erythroxylon and Its
Derivatives,&quot; in Byck, Cocaine Papers, p. 144. </p>

<p>10. W. Golden Mortimer, History of Coca (New York: Vail,
1901), pp. 491-509. 1 1. Sigmund Freud, &quot;Craving For and
Fear Of Cocaine,&quot; in Byck, Cocaine Papers, pp. 171-76. </p>

<p>12. Grinspoon and Bakalar, Cocaine, pp. 161-63; Nicholas L.
Schenk, &quot;Local Anesthesia in Otolaryngology: A
Reevaluation,&quot; Annals of Otology, Rhinology and Laryngology
84 (1979):65-72. </p>

<p>13. Felix Barre, &quot;Cocaine as an Abortive Agent in Cluster
Headache,&quot; Headache 22 (1982): 69-73. </p>

<p>14. R. G. Twycross, &quot;Value of Cocaine in
Opiate-containing Elixirs,&quot; British Medical Journal 2
(1977): 1348. </p>

<p>15. W. R. Bett, &quot;Benzedrine Sulfate in Clinical Medicine:
A Survey of the Literature,&quot; Postgraduate Medical Journal 22
(1946): 205-18. </p>

<p>16. See Lester Grinspoon and Peter Hedblom, The Speed Culture:
Amphetamine Use and Abuse in America (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1975), pp. 19-20. </p>

<p>17. D. Adlersberg and M. E. Mayer, &quot;Results of Prolonged
Medical Treatment of Obesity with Diet Alone, Diet and Thyroid
Preparations, and Diet and Amphetamine,&quot; Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology 9 (1949): 275-84. </p>

<p>18. C. D. Leake, The Amphetamines: Their Actions and Uses
(Springfield, Ill.: Thomas, 1958), pp. 67-69. </p>

<p>19. E. H. Hare, J. Dominian, and L. Sharpe, &quot;Phenelzine
and Dexamphetamine in Depressive Illness: A Comparative
Trial,&quot; British Medical Journal (1962): 9-12; J. E. Overall
et al., &quot;Drug Therapy in Depressions: Controlled Evaluation
of Imipramine, Isocarboxazine, Dextroamphetamine-Amobarbital, and
Placebo,&quot; Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 3 (1962):
16-21. </p>

<p>20. Eric J. Drimmer, Michael J. Gitlin, and Harry E.
Gwirtsman, &quot;Desipramine and Methylpheniclate Combination
Treatment for Depression: Case Report,&quot; American Journal of
Psychiatry 140 (1983): 241-42; R. N. Wharton, et al., &quot;A
Potential Clinical Use for Methy1phenidate with Tricyclic
Antidepressants,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry 127 (1971):
161925. </p>

<p>21. M. W. Kaufmann et al., &quot;The Use of Methylphenidate in
Depressed Patients After Cardiac Surgery,&quot; Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry 45 (1984): 82-84; Wayne Katon and Murray
Raskind, &quot;Treatment of Depression in the Medically III
Elderly with Methylphenidate,&quot; American Journal of
Psychiatry 137 (1980): 963-65. </p>

<p>22. W. H. Forest et al., &quot;Dextroamphetamine with Morphine
for the Treatment of Postoperative Pain,&quot; New England
Journal of Medicine 296 (1977): 712-15. </p>

<p>23. Thomas R. Insel et al., &quot;Amphetamine in
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder,&quot; Psychopharmacology 80
(1983): 231-35. </p>

<p>24. Charles Bradley, &quot;The Behavior of Children Receiving
Benzedrine,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry 94 (1937):
577-85. </p>

<p>25. C. K. Conners et al., &quot;Dextroamphetamine Sulfate in
Children with Learning Dis- </p>

<p>orders: Effects on Perception, Learning, and
Achievement,&quot; Archives of General Psychiatry </p>

<p>21 (1969): 182-90; Gabrielle Weiss et al., &quot;Studies on
the Hyperactive Child: V. The Effects of Dextroamphetamine and
Chlorpromazine on Behavior and Intellectual Functioning,&quot;
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 9 (1968): 148-53. </p>

<p>26. Peggy T. Ackerman et al., &quot;Methylphenidate Effects on
Cognitive Style and Reaction Time in Four Groups of
Children,&quot; Psychiatry Research 7 (1982): 199-213; Roscoe A.
Dykman, Peggy T. Ackerman, and David S. McCray, &quot;Effects of
Methylpheniclate on Selective and Sustained Attention in
Hyperactive, Reading-Disabled, and Presumably
Attention-Disordered Boys,&quot; Journal of Nervous and Mental
Disease 168 (1980): 745-52. </p>

<p>27. J. L. Rapaport et al., &quot;Dextroamphetamine: Cognitive
and Behavioral Effects in Normal Prepubescent Boys,&quot; Science
199 (1978): 560-63. </p>

<p>28. C. K. Conners, &quot;Controlled Trial of Methylpheniclate
in Preschool Children with Minimal Brain Dysfunction,&quot;
International Journal of Mental Health 4 (1975): 61-74; Rachel
Gittelman, &quot;Indications for the Use of Stimulant Treatment
in Learning Disorders,&quot; Journal of the American Academy of
Child Psychiatry 19 (1980): 623-36. </p>

<p>29. Linda Charles and Richard Schain, &quot;A Four-Year
Follow-Up Study of the Effects of Methylpheniclate on the
Behavior and Academic Achievement of Hyperactive Children,&quot;
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology 9 (1981): 495-505. </p>

<p>30. Charles Bradley, &quot;Benzedrine and Dexedrine in the
Treatment of Children's Behavior Disorders,&quot; Pediatrics 5
(1950): 24-36. </p>

<p>31. R. H. Mattson and J. R. Calverly, &quot;Dextroamphetamine
Sulfate-Induced Dyskinesias,&quot; Journal of the American
Medical Association 2O4(1968): 400-2; P. G. Ney, &quot;Psychosis
in a Child Associated with Amphetamine Administration,&quot;
Canadian Medical Association Journal 97 (1967): 1026-29. </p>

<p>32. Jeffrey A. Mattes and Rachel Gittelman, &quot;Growth of
Hyperactive Children on Maintenance Regimen of
Methylphenidate,&quot; Archives of General Psychiatry 40 (1983):
317-21. </p>

<p>33. Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalar, Psychedelic Drugs
Reconsidered (New York: Basic Books, 1979), pp. 163-66, 168-71. </p>

<p>34. Norman 1. Dishotsky et al., &quot;LSD and Genetic
Damage,&quot; Science 172 (1971): 43140; Sally Y. Long,
&quot;Does LSD Induce Chromosomal Damage and Malformations? A
Review of the Literature,&quot; Teratology 6 (1972): 75-90. </p>

<p>35. Constance A. Newland, My Self and I (New York: New
American Library, 1962), pp. 20-47. </p>

<p>36. Albert A. Kurland, &quot;The Therapeutic Potential of LSD
in Medicine,&quot; in R. DeBold and R. Leaf, eds., LSD, Man, and
Society (Middletown, Corm.: Wesleyan University Press, 1967), pp.
20-35. </p>

<p>37. Abram Hoffer, &quot;A Program for the Treatment of
Alcoholism: LSD, Malvaria, and Nicotinic Acid,&quot; in Harold A.
Abramson, ed., The Use of LSD in Psychotherapy and Alcoholism
(New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1967), pp. 353-402. </p>

<p>38. Reginald G. Smart et at., &quot;A Controlled Study of
Lysergicle in the Treatment of Alcoholism,&quot; Quarterly
Journal of Studies on Alcohol 27 (1966): 469-82; Frances E. Cheek
et al., &quot;Observations Regarding the Use of LSD-25 in the
Treatment of Alcoholism,&quot; Journal of Psychopharmacology 1,
no. 1 (1966): 56-74. </p>

<p>39. Bernard J. Albaugh and Philip 0. Anderson, &quot;Peyote in
the Treatment of Alcoholism Among American Indians,&quot;
American Journal of Psychiatry 131 (1974): 1247-51. </p>

<p>40. Walter N. Pahnke, &quot;The Psychedelic Mystical
Experience in the Human Encounter with Death,&quot; Harvard
Theological Review 62 (1969): 1-21. </p>

<p>41. Stanislav Grof et al., &quot;LSD-Assisted Psychotherapy in
Patients with Terminal Cancer,&quot; International
Pharmacopsychiatry 8 (1973): 129-41. </p>

<p>42. Walter Houston Clark and G. Ray Funkhouser,
&quot;Physicians and Researchers Disagree on Psychedelic
Drugs,&quot; Psychology Today 3, no. 11: 48-50, 70-73; Sidney
Cohen, &quot;Lysergic Acid Diethylamide: Side Effects and
Complications,&quot; Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 130
(1960): 30-40; Nicholas Malleson, &quot;Acute Adverse Reactions
to LSD in Clinical and Experimental Use in the United
Kingdom,&quot; British Journal of Psychiatry 188 (1971): 229-30. </p>

<p>43. Personal communication, 1979. </p>

<p>44. Claudio Naranjo, The Healing Journey (New York:
Ballantine, 1975). </p>

<p>45. George Greer, &quot;MDMA: A New Psychotropic Compound and
Its Effects in Humans,&quot; 1983 (unpublished). </p>

<p>46. R. Mechoulam and E. A. Carlini, &quot;Toward Drugs Derived
from Cannabis,&quot; Naturwissenschaften 65 (1978): 174-79. </p>

<p>47. J. Kotin, R. M. Post, and F. K. Goodwin,
&quot;Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Depressed Patients,&quot;
Archives of General Psychiatry 28 (1973): 345-48. </p>

<p>48. C. M. Rosenberg, J. R. Gerrein, and C. Schnell,
&quot;Cannabis in the Treatment of Alcoholism,&quot; Journal of
Studies on Alcohol 39 (1978): 155-58. </p>

<p>49. C. M. Rosenberg, &quot;The Use of Marihuana in the
Treatment of Alcoholism,&quot; in S. Cohen and R. C. Stillman,
eds. The Therapeutic Potential of Marihuana (New York andLondon:
Plenum, 1976). </p>

<p>50. Paul F. Consroe, George C. Wood, and Harvey Buchsbaum,
&quot;Anticonvulsant Natureof Marihuana Smoking,&quot; Journal of
the American Medical Association 234 (1975): 306-7. </p>

<p>51. D. J. Petro, &quot;Marihuana as a Therapeutic Agent for
Muscle Spasm or Spasticity,&quot; Psychosomatics 21 (1980):
81-85. </p>

<p>52. J. M. Cunha et al., &quot;Chronic Administration of
Cannabidiol to Healthy Volunteers and Epileptic Patients,&quot;
Pharmacology 21 (1980): 175-85. </p>

<p>53. D. P. Tashkin et at., &quot;Effects of Smoked Marijuana in
Experimentally Induced Asthma,&quot; American Review of
Respiratory Diseases 112 (1975): 377-86; D. B. Tashkin et at.,
&quot;Bronchial Effects of Aerosolized
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Healthy and Asthmatic
Subjects,&quot; American Review of Respiratory Diseases 115
(1977): 57-65. </p>

<p>54. R. S. Hepler, I. M. Frank, and R. Petrus, &quot;Ocular
Effects of Marihuana Smoking,&quot; in M. C. Braude and S. Szara,
eds., Pharmacology of Marihuana (New York: Raven Press, 1976). </p>

<p>55. Roger A. Roffman, Marihuana as Medicine (Seattle: Madrona,
1982), P. 99. </p>

<p>56. W. Regelson et al., &quot;Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol as
an Effective Antidepressant and Appetite-Stimulating Agent in
Advanced Cancer Patients,&quot; in Braude and Szara, eds.,
Pharmacology of Marihuana, pp. 763-76. </p>

<p>57. A. C. White et al., &quot;Effects of
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Lewis Lung Adenocarcinoma Cells
in Tissue Culture,&quot; Journal of the National Cancer Institute
56 (1976): 65558. </p>

<p>58. Roffman, Marijuana as Medicine, pp. 82-83. </p>

<p>59. V. S. Lucas and J. Laszlo,
&quot;Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol for Refractory Vomiting
Induced by Cancer Chemotherapy,&quot; Journal of the American
Medical Association 243 (1980): 1241-43; S. E. Sallan, N. E.
Zinberg, and E. Frei, &quot;Antiemetic Effect of
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in Patients Receiving Cancer
Chemotherapy,&quot; New England Journal of Medicine 293 (1975):
795-97. 60. S. Frytak et al., &quot;Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
as an Antiemetic for Patients Receiving Cancer Chemotherapy: A
Comparison with Prochlorperazine and a Placebo,&quot; Annals of
Internal Medicine 91 (1979): 825-30. </p>

<p>61. T. S. Herman et al., &quot;Superiority of Nabilone Over
Prochlorperazine as an Antiemetic in Patients Receiving Cancer
Chemotherapy,&quot; New England Journal of Medicine 300 (1979):
1295-97. </p>

<p>62. Institute of Medicine, Marijuana and Health (Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press, 1982), p. 139.<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>