
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B05-58</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA044-000801-B012-126</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://samsara.law.cwru.edu:80/aeca.html 129.22.184.108 19970118133302 text/html 15964
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 18 Jan 1997 13:36:52 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 15792
Last-modified: Tue, 16 Jul 1996 20:08:47 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<title>Arms Export Control Act</title>
</HEAD>
<BODY>

<h1>                TITLE 22.  FOREIGN RELATIONS AND INTERCOURSE   </h1>
<h2>                      CHAPTER 39.  ARMS EXPORT CONTROL   </h2>
<h3>                            MILITARY EXPORT CONTROLS</h3>

<h4>                             22 USCS &#167; 2778 (1994)</h4>

<P> &#167; 2778.  Control of arms exports and imports

<P>
    (a) Presidential control of exports and imports of defense
articles and services, guidance of policy, etc.; designation of United
States Munitions List; issuance of export licenses; condition for
export; negotiations information.

<P>
   (1) In furtherance of world peace and the security and foreign
policy of the United States, the President is authorized to control
the import and the export of defense articles and defense services and
to provide foreign policy guidance to persons of the United States
involved in the export and import of such articles and services. The
President is authorized to designate those items which shall be
considered as defense articles and defense services for the purposes
of this section and to promulgate regulations for the import and
export of such articles and services. The items so designated shall
constitute the United States Munitions List.

<P>
   (2) Decisions on issuing export licenses under this section shall
be made in coordination with the Director of the United States Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency, taking into account the Director's
assessment as to whether the export of an article would contribute to
an arms race, aid in the development of weapons of mass destruction,
support international terrorism, increase the possibility of outbreak
or escalation of conflict, or prejudice the development of bilateral
or multilateral arms control or nonproliferation agreements or other
arrangements. The Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
is authorized, whenever the Director determines that the issuance of
an export license under this section would be detrimental to the
national security of the United States, to recommend to the President
that such export license be disapproved.

<P>
   (3) In exercising the authorities conferred by this section, the
President may require that any defense article or defense service be
sold under this Act as a condition of its eligibility for export, and
may require that persons engaged in the negotiation for the export of
defense articles and services keep the President fully and currently
informed of the progress and future prospects of such negotiations.

<P>
   (b) Registration and licensing requirements for manufacturers,
exporters, or importers of designated defense articles and defense
services; exceptions.

<P>
   (1) (A) As prescribed in regulations issued under this section,
every person (other than an officer or employee of the United States
Government acting in an official capacity) who engages in the business
of manufacturing, exporting, or importing any defense articles or
defense services designated by the President
under subsection (a)(1) shall register with the United States
Government agency charged with the administration of this section, and
shall pay a registration fee which shall be prescribed by such
regulations. Such regulations shall prohibit the return to the United
States for sale in the United States (other than for the Armed Forces
of the United States and its allies or for any State or local law
enforcement agency) of any military firearms or ammunition of United
States manufacture furnished to foreign governments by the United
States under this Act or any other foreign assistance or sales program
of the United States, whether or not enhanced in value or improved in
condition in a foreign country. This prohibition shall not extend to
similar firearms that have been so substantially transformed as to
become, in effect, articles of foreign manufacture.

<P>
   (B) The prohibition under such regulations required by the second
sentence of subparagraph (A) shall not extend to any military firearms
(or ammunition, components, parts, accessories, and attachments for
such firearms) of United States manufacture furnished to any foreign
government by the United States under this Act or any other foreign
assistance or sales program of the United States if--

<P>
   (i) such firearms are among those firearms that the Secretary of
the Treasury is, or was at any time, required to authorize the
importation of by reason of the provisions of section 925(e) of title
18, United States Code (including the requirement for the listing of
such firearms as curios or relics under section 921(a)(13) of that
title); and

<P>
   (ii) such foreign government certifies to the United States
Government that such firearms are owned by such foreign government.

<P>
   [(C)] (B) A copy of each registration made under this paragraph
shall be transmitted to the Secretary of the Treasury for review
regarding law enforcement concerns. The Secretary shall report to the
President regarding such concerns as necessary.

<P>
   (2) Except as otherwise specifically provided in regulations issued
under subsection (a)(1), no defense articles or defense services
designated by the President under subsection (a)(1) may be exported or
imported without a license for such export or import, issued in
accordance with this Act and regulations issued under this Act, except
that no license shall be required for exports or imports made by or
for an agency of the United States Government (A) for official use by
a department or agency of the United States Government, or (B) for
carrying out any foreign assistance or sales program authorized by law
and subject to the control of the President by other means.

<P>
   (3) (A) For each of the fiscal years 1988 and 1989, $ 250,000 of
registration fees collected pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be
credited to a Department of State account, to be available without
fiscal year limitation.  Fees credited to that account shall be
available only for the payment of expenses incurred for--

<P>
   (i) contract personnel to assist in the evaluation of munitions
control license applications, reduce processing time for license
applications, and improve monitoring of compliance with the terms of
licenses; and

<P>
   (ii) the automation of munitions control functions and the
processing of munitions control license applications, including the
development, procurement, and utilization of computer equipment and
related software.

<P>
   (B) The authority of this paragraph may be exercised only to such
extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriation
Acts.

<P>
   (c) Criminal violations; punishment.  Any person who willfully
violates any provision of this section or section 39 [22 USCS &#167;
2779], or any rule or regulation issued under either section, or who
willfully, in a registration or license application or required
report, makes any untrue statement of a material fact or omits to
state a material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to
make the statements therein not misleading, shall upon conviction be
fined for each violation not more than $ 1,000,000 or imprisoned not
more than ten years, or both.

<P>
   (d) [Repealed]

<P>
   (e) Enforcement powers of President.  In carrying out functions
under this section with respect to the export of defense articles and
defense services, the President is authorized to exercise the same
powers concerning violations and enforcement which are conferred upon
departments, agencies and officials by subsections (c), (d), (e), and
(g) of section 11 of the Export Administration Act of 1979 [50 USCS
Appx &#167; 2410(c), (d), (e) and (g)], and by subsections (a) and (c)
of section 12 of such Act [50 USCS Appx &#167; 2411(a) and (c)],
subject to the same terms and conditions as are applicable to such
powers under such Act.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed
as authorizing the withholding of information from the Congress.
Notwithstanding section 11(c) of the Export Administration Act of 1979
[50 USCS Appx &#167; 2410(c)], the civil penalty for each violation
involving controls imposed on the export of defense articles and
defense services under this section may not exceed $ 500,000.

<P>
   (f) Periodic review of items on the munitions list.  The President
shall periodically review the items on the United States Munitions
List to determine what items, if any, no longer warrant export
controls under this section. The results of such reviews shall be
reported to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and to the
Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Banking, Housing,
and Urban Affairs of the Senate. Such a report shall be submitted at
least 30 days before any item is removed from the Munitions List and
shall describe the nature of any controls to be imposed on that item
under the Export Administration Act of 1979.

<P>
   (g) Identification of persons convicted or subject to indictment
for violations of certain provisions.

<P>
   (1) The President shall develop appropriate mechanisms to identify,
in connection with the export licensing process under this section--

<P>
   (A) persons who are the subject of an indictment for, or have been
convicted of, a violation under--

<P>
   (i) this section,

<P>
   (ii) section 11 of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 U.S.C.
App.  2410),

<P>
   (iii) section 793, 794, or 798 of title 18, United States Code
(relating to espionage involving defense or classified information),

<P>
   (iv) section 16 of the Trading with the Enemy Act (50 U.S.C. App.
16),

<P>
   (v) section 206 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act
(relating to foreign assets controls; 50 U.S.C. App. 1705),

<P>
   (vi) section 30A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C.
78dd-1) or section 104 of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (15 U.S.C.
78dd-2),

<P>
   (vii) chapter 105 of title 18, United States Code [18 USCS
&#167;&#167; 2151 et seq.]  (relating to sabotage),

<P>
   (viii) section 4(b) of the Internal Security Act of 1950 (relating
to communication of classified information; 50 U.S.C. 783(b)),

<P>
   (ix) section 57, 92, 101, 104, 222, 224, 225, or 226 of the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2077, 2122, 2131, 2134, 2272, 2274,
2275, and 2276),

<P>
   (x) section 601 of the National Security Act of 1947 (relating to
intelligence identities protection; 50 U.S.C. 421), or

<P>
   (xi) section 603(b) or (c) of the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act
of 1986 (22 U.S.C. 5113 (b) and (c));

<P>
   (B) persons who are the subject of an indictment or have been
convicted under section 371 of title 18, United States Code, for
conspiracy to violate any of the statutes cited in subparagraph (A);
and

<P>
   (C) persons who are ineligible--

<P>
   (i) to contract with,

<P>
   (ii) to receive a license or other form of authorization to export
from, or

<P>
   (iii) to receive a license or other form of authorization to import
defense articles or defense services from, any agency of the United
States Government.

<P>
   (2) The President shall require that each applicant for a license
to export an item on the United States Munitions List identify in the
application all consignees and freight forwarders involved in the
proposed export.

<P>
   (3) If the President determines--

<P>
   (A) that an applicant for a license to export under this section is
the subject of an indictment for a violation of any of the statutes
cited in paragraph (1),

<P>
   (B) that there is reasonable cause to believe that an applicant for
a license to export under this section has violated any of the
statutes cited in paragraph (1), or

<P>
   (C) that an applicant for a license to export under this section is
ineligible to contract with, or to receive a license or other form of
authorization to import defense articles or defense services from, any
agency of the United States Government,

<P>
   the President may disapprove the application. The President shall
consider requests by the Secretary of the Treasury to disapprove any
export license application based on these criteria.

<P>
   (4) A license to export an item on the United States Munitions List
may not be issued to a person--

<P>
   (A) if that person, or any party to the export, has been convicted
of violating a statute cited in paragraph (1), or

<P>
   (B) if that person, or any party to the export, is at the time of
the license review ineligible to receive export licenses (or other
forms of authorization to export) from any agency of the United States
Government,

<P>
   except as may be determined on a case-by-case basis by the
President, after consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury,
after a thorough review of the circumstances surrounding the
conviction or ineligibility to export and a finding by the President
that appropriate steps have been taken to mitigate any law enforcement
concerns.

<P>
   (5) A license to export an item on the United States Munitions List
may not be issued to a foreign person (other than a foreign
government).

<P>
   (6) The President may require a license (or other form of
authorization) before any item on the United States Munitions List is
sold or otherwise transferred to the control or possession of a
foreign person or a person acting on behalf of a foreign person.

<P>
   (7) The President shall, in coordination with law enforcement and
national security agencies, develop standards for identifying
high-risk exports for regular end-use verification. These standards
shall be published in the Federal Register and the initial standards
shall be published not later than October 1, 1988.

<P>
   (8) Upon request of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of
Defense and the Secretary of the Treasury shall detail to the office
primarily responsible for export licensing functions under this
section, on a nonreimbursable basis, personnel with appropriate
expertise to assist in the initial screening of applications for
export licenses under this section in order to determine the need for
further review of those applications for foreign policy, national
security, and law enforcement concerns.

<P>
   (9) For purposes of this subsection--

<P>
   (A) the term "foreign corporation" means a corporation that is not
incorporated in the United States;

<P>
   (B) the term "foreign government" includes any agency or
subdivision of a foreign government, including an official mission of
a foreign government;

<P>
   (C) the term "foreign person" means any person who is not a citizen
or national of the United States or lawfully admitted to the United
States for permanent residence under the Immigration and Nationality
Act, and includes foreign corporations, international organizations,
and foreign governments;

<P>
   (D) the term "party to the export" means--

<P>
   (i) the president, the chief executive officer, and other senior
officers of the license applicant;

<P>
   (ii) the freight forwarders or designated exporting agent of the
license application; and

<P>
   (iii) any consignee or end user of any item to be exported; and

<P>
   (E) the term "person" means a natural person as well as a
corporation, business association, partnership, society, trust, or any
other entity, organization, or group, including governmental entities.

<P>
   (h) Judicial review of designation of items as defense articles or
services.  The designation by the President (or by an official to whom
the President's functions under subsection (a) have been duly
delegated), in regulations issued under this section, of items as
defense articles or defense services for purposes of this section
shall not be subject to judicial review.

</BODY>
</HTML>

</DOC>