
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-68</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B006-140</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/buck1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035410 text/html 21735
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:04 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:09 GMT
Content-length: 21517
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Effects of Drug Legalization</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h2>The Effects of Drug Legalization </h2>

<p>The following is an excerpt form &quot;Ain't Nobody's Business
If You Do&quot;, by Peter McWilliams. It is a discussion between
William F. Buckley, Jr. and Professor Gazzaniga (the Andrew W.
Thompson Jr. Professor of Psychiatry [Neuroscience] at Dartmouth
Medical School) which was originally published in the February 5,
1990, issue of the National Review. </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> It is said that the drug crack is
substantively different from its parent drug, cocaine, in that it
is, to use the term of Professor van den Haag,
&quot;crimogenic.&quot; In other words a certain (unspecified)
percentage of those who take crack are prompted to--well, to go
out and commit mayhem of some kind. Is that correct? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> No, not in the way you put it. What you are
asking is: Is there something about how crack acts on the brain
that makes people who take it likelier to commit crime? </p>

<p>Let's begin by making it clear what crack is. It is simply
cocaine that has been mixed with baking soda, water, and then
boiled. What this procedure does is to permit cocaine to be
smoked. Now any drug ingested in that way-- i.e., absorbed by the
lungs--goes more efficiently to the brain, and the result is a
quicker, more intense experience. That is what crack gives the
consumer. But its impact on the brain is the same as with plain
cocaine and, as a matter of fact, amphetamines. No one has ever
maintained that these drugs are &quot;crimogenic.' </p>

<p>The only study I know about that inquires into the question of
crack breeding crime reports that most homicides involving crack
were the result NOT of the use of crack, but of dealer disputes.
Crack did not induce users to commit crimes. Do some crack users
commit crimes? Of course. After all, involvement in proscribed
drug traffic is dangerous. Moreover, people who commit crimes
tend to use drugs at a high rate, though which drug they prefer
varies from one year to the next. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> You are telling us that an increase in the use
of crack would not mean an increase in crime? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> I am saying that what increase there would
be in crime would not be simply the result of the pharmacology of
that drug. Look, let's say there are 200,000 users/abusers of
crack in New York City--a number that reflects one of the current
estimates. If so, and if the drug produced violent tendencies in
all crack users, the health-care system would have to come to a
screeching halt. It hasn't. In fact, in 1988 the hospitals in New
York City (the crack capital of the world) averaged only seven
crack- related admissions, city-wide, a day. The perception of
crack-based misbehavior is exaggerated because it is the cases
that show up in the emergency rooms that receive public notice,
and the whole picture begins to look very bleak. All of this is
to say: when considering any aspect of the drug problem, keep in
mind the matter of selection of evidence. </p>

<p>It is prudent to recall that, in the past, dangerous and
criminal behavior has been said to have been generated by other
drugs, for instance marijuana (you remember &quot;Reefer
Madness&quot;?). And bear it in mind that since cocaine is
available everywhere, so is crack available everywhere, since the
means of converting the one into the other are easy, and easily
learned. It is important to note that only a small percentage of
cocaine users actually convert their stuff to crack. Roughly one
in six. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Then would it follow that even if there were
an increase in the use of crack, the legalization of it would
actually result in a decrease in crime? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> That is correct. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Isn't crack a drug whose addictive power
exceeds that of many other drugs? If that is the case, one
assumes that people who opt to take crack do so because it yields
the faster and more exhilarating satisfactions to which you make
reference. </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> That is certainly the current understanding,
but there are no solid data on the question. Current observations
are confounded by certain economic variables. Crack is cheap-- </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Why? If cocaine is expensive, how can crack be
cheap? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> Cocaine costs $1,000 per ounce if bought in
quantity. Once ounce can produce one thousand vials of crack,
each of which sells for $5. The drug abuser is able to experience
more drug episodes. Crack being cheap, the next high can come a
lot more quickly and since there is a down to every up, or high,
the cycle can become intense. </p>

<p>So yes, crack is addictive. So is cocaine. So are
amphetamines. The special punch of crack, as the result of going
quickly via the lungs to the brain, may prompt some abusers to
want more. By the way, it is the public knowledge that crack acts
in this way that, as several studies document, causes most
regular cocaine users to be cautious about crack. The casual-
to-moderate user very clearly wants to stay in that category. So,
all you can say is that there is a *perception*, widely shared,
that crack is more addictive. Whether it is, isn't really known.
One thing we do know is that crack does not begin to approach
tobacco as a nationwide health hazard. For every crack-related
death, there are three-hundred tobacco-related deaths. Another
example of hyperbole is the recent claim that there were 375,000
&quot;crack babies&quot; born last year; how could that possibly
be, when the government (the National Institutes on Drug Abuse)
informs us that there were only 500,000 crack &quot;users&quot;
last year? Exaggeration and misinformation run rampant on this
subject. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Well, if crack were legally available
alongside cocaine and, say, marijuana, what would be the reason
for a consumer to take crack? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> You need to keep your drug classifications
straight. if your goal were, pure and simple, to get high, you
might try crack or cocaine, or some amphetamine. You wouldn't go
for marijuana, which is a mild hallucinogen and tranquilizer. So,
if you wanted to be up and you didn't have much time, you might
go to crack. But then if it were absolutely established that
there was a higher addiction rate with crack, legalization could,
paradoxically, diminish its use. This is so because if cocaine
were reduced to the same price as crack, the abuser,
acknowledging the higher rate of addiction, might forgo the more
intensive high of crack, opting for the slower high of cocaine.
Crack was introduced years ago as offering an alluring new
psychoactive experience. But its special hold on the ghetto is
the result of its price. Remember that--on another front--we know
that 120- proof alcohol doesn't sell as readily as 86 proof, not
by a long shot, even though the higher the proof, the faster the
psychological effect that alcohol users are seeking. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Is there evidence that the current consumption
of drugs is restrained by their illegality? We have read that
ninety million Americans have experimented, at one time or
another, with illegal drugs. Would more than ninety million have
experimented with them if drugs had been legal? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> I think illegality has little if anything to
do with drug consumption--and, incidentally, I am certain that
far more than ninety million Americans have at some point or
other experimented with an illegal drug. </p>

<p>This gets to the issue of actual availability. Drugs are
everywhere, simply everywhere. In terms of availability, drugs
might just as well be legal as illegal. Now it has been argued
that legalization will create a different social climate, a more
permissive, more indulgent climate. It is certainly conceivable,
primarily for that reason, that there would be greater initial
use--the result of curiosity. But the central point is that human
beings in all cultures tend to seek out means of altering their
mental state, and that although some will shop around and lose
the powers of self-discipline, most will settle down to a base
rate of use, and a much smaller rate of abuse, and those rates
are pretty much what we have in the U.S. right now. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Then the factor of illegality, in your
opinion, does not weigh heavily? But, we come to the critical
question, if ninety million (or more) Americans have experimented
with the use of drugs, why is drug abuse at such a (relatively)
low level? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> If you exclude tobacco, in the whole nation
less than 10 per cent of the adult population &quot;abuses&quot;
drugs. That is, 9 to 12 million adult Americans abuse drugs. That
figure includes alcohol, by the way, and the figure remains
fairly constant. </p>

<p>Consider alcohol. In our culture alone, 70 to 80 percent of us
use alcohol, and the abuse rate is now estimated at 5 to 6 per
cent. We see at work here a major feature of the human response
to drug availability, namely, the inclination to moderation. Most
people are adjusted and are intent on living productive lives.
While most of us, pursuing that goal, enjoy the sensations of
euphoria, or anxiety reduction, or (at times) social dis-
inhibition or even anesthesia, we don't let the desire for these
sensations dominate our behavior. Alcohol fills these needs for
many people and its use is managed intelligently. </p>

<p>It is worth nothing that the largest proportion of this drug
is sold to the social drinker, not the drunk, just as most
cocaine is sold to the casual user, not the addict. Now, early
exposure to alcohol is common and inevitable, and youthful
drinking can be extreme. Yet studies have shown that it is
difficult to determine which drunk at the college party will
evolve into a serious alcoholic. What is shown is that the vast
majority of early drinkers stop excessive drinking all by
themselves. In fact, drug use of all types drops off radically
with age. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Wait a minute. Are you telling us that there
is only a 10 per cent chance that any user will become addicted
to a drug, having experimented with it? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> The 10 per cent figure includes all drugs
except tobacco. The actual risk for abuse for some drugs is much
lower. Consider last year's national Household Survey (NHS) which
was carried out by the National Institutes on Drug Abuse. </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> It is estimated that some 21 million people
tried cocaine in 1988. But according to the NHS only three
million defined themselves as having used the drug at least once
during each month preceding their interview. Most of the three
million were casual users. Now think about it. All the cocaine
users make up 2 per cent of the adult population, and the addicts
make up less than one quarter of 1 per cent of the total popu-
lation. These are the government's own figures. Does that sound
like an epidemic to you? </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> But surely an epidemic has to do with the rate
at which an undesirable occurrence is increasing. How many more
cocaine users were there than the year before? Or the year before
that? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> The real question is whether or not more and
more Americans are becoming addicted to something. Is the rate of
addiction to psycho- active substances going up? The answer to
that is a flat no. Are fads during which one drug becomes more
popular than another as the drug of abuse? Sure. But, when one
drug goes up in consumption, others go down. Heroin use is down,
and so is marijuana use. That is why the opiate and marijuana
pushers are trying to prove their purity--so they can grab back
some of their market share, which apparently they have done for
heroin in New York City. </p>

<p>But having said that, you should know that the actual use of
cocaine and all other illicit drugs is on the decline, according
to the NHS. The just- published National High School Survey
carried out by the University of Michigan reports that the same
is true among high-school students. Crack is used at such a low
rate throughout the country that its use can hardly be measured
in most areas. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Well, if low addiction rate is the rule, how
do we come to terms with the assertion, which has been made in
reputable circles, that over 40 per cent of Americans fighting in
Vietnam were using heroin and 80 per cent marijuana? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> Stressful situations provoke a greater use
of drugs. Vietnam was one of them. But what happens when the
soldiers come home? That point was examined in a large study by
Dr. Lee Robbins at Washington University. During the Vietnam War,
President Nixon ordered a study on the returning vets who seemed
to have a drug problem. (Nixon didn't know what he was looking
for, but he was getting a lot of flak on the point that the was
producing a generation of drug addicts.) Dr. Robbins chose to
study those soldiers returning to the U.S. in 1971. Of the 13,760
Army enlisted men who returned and were included in her sample,
1,400 had a positive urine test for drugs (narcotics,
amphetamines, or barbiturates). She was able to re- test 495 men
from this sample a few months later. The results were crystal
clear: Only 8 per cent of the men who had been drug positive in
their first urine test remained so. In short, over 90 per cent of
them, now that they were back home, walked away from drug use.
And all of them knew how to get hold of drugs, if they had wanted
them. Incidentally, Dr. Robbins did a follow-up study a couple of
years later on the same soldiers. She reported that there had not
been an increase in drug use. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Aha! You are saying that under special
circumstances, the use of drugs increases. Well, granted there
was stress in Vietnam. Isn't there also stress in American
ghettos? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> If you live in poverty and frustration, and
see few rewards available to you, you are likelier than your
better-satisfied counterpart to seek the escape of drugs,
although the higher rate of consumption does not result in a
higher rate of addiction. Virtually every study finds this to be
the case with one possibly interesting twist. A recent Department
of Defense study showed that drug use in the military was lower
for blacks than for whites, the reverse of civilian life. (It is
generally agreed that the military is the only institution in our
country that is successfully integrated.) In short, environmental
factors play an important role in the incidence of drug use. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> So you are saying that there are social
circumstances that will raise the rate of consumption, but that
raising the rate of consumption doesn't in fact raise the rate of
addiction. In other words, if 50 per cent of the troops in
Vietnam had been using crack, this would not have affected the
rate at which, on returning to the U.S., they became addicted.
They would have kicked the habit on reaching home. </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> That's the idea. Drug consumption can go up
in a particular population, fueled by stress, but the rate of
addiction doesn't go up no matter what the degree of stress. Most
people can walk away from high drug use if their lives become
more normal. Of course, the stress of the ghetto isn't the only
situation that fuels high drug consumption. Plenty of affluent
people who for some reason or another do not find their lives
rewarding also escape into drugs. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> If it is true, then, that only a small
percentage of those who take crack will end up addicted, and that
that is no different from the small percentage who, taking one
beer every Saturday night, will become alcoholics, what is the
correct way in which to describe the relative intensity of the
addictive element in a particular drug? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> That is an interesting question and one that
can't satisfactorily be answered until much more research is
done. There are conundrums. Again, it is estimated that 21
million people tried cocaine in 1988. Yet, of those, only 3
million currently use it, and only a small per- centage are
addicted. As for crack, it is estimated that 2.5 million have
used it, while only a half million say they still do, and that
figure includes the addicted and the casual user. Some reports
claim that as many as one half of crack users are addicted. As I
have said, crack is cheap, and for that reason may be especially
attractive to the poor. That is a non- pharmacological,
non-biological factor, the weight of which we have not come to
any conclusions about. We don't even have reliable data to tell
us that crack creates a greater rate of addiction than, say,
cocaine. My own guess is it doesn't. Remember that the drug acts
on the same brain systems that cocaine and amphetamines do. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> To what extent is the addictive factor
affected by education? Here is what I mean by this: Taking a
drug, say heroin or cocaine or crack- -or, for that matter,
alcohol--is a form of Russian roulette, using a ten- cartridge
revolver. Now, presumably, an educated person, concerned for his
livelihood, wouldn't take a revolver with nine empty cartridges
and one full cartridge, aim it at his head, and pull the trigger.
But granted, decisions of that kind are based on ratiocinative
skills. And we have to assume these skills don't exist even among
college students. If they did, there would be no drinking in
college, let alone drug taking. Comments? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> Most people perceive themselves as in
control of their destiny. They do not think the initial exposure
will ruin their lives, because of their perceived self-control,
and they are right. Take the most difficult case, tobacco--the
most highly addictive substance around. In a now classic study,
Stanley Schachter of Columbia University formally surveyed his
highly educated colleagues at Columbia. At the same time, he
polled the working residents of Amagansett, a community on Long
Island where he summered. He first determined who were ongoing
smokers, and who had been smokers. He took into account how long
they had smoked, what they had smoked, and all other variables he
could think of. </p>

<p>It wasn't long before the picture began to crystallize. Inform
a normally intelligent group of people about the tangible hazards
of using a particular substance and the vast majority of them
simply stop. It wasn't easy for some, but in general they
stopped, and they didn't need treatment programs, support
programs, and all the rest. Dr. Schachter concluded, after this
study, that it is only the thorny cases that show up at the
treatment centers, people who have developed a true addiction.
For those people, psychological prophylactics, including
education, are of little or no value. Yet it is these people that
are held up as examples of what happens when one uses drugs. This
is misleading. It creates an unworkable framework for thinking
about the problem. Most people can voluntarily stop using a
psychoactive substance, and those people who do continue to use
it can moderate their intake to reduce the possibility of health
hazards. This is true, as I say, for most substances, but I
repeat, less true for tobacco because of its distinctively
addictive nature. The people who unwisely continue to use tobacco
tend to smoke themselves into major illness even though they are
amply warned that this is likely to happen. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>