
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B18-132</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA026-000276-B036-12</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.ef.org:80/essay/city.html 198.77.86.203 19970113171655 text/html 10745
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Mon, 13 Jan 1997 17:19:00 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.0
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 10573
Last-modified: Mon, 17 Jun 1996 20:13:32 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML><HEAD>
<TITLE>"Change the City"</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<a href = "./index.html#toc"><img align=right border=0 src="../grf/up.gif" alt = "[ Up ]"></a>
<br clear=all>

<BLOCKQUOTE><H1>Change the City</H1>

<BLOCKQUOTE><H3><I><hr>If streets are well laid-out and destinations are
brought closer; people can get around without having to
drive.<hr></I></H3>
</BLOCKQUOTE>

Enough with the car. What about the cities and suburbs
where the car is driven? No amount of new auto
technology or cleaner fuels will relieve congestion,
make towns more accessible to those without cars,
encourage people to interact with their neighbors,
rebuild communities, or preserve open space and
agricultural land. The pattern of U.S. metropolitan
growth needs to be examined--and the further one
projects ahead, the more important that pattern becomes.
<P>
American communities are in the middle of a revolution.
In the first part of this century, the nation moved from
being an agricultural society, in which most people
lived on farms, to one in which the population was split
between farms and cities. In the second half of the
century, there was a vast migration from both the urban
areas and rural areas to the suburbs. The United States
is now primarily a suburban economy, with more than half
the population living in suburbs.
<P>
The automobile made suburbs possible, and the auto
continues to dominate the suburban form. The average
American household makes more than 10 car trips per day.
It is the norm for American families to do their
shopping, go to school or work, enjoy sports, and
commune with friends and families in a 40-mile radius of
their home. (Note that a 40-mile circle contains 1,200
square miles!) This easy access to remote destinations
means that it is commensurably less important to have
friends or shops or schools or work nearby. The auto has
made it possible to pay little attention to the quality
of local resources, since substitutes can be found a 15-
or 30-minute drive away. Access has been decoupled from
location.
<P>
That decoupling has both good and bad consequences. The
benefits of a broader base of options include access to
better jobs, better or cheaper homes, more schools, more
sports facilities, and more shopping. The downside is
that local resources are neglected. Why pay taxes to
support a local park when you can drive to a state park?
Why strive to protect downtown jobs when you don't work
downtown or shop downtown?
<P>
The car also makes the idea of the "common good" more
abstract and remote. A village square or a local school
is the only option in a car-less world; everyone has an
interest in keeping that square clean and that school
healthy. The auto makes the square just one of dozens of
options for public space, and because that square is
supported by local taxes, it often seems to be the most
expensive of the lot. The country is thus in the midst
of abandoning the "public sphere"--parks, public
schools, and even public services like police
protection--in favor of  the "private sphere," with
gated suburbs, private recreation clubs, private
schools, and private 
security forces.
<P>
Some of the most creative thinkers--conservative and
liberal--argue that it is time to reinvent the suburb
and rethink the urban core. Town planners, architects,
and economists are converging around a practical and
positive vision of the metropolis. Three themes dominate
their work:

<UL>
<LI> The destinies of suburbs and urban cores cannot
be separated; policies must be developed that serve the
greater metropolis.

<LI> The most successful cities are those where local
values and local commitment are manifest. Good policies
make it easier for citizens to contribute to their
communities.

<LI> Land-use patterns-the physical form of a
neighborhood-have a profound (and underappreciated)
impact on social interactions, neighborliness, and sense
of community.
</UL>

These ideas can easily be made tangible and practical.
For example, 20 years ago, Oregon required every city to
develop an "urban growth boundary" to contain and focus
future development. As a result, cities such as Portland
have managed to avoid much of the sprawl and related
urban blight that characterize so many cities. The
simple act of drawing a boundary around the metropolis
has united the downtown and suburban concerns, and it
has preserved farmland, reduced demands for auto travel,
and made transit systems viable. Downtown businesses
know that the boundary keeps them within a reasonable
range of the region's shoppers and workers. Most
developers happily trade geographic limitations for the
certainty of knowing where they can build and where they
cannot. Suburbanites appreciate the relative lack of
congestion, since they are not immediately surrounded by
suburbs even farther out. Growth is directed to land
inside the boundary:  this "infill" development means
that light rail is fast becoming a viable option for
Portland commuters.
<P>
Not every city has the political impetus to draw a
boundary around itself, but other measures can have a
similar impact. Lowering regulatory barriers for
development within metropolitan boundaries, while
raising them for development beyond, can funnel most
development to where it should occur. If cities and
suburbs were to collaborate on tax policies-or even
establish tax-base sharing, as Minneapolis-St. Paul has
done-they could avoid the ultimately debilitating game
of bidding for development with lower taxes. By
rethinking and coordinating development and tax
policies, a city and its suburbs can both emerge as
winners, rather than one prospering only at the other's
expense.
<P>
An urban-growth boundary implies infill development and
mixed use, which can themselves be a boon. Space and
quiet are the great virtues of suburbia, but these often
come at the cost of easy access to stores, restaurants,
and schools. By mixing these uses with housing, suburbs
become communities. If streets are laid out well and
destinations are nearby, kids can walk or bike to the
store or school. Families can walk to a park instead of
driving. A number of regions have started this repair
work, including the city of Pasadena and San Diego
County.
<P>
Good infill and mixed-use development get at the heart
of the transportation dilemma. Two California suburbs
illustrate how such changes lead to dramatically
different automobile use. Rockridge is a traditional
suburb near Berkeley, with a grid-street layout and a
mix of shops, schools, parks, and houses. Danville, in
Contra Costa County, is composed of arterials, feeders,
and culs-de-sac, and has only housing. Danville
households put twice as many miles on their cars as
their Rockridge counterparts. The policy question, then,
is: Do we build more Danvilles on more farmland, or do
we fill in, and in the process make current suburbs more
livable?
<P>
Infill has another great bonus. Transit systems like
light rail require a certain minimum housing density to
be useful-they become cost-effective only when there are
enough potential riders along each stretch of the route.
Transit will become feasible in many of today's suburbs
with judicious infill. 
<P>
Finally, the topography of our cities and suburbs
matters a great deal. Old housing projects-modernist
glass and concrete towers surrounded by parking lots-are
dehumanizing; it is no surprise that so many are reduced
to shambles in a few years. Strip malls and shopping
centers can have a similar dehumanizing effect. There is
no way to walk to most malls--they tend to be removed
from neighborhoods and surrounded by wide, busy streets
and highways--or to browse on a strip mall. The auto
becomes the only way to get to and from these centers.
<P>
By taking great care with the relationships among
houses, streets, parks, schools, and commercial centers,
town planners and developers can reverse or reduce such
car dependency. Good walkable or bikeable connections
between houses and schools are cheap and obvious ways to
breathe life into a town even as they reduce auto use.
Some towns are turning to "pedestrian-oriented
development" and "transit-oriented development" to
reintroduce people into a town's fabric. To make a town
pedestrian friendly, planners use "traffic calming,"
which is the generic term for narrowing streets,
building 
speed bumps, giving predominance to pedestrians in
intersections, and similar measures. Parking lots are
tucked behind shops, instead of vice versa.
Transit-friendly developments incorporate the same
concepts, but they are clustered developments--with
greater density-located near transit stops. In Chicago's
West Side, for example, the Center for Neighborhood
Technology is helping redevelop an urban area as a
transit-oriented development <A HREF =
"neighborhood.html" name="neighbor">(see "Reclaiming a
neighborhood")</A>. 
<P>
Besides creating a more enjoyable town or community,
making streets and destinations accessible to
pedestrians tends to raise the value of real estate in a
community. It turns out that people like to live in
towns with walkable destinations and schools a quick
bike ride away. This added value, if coupled with the
reduced regulatory burdens described above, could be the
spur that moves development past cookie-cutter sprawl.
</BLOCKQUOTE><P>
<BR>

<CENTER>
<NOBR><A HREF="start.html"><IMG WIDTH=152 HEIGHT=148 BORDER=0 HSPACE=0 VSPACE=0 ALT="Start Essay" SRC="MAPTL1.gif"></A><A HREF="cars.html"><IMG WIDTH=152 HEIGHT=148 BORDER=0 HSPACE=0 VSPACE=0 ALT="Build Better Cars" SRC="MAPTR1.gif"></A></NOBR><BR><NOBR><A HREF="city.html"><IMG WIDTH=152 HEIGHT=139 BORDER=0 HSPACE=0 VSPACE=0 ALT="Change the City" SRC="MAPML1on.gif"></A><A HREF="fuels.html"><IMG WIDTH=152 HEIGHT=139 BORDER=0 HSPACE=0 VSPACE=0 ALT="Switch to Better Fuels" SRC="MAPMR1.gif"></A></NOBR><BR><NOBR><A HREF="altmodes.html"><IMG WIDTH=152 HEIGHT=149 BORDER=0 HSPACE=0 VSPACE=0 ALT="Promote Other Modes" SRC="MAPBL1.gif"></A><A HREF="conclusion.html"><IMG WIDTH=152 HEIGHT=149 BORDER=0 HSPACE=0 VSPACE=0 ALT="Conclusion" SRC="MAPBR1.gif"></A></NOBR><BR>
</CENTER>

<a href = "./index.html#toc"><img align=right border=0 src="../grf/up.gif" alt = "[ Up ]"></a>
<br clear=all>

</BODY>
<hr>
<p align=right>
<A HREF="http://www.ef.org/"><IMG border=0 SRC="../grf/efhome.gif" ALT="EF Home Page" ALIGN=LEFT></A>
<font size=-1>Copyright (c) 1996 the Energy Foundation<br>
<A HREF="mailto:ef@ef.org">Comments & Questions</A><br>
Web Development by <A HREF="http://www.crest.org/common/crestinfo.html">CREST</A>
</font></p>

</HTML>

</DOC>