
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B040-317</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1n.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113346 text/html 39268
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:33:35 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:44 GMT
Content-length: 39050
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marihuana and Driving</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Marihuana and Driving</h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The United States Department of Transportation has estimated
that in 1970, more than 111 million Americans were licensed
drivers and that there were approximately 109 million vehicles
registered and regularly traversing America's streets and
highways. The Commission-sponsored National Survey (Abelson, et
al., 1972) has revealed that approximately 21 million or 15% of
all American adults 18 years and over have tried marihuana and
that about 6.9 million adults currently use the drug. </p>

<p>At the present time, there is no reliable estimate of the
proportion of marihuana users who drive while &quot;high,&quot;
but America's tragic experience with highway accidents and
fatalities involving persons driving under the influence of
alcohol raises serious questions about the extent to which
marihuana impairs driving skills and performance and thereby
constitutes a public safety hazard on this nation's
thoroughfares. </p>

<p>In recent years, public safety experts, along with the medical
and scientific communities, have devoted increasing attention to
the effects of any mind-altering drug on driving, but there is as
yet little evidence to inform discussion. As part of its more
general concern with the impact of marihuana on public safety,
the Commission has reviewed the available research and has
concluded that the evidence which presently exists is, at best,
inconclusive. </p>

<p>In view of this finding and prior to a rather brief summary of
the knowledge we now have, the Commission feels compelled to urge
the public to consider these findings as only tentative, to adopt
an extremely cautious attitude about the effects of marihuana on
driving skill and performance, and perhaps most importantly, to
avoid driving at all while under the influence of any
mind-altering drug or intoxicant. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE CURRENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE </b></p>

<p>The literature on drugs and driving contains several
references to the role of drugs, including marihuana, in traffic
violations, accidents and fatalities. They differ considerably,
however, in the nature and extent to which they influence or
affect driving behavior (Waller, 1965; Chetta, 1967, Commission
on Narcotic Drugs, 1968; Third Triannual Congress on Traffic
Accidents, 1969; Waller, 1970; Klein, Davis and Blackbourne, 1971
National Institute of Mental Health, 1972). </p>

<p>The studies examine the relationship between marihuana and
driving and tend to be either statistical and enumerative with
regard to traffic accidents or experimental with respect to the
physiological and psychological effects of marihuana use deemed
to be related to driving skill and performance. All of them
suffer to one degree or another from an overabundance or dearth
of extraneous variables and have, therefore, precluded
generalization of the results and the production of conclusive,
and valid findings. </p>

<p>The difficulty in interpreting the data gathered from
statistical or enumerative studies of traffic accidents derives
primarily from the inability to isolate precise cause. There are
no tissue, urine or blood analysis methods currently and
systematically in use outside the laboratory, similar to those
available for alcohol, for determining the presence of marihuana
in the bodily fluids of drivers. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Statistical Studies</b> </p>

<p>The statistical or enumerative studies generally can be
characterized as two types. In the first type, samples of
arrested marihuana, or other drug law violators are selected and
their traffic violations or accident rates are compared with
those in the general population. In the second type, samples are
drawn initially from lists of persons known to have committed
traffic violations or been involved in traffic accidents. The
samples are then divided into persons who in some way are
identified as marihuana users and those who are not and the
incidence of traffic violations or accidents in the two groups is
then compared.5 </p>

<p>5 Dr. E. J. Woodhouse, a chemist, is now in the process of
developing a marihuana testing method. At the present time he
reports being able to detect the presence of marihuana by
analyzing urine samples (Polak, 1971). </p>

<p>Waller (1965), compared the crash rates per unit miles of
driving of known marihuana users with those of other drivers of
similar age distribution. He found that the crash risk was not
increased by the use of marihuana. </p>

<p>A similar study yielding similar results was performed in the
State of Washington (Crancer and Quiring, 1968). There were no
significant differences in the crash rates per 100 drivers
between those who did use marihuana and those who did not. The
researchers compared the driving records of persons arrested for
illegal drug use (100 narcotics users, 123 dangerous drug users
and 79 marihuana users) with those of 687,228 licensed drivers
living in the same general driving environment (King's County,
Washington). Comparisons were made of the number of accidents,
the number of violations and the type of violations accumulated
between January 1, 1961 and October 1, 1967. </p>

<p>All three drug using groups had significantly higher accident
and violation rates than did the comparison group matched for age
and sex; the accident rate for the marihuana users was 39%
higher; for the narcotics users, 29% higher; and for the
dangerous drug users, 57% higher. The violation rates were 180 %
higher, 149 % higher and 16% higher, respectively. </p>

<p>Table 9 below shows the percentage of marihuana users and
county drivers, by sex, with none and 10 or more traffic
violations and accidents between January 1, 1961 and October 1,
1967. </p>

<p>Since the majority of the users were first arrested for their
illegal drug use in 1964, the researchers compared their
violation rates before and after that time. The data show a
violation rate of 1.78 per marihuana driver prior to 1964
(January 1, 1961 to June 30, 1964) ; the rate increased to 3.44
per driver between July 1, 1964 and October 1, 1967. For the same
time periods, the county group's violation rate per driver
increased from 0.4-4 to 0.53. </p>

<p>The violation rates for both reckless and hit-and run driving
were significantly higher for the marihuana users than for the
county comparison group. </p>

<p>In short, these data suggest that marihuana users are much
more likely to have many violations and accidents and are much
less likely to have clear accident and violation records than are
a comparison group of drivers drawn from the same general
population. Them findings are difficult to interpret more
precisely, however, because Such variables as the number of miles
driven and overall driving experience were not taken into
account. </p>

<p><b>Table 9.-MARIHUANA USERS AND COUNTY DRIVERS HAVING NONE AND
TEN OR MORE TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS AND ACCIDENTS, BY SEX, JANUARY 1,
1961OCTOBER 1, 1967</b> </p>

<p>(Figures in Percentages) </p>

<p>Marihuana users County drivers </p>

<p>Male Female Male Female </p>

<p>None... 10.0 33.3 41.1 67.7 </p>

<p>10..... 22.9 11.1 2.2 0.1 </p>

<p>Source: Crancer and Quiring, 1968:9.<br>
</p>

<p>A survey of 12,453 Virginia high school students was conducted
during 1970 by the Virginia Highway Safety Division (Ferguson and
Howard, 1971). The objectives of the survey were to determine the
extent of drug use in the Virginia high school population and to
assess the number of traffic crashes which could be caused by
drug-impaired drivers. </p>

<p>The data, show that 2.9% of the sample reported experiencing,
either as a passenger or driver, at least one traffic crash in
which drug use &quot;could have been a causal factor.&quot; The
data also show that the students were more likely to attribute
the crashes to marihuana (54%) than to other drugs (46%). Use of
marihuana was found to be slightly more common than was the use
of other drugs among drivers involved in non-fatal collisions but
was used with equal frequency in those drivers involved in fatal
crashes (p. 31). </p>

<p>The researchers suggest as an explanation for their findings
the fact that marihuana. usage was greater among this population
(12.3%) than was the use of other drugs (7.7%). This explanation
is not completely adequate, however, in that the survey ignores
both the possible presence of alcohol along with marihuana and
other drugs, either separately or in combination. As such, it
cannot be said that marihuana causes more accidents than do other
drugs, including alcohol. </p>

<p>Klein, Davis and Blackbourne (1971) surveyed students at four
academic institutions in Florida in an effort to assess the role
of marihuana in traffic involvements. Respondents were divided
into five groups of marihuana users: (a) non-users, (b) previous
users, (c) using less than four times a month, (d) using four to
eight times per month, and (e) using more than eight times per
month. For each group information was obtained relative to the
frequency of alcohol and tobacco use; respondents' ability to
judge speed, time and reaction time; traffic involvements; and
license revocations. In addition, respondents were asked their
opinion about whether or not persons under the influence of
marihuana should be permitted to operate aircraft and various
other vehicles, including taxis and private automobiles. </p>

<p>With respect to traffic involvements, the data show that 18%
of the infrequent users and 53% of the frequent users reported
having been stopped by the police while under the influence of
marihuana. The data also show that as the frequency of use
increases, so too does the number of license revocations. </p>

<p>As Nichols (1971) has pointed out, however: </p>

<p><i>Apparently no attempt was made to compare the number of
times they were stopped while under the influence of marihuana as
opposed to the number of times they were stopped while not under
the influence. Thus, the data do not give any indication of
whether the violations were due to the effects of marihuana or
whether they were the result of poor driving habits in the first
place</i> (pp. 28-29). </p>

<p>Both experimental and quasi-experimental approaches to
assessing the effects of marihuana on driving suffer from
methodological shortcominogs and inconsistent results. The
primary deficiency in the experimental investigations lies in
their inability to hold constant the numerous external variables
which actually affect driving behavior and which, therefore,
precludes valid comparisons of actual driving performance with
that simulated in a controlled but unrealistic environment. In
the quasi-experimental studies using interviewing techniques, the
accuracy of self-reports becomes a question which must be raised
with respect to the, effects of marihuana on driving skills and
performance. </p>

<p>The data derived front these studies, however, suggest that
marihuana does interfere, at least in some users, with the
ability to judge time, speed and distance ; with reaction time;
and with the ability to control the vehicle and respond to an
emergency situation (Zinberg and Well, 1969; James, 1970- Hochman
and Brill, 1971; Klein, et al., 1971). </p>

<p>Data from a survey of 10% of the undergraduate students at
UCLA (Hochman and Brill, 1971) show that one-third of all
marihuana users drive, occasionally while &quot;high.&quot; Of
the chronic users, 42% drive frequently while high and 10% always
drive while &quot;stoned&quot; (p. 22). </p>

<p>According to the researchers, &quot;both (marihuana) users and
non-users were universally of the opinion that (marihuana)
'intoxication' affected driving, but users thought, that they
compensated by being more cautious, driving more slowly, and
concentrating on the driving,&quot; (p. 22). The researchers also
report that as usage of marihuana becomes more chronic,
&quot;fear&quot; and avoidance of driving while intoxicated
decreases and the ability to compensate for the drug's effects
increases. </p>

<p>With respect to traffic violations, the data show that 4% of
occasional and chronic marihuana users had received traffic
tickets when they were intoxicated by the drug but that none had
been discovered to be intoxicated at the time. </p>

<p>These findings corroborate those, from an earlier study
(Zinberg and Weil, 1969) in which the researchers stated that
&quot;users appear to be able to compensate 100% for the
nonspecific effects of ordinary doses of marihuana on ordinary
psychological performance&quot; (p. 39). In another report Weil
(1969) wrote that &quot;it appears that once a person becomes
accustomed to the effects of cannabis, he, can compensate fully
for the drug's influence on performance of tasks of ordinary
complexity.&quot; (p. 6). </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Experimental Studies </b></p>

<p>Controlled laboratory experiments have attempted to measure
these and other effects on driving with greater specificity.
Manno and his associates (1970) found that there are significant
impairments of motor and mental performance attributable to
marihuana. </p>

<p>In an experiment conducted by Frank and his colleagues (1971),
marihuana smokers demonstrated &quot;a marked and very consistent
increase in the amount of time required to recover from glare . .
. This ranged up to four times as long with a mean peak of almost
twice as long (171%) after smoking marihuana. . . . Furthermore,
this increase in glare recovery time persisted for several
hours&quot; (p. 9) and did not seem to be dose related. </p>

<p>These researchers did not find significant differences between
marihuana users and nonusers, however, in pulse, rate, time
estimation or dilation of the pupils. </p>

<p>With respect to marihuana's effect on emotional reactions, Dr.
S. E. Miller (1959) suggested that &quot;these drugs (Including
marihuana) have similar abilities for changing normal emotional
reactions, even causing individuals to become oblivious or
indifferent to their surroundings&quot; (p. 864). Klein and his
colleagues (1971), however, urge against generalizing these
findings from the laboratory situation to the complex task of
actual driving. </p>

<p>Crancer and his coworkers (1969) conducted a study designed to
determine the effects of a &quot;normal social marihuana
high&quot; on simulated driving performance among 36 experienced
marihuana smokers and compared the effects they discovered with
those occasioned by alcohol use. </p>

<p>The researchers found that experienced marihuana users under
conditions of a &quot;normal social marihuana high&quot; (from
two cigarettes totalling 1.7 grams of THC) accumulated
significantly more speedometer errors than under control
conditions. No significant differences were found, however,
relative to accelerator, brake, signal, steering or total errors
in simulator scores. </p>

<p>Comparing the effects of alcohol (at a blood level of
0.10%-the legal limit of intoxication) and marihuana intoxication
(1.7 grams THC), the researchers concluded that moderate
intoxication by marihuana was less detrimental to simulated
driving performance than was the presence of alcohol at the 0.10%
blood level. The mean error scores were 84.46 for the control
group, 84.49 for the marihuana group and 97.44 for the alcohol
group (p. 6). </p>

<p>There have been several criticisms leveled at this study,
however, and several researchers have cited contradictory
findings. Frank and his associates (1971) have pointed out the
fact that the subjects did not have, complete control over their
simulated drive. </p>

<p>Kalant (1969) noted that &quot;it does not follow
automatically that lack of effect of a drug on the simulated task
will correlate with lack of effect on the actual task&quot; (p.
640). He also criticized the use of dissimilar doses of marihuana
and alcohol for the comparison and in this regard stated that
&quot;the finding that a heavy dose of alcohol caused more
impairment than a mild dose of marihuana is neither surprising
nor helpful in assessing the relative effects of the two drugs in
the relative doses in which they are normally used&quot; (p.
640). </p>

<p>Lastly, Kalant pointed out that Crancer and his colleagues
failed to indicate if any measures were actually taken to ensure
effective absorption of the doses by the experimental subjects.
This may be important, if the findings of dose dependent
impairments observed by Dagirmanjian and Boyd (1962) and Isbell
and his associates (1967) are valid. </p>

<p>Although Crancer and his fellow researchers did not feel that
the impairments found were related to either dosage level or
experience with the drug, this latter finding is also subject to
question in view of the earlier findings of the Mayor's Committee
on Marihuana (1944) and Weil and his colleagues (1968) that the
performance of drug-naive subject, was more impaired than was
that of experienced marihuana users. </p>

<p>In a more recent simulator study, attention was directed to
the effects of marihuana on risk acceptance (Dott, 1971). The
experimental situation involved the placement of 12 experienced
marihuana users under four conditions (non-smoking, placebo, low
dose, and high dose) in order to compare subjects' reactions to
various passing situations, some of which required an immediate
response to an emergency. </p>

<p>The data show that even though more accidents occurred under
the two marihuana conditions than under the placebo (and normal)
condition, the differences were not significant. Significant
differences were found in the number of passes completed and in
the time needed to make pass decisions. Not only did the
marihuana smokers complete fewer passes (174 in placebo
condition, 153 in low dose condition, and 133 in the high dose
condition), but they took more time to make the pass decisions
while under the influence of the drug. The researcher concluded
that &quot;marihuana appears to make the subject less willing to
accept risk, and it delays elective decision reaction time.
Effects were most noted in situations which did not have a high
attention demanding value. . . . In those situations which were
of an emergency nature and which demanded immediate attention and
response . . . . no drug effects were noted&quot; (p. 28). </p>

<p>Dott also found, in contrast to Frank and his associates
(1971) that pulse rate did seem to be affected by marihuana
intoxication. </p>

<p>Based upon a comparison with the same experiment performed
years before in relation to alcohol (Light and Kelper, 1969),
Dott stated that &quot;the effects of marihuana on driving
behavior are more subtle and less hazardous than the effects of
alcohol.&quot; </p>

<p>McGlothlin (1971) is presently conducting another simulator
study and is attempting to measure the effects of marihuana,
methadone and alcohol on simulated driving, attention,
information processing abilities and other measures related to
driving efficiency such is peripheral vision, depth perception
and glare recovery. At this time, five experiments have been
conducted and the researcher has stated that: </p>

<p><i>concentrated and divided attention for both auditory and
visual modalities are significantly impaired by smoked marihuana
containing 15 mg. THC.... In general, where impairment was found
for the marihuana treatments, it appears to be equivalent to that
resulting from a blood alcohol level of about 0.01%. Frequent
marihuana users (one or two times per week) typically showed less
impairment than those using less frequently </i>(p. 22.). </p>

<p>The inconclusive and controversial nature of the research to
date suggests that there is enough of a potential risk involved
to both the individual and the public safety to recommend
strongly against driving while intoxicated-no matter what the
intoxicant. Although marihuana does not seem to produce serious
impairments of driving skills or performance, to say that the
drug does not at all adversely affect driving behavior or that it
may not be a factor in traffic violations or accidents is to
misrepresent the current state of knowledge. As the National
Institute of Mental Health (1972) has noted, &quot;obviously,
more research is needed in elucidating the role of various drugs
on highway accidents . . .&quot; (p. 220). </p>

<hr>

<p><b>References<br>
</b></p>

<p>Abelson, H.; Cohen R.; and Schrayer, D., Public Attitudes
Toward Marihuana, Part 1, Princeton: Response Analysis, 1972. </p>

<p>&quot;A Drug and Insanity,&quot; New York Daily Worker,
January 28, 1940. Cited in Solomon, D., ed. The Marihuana Papers,
New York: Signet Books, 1968, p. 288. </p>

<p>Allentuck, S., &quot;Medical Aspects: Symptoms and
Behavior,&quot; in Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana
Problem in the City of New York, Lancaster: Jacques Cattell
Press, 1944, pp. 35-51. </p>

<p>Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M., &quot;The Psychiatric Aspects
of Marihuana Intoxication,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry,
99: 248-251, 1942. </p>

<p>Ames, P., &quot;A Clinical and Metabolic Study of Acute
Intoxication with Cannabis Saliva and its Role in the Model
Psychoses,&quot; Journal of Mental Sciences, 104 (437) :
972-99,1958. </p>

<p>Amir, M., Patterns in Forcible Rape, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1971. </p>

<p>Andrade, 0. M &quot;The Criminogenic Action of Cannabis
(Marihuana) and Narcotics,&quot; UN Bulletin of Narcotics, 16:
23-28,1964. </p>

<p>Anslinger, H. J., &quot;Marijuana-Assassin of Youth,&quot;
American Magazine, July 1937. </p>

<p>Anslinger, H. J. and Tompkins, W., The Traffic in Narcotics,
New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953. </p>

<p>Asuni, T., &quot;Socio-Psychiatric Problems of Cannabis in
Nigeria,&quot; UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 16: 17-28, 1964.
Ausubel, D. P., Drug Addiction: Physiological, Psychological, and
Sociological Aspects, New York: Random House, 1958. </p>

<p>Bloomquist, E. R., Marijuana, Beverly Hills: Glencoe Press,
1968. </p>

<p>Blum, R H., and Associates, Society and Drugs, -San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 1969. </p>

<p>Blumer, H., et al., The World of Youthful Drug Use, Berkeley:
School of Criminology, University of California, 1967. </p>

<p>Bouquet, J., &quot;Cannabis,&quot; UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 2
(4) :14-30, October 1950. </p>

<p>Brenner, J. H.; Coles R. and Meagher, D., Drugs and Youth, New
York: Liveright, 1970. </p>

<p>Bromberg, W., &quot;Marihuana: A Psychiatric Study,&quot;
Journal of the American Medical Association, 113: 4-12, 1939. </p>

<p>Bromberg, W., &quot;Marihuana Intoxication: A Clinical Study
of Cannabis Sativa Intoxication,&quot; American Journal of
Psychiatry, 91 (2) : 23-30, 1934. </p>

<p>Bromberg, W. and Rodgers, T. C., &quot;Marihuana and
Aggressive Crime,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:
825-827,1946. </p>

<p>Brotman, R. and Suffet, F., &quot;Marihuana Users' Views of
Marihuana Use,&quot; in Zubin, J. and Freedman, A., eds., The
Psychology of Adolescence, New York: Grime and Stratton, 1970,
pp. 258-72. </p>

<p>Brown, T. T., The Enigma of Drug Addiction, Springfield:
Charles C Thomas, 1961. </p>

<p>Carstairs, G. H., &quot;Darn and Bhang: Cultural Factors in
the Choice of Intoxicants,&quot; Quarterly Journal of Studies on
Alcohol, 15: 220-237, 1954. </p>

<p>&quot;The Case Against Cannabis,&quot; Pharmaceutical Journal
(England), 199 (5425) :399-400,1967. </p>

<p>Charen, S., and Perelman, L., &quot;Personality Studies of
Marihuana Addicts,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry, 102:
674-82,1946. </p>

<p>Chetta, N. J., &quot;Alcohol, Drugs and Driving,&quot; Journal
of the Louisiana State Medical Society, 119 (9) : 344347, 1967.
Commission of Narcotic Drugs, 23rd Session on Drug Abuse, October
21, 1968. </p>

<p>Chopra, R. N. and Chopra, 1. C., &quot;Cannabis Sativa in
Relation to Crime and Mental Disease in India,&quot; American
Journal of Medical Research, 30: 155-171, 1942. Chopra. R. N. and
Chopra, G. S., &quot;The Present Position of Hemp Drug Addiction
in India,&quot; Indian Medical Research Memoirs, No. 31, July
1939. </p>

<p>Crancer, A., Jr., and Quiring, T). L., &quot;Driving Records
of Persons Arrested for Illegal Drug Use,&quot; Report 011, State
of Washington, Department of Motor Vehicles, May 1968. Reprinted
in part in The Police Chief, 36: 41-43. February 1969. </p>

<p>Crancer, A.. Jr.; Dille, J. M.; Delay, J. C.; Wallace, J. E.
and Haykin, M. D., &quot;Comparison of the Effects of Marihuana
and Alcohol on Simulated Driving Performance,&quot; Report 021,
State of Washington, Department of Motor Vehicles, April 1969,
Reprinted in Science, 164: 851-54, May 16, 1969. </p>

<p>Dagirimaijian, R. and Boyd, E. S., &quot;Some Pharmacological
Effects of Two Tetrahydrocannabinols,&quot; Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 135: 25-33, 1962. </p>

<p>Dott, A. B., &quot;Effect of Marihuana on Risk Acceptance in
an Automobile Simulator,&quot; RR71-3, Injury Control Research
Laboratory for the U.S. Department of Health, Education and
Welfare, 1971. </p>

<p>&quot;Drugs and Reckless Driving,&quot; New Jersey Journal of.
Pharmacy, 40 (1) : 30, 1967. </p>

<p>Ewens, G. F. W., &quot;Insanity Following the Use of Indian
Hemp,&quot; Indian Medical Gazette, 39: 401-13, 1904. </p>

<p>Ferguson, W. S. and Howard, W. L., Marihuana and Drug Use and
Highway Safety-A Survey of High School Students in Virginia,
Virginia Highway Research Council, July 1971. </p>

<p>Fort, J., &quot;Playboy Panel: The Drug Revolution,&quot;
Playboy, 17(2) : 53-55 et. seq., February, 1970. </p>

<p>Frank, I. M.; Hepler, R. S.; Stier, S.; Rickles, W. H. and
Ungerleider, J. T., &quot;Marihuana, Tobacco and Functions
Affecting Driving.&quot; Paper presented to annual meeting of the
American Psychiatric Association, Washington, D. C., May 1971. </p>

<p>Freedman, H. L. and Rockmore, M. I., &quot;Marihuana: Factor
in Personality Evaluation and Army Maladjustment.` Journal of
Clinical Psychopathology, 7: 765-82, 8: 221236,1946. </p>

<p>Gardikas, C. G., &quot;Hashish and Crime,&quot; Enkephalos 2-3
201-211, 1950, Cited in Tinklenberg, J., &quot;Marihuana and
Crime,&quot; Paper prepared for the National Commission on
Marihuana and Drug Abuse, 1972, pp. 11-12. </p>

<p>Gebhard, P. H.; Gagnon, J. H.; Pomeroy, W. B., and
Christenson, C. V., Sex Offenders: An Analysis of Types New York:
Bantam, 1967. </p>

<p>Goode, E., &quot;Drug Use and Sexual Behavior on a College
Campus,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry, in press. Goode,
E., &quot;Marijuana and Sex,&quot; Evergreen Review, 66:
19-21,72-74,1969. </p>

<p>Goode, E., The Marijuana Smokers, New York: Basic Books, 1970.
</p>

<p>Goode, E., &quot;Marihuana Use and Crime,&quot; prepared for
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, Jannary 15,1972.
</p>

<p>Grinspoon, L., Marihuana Reconsidered, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1971. </p>

<p>Gusfield, J., &quot;On Legislating Morals: The Symbolic
Process of Designating Deviance,&quot; California Law Review, 56:
54-73, January 1968. </p>

<p>Halikas, J. A.; Goodwin, D. W.; and Guze, S. B.,
&quot;Marihuana Effects: A Survey of Regular Users,&quot; Journal
of the American Medical Association, 217: 692-94, August, 1971. </p>

<p>Hochman, J. S. and Brill, N. Q., &quot;Marijuana Use and
Psychosocial Adaptation,&quot; Paper presented to annual meeting
of American Psychiatric Association, Washington, D.C., May
3,1971. </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E.; Richards, R. K.; and Gillespie, H. K., </p>

<p>&quot;Comparison of Tetrahydrocannabinol and Synhexyl in
Man,&quot; Chemical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 9: 383-391,
1968. </p>

<p>Hollister, L. E., &quot;Marihuana in Man: Three Years
Later,&quot; Science, 172 (3978) : 21-29, April 2, 1971. </p>

<p>Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, Marijuana, 1894. Reprinted,
Silver Spring, Maryland: Thomas Jefferson Publishing Co., 1969. </p>

<p>Insurance Institute for Highway Safety, Report an Washington
State Studies-Drug User Accident Rate, 8 (4), August, 1968. </p>

<p>InTech Corporation, Research on Marihuana Use as a
Contributing Factor in the Commission of Criminal Acts as Well as
Juvenile Delinquency, Final Report, Prepared for the National
Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, November 19,1971. </p>

<p>Isbell, H.; Gorodetzky, C. W.; Jasinski, D.; Claussen, U.; Von
Spulak, T.; and Korte, F., &quot;Effects of (-)-delta-9.
Trans-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,&quot; Psychopharmacologia, 11
(2) : 184-88, 1967. </p>

<p>James, T., &quot;Dagga and Driving,&quot; S. A. Mediese
Tydskrif, 44: 580-81, May 16, 1970. </p>

<p>Johnson, R. D., &quot;'Medico-Social Aspects of Marijuana
Rhode Island Medical Journal, 51: 171-78, 1968. </p>

<p>Kalant, H., &quot;Marihuana and Simulated Driving,&quot;
Science, 166: 640, August 22, 1969. </p>

<p>Kaplan, J., Marijuana: The New Prohibition, New York: Pocket
Books, 1971. </p>

<p>Klein, A. W.; Davis, J. H.; and Blackbourne, B. D.,
&quot;Marihuana and Automobile Crashes,&quot; Journal of Di-mg
Issues, 1 (1) :18-26,1971. </p>

<p>Kolansky, H. and Moore, W. T., &quot;Effects of Marihuana on
Adolescents and Young Adults,&quot; Journal of American Medical
Association, 216 (3) : 485-92, April 1971. </p>

<p>Lambo, T. A., &quot;Medical and Social Problems of Drug
Addiction in West Africa,&quot; UN Bulletin on Narcotics, 17 (1)
: 3-13,1965. </p>

<p>LaRoe, A. D., &quot;Growth of the Marijuana Habit Among Our
Youth,&quot; American Weekly, 1940. </p>

<p>Light, W. 0. and Keiper, C. G., &quot;Effects of Moderate
Blood Alcohol Levels on Automobile Passing Behavior,&quot;
RR-69-4, Injury Control Research Laboratory, U.S. Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare, 1969. </p>

<p>Lindesmith, A. R., Addiction and Opiates, rev. ed., Chieago:
Aldine, 1968. </p>

<p>MacDonald, J. M., Rape, Offenders and Their Victims,
Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1971. </p>

<p>Manno, J. E.; Kiplinger, G. F.; Halne, S. E.; Bennett, I. F.;
and Forney, R. B., &quot;Comparative Effects of Smoking Marihuana
or Placebo on Human Motor and Mental Performance,&quot; Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 2 (6) :808-15,1970. </p>

<p>Maurer, D. W. and Vogel, V. H., Narcotics and Narcotics
Addiction, Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, 1962. </p>

<p>Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in New
York City, Lancaster: Jacques Cattel Press, 1944. </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W. H., &quot;Cannabis: A Reference,&quot; in The
Marihuana Papers, Solomon, D., ed., New York: Signet Books, 1966,
pp. 455-72. </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W. H., Progress Report (on Marihuana and Driving
Study), Department of Psychology, University of California at Los
Angeles, August, 1971. </p>

<p>Merrill, R. T., Marihuana, the New Dangerous Drug, Opium
Research Committee, Foreign Policy Association, Washington, D.C.,
March, 1938. </p>

<p>Miller, D. E., &quot;Marihuana: The Law and Its
Enforcement,&quot; Suffolk University Law Review, 3: 81-96, Fall
1968. </p>

<p>Miller, S. E., &quot;The Physician and the Prevention of Motor
Vehicle Accidents,&quot; Medical Times, 87 (7) : 861-69, July
1959. </p>

<p>Murphy, H. B. M., &quot;The Cannabis Habit: A Review of Recent
Psychiatric Literature,&quot; UN Bulletin of Narcotics, 15 (1) :
15-23, 1963. </p>

<p>National Institute of Mental Health, Statement to the Select
Committee on Crime, U.S. House of Representatives, Marijuana, H.
Rept. No. 91-798, 91st Cong., 2d Sess., 1970, p. 113, </p>

<p>National Institute of Mental Health, U.S. Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare, Marihuana and Health: Second
Annual Report to Congress from the Secretary, Health, Education,
and Welfare, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office,
1972. </p>

<p>Nichols, J. L., Drug Use and Highway Safety: A Review of the
Literature, Prepared for U.S. Department of Transportation, July
1971. </p>

<p>Oursler, W., Marijuana: The Facts, The Truth, New York: Pap _I
S. Eriksson, 1968. </p>

<p>P_olak; &quot;Chemical Analysis: Pot Test Developed for Use on
Drivers,&quot; Washington Evening Star, November 26,1971, p. 7. </p>

<p>President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration
of Justice, Task Force Report: Narcotics and Drug Abuse,
Washing-ton, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967. </p>

<p>&quot;Report of the Third Triannual Congress on Traffic
Accidents,&quot; Bulletin de Medecine Legate et de Toxicologic
Mcdecale, 12(4) :161-65,1969. </p>

<p>Robins, L. N. and Murphy, G. B., &quot;Drug Use in a Normal
Population of Young Negro Men,&quot; American Journal of Public
Health, 57: 1580--96, September 1967. </p>

<p>Robins, L. N.; Darvish, H. S.; and Murphy, G. E., &quot;The
Long-Term Outcome of Adolescent Drug Users,&quot; in Zubin, J.
and Freedman, A., eds., The Psychology of Adolescence, New York:
Grime and Stratton, 1970, pp. 159-78. </p>

<p>Robinson, V., &quot;Concerning Cannabis Indica,&quot; in Book
of Grass: An Anthology of Indian Hemp, Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog,
S., eds., New York: Grove Press, 1967, pp. 135-139. </p>

<p>Rosevear, J., Pot: A Handbook of Marihuana, New York:
University Books, 1967. </p>

<p>Rowell, E. A. and Rowell, R., On the Trail of Marihuana: The
Weed of Madness, Mountain View, California: Pacific Press, 1939. </p>

<p>Schofield, G. W., Unpublished Survey of the views of police
officers regarding marihuana and aggression (1968), in Kaplan,
J., Marijuana: The New Prohibition, New York: Pocket Books, 1971,
pp. 110-115. </p>

<p>Schoenfeld, D. D., &quot;The Sociological Study,&quot; in
Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana Problem in the City
of New York, Lancaster: Cattell Press, 1944, pp. 1-25. </p>

<p>Siler, J. P., et al., &quot;Marihuana Smoking in Panama,&quot;
The Military Surgeon, 73: 269--280,1933- </p>

<p>Simmons, J. L., Deviants, Berkeley: Glendessary Press, 1969. </p>

<p>Solomon, D., ed., The Marihuana Papers, New York: Signet
Books, 1966. </p>

<p>South Africa Interdepartmental Committee on Abuse of Dagga,
Report, Government Printer, 1952. </p>

<p>Tart, C. T., On Being Stoned: A Psychological Study of
Marijuana Intoxication, Palo Alto: Science and Behavior-Books,
1971. </p>

<p>Taylor, N., Narcotics: Nature's Dangerous Gifts, rev. ed., New
York: Dell, 1963. </p>

<p>Tinklenberg, J., &quot;Marihuana and Crime,&quot; Prepared for
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, October 1971. </p>

<p>Tinklenberg, J. R. and Stillman, R. S., &quot;Drug Use and
Violence,&quot; in Daniels, D. N., et al., eds., Violence and
Man's Struggle for Existence, Boston: Little, Brown and Company,
1970. </p>

<p>Trocchi, A., &quot;Marihuana and Sex,&quot; in Book of Grass:
An Anthology of Indian Hemp, Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog, S., eds.,
New York: Grove Press, 1967, p. 108. </p>

<p>U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means,
Taxation of Marihuana, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., 1937. </p>

<p>Waller, J. A., &quot;Chronic Medical Conditions and Traffic
Safety: A Review of California Experience,&quot; New England
Journal of Medicine, 273: 1413-20, Dec. 23, 1965. </p>

<p>Waller, J. A., &quot;Medical Impairment and Highway
Crashes,&quot; Police, 14 (6): 24-27, July-August, 1970. Walton,
R. P., Marihuana: America's New Drug Problem, Philadelphia:
Lippincott, 1938 </p>

<p>Watt, J. M., &quot;Dagga in South Africa,&quot; UN Bulletin on
Narcotics,13 (3):9-14,1961. </p>

<p>Weil, A. T., &quot;Cannabis,&quot; Science, 164: 2-8,
September 1969. Weil, A. T.; Zinberg, N.; and Nelsen, J. M.,
&quot;Clinical and Psychological Effects of Marihuana in
Man,&quot; Science, 162: 1234-42, 1968. </p>

<p>Weiss, B. and Laties, V. G., &quot;Enhancement of Human
Performance by Caffeine and Amphetamines,&quot; Pharmacological
Reviews, 14: 1-37,1962. </p>

<p>Weitzner, M.; Smith, H. B.; Gerver, I.; and Pollack, H.,
&quot;A Study of the Relationship Between Severity of Disposition
and Subsequent Criminal Behavior in a Sample of Youthful
Marijuana Offenders in New York State.&quot; Prepared for the
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, 1971. </p>

<p>White House Conference on Narcotic Drug Abuse, Proceedings,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office 1962. </p>

<p>Williams, G., cited in Wilson, E., &quot;The Crazy
Dreamers,&quot; Colliers, June 4,1969. </p>

<p>Zinberg, N. E. and Weil, A. T., &quot;The Effects of Marihuana
on Human Beings,&quot; Addictions, 16 (4) : 2G-42 Winter 1969. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>