
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B047-209</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132203 text/html 88784
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:21:53 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:47 GMT
Content-length: 88566
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE
ABUSE AND ADDICTION </b> </p>

<p> <b>US Government Office of Technology Assessment</b> </p>

<p> October 18, 1994 </p>

<p> <b><font size="5">CHAPTER 8 </font></b> </p>

<p> <b><font size="5">COMMUNITY ACTIVITY SETTINGS <br>
</font></b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> This chapter reviews substance use and abuse-related research
on factors and interventions in homes, schools, workplaces,
recreational and other developmental settings, and community-wide
settings. These community activity settings are the major
physical and social arenas in communities where individuals
interact and learn their values, attitudes, and behaviors, some
of which can increase or reduce the likelihood that individuals
will use and abuse substances. The addition of treatment settings
of all types and correctional settings would provide a fairly
comprehensive and systematic overview of all the major settings
in communities. Those settings are not discussed at length in
this report, however, because of its focus primarily on
prevention, even though comprehensive prevention strategies will
almost always want to include treatment and correctional
components as well. </p>

<p> By focusing on any one of these settings, researchers
interested in substance use and abuse can study the interplay of
multiple factors in a context, and practitioners can implement
programs designed for specific settings. By examining all of
these settings together, policymakers and practitioners
interested in substance abuse and the healthy development of
individuals and communities can identify and, within available
resources, implement concrete, systematic, and comprehensive
preventive interventions for communities as a whole. The
development and strengthening of community-wide norms against the
use of substances may well be one of the more important ways to
protect individuals against the use of substances. The section on
communities discusses some of the issues and tools for
community-wide prevention planning and coordination. </p>

<p> HOMES AND FAMILIES </p>

<p> Although American society expects families in their homes to
take the lead in dealing with substance abuse and other problem
behaviors (69), families in this country generally receive only
limited outside support in protecting themselves against
substance abuse. This situation may result in part from the
belief that most nuclear families can raise their children
largely independently and therefore do not need outside support,
and in part from the belief that teens and young adults are more
influenced by their peers. The first belief, however, is not
supported by long- standing practices in most societies, where
extended families and life-long neighbors have traditionally
helped raise children (although in the United States many parents
do not have access to these additional child-rearing resources
because of urbanization, high technology, and family mobility).
And the second belief is being questioned by growing evidence
that certain parenting practices and family intervention programs
can significantly reduce the risk of substance abuse among
adolescents and young adults. </p>

<p> An extensive and growing body of research strongly suggests
that many families do need, and can benefit from, support from
outside the family, and can often protect their children from
substance abuse, even into adolescence and adulthood. While some
of the findings reported here may appear to be commonsensical,
they are presented because they have been addressed by
researchers as part of a growing body of increasingly rigorous
research. Some of the studies focus on risk and protective
factors that are known or thought to be associated with substance
use and abuse, while others focus directly on substance use and
abuse. To reduce redundancy, factors and programs discussed
elsewhere in this report are for the most part not considered
here. </p>

<p> Protective Factors </p>

<p> Families can protect against substance use and abuse by
providing close family relationships, sufficient monitoring,
clear messages about substance use and abuse, and attractive
alternatives to substance use and abuse. </p>

<p> Close Family Relationships </p>

<p> Family relationships can help protect against substance use
and abuse when they are characterized by closeness and warmth,
effective and positive discipline, and successful problem solving
and communications. For example, young people who report feeling
close to their families are less likely to abuse substances than
those who report not feeling close to their families. Parents in
such families are more likely to comfort their children when they
are afraid, have two-way communications, and give children some
say in what happens to them (83,86,152). Because such parents
spend more time with their children, there can be more conflict,
but the time spent together can also lead to greater mutual
understanding and acceptance (23,59). </p>

<p> Parents can better channel their children away from substance
use and abuse if they have routinely used effective,
age-appropriate discipline methods, including clear expectations
and rules about homework, television, curfews, and drugs and
alcohol. Such methods are particularly effective when they are
enforced by praise and encouragement, instead of by threatening,
nagging, and blaming (42,47). In contrast, ineffective or
provocative family management practices, including overly harsh
or reluctant discipline practices and inconsistent followthrough,
are associated with early sampling of substances and later abuse
(8,115). Unruly behaviors in childhood can lead children to poor
achievement in school, social rejection by more conventional
peers, and greater association with other children with behavior
problems (46). </p>

<p> Skillful handling of problems by families helps children
learn how to distance themselves from problems and address them
with specific problem-solving strategies (77). Such skills can
help children later avoid the use and abuse of substances. By
contrast, families where children eventually abuse substances do
not make decisions and solve problems as well as other families
(97). Positive caregiving and discipline can prevent negative
outcomes even for highly stressed, minority, low socioeconomic
status (SES), urban families (177). When the birth parents are
not available, effective parenting by a surrogate, relative, or
neighbor can also be protective (173). </p>

<p> Sufficient Monitoring </p>

<p> When parents or parent surrogates know how their children are
spending their time, the risk of substance abuse is low (47).
Such monitoring may prevent abuse by reducing access to
substances, preventing use of substances, or allowing parents to
identify substance use earlier and to apply sanctions. Monitoring
may also entail greater involvement by parents in their
children's lives, which may help render substance use and abuse
less appealing by enhancing feelings of trust, warmth, and
closeness in the family. Such monitoring prevents substance
sampling across ages, ethnicities, and settings. </p>

<p> Single parents and working parents are often less able to
monitor their children thoroughly, because they can be in only
one place at a time. However, grandmothers, aunts, after-school
personnel, and other caring and supportive adults can also
monitor children and help reduce deviant behaviors (59,88). Early
autonomy and unsupervised leisure time apparently increase the
risk of substance use and abuse by children. </p>

<p> Clear Messages About Effects of Substances, Including
Sanctions </p>

<p> Children are more likely to avoid the use of substances if
they know that use will bring negative outcomes, such as adverse
physical and psychological effects, disapproval, and penalties
imposed by parents. Many children develop expectations about the
effects of substances as early as the preschool years (100),
influenced primarily by their parents. Frequent parental use even
of aspirin, cold pills, prescribed psychotropic medications (85),
and cough medicine can give children positive expectations about
the effects of substances (61). </p>

<p> When parents apply reliable penalties, such as revoking
privileges, and coach their children about the adverse effects of
substances, use is likely to discontinue (6). By contrast, if the
possible adverse effects (e.g., illness and depression) are not
emphasized and few negative sanctions are applied when
adolescents first use marijuana, while the immediate experiences
are to feel pleasantly stoned and potent (87), then continued use
and adult drug problems are more likely (37). Parental
disapproval of children's alcohol use has been found to be
protective across ethnic groups (33). Increased appreciation of
risks and social disapproval of substance use is credited with
the recent downturn in cocaine and marijuana use nationally (5). </p>

<p> Attractive Alternatives to Substance Use and Abuse </p>

<p> Participation in religious and other conventional and
challenging activities can protect against substance use and
abuse (26,81,111,173). Especially important are activities about
which youth are passionate. </p>

<p> Parents are more likely to guide their children away from
substance use and abuse if parents have instilled hope in their
children to succeed as adults (172). By contrast, some children
do not look forward to and plan for adulthood, but learn only
short-term thinking (see box 8-1) and have been encouraged by
their parents to believe they cannot succeed. </p>

<p> Parents of inner-city African American children face special
difficulties in holding out hope for their children's success
through traditional opportunities. Unemployment among African
American men is almost 50 percent (24) and the marriage rate
among African American women is low and still declining (10),
with substance use and abuse among African Americans increasing
as they reach 26 to 34 years of age, instead of decreasing as
with other racial and ethnic groups (164). </p>

<p> Risk Factors </p>

<p> Families also face risk factors, such as parental neglect and
rejection, behavioral problems and crime, physical and sexual
abuse, substance abuse in the family, failure in school,
emotional problems, negative life events, early use of
substances, substance abuse in the neighborhood, and poverty,
unemployment, and homelessness. Because some of these factors are
discussed elsewhere in this report, this section will focus only
on parental neglect and rejection, physical and sexual abuse,
substance abuse in the family, negative life events, and drug
trafficking in the neighborhood. </p>

<p> Parental Neglect and Rejection </p>

<p> Children who are neglected anytime, but especially from
earliest childhood, are at greater risk of substance abuse
(17,142). When children have been continually rejected, they
become immune to parental guidance. Such children fail to form
close relationships, get along with others, solve problems, and
regulate impulses. </p>

<p> Physical and Sexual Abuse </p>

<p> Physical or sexual abuse in childhood leads to greater
vulnerability to substance abuse in adolescence and adulthood
(38). Rape victims, particularly those with Post Traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD) symptoms, are 20 times more likely to have
subsequent substance abuse problems (165). Substance abuse
rehabilitation programs report that as many as 60 to 70 percent
of the female patients and 25 percent of the male patients have
been sexually victimized, while 43 percent have been beaten
(45,99,92). Victims of sexual or physical abuse often report
wishing to avoid unpleasant memories, including flashbacks to the
abuse (126). The use of substances may help some victims forget
for awhile (see box 8-2). </p>

<p> Substance Abuse in the Family </p>

<p> The biological children of alcoholics have a higher than
average chance of abusing alcohol, even if they are reared away
from their alcoholic parents (40,63). Thus, a part of the
vulnerability to alcohol abuse, at least for some, may be
inherited. Children of alcoholics, for example, may experience
more positive effects or fewer negative effects from the use of
alcohol. Either of these responses could result from individual
differences in experienced pharmacological effects of drugs (135)
or differences in temperament that can be modified by the use of
alcohol and other drugs (154). </p>

<p> In addition to friends and acquaintances, relatives are a
common source of alcohol and other drugs for teens. Family
members and other relatives can be very persuasive when they
offer such substances to teens. One study, that included both
abstainers and heavy users, found that young people refused
available substances, mainly alcohol, 46 percent of the time when
friends offered them, but only 18 percent of the time when
relatives outside the family offered them. When their own parents
offered such substances, the young people never refused (9).
Family members who use substances can also inadvertently make
them available to teens by leaving family cabinets containing
alcohol or pills unlocked (35). </p>

<p> Family members can learn how to use alcohol and other drugs
by watching and listening to abusing family members; they can
also adopt the abusing members' expectations about the effects of
these substances. For example, children of alcoholics are more
likely to think that the purpose of drinking is to get drunk
(107). They also have greater expectations for the use of alcohol
(143), and sometimes believe they can do things better after a
few drinks. </p>

<p> Families with a substance abusing parent experience
significant disruptions in many aspects of their lives, including
child rearing (160). Substance abusing parents and spouses often
have difficulties guiding their children, especially away from
substances, because of inconsistent nurturing, monitoring, and
disciplinary practices (36,47). Their abuse of substances can
also rob children of stability in life and of competent adult
role models. Even a nondrinking spouse can become so involved
with the drinking spouse and so depressed and isolated from
social support that children feel neglected (13). Marital quality
can be affected (160), and the level of conflict and verbal and
physical aggression can be high (151). In addition, adolescent
and adult children of substance abusers are less influenced by
their parents and have lower parental attachment, less
involvement with other people, more difficulty getting along with
other people (84), lower self- esteem, lower academic
achievement, higher depression (128), and a greater number of
other psychiatric symptoms (143). </p>

<p> Major Negative Life Events </p>

<p> Substance use and abuse often increase as children experience
more negative events (106,174) (see table 8-1). Adult alcoholics
report a significantly higher number of severe life events just
before their alcohol dependency begins (65), with seven out of
eight of them reporting disruptions in important personal
relationships, such as with friends, lovers, or spouses. Among
the elderly, late- onset alcoholism is reportedly preceded by new
feelings of loneliness and depression, perhaps also due to recent
losses of important relationships (120,134). </p>

<p> Such negative life events may heighten vulnerability to
substance abuse by increasing depression (174). For instance, one
study found that children who had lost a parent to death had a
7.5 times greater risk of developing a depression than other
children (60). Negative life events may also occasion perceptions
of helplessness and decreased personal control; these too can be
offset, at least for awhile, by some drugs (91). </p>

<p> Families are likely to have the greatest difficulty
preventing substance abuse if friends abuse substances (86,109)
or if substance use is rampant in the neighborhood
(39,44,51,124). Such conditions encourage substance use and
reduce the barriers against use by making drugs continuously
available and socially acceptable (even appealing) and by
providing temporary escape from the frequent hassles and
tragedies of life among highly transient and troubled (rather
than stable and helpful) neighbors (146). </p>

<p> Programs To Enhance Protective Factors </p>

<p> This section discusses some of the numerous programs that
have been developed for families with infants, school-aged
children, and young adults. Few of these programs specifically
target substance abuse and addiction, but many have been found to
enhance family-based protective factors and/or reduce risk
factors that can be associated with drug abuse. Unlike some
school-based programs, methodologically rigorous studies
correlating the efficacy of these programs to the level of
substance abuse and addiction have yet to be done. </p>

<p> Families With Infants </p>

<p> Parent education, prenatal and infant care, and social
support programs help strengthen involved and responsive
parenting (4), which in turn can significantly reduce substance
abuse risk factors such as child abuse and neglect and childhood
accidents. </p>

<p> Parents who had participated in such programs attained more
education, had fewer other children, and were less likely to be
on welfare by the time their children were 10 years old, than
parents who had not participated in such programs. Participating
parents reported less stress and more confidence in their
parenting (175). Most importantly, children were dramatically
less likely to experience attendance, behavior, or academic
problems in school (112,138,139). </p>

<p> These programs can take many forms: </p>

<p> o a neighborhood house where parents and their infants can
come during the day for companionship, child care advice, social
services, and health care from a stable professional staff (139);
</p>

<p> o twice-a-week home visits by the same nurse, from pregnancy
until the child is 2 years old (112); </p>

<p> o home visits, with child development advice, help in
acquiring other services, and time-limited family counseling to
lower conflict and increase support from the extended family; </p>

<p> o a public school dedicated to pregnant teens and new mothers
and that provides health and child care education, social
services, and intensive high school education (138); and </p>

<p> o parent meetings in the hospital where the baby was born
(175). </p>

<p> Families With School-Age Children </p>

<p> Parent training and support programs can help parents of
school-aged children motivate their children to more willingly
pay attention to and accept parental guidance and to develop
skills for success outside the family. A parent training program
called WINNING, provided through a Texas school system, increased
positive and corrective feedback from parents to children,
increased parent-child interactions, and decreased the attention
parents gave to inappropriate child behavior. Concomitantly, the
portion of their children's behavior that was inappropriate
decreased (43). </p>

<p> Another parent training and support program, &quot;How to
Help Your Child Succeed in School,&quot; was offered through
Seattle, Washington schools to increase protective factors and
reduce risk factors for substance use and abuse. After the
program, parents spent more time reading with their children and
provided more consistent positive and negative consequences for
behavior (70,71, 72,73,74). </p>

<p> Involving parents more in schools can further
supportparenting and prevent it from being undermined by peers
and by school environments. In the School Development Program in
New Haven, Connecticut, for example, parents serve as members of
the School Advisory Council and as employees or volunteers in
classrooms. Significant improvements have been seen in student
attendance, language skills, math scores, and social competence,
and virtually all classroom behavior problems have been
eliminated (34,41). </p>

<p> A community grassroots effort to provide these and other
resources for parents began 17 years ago in the Ravendale section
of Detroit, Michigan. The &quot;Joy of Jesus&quot; programs now
support families living in more than 30 contiguous blocks. Every
day after school about 250 youth of all ages participate in
scheduled activities such as tutoring, music, dance, gym,
writing, teen sex education, cultural field trips, university
tours, and an entrepreneur's club (for 30 teens who are starting
their own businesses). This program provides several substance
abuse protective factors and prevents the risk factor of school
failure, by monitoring report cards and enrolling students in an
individualized after-school motivational learning program, if
necessary. </p>

<p> In Los Angeles, California, an after-school tutoring and
activities program has been developed in a for profit apartment
building. The program, called EEXCEL, provides a room in the
building and live-in counselors and tutors who offer children a
&quot;sanctuary for education [and]...incentives for
learning.&quot; When report cards come out, good grades are
recognized at parties. Only those families that want this
resource for their children are accepted as tenants in the
building (108). </p>

<p> Atlanta, Georgia-based Inner-City Families in Action has been
presenting comprehensive information in a series of 2- hour
sessions about how specific drugs, such as alcohol or crack,
affect every system in the body, to residents in two Atlanta
housing projects. The curriculum is called &quot;You Have the
Right to Know.&quot; After 2 years of using the curriculum in
many locations, the narcotics arrests in both housing projects
are down (52). </p>

<p> Through flyers, personal invitations from schools, and a 1-
hour television special, parents were recruited to 87 local sites
around Seattle, Washington, for workshops on &quot;Preparing for
the Drug (Free) Years,&quot; led by trained parents. Surveys
showed that parents' attitudes and behaviors were changed in the
direction of providing protective factors. Parents also rated
highly the workshops' content, process, and leaders (71). </p>

<p> The Midwestern Prevention Project (Project STAR) in Kansas
City, Missouri, used the local media to recruit parents to become
involved in a school and parent substance abuse education course
and to repeat the messages for more than one year. This intensive
effort reduced the rate of increase in initiation of alcohol,
tobacco, and marijuana use among seventh and eighth graders who
had participated in the program, as compared to those who had not
participated (116). </p>

<p> Families With Young Adults </p>

<p> Job Corps, Peace Corps/VISTA programs, American Conservation
and Youth Service Corps, National and Community Service Programs,
universities, and the military all provide young people sheltered
work experiences, educational training if necessary, and
opportunities to live away from home with other young people in
structured environments. Research shows that such experiences
enhance the confidence of participants in their ability to work
hard (48). </p>

<p> Programs To Reduce Risk Factors </p>

<p> Reducing Drug-Trafficking and Substance-Using Peers </p>

<p> Operation Clean Sweep, now being run by the Chicago,
Illinois, Housing Authority, is designed to reduce drug dealing
and other crimes in housing projects. Staff approach one
high-rise building at a time, spending at least a whole day at
the building. State and local law enforcement officers and
housing authority security officers search apartment units (if
there is reasonable cause) for illegal weapons and unauthorized
residents. Authorized residents are given photo I.D. cards, while
others are put on the lease, given a 2-week pass, or asked to
leave. The maintenance staff makes repairs, cleans graffiti,
encloses lobbies, and builds a security station for 24-hour-a-day
surveillance and review of photo I.D.'s and passes for
admittance. The program is being replicated in cities across the
nation, with funding and technical assistance from the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). </p>

<p> Reducing Physical and Sexual Abuse </p>

<p> Physical and psychological security is important for the
emotional well-being of children (30) and may well reduce their
risk of later substance abuse. Mandatory arrest and brief
incarceration for physical and sexual abuse of children or
mothers has been shown to deter more repeat offenses than do
warnings or counseling alone (144), and court-mandated treatment
for convicted offenders seems to reduce later abuse even further
(50). Since 40 to 87 percent of adult sexual or physical abusers
also report alcohol or drug abuse, individuals treated for family
violence should perhaps also be screened and, if appropriate,
treated for substance abuse (176). </p>

<p> Reducing Substance Abuse in the Family </p>

<p> Substance abuse treatment for the family can reduce substance
abuse in the short-term and maintain those reductions in the
long-term (27,75, 101,147,149,153,). Substance abuse treatment
for married adults is more effective when both spouses are
involved (96), and especially with a behavioral approach to
marital problems (110). Clearly, families can help rehabilitate
substance abusers, thereby reducing the risk of substance abuse
for other family members. </p>

<p> Reducing Impact of Negative Life Events </p>

<p> Linking people with modest community supports during crises
or adjustments can reduce risk factors and enhance protective
factors. For example, when widows were contacted individually by
trained, previously widowed persons to discuss grief and
decisions to be made, 61 percent accepted the widow-aide services
(145) and one month after bereavement were less depressed and
less preoccupied with the past than widows who had received no
intervention. One year later, the intervention group was
significantly more resocialized in their roles as singles; two
years later, the health of the intervention group members was
significantly better than that of control group members (168). </p>

<p> Also, a 6-month program for newly separated or divorced
people in Colorado (which included both one-to-one counseling by
trained volunteers and group meetings about practical problems,
such as career planning and child- rearing) significantly reduced
the participants' problems and their anxiety, nervousness, and
fatigue. It also improved their psychological adjustment (less
guilt and self-blame, more competence), as compared with a
randomly selected control group (18). More indirect approaches
have also been tried. For example, socially isolated and lonely
individuals, who were provided a free blood pressure station in
the lobby of their innercity single room occupancy hotel, were
introduced to each other by the nurse and later formed a
&quot;Senior Activities Club.&quot; In another example, a surplus
food distribution service, that required individuals to work
together to get their food, produced new friendships (117). </p>

<p> Reducing Parental Neglect </p>

<p> Parents whose children failed to maintain gains after parent
education or family therapy are often socially isolated and
subject to seemingly insurmountable daily problems (49). An
experimental program--with weekly follow-up sessions with
isolated parents, to discuss environmental problems that affected
how parents saw their children's behavior--reduced maternal
criticisms of children, negative responses by children to
mothers, and child problem behaviors (170). When the weekly
discussions stopped, however, the negative interactions resumed. </p>

<p> In a more comprehensive program for low SES parents believed
by Child Protective Services to be at high risk for child abuse
or neglect, Project 12-Ways held meetings with parents in their
homes (95). Treatment goals were developed and, as needed,
behavioral training was provided in stress reduction,
assertiveness, self-control, leisure time planning, marital
counseling, and job finding. Social support groups, alcohol
treatment referral, homemakers, physicians, and mental health
workers were also involved. Parent compliance and involvement in
this 5- to 6-month program were high. Twenty months after
treatment, only 2 percent of Project 12-Ways parents abused or
neglected their children, while 10 percent of a nonprogram
comparison group did. </p>

<p> Families on the verge of having children placed in foster-
care, group homes, or psychiatric hospitals can benefit from
family preservation programs. Children have fewer behavioral and
academic problems when they are raised by birth-parents in safe
homes (130). Thus, the goal of a family preservation counselor is
to help the family out of the crisis and learn how to retain the
child safely at home. The interventions are typically intensive
and brief--for example, a counselor is available for meetings in
the home 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, for about 6 weeks. The
counselor deals with any relevant problems, helping the family
clarify values, set goals, and solve problems, and helps connect
family members with community resources (see box 8-3). </p>

<p> Many families, especially those with substance abuse
problems, need more prolonged help. A family support program that
provides such longer term support is Camden House, in the
Ravendale section of Detroit, Michigan. A rundown house was
purchased, renovated, and made the center of an outreach and
drop-in program for about 10 local families with multiple
problems that included substance abuse, lack of skills, chronic
unemployment, early pregnancy, and crime. After staff had worked
with the families for one to two years, taking one problem at a
time and actively mentoring the parents, six out of 10 of the
original parents were out of the Camden House program, drug-free,
trained and employed, and safely and responsibly raising their
children. </p>

<p> SCHOOLS AND PEERS </p>

<p> Millions of school-age youth in the United States experiment
with alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs annually, often
(especially with alcohol) in ways that can cause overdose deaths,
accidental injuries or deaths, and permanent impairments. Many
school-age youth continue to use substances and later develop
long-term addictions. To address these substance abuse problems,
schools provide the most important settings for reaching young
people with standardized, broadly applied educational and
preventive messages. </p>

<p> Because school-age youth are especially likely to initiate
the use of alcohol and other drugs, much of the research has
focused on use, rather than on abuse and dependency. Such
research is nevertheless relevant to an understanding of abuse
and dependency, since use is a precondition and contributor to
abuse and dependency and even experimental use can be harmful.
For example, nearly half of all youth who experiment with
cigarettes develop long-term smoking habits, and alcohol and
marijuana use by youth with no chronic problems still contributes
to highway deaths, crime, and violence. This section summarizes
results from an analysis of survey research on the causes of
school-age substance use and discusses school-based prevention
programming. </p>

<p> Analysis of Survey Research on Causes of School-Age Substance
Use </p>

<p> OTA commissioned a review of the survey research literature
on school-aged substance use that compiled, classified, and
examined 9,930 statistical analyses from 242 separate studies.
This is by far the most extensive systematic examination of this
body of research conducted so far. Most of the studies dealt with
school-based populations, but some focused on school-age army
recruits, dropouts, children of alcoholics, and individuals
involved in clinics. The studies reported statistical
relationships between substance use and its postulated causes.
Statistical findings from the study reports were sorted into 11
major categories and 50 subcategories (see table 8-2), and then
analyzed to identify strong, moderate, and weak statistical
relationships, as well as those that had been insufficiently
studied. </p>

<p> Characteristics of Database </p>

<p> The studies tended to focus on so-called gateway substances,
with tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana analyses accounting for 82
percent of the completed analyses (see figure 8-1). Cocaine,
inhalants, heroin, and prescription drugs, which have recently
received extensive social attention, have been relatively ignored
by quantitative researchers to date; none of these latter
categories of substance use accounted for more than 5 percent of
the analyses in the research reports examined. Gateway drugs are
indeed important, since they may lead some individuals to later
abuse. Nevertheless, the literature has gaps. Inhalants, for
instance, may well be one of the most commonly used and abused
substances among some youth, but they have received almost no
attention from survey researchers. </p>

<p> Although the primary measures were of use, not abuse, the
database included some measures of alcohol abuse (e.g., drunk
driving and impairment from alcohol use). Abuse of cocaine,
heroin, and analgesics was not measured. The percentages of
analyses in the database for each of the 11 major types of
independent variables is displayed (see figure 8-2). The types of
independent variables most studied were personality, use by
others, and cognitive factors (including attitudes, beliefs, and
values). </p>

<p> Results of Analysis </p>

<p> After being sorted into the 11 major categories and 50
subcategories, the average of all the correlations in each
subcategory was calculated. Then, each subcategory was ranked by
its average correlation and the rankings were divided into three
groups, defined by ranges of correlations: primary (with
correlations over .30), secondary (with correlations between
about .20 and .30), and tertiary (with correlations under about
.20) (see figure 8- 3). </p>

<p> Primary correlates </p>

<p> The four variables that dominate as correlates of and
possible contributors to substance use are: 1) prior and
concurrent use of substances, 2) substance use by peers and
friends, 3) perceived peer attitudes about substance use, and 4)
offers to use substances. The prominence of prior and concurrent
use is consistent with the reinforcing nature of substance use
itself. The prominence of the other three variables emphasizes
the importance of the social environment in contributing to and
reinforcing substance use among school-age youth. </p>

<p> Secondary correlates </p>

<p> Of the 15 variables judged to be of secondary importance,
seven are social variables: 1) susceptibility to peer pressure,
2) resistance skills, 3)??perception of social pressure to use
substances, 4)? beliefs that such pressure can be effectively
handled, 5) beliefs about social consequences of use, 6)
bondedness (especially to school), and 7) peer group
characteristics. With the exception of parent attitudes about
substance use, other parental variables--such as parental
supervision, monitoring, and relations--are notably missing as
primary or secondary correlates. </p>

<p> Tertiary correlates </p>

<p> Of the 38 variables found to have no more than a minor role
in substance use, 10 were included in at least 100 of the
correlational analyses in the database for this review. They are:
1) substance use by parents, 2) personality traits, 3)
intelligence, 4) social personality traits, 5) parental
relations, 6) affect, 7) participation in structured activities,
8) bonding with the peer group, 9) beliefs about health
consequences of using substances, and 10) self-esteem. </p>

<p> Variables requiring further study </p>

<p> Several of the secondary and tertiary variables in the
studies reviewed here were insufficiently examined to allow
general conclusions to be drawn. However, they may later prove to
be useful to the field. For example, religious affiliation and
the development of substance use-specific values, while not
extensively studied as separate variables, both address issues
related to social norms and influences that have often been found
to be associated with substance use; thus, an association between
these two variables and the onset of substance use might be
expected. Also, availability may prove to be important,
especially if it is defined in future studies more broadly (e.g.,
as physical and social availability, as discussed in ch. 5)
rather than as potential availability (that is, how easy it
appears to be to get a substance, if motivated), as many current
surveys define it. </p>

<p> Preventive Interventions </p>

<p> Schools can seek to prevent substance use and abuse through
curriculum-based drug prevention programs and through other, more
novel approaches, such as school-based clinics, student
assistance programs, and holistic environmental interventions.
School-based prevention efforts have been hampered, however, by a
lack of good evaluation data on the most widely marketed programs
and by insufficient information about and dissemination of the
more promising programs. </p>

<p> Numerous studies of the effectiveness of curriculum-based
drug prevention programs have been completed and reviewed (67).
Studies of prevention programs focusing on tobacco have been
extensively reviewed (16,20,54,58,94,132,155) and alcohol studies
have been reviewed several times (62,64,102). Reviews of
school-based prevention curricula that specifically target
marijuana or cocaine do not exist. However, several reviews have
examined studies of programs designed to prevent the use of
multiple substances (7,25,102,131,156). Even these reviews,
however, typically focus primarily on tobacco and alcohol. </p>

<p> Effectiveness of Drug Abuse Resistance Education Program </p>

<p> Three merchandised curriculum programs have captured a
sizable share of the prevention program market: DARE (Drug Abuse
Resistance Education); Quest: Skills for Living; and Here's
Looking at You 2000. Of these, evaluations only of DARE have been
reported in sufficient numbers to allow conclusions to be drawn. </p>

<p> The DARE program is delivered in schools by uniformed police
officers who have been trained in any of five regional training
centers. It was designed by the Los Angeles, California, Unified
School District, which borrowed from research-based programs
developed in the early 1980s. DARE is delivered annually to about
5 million students in all 50 States, at a total cost of about $50
million (an average annual cost of about $10 per student) (93).
DARE is thus one of the better funded drug prevention programs in
schools. </p>

<p> One research team examined 17 published and unpublished
evaluations of DARE (53). For the 11 studies that met minimal
standards of methodological rigor, the average reductions in
substance use were very small. Use among control schools and DARE
schools was roughly equal. The few studies that were longitudinal
found neither short-term nor long-term reductions. </p>

<p> DARE has important strengths, including favorable reactions
among students who have participated in DARE programs, widespread
political support, substantial funding, uniformly reported
improvements in school-police relations, highquality of program
implementation, and expert marketing. However, these strengths
have not guaranteed that DARE is always effective as a drug
prevention program. A scientific advisory group has been
established to review research and evaluation of the DARE program
and to consider changes in the curriculum. </p>

<p> The General Accounting Office (GAO) estimated that about
one-fourth of the funds given to the States and local schools
under the Drug-Free School and Communities Act went toward
purchasing and delivering school curricula (163). However, widely
adopted curriculum packages (such as Quest: Skills for Living;
Here's Looking at You 2000; Project Adventure; BABES; Project
CHARLIE; and Children Are People) have presented no adequate
evaluation results that allow program effectiveness to be judged.
Evaluations conducted to date have been primarily short-term
reviews for dissertations and theses, and they lack interpretable
behavioral end-points. Given the widespread dissemination of
these curricula, quality evaluation studies would be important. </p>

<p> Conclusions About Curriculum-Based Prevention in Schools </p>

<p> Curriculum-based drug prevention efforts to date can be
characterized as showing promise (67,156), but critics point out
that the effectiveness of these programs, especially those that
are being commercially marketed, has not yet been proven and that
significant difficulties remain (102). Some of these are
methodological difficulties intrinsic to all field trial
research, while others relate to the possibly intrinsic
limitations of curriculum approaches when used alone. Individual
studies suggest that curriculum-based prevention programs in the
schools may ultimately be proven to be effective for preventing
substance use among some youth, especially when used as
components in more comprehensive substance use prevention
efforts. However, school-based prevention technologies currently
in use have not been refined and tested enough to demonstrate
their effectiveness for reducing substance use for students in
general, and especially not for multiproblem youth, who are at
higher risk of substance abuse. Clearly, for DARE and for the
other major school-based curriculum prevention programs,
resources must be set aside to properly evaluate program results.
</p>

<p> Noncurricular Approaches to School-Based Prevention </p>

<p> Curriculum-based efforts have dominated the field, largely
because they are relatively simple to understand, implement, and
replicate, and because methods to evaluate them have become
standardized. However, curriculum-based prevention programs have
not been demonstrated to be effective, and several noncurricular
approaches have recently emerged, including student assistance
programs, school-based clinics, and more holistic
school-community collaborations and alterations of psychosocial
environments in schools. These approaches have been evaluated
only rarely, but interest in them has been growing. For example,
although student assistance programs remain largely unevaluated,
they accounted for about half of the spending, under the Drug-
Free Schools and Communities Act, in six recently evaluated urban
school districts (163). </p>

<p> Student assistance programs try to identify substance-using
students early on and then provide social support, build skills
for dealing with life problems, or refer to treatment, as
appropriate. Peers often help as crisis managers, small group
facilitators, and referral agents, while adults often act as
program facilitators and counselors. Programs typically counsel
students who are children of alcoholics, who use alcohol or drugs
abusively, and who are performing poorly at school. Programs can
also help parents address their children's needs. </p>

<p> Only three evaluations of student assistance programs were
found by OTA for this review. Two focused on process issues only
(89,118), while one addressed program outcomes (90). The outcome
study focused on interventions for students in six residential
facilities, including a locked correctional facility. Although
the sites are atypical for student assistance programs, the
program otherwise resembled student assistance programs in
schools. </p>

<p> The outcome study found that marijuana and tobacco use
declined among program participants in five of the six
facilities. Alcohol use declined in half of the sites, while
alcohol use in two sites remained unchanged and in one site rose
slightly. The declines in use were observed at about nine and 15
months after participation in the program. Although these results
are promising, one study (especially a study conducted in
nonschool settings) cannot support general conclusions about the
effectiveness of student assistance programs in schools. </p>

<p> Many schools, either directly or through community agencies,
are bringing services into schools to help deal with social and
health problems that are often interrelated, such as depression,
violence, substance use, and sexually transmitted diseases.
School-based clinics and youth service centers are being set up
to provide comprehensive and integrated health and social
services. This new wave of programming has been supported by
State governments, local school districts, and private
foundations. </p>

<p> School-based clinics have been developing in response to
growing poverty, widespread lack of insurance, and increases in
health and social problems among youth. One study indicates that
the percent of adolescents defined as living in poverty increased
from 15 percent in 1979 to 19 percent in 1986 (22). Not all youth
living in poverty are covered by Medicaid or other health
insurance, and millions of other youth (e.g., in near-poor or
recently unemployed families) also lack health insurance.
Violence, teen pregnancy, and substance use and abuse remain high
or are increasing in many communities, and these problems often
require direct one-on-one medical or social interventions, if
they are to have a chance of being resolved. </p>

<p> Self-referral and other data suggest that school-based
clinics are providing health care and social support. For
example, a survey of 306 such clinics in 33 States and Puerto
Rico (22) found that about half the visits were for medical
problems, such as injuries and illnesses, with 40 percent of the
visits for counseling and 10 percent for birth control supplies
or counseling about reproductive issues more generally. No
evaluations seem yet to have focused on the effectiveness of
school-based clinics for assisting with the treatment and
prevention of substance use and abuse. School-based clinics
perhaps should not focus primarily on these problems, but as
clinics expand in numbers questions will naturally and more
frequently arise about their role in addressing substance use and
related problems. </p>

<p> Several notable collaborations between schools and other
community agencies and resources have been supported and, at
least in part, studied. For example, the Community Partnership
Program, administered by the Center for Substance Abuse
Prevention, has supported more than 250 local partnerships for
the prevention of substance use and abuse, with over 60 percent
actively involving schools as coalition members. Each site must
have a local evaluator that will monitor primarily program
activities, and a national evaluation to monitor program
activities and outcomes has begun. The local evaluations are
expected to vary widely, in part because uniform, accepted
standards for community-wide program evaluation have yet to be
developed. Outcome findings are expected by 1997. </p>

<p> The Midwest Prevention Project (116) provides and studies
school-based interventions in the greater Kansas City, Missouri,
metropolitan area and in Marion County (Indianapolis), Indiana.
Due to constraints in the study design, the evaluation results to
date speak directly only to the impact of the school-based
curricular interventions; the impact of community organization,
parental, and media components cannot be evaluated. Nonetheless,
this approach suggests the potential for communities to support
school- based prevention efforts. </p>

<p> Cities-in-Schools is a national nonprofit organization
devoted to preventing students from dropping out, through
partnerships among schools, local governments, and businesses.
Cities-in-Schools operates in 122 communities in 21 states with
384 schools participating in the program. The national
organization strives to bring health, social, and employment
services into schools across the nation, to help youth find jobs,
tutors, and counseling and to motivate them to stay in school. A
national staff assists local boards. A prominent person in
business presides over each local program, directs fund-raising,
and organizes a team of professionals to help potential dropouts.
In most programs, a case manager is assigned to each high-risk
child. Beyond these basics, programs vary greatly, focusing on a
diversity of prevention and intervention strategies. Several
Cities- in-Schools sites have achieved national attention.
Although little concrete evaluation data are available about the
effects of these programs in general or on substance use, the
model appears promising and warrants further study. </p>

<p> Changing the social or physical climate in schools may also
help reduce substance use and abuse. Future research and
evaluation studies could focus on the impacts on substance use
and abuse of this and other holistic models, such as open versus
closed campuses, alternative schools, and after- school care
programs. These models may be especially promising for high risk
youth suffering from multiple risk factors and limited protective
factors, many of which are rooted in problematic (often substance
using and abusing) homes, neighborhoods, peer groups, and other
subcultures, which cannot easily be influenced by more limited
school- based prevention approaches alone. </p>

<p> WORKPLACES </p>

<p> Workplaces can also contribute to and protect against alcohol
and drug abuse. This section reviews literature on factors and
interventions associated with substance abuse in the workplace,
with a special focus on the role of workplace settings
themselves. Researchers have investigated the causes of substance
abuse among workers for nearly four decades, and U.S. management
and labor have been concerned about workplace substance abuse for
over a century (150,158,159). Alcohol has been the drug most
studied in workplaces and appears to be the drug most commonly
used. </p>

<p> Magnitude of Problem </p>

<p> The prevalence of substance abuse among the employed remains
inadequately documented, based on a small number of flawed
studies. For American workers more information exists on the
extent of alcohol use and dependence (although gaps remain) than
on the use and abuse of illegal substances (57, 68,114). </p>

<p> The 1988 National Health Interview Survey found that about 13
percent of employed men and 6 percent of employed women were
alcohol dependent (68). This nationwide household survey of
almost 27,000 individuals found that, for both men and women, the
percentage of white-collar workers who drank was greater than the
percentage of blue-collar workers who drank. However, among those
who drank, blue-collar workers drank more than white-collar
workers. Consistent with an earlier survey in Detroit, Michigan,
alcohol-related disorders were also found to be greater among
blue-collar workers, with the rates highest for men who were
craftsmen, laborers, and service workers, and for women who were
machine operators, laborers, and service workers (114). Another
investigator has reported that the rate of on-the- job substance
use among young men in the 6 months prior to the study was about
28 percent (105). </p>

<p> Substance abuse contributes to workplace problems, such as
accidents, injuries, absenteeism, turnover, lost productivity,
compensation claims, and insurance costs (11). The total cost to
the American economy related to substance abuse has been
estimated to be more than $144 billion a year, with about 60
percent due to alcohol abuse and 40 percent due to the abuse of
other drugs (121). Costs to the economy include costs due to
medical care, prevention, law enforcement, and lost productivity.
The 1985 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse found that
substance-using employees were 3.6 times more likely to have
accidents than nonusing employees. They had 2.5 times more
absences of 8 days or more. They were three times more likely to
be tardy than nonusing employees and were 2.2 times more likely
to ask for early dismissal. They requested sick leave three times
as much as nonusing employees. They were five times as likely to
file for worker compensation. The total cost of lost productivity
due to alcohol and other drug abuse has been estimated at more
than $33 billion in 1985 and a little more than $43 billion in
1988 (122). </p>

<p> Factors Affecting Individuals in Workplaces </p>

<p> Substance abuse in workplaces can be affected by nonworkplace
factors and workplace factors. </p>

<p> Nonworkplace Factors </p>

<p> Early research attributed drinking and other drug problems on
the job to factors outside the workplace. Substance abuse was
seen as a problem brought to the workplace but not caused by the
workplace, and some believed that substance abusers selected
workplaces where they could conceal their problems. This view
assumed that substance abusers had the knowledge and freedom to
choose jobs on this basis, an assumption unlikely to apply to
all, given the limits of education and work experience among many
substance abusers, especially blue-collar workers (113). In any
case, family and community experiences interact with workplace
experiences (2), and workers from families and other subgroups
that drink may find that drinking influences their work lives as
well. </p>

<p> As noted earlier, drinking problems are more common among
those with lower SES, although drinking occurs more frequently
among higher SES individuals (31). Workplaces that employ more
lower SES employees may therefore be expected to have more
alcohol abusers (157). </p>

<p> The acceptance of alcohol and other drugs in the larger
society outside the workplace can also influence substance use
and abuse in the workplace. This can be seen in the new attitudes
in American society toward smoking. Consumers used to be assailed
constantly by advertisements presenting smoking in a positive
light, but are now more informed about its negative effects on
health. As a result, smoking has been banned from many airplane
flights, restaurants, stores, and public and private workplaces. </p>

<p> The availability of alcohol in the local community from which
a work organization derives its employees can also influence
workplace drinking (157). Higher rates of drinking problems exist
in communities where alcohol is cheaply and widely available and
alcohol outlets remain open for long hours. </p>

<p> Workplace Environment Factors </p>

<p> Several decades ago, researchers distinguished four
categories of workplace factors that place employees at risk for
excessive drinking (127). They are: </p>

<p> o lack of work visibility, </p>

<p> o absence of job structure, </p>

<p> o lack of social controls that discourage alcohol use, and </p>

<p> o job stress. </p>

<p> A more recent review (157) of risk factors internal to
workplace environments identified the following elements: </p>

<p> o alienation and powerlessness, </p>

<p> o work stress, </p>

<p> o structural features of the workplace, </p>

<p> o influence of administrative subcultures, </p>

<p> o poorly implemented intervention programs, and </p>

<p> o union-management conflict. </p>

<p> It has also been suggested that individual factors and
perceived work situations may be more important for alcohol use
than objective work situations (136). Those with boring and
routine jobs, or jobs over which they have little control, may be
more likely to drink (3,76). For example, a study of auto factory
assembly line workers found that 40 percent drank alcohol at work
(129). Other research found a consistent relationship between
powerlessness and alcohol use, and no evidence that work
experience or social support moderated alcohol use (137). </p>

<p> Workplace subcultures, whether administrative or
occupational, may also encourage drinking or the use of other
drugs at work. Administrative support for heavy drinking can
exist throughout the work organization or can be limited to
specific sites or occasions. Subcultures that can support the
heavy use of alcohol, but strongly discourage the use of illicit
drugs, are found in the military (28,119). Anecdotal reports
suggest that other occupational settings have encouraged the use
of cocaine (e.g., entertainment industry). Although available
research does not support the conclusion that workplace
subcultures are the primary cause of substance abuse, there is
evidence that at least alcohol problems vary widely according to
occupation (148). </p>

<p> Workplaces can offer protective factors as well. For some,
the fact of being employed, with the income and stability and
status that employment can convey, may offer protection against
substance use and abuse. If unemployment and underemployment are
viewed as risk factors, then employment by itself, at a decent
wage in a decent job, may offer protection. In addition, the
specific characteristics of a workplace can be protective. For
example, the risk factors listed above could be viewed as the
extremes on a continuum, the other end of which could be expected
to offer protection. Thus, work visibility, job structure,
manageable stress, worker involvement and empowerment, supportive
administrators, well implemented treatment and prevention
programs, and union-management harmony could be expected to be
protective factors. </p>

<p> Interventions </p>

<p> Two primary ways of dealing with employee substance abuse and
health have emerged: traditional employee assistance programs
(EAPs), which seek to help employees with identified problems,
and health promotion programs, which seek to prevent illness and
promote health (56). </p>

<p> Employee Assistance Programs </p>

<p> EAPs help employees with personal problems at the employer's
expense, by providing services directly (through the work
organization) or indirectly (through a provider in the community)
(140). In some workplaces, for example, EAPs are located in
medical departments, which generally provide emergency medical
care and may also provide preventive or rehabilitative care.
Medical departments, however, appear to be declining as sites for
EAPs (141). </p>

<p> EAPs rely on a strategy of constructive confrontation, which
assumes that supervisors or coworkers of substance abusers will
help refer them to the EAPs. In addition, workers are encouraged
to refer themselves to EAPs for assistance. </p>

<p> A review of what works in fighting substance abuse in the
workplace stresses that an employee assistance program is a key
to a good workplace program (167). It also recommends a written
drug-free workplace policy, management and supervisory training,
drug testing in workplaces where appropriate (one example of
which is when substance abuse may be dangerous to self or
others), and employee education programs focused on substance
abuse. Testing may well prevent substance use and abuse in
workplaces. </p>

<p> Some studies suggest that EAPs can be cost-effective for
business. The Department of Labor has reported thatemployers
generally find that for every dollar invested in an EAP, savings
of from $5 to $16 are achieved (167). Other reviews of the
limited evaluations of the economic and other benefits of EAPs
have found that health care costs and absenteeism, for example,
decline after employees have been served by EAPs (178). </p>

<p> However, EAPs have also been criticized in some cases, for
their inability to reach those at greatest risk, their incomplete
coverage of lower status employees, their failures to identify
problem drinkers early enough, their inadequate handling of
situation-dependent drinking problems, and their uncertain
effectiveness in rehabilitating problem drinkers (140). The
relative lack of EAPs in medium and small workplaces is an
important constraint on the ability of EAPs to offer more
widespread protection to the employed. </p>

<p> Health Promotion Programs </p>

<p> Health promotion programs seek to prevent illness and promote
wellness through behavior change. For example, they provide
information and support activities to help individuals increase
exercise, quit smoking, change diets, and manage stress and
hypertension. There are several advantages to using such general
workplace health promotion programs to prevent substance abuse in
the context of promoting positive life-style changes for all
employees. These include: </p>

<p> o little or no stigma; </p>

<p> o the use of positive, optimistic approaches; </p>

<p> o ease in selling to employees and generating enthusiasm;
and, </p>

<p> o generous corporate financing of health promotion programs
(103). </p>

<p> The use of health promotion programs to prevent substance
abuse can also present problems, however. For example, prevention
historically has been one of the lowest priorities for Federal
funding (104). When implemented by businesses, health promotion
programs may inadequately deal with the needs of a particular
work organization's employees, since the programs often come from
outside and have not been tailored to fit the needs of a
particular group of employees. Decision makers within a workplace
may decide on the basis of intuition, whim, or trendiness to buy
a health promotion program from the increasing number of
purveyors of programs (140). Furthermore, many of the proponents
of marketed health promotion programs have failed to adequately
evaluate their programs. Unfortunately, this has been
particularly true of activities intended to prevent substance
abuse. </p>

<p> Environment-Oriented Approaches to Substance Abuse Prevention
</p>

<p> A third approach, often associated with Scandinavia, focuses
less on changing employee behaviors and more on altering
workplace factors that influence worker health. The Swedish Work
Environment Fund, established in 1972, supports research,
workplace innovations, information dissemination, and training to
achieve better working environments. Grants that support
occupational health centers and research programs in Sweden are
financed through a combination of employer fees, payroll taxes,
and government financial assistance. </p>

<p> By contrast, the goal of alcohol policy in the workplace in
the United States has for centuries been to change individual
drinking behavior (1). Researchers have recently begun to focus
on how the workplace environment influences problem drinking. The
Harvard School of Public Health, jointly funded by the National
Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism and the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation, is surveying thousands of managers and work
groups in up to 10 large multinational corporations (171). The
study will determine corporate and work site patterns of
drinking, levels of work site drinking problems as they relate to
attitudes and practices of management, how corporate culture
affects managerial behavior and drinking problems in the
workplace, and what role the work group plays in promoting or
preventing problem drinking. </p>

<p> RECREATIONAL SETTINGS </p>

<p> Recreational and other developmental activities and settings
may also contribute to the prevention of substance use and abuse,
or by their absence increase the risk. Examples of such
recreational and other developmental activities and settings
include Boys and Girls Clubs, Boy and Girl Scouts, organized
sports, cultural activities, and local park and recreation
department programs. </p>

<p> Organized Activities and Drug Abuse </p>

<p> Research on the impact of organized youth activities on
substance use and abuse is limited, and only a few studies have
addressed the issue directly, while others have addressed it more
indirectly. </p>

<p> One study (which relied extensively on reports from employees
of Boys and Girls Clubs) found that public housing developments
served by Clubs had 22 percent less drug activity than
developments not served by Clubs. The presence of crack in
particular was 25 percent lower, and even lower in developments
served by new Clubs with SMART Moves, a substance abuse
prevention program (133). </p>

<p> A more extensive investigation has been conducted by the
Search Institute, which has surveyed 180,000 6th through 12th
grade youth in 430 school districts since 1988. Analysis of the
data found that as developmental assets increased (including
involvement in music, school team sports, nonsport school-based
cocurricular activities, nonschool clubs or organizations, and
churches) at-risk behaviors decreased, including the use of
alcohol, tobacco, and illicit drugs (12). Specifically, the
correlations: </p>

<p> o tend to be small; </p>

<p> o are strongest for tobacco use and weakest for alcohol use;
and, </p>

<p> o are slightly higher for church involvement than for other
activities. </p>

<p> Involvement in youth programs and activities has been found
to be associated with fewer at-risk behaviors among youth. One
study found that higher levels of four youth assets (perceived
positive school climate, family support, involvement in
structured youth activities, and involvement in church or
synagogue) were associated with lower levels of 20 at-risk
indicators, contained mainly in eight at-risk domains (alcohol,
tobacco, illicit drugs, sexuality, depression/suicide, antisocial
behavior, school, and vehicle safety) (12). High school students
who listed no assets, for example, reported an average of 5.6
at-risk indicators, while students listing all 4 assets reported
only 1.7 at- risk indicators. </p>

<p> A study of different communities found that 55 percent of the
youth in the healthier communities (defined by fewer at- risk
behaviors among youth) were involved in structured activities,
whereas only 39 percent of the youth in the least healthy
communities were involved in such activities (19). </p>

<p> Qualitative assessments across prevention disciplines support
these findings. For example, although a review and analysis of
delinquency, adolescent pregnancy, substance abuse, and school
failure and dropout prevention programs did not directly
investigate connections between youth development programs and
substance abuse prevention, its authors concluded that the
elements in youth development organizations can play a critical
role in preventing each of these problem behaviors (48). </p>

<p> The Carnegie Council on Adolescent Development has identified
several successful prevention efforts launched by national
youth-serving organizations, including the adolescent pregnancy
efforts of the Association of Junior Leagues and of Girls, Inc.,
and found that participation in such programs was associated with
fewer at-risk behaviors (32). The Carnegie Council's Task Force
on Youth Development and Community Programs concluded that, taken
together, current social science theory and field evaluations
provide a solid rationale for strengthening and expanding the
role of community-based programs in promoting healthy adolescent
development, since unsupervised after-school hours represent a
period of significant risk, with young adolescents standing a
greater chance of engaging in substance abuse. </p>

<p> Another study tested whether inactivity or boredom was
associated with substance abuse. It compared adolescents who had
been clinically diagnosed as substance abusers with a comparison
group of nonsubstance abusers, and found that the substance
abusers experienced their leisure activities as more boring, even
though they had participated in more leisure activities
(including such activities as going to concerts and going for a
drive). Available leisure activities may, for some youth, fail to
satisfy &quot;their need for optimal arousal,&quot; leaving them
more vulnerable to the appeal of drugs (78). </p>

<p> Thus, being active does not by itself protect against
substance abuse. Some activities, such as those that are
unstructured and unsupervised, may even increase the risks of
substance use and abuse through association with a wider range of
peers, some of whom are using substances. In addition, activities
perceived as boring may not protect against substance use and
abuse. More research is needed, to clarify the aspects of
recreational and other leisure activities that may protect
against substance use and abuse. Research might profitably focus
on whether activities that are supervised, structured, drug-free,
empowering, skills- building, self-esteem-promoting, active,
shared, and nonboring (or some combination of those) are
associated with lower levels of substance use and abuse. </p>

<p> Elements of Notable Programs </p>

<p> Several of the most important elements of notable substance
abuse prevention programs are provided by youth development
programs as well. These include: </p>

<p> o Promoting social and life skills. Programs that rely
exclusively on transmitting information about the health, legal,
and social risks of substance use and abuse are generally
ineffective (79). If, as the author of a recent longitudinal
study contends, substance use is a symptom rather than a cause of
personal and social maladjustment, promoting social and
psychological well-being may help prevent substance abuse (66).
Many alcohol and other drug prevention programs focus on the
development of social and life skills, as a way to help youth
understand their emotions, control their anger, curb
aggressiveness, and presumably reduce their inclination to turn
to substances (66,166). </p>

<p> o Strengthening families. Increasingly, alcohol and other
drug prevention programs are recognizing and addressing family
factors. Youth development organizations afford opportunities for
involving parents in recreational and other nonschool, nonfamily
activities. </p>

<p> o Promoting healthy peer interactions. Several studies have
shown the value of using peers as role models in prevention
programs. One study conducted a meta-analysis of 143 adolescent
drug prevention programs and collapsed prevention programs into 5
strategies or types: knowledge only, affective (i.e., addressing
feelings) only, peer programs, knowledge plus affective, and
alternatives. Peer programs that highlight peer influences and
emphasize skill building were found to be the most successful
(156). Peers are often the best positioned to help others build
resistance skills and bring about significant results in reducing
substance use, as compared to teachers or other adults. Peer
counseling and student assistance programs, for example, offer
unique opportunities for youth to cope with difficult issues and
develop skills to resist peer pressure (33). </p>

<p> o Indirect and participatory approaches to substance use.
Substance prevention programs are more likely to be effective if
they develop creative ways to reach and connect with their
participants. Many programs incorporate lessons concerning
substance use into activities such as games, theatrical
performances, creative arts, and sports. Some programs avoid
stating in their names that they are focusing on substance use
prevention, and in this way often attract more youth and preclude
them from feeling stigmatized (161). Because youth spend so much
time in school, where didactic, lecturing approaches so often
predominate, these approaches may well be less effective in
nonschool activities. GAO has recommended that programs engage
youth in activities that are more motivational and participatory,
such as support groups, dramatic productions, leadership
training, and role- playing (161). </p>

<p> o Alternative activities. Communities are beginning to create
healthy, substance-free alternative activities, such as teen
centers or drug-free parties, for youth who may feel there is
nothing else to do. This alternatives approach grows from the
idea that youth who turn to substances to meet certain social and
psychological needs can meet those needs in more positive and
healthy ways without chemicals. In its guide book, Prevention
Plus III, CSAP stresses the importance of incentives for youth to
participate in such alternative activities. At a minimum,
activities should reflect the interests and preferences of the
youth involved. A 10-year study with over 500 subjects found that
the largest percentage (67 percent) of assuredly recovered
substance abusers, defined as those who have been clean for five
years, used alternative activities to cope with or improve their
moods (169). However, although it remains a promising strategy,
many agree that more substantial research is needed. </p>

<p> The elements of notable programs suggest that youth
development organizations may be able to play a greater role in
the prevention of substance abuse. First, they can provide
specific information about substances and training in refusal
skills. Second, they can address life skills development,
emotional issues, and academic remediation. Further, they can
involve both youth and their families, as well as peers, in
settings for collaborative, substance-free interactions. Research
has shown the importance of building supportive communities
through such networks of social support that can diminish
substance use and abuse and promote healthy youth development
(14,19,133). PLANNING, IMPLEMENTING, AND EVALUATING
COMMUNITY-WIDE PROGRAMS </p>

<p> If substance abuse and addiction problems in a particular
community affect individuals via multiple risk and protective
factors interacting in multiple settings, then efforts to prevent
these problems may require multipronged efforts involving
schools, parents, media messages, and other community resources
(116). While it is possible that an assessment of problems may be
carried out by relatively few individuals, it is extremely
unlikely that the planning, implementation, and evaluation of
community-wide efforts can be achieved without participation of
residents and leaders throughout the community. Widespread
coordination and cooperation are intrinsic to community-wide
efforts. To help achieve such community-wide coordination and
cooperation, several different types of community coalitions have
been created. The CSAP has studied the ability of 7 pilot test
communities, under Community Partnership grants, to gather
information on 15 community-wide indicators of alcohol and other
drug abuse (see table 8-3). Some of these indicators are directly
related to and measure the extent of substance abuse and
addiction among subpopulations in a community (e.g., number of
drug positive urine samples from pregnant women at time of
delivery). Some of the indicators measure the extent of behaviors
or outcomes that may be directly related to substance abuse
(e.g., number of single vehicle nighttime accidents and number of
deaths due to alcohol and other drugs). Some of the CSAP
indicators relate to community activity settings, such as
workplaces and schools. </p>

<p> CSAP has recently supported, through the Community
Partnership program and the High-Risk Youth program, the use of
nonquantitative techniques to gain insights into substance abuse
and addiction and related problems in communities. This
information can be garnered by ethnographers and citizen
informants, who can report on the values, attitudes, purposes,
behaviors, and experiences of individuals in the subcultures of
communities. </p>

<p> The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation has funded 13 community
coalitions in its &quot;Fighting Back&quot; program to reduce
substance abuse and addiction. About 600 coalitions now belong to
a national organization, Community Anti-Drug Coalitions of
America (CADCA). Some coalitions have been formed to address
other health and social issues, including the ASSIST and COMMIT
community tobacco control programs, funded by the National
Institutes of Health, and the Planned Approach to Community
Health (PATCH) program, funded by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention to encourage local coalitions for community health
planning and implementation (29). HUD now has funds to support
Community Coalitions Against Crime, which also address substance
abuse and addiction. And CSAP has supported numerous activities
conducted by approximately 250 coalitions through its Community
Partnership program (see table 8-4). </p>

<p> A recent review of some of the Community Partnerships
revealed the wide range of activities they have so far
implemented, including general prevention programs, public
education, alternative activities, community organizing and
empowerment, advocacy for policy change, and other community
activities. </p>

<p> Although coalitions have not been extensively evaluated as
yet, and although the evaluations that are now in process will
not produce outcome results for several years, there is reason to
believe that community coalitions offer promise for
community-wide efforts to prevent substance abuse and addiction.
First, as documented by this report, the factors contributing to
substance abuse and addiction are multiple and interactive.
Second, these factors interact in subcultures and community
activity settings that can encourage or inhibit substance abuse
and addiction and are widely dispersed. Thus, especially in
communities severely impacted by these problems, multiple efforts
addressing multiple factors in multiple settings may be required.
A recent report from the General Accounting Office concluded that
&quot;preliminary research results indicated that a
community-based approach may hold promise in preventing drug
use,&quot; and went on to emphasize the need for comprehensive
evaluations of such efforts (162). </p>

<p> Community coalitions could make use of the framework in this
report to develop plans for preventive interventions addressing
targeted populations in selected community activity settings.
Building on a systematic quantitative and nonquantitative
assessment of needs, a coalition could identify optional
preventive interventions that address selected populations and
settings, and then phase them in as resources permit. However,
some community coalitions may need additional support and
technical assistance to help them resolve conflicts, form
consensus on goals and plans, and sustain cooperative,
coordinated efforts that are subject to more rigorous evaluations
and midcourse corrections. Each community coalition needs to take
a critical look at what works and what does not work, and needs
to be flexible enough to try promising and proven analytical and
programmatic technologies, even if they are somewhat new to the
coalition. </p>

<p> SUMMARY </p>

<p> This chapter has reviewed research on factors and
interventions relevant to the onset and prevention of substance
use, abuse, and addiction in the four principal community
activity settings--homes and families, schools and peers,
workplaces, and recreational and other community settings.
Research indicates that families may influence whether family
members, especially (but not limited to) the young, initiate
substance use and progress to abuse and dependency, and can be
the target of a wide range of increasingly tested preventive
interventions that can help family members resist the use of
substances. Similarly, schools, especially through peer group
norms and behaviors related to substance use, can also be
important locations for the onset of substance use (including
alcohol use) and for preventive interventions, especially those
that focus on social influences, including peers. Factors in
workplaces, although less studied, can also contribute to and
protect against substance use and abuse, and workplace
interventions that focus on individuals and environments provide
opportunities for prevention. Finally, an emerging literature on
the role of recreational settings and activities, especially for
youth, suggests that the availability of attractive and
compelling substance-free activities can play a role in
dissuading youth from becoming heavily involved in the use and
abuse of substances. </p>

<p> BOX 8-1: Example of Short-Term Thinking Eighteen-year-old
Lyle is a senior at an inner-city highschool. In four weeks, he
will receive his high schooldiploma. In six months, he will
become a father.Lyle has a significant history of delinquent
behavior,including assault, drug dealing, and grand larceny. He
hasrecently withdrawn from a gang because &quot;it's gotten
crazyand it's gotten really out of hand&quot; and &quot;I don't
want todie.&quot; However, he adds, &quot;I still hang with the
fellows andstuff like that.&quot;Because he &quot;feels like
working,&quot; Lyle is looking forward togetting out of high
school. He has no plans for college,which he regards as &quot;too
much hassle, to tell you thetruth.&quot; His plans for the future
are vague--to &quot;work, makemoney, you know&quot;--but he tries
not to think about it muchbecause, &quot;you know, you might
die.&quot; For Lyle, &quot;the wayeverything's happening now, you
can't really think about thefuture...the way things happen now,
you can get shot comingout of your house. You can be shot in the
window, you know.&quot;Lyle is a daily smoker of ten or more
cigarettes, a habit hedescribes as &quot;like a everyday
routine--whenever I can gettime to smoke one, I'll smoke
one.&quot; He drinks a couple beersalmost daily, and also smokes
marijuana &quot;most likely&quot; everyday.But Lyle avoids harder
drugs, like cocaine, because &quot;I don'twant to kill
myself.&quot; By way of explanation, he adds &quot;I'drather kill
myself slowly than fast.&quot;SOURCE: H. Stauber, &quot;I've Got
Plenty of Cells to Waste:&quot;Perceptions of danger and
invulnerability among reckless-behaving adolescents, Unpublished
paper, Harvard GraduateSchool of Education, in progress. </p>

<p> BOX 8-2: Janice Janice, a 28-year-old, white, married female,
was inoutpatient treatment for bulimia nervosa, a
binge-purgepattern of eating that began when she was 18 years
old. Shealso had an intermittent history of alcohol abuse
datingfrom midadolescence. Janice appeared to be well-motivated
intreatment. She used the psychoeducational approach taught byher
therapist to increase her knowledge of how her binge-eating and
moodiness were related to her restricted dailycaloric intake. She
made progress quickly, using cognitivebehavioral techniques to
challenge her distortions andunderstand her behavior; she began
to eat consistent mealsin adequate amounts. These changes led to
a decrease in herbinge-eating and self-induced vomiting. However,
along withthis progress she became increasingly anxious, fearful,
andagitated about weight gain (despite the fact that little
ornone had occurred). At the same time, she became overwhelmedby
the intensity of the feelings she experienced, was havingbad
dreams, and withdrew from her support system in waysthat angered
her friends. She once more resorted toinconsistent meal patterns,
dieting, poor nutrition, and--inevitably--binge-eating and
vomiting. Her alcohol useincreased.Janice's symptomatology
shifted once she significantlydecreased her bulimic behavior.
Instead of dealing witheveryday feelings, behavior, and thoughts,
she began torelive memories from her unresolved traumatic past.
Thesememories started with vague feelings of uneasiness,
whichgrew more intense as she binged less. She then began
toremember her dreams, which, as they came into clearer
focus,caused her to be suspicious of her friends, and
particularlyof the men around her. Janice reported feeling fine
oneminute and then very frightened the next. Whereas she usedto
be flattered by any male attention, she now felt fearfulwhen men
looked at her. She started to remember multiplesexual assaults in
her past, both by persons known to herand by strangers. She felt
increasing urges to suicide, andobserved the reality of her
internal suffering as being &quot;tooawful.&quot; As she said,
&quot;If this is what recovery is all about,I don't think it's
worth it; I'll take my chances andstruggle with addictions. If I
can't stand that, there'salways suicide.&quot;SOURCE: M.P. Root,
&quot;Treatment Failures: The Role of SexualVictimization in
Women's Addictive Behavior,&quot; AmericanJournal of
Orthopsychiatry, 59(4), 543, 1989. </p>

<p> BOX 8-3: Dara Dara (20) was the natural mother of Christina
(9 months).Christina was in danger of placement in foster care
due tothe cocaine addiction of her mother. Her father, Matt,
wasserving time in jail on a drug charge. Christina's
olderbrother, Jason, was placed in foster care prior
toHomebuilder involvement. Dara's addiction prevented her
fromproperly caring for herself and the children. Dara rentedthe
upstairs apartment in her parent's home. Her
19-year-oldboyfriend, Brian, spent a great deal of time with her
andChristina.I helped Dara find out about drug treatment centers
and aschedule for Narcotic Anonymous (N.A.). She missed her
firstdrug evaluation because of having an abortion. She and
Brianwent to one N.A. meeting and then missed many days. The
CPScaseworker met with me and Dara and stressed the importanceof
her drug recovery. Dara agreed to complete the evaluationas well
as attend N.A. meetings. Initially I accompanied herto the N.A.
meetings for moral support. Sometimes Brianwould go and the rest
of the time her mother would accompanyher. Dara successfully
completed her drug evaluation andattended regular counseling
sessions with a drug counselor.She volunteered for urinalysis,
&quot;just to keep her honest.&quot;Dara got involved with other
young adults in N.A. They wentto eat together and went out to
dances and movies. She beganassociating with a new peer group.
The CPS caseworkerauthorized maximum day-care to be paid for so
she couldattend her meetings and counseling. Dara's
mothervolunteered to baby-sit Christina if Dara was with
herfriends from N.A.Dara's husband got out of jail and wanted a
divorce. Hefiled for custody of both of their children. I helped
Daraarrange for legal aid. She said she was more determined
thanever to &quot;stay straight so she would look good in
court&quot; overthe custody of the children.Dara asked her
boyfriend to move out so she could live byherself. She and Brian
continue to stay in contact from timeto time. Dara retained
custody of Christina. She and Mattagreed on joint custody of
their son, Jason, and Dara sawhim every other weekend. She
continued drug counseling andattending N.A. Her urinalysis always
tested negative.SOURCE: J. Kinney, D. Haapala, and C. Booth,
KeepingFamilies Together, (pp. 22-23) (New York: Aldine De
Gruyter,1991)._ <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>