
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B28-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B022-139</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/fada/fada1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122135814 text/html 127631
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:57:50 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:07:16 GMT
Content-length: 127412
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Federal Government's Response to Illicit Drugs,
1969-1978 </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<h1>The Facts About Drug Abuse </h1>

<p> <b>The Drug Abuse Council, 1980</b> </p>

<p> <font size="5">The Federal Government's Response to Illicit
Drugs, 1969-1978</font> </p>

<p> <i><font size="4">Peter Goldberg</font></i> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> Note on Acronyms<br>
</p>

<p> <font size="1">ACRONYMS ARE USED </font><font size="2">throughout
this chapter for a number of federal agencies. Among those most
often referred to are:<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">ADAMHA Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health
Administration</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">BNDD Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">DEA Drug Enforcement Administration</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">FBN Federal Bureau of Narcotics</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">NIDA National Institute on Drug Abuse</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">NIMH National Institute of Mental Health</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">ODALE Office of Drug Abuse Law Enforcement</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">ODAP Office of Drug Abuse Policy</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">OMB Office of Management and Budget</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">SAODAP Special Action Office for Drug Abuse
Prevention <br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <b><font size="4">Introduction<br>
</font></b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Throughout the twentieth century the
government of the United States has engaged, in one form or
another, in efforts to prevent its citizens from using certain
designated psychoactive drugs. The use of nonapproved drugs has
been defined as illegal, and billions of taxpayer dollars have
been spent and millions of man-hours devoted to curtailing the
availability of such drugs. Yet in spite of these efforts there
are now as many users and abusers of illicit drugs as ever
before. Similarly, the misuse of legally available drugs has
dramatically increased.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Data on the use of illicit drugs do not
conclusively demonstrate that the federal government's antidrug
efforts have failed, but they do provide compelling reasons to
undertake a thorough reappraisal of federal policies and
programs. Evaluations made by both federal government study
groups and private organizations' have resulted in
changes-particularly in preventive and treatment approaches-but
federal drug policies have remained fundamentally the same for
decades.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">This chapter will concentrate on the response
of the federal government to the issues of illicit drug use <b>and
</b>misuse from 1969 to the present. It was during this period
that our country experienced an unprecedented growth in the
governmental response to the use of illicit drugs. This period
also roughly coincides with the years during which the Drug Abuse
Council has been studying drug issues and policy.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">To understand the U.S. government's response
to illicit drugs in the 1970s it is necessary to know something
of the history. Our nation's current drug policies and programs
are the result of over seventy years of development. Detailed
analyses such as those provided by David </font><font size="1">Musto2
</font><font size="2">and Rufus King3 offer insight into this
process. It is clear from these analyses that the government's
response to public fear of certain drugs and drug users has
primarily consisted of law enforcement or quasi-enforcement
strategies intended to prohibit both new and continued use of
nonapproved substances. The belief that some drugs are so
innately harmful that the citizens of this country should and
could be prevented from using them has been the basic tenet of
American drug policy for the past seven decades.<br>
<br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>Historical Review <br>
</b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Several major pieces of drug legislation and
presidential initiatives have shaped public policy in the drug
field. The first pertinent legislation in this area passed by
Congress was the District of Columbia Pharmacy Act in </font><font
size="1">1906.4 </font><font size="2">Although this act applied
only to the District of Columbia, it set a precedent for Congress
to deal with drug issues. This act permitted a physician to
prescribe narcotics to addicts, but only when &quot;necessary for
the cure&quot; of addiction; the prescription of narcotic drugs
to nonaddicted persons was limited to the treatment of injury or
disease. The intent of the act was to prevent the further -spread
of addictive drug use. It first raised the difficult
philosophical question of government regulation of physician
prescribing practices with respect to addictive drugs, an issue
still actively debated.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The Harrison Narcotic Act,' passed in late
1914, marked the official entry of the government into the area
of narcotics control. This act simplified record keeping on the
dispensation of certain narcotic drugs, and required that
standard forms be filed and maintained for two years on the sales
of narcotic drugs. Revenue agents could inspect these records at
will. However, physicians were allowed to dispense drugs without
keeping records if in actual attendance on their patients.
Numerous patent medicines containing small amounts of morphine,
cocaine, opium, and heroin were still permitted to be sold by
mail order or in general stores.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Through regulations issued by the Treasury
Department pursuant to the Harrison Narcotic Act, the federal
government hampered the treatment of heroin and morphine
addiction to such a degree that by the early 1920s those clinics
in the country which regularly provided opiates to registered
addicts (so-called &quot;maintenance clinics&quot;) were closed,
and few private physicians dared to provide these drugs to
addicts </font><font size="1">. 6 </font><font size="2">This
effectively ended the medical profession's active involvement in
the treatment of drug addiction until the 1960s. From the 1920s
on, the federal government was for all practical purposes in
charge of attempts to control illicit drug use. Although there
were, at the time, serious questions raised about the
constitutionality of using federal police powers to restrict, and
eventually prohibit, the use of certain drugs, the popular belief
was that the use of these drugs must be eliminated even when
occurring in the context of medical treatment for addiction.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">In 1929 Congress passed the Porter Act </font><font
size="1">7 </font><font size="2">ostensibly addressing the
treatment needs of convicted addicts. The Porter Act called for
the building of two narcotics &quot;farms&quot; in which those
convicted of the &quot;crime&quot; of drug addiction would be
housed in order to receive compulsory treatment. The underlying
assumption of the act seemed to be that treatment-enforced
abstinence-required isolation and a controlled environment.
Although the Porter Act became law in January 1929, the first
farm did not open until 1935 in Lexington, Kentucky. A second
farm opened in 1938 in Fort Worth, Texas. The treatment rendered
at these farms was not successful, with most addicts returning to
addiction after discharge.&quot; In reality the farms were little
more than specialized prisons. In fact, Musto reports that
&quot;not until the late 1960s were the bars removed from the
Lexington facility and the cells turned into rooms.&quot;9</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">In 1930 the first federal agency specifically
devoted to the control of illicit drugs, the Federal Bureau of
Narcotics (FBN), was established. Because the federal regulation
of narcotic drugs was based on the taxing power of Congress, the
FBN was made part of the Treasury Department and was concerned
only with enforcement issues. The FBN was responsible, at least
initially, for enforcing the Harrison Narcotic Act and
controlling only what were then thought of as the most dangerous
drugs-cocaine and the opiates. The FBN's policies were predicated
on the belief that &quot;the most effective way of gaining public
compliance with a law regulating a dangerous drug was a policy of
high fines and severe mandatory prison sentences for first
convictions.&quot; 10</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The FBN did not initially support a federal
antimarijuana effort. However, newspaper accounts of serious
crimes attributed to marijuana users and the drug's &quot;Mexican
purveyors&quot; triggered a series of events that culminated in
the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. 11 The FBN changed
its policies after this act was passed, vigorously enforcing the
federal laws prohibiting marijuana. </font><b><font size="1">12</font></b>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">Passage of the Marihuana Tax Act in effect
imposed a total prohibition on marijuana use. Marijuana was
described in congressional hearings as impairing the ability to
think rationally, dangerous to the mind and body, and leading to
insanity. It was further claimed that marijuana led to the
commission of violent crimes, spread drug use to school children,
and resulted in impotence in the habitual user. It was not until
the early 1970s that many of these views began to be modified. To
this day, however, their effects on public attitudes and policies
linger.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">During the late 1940s and early 1950s there
were reports that rates of heroin addiction had risen,
particularly in inner-city minority communities. This period
coincided with the beginning of the so-called &quot;McCarthy
era,&quot; a time when public fear of nonconforming behavior was
high and tolerance of it low. Drugs were linked to communism. As
David Musto has written, &quot;The Federal Bureau of Narcotics
linked Red China's attempts to get hard cash, as well as to
destroy Western society, to the clandestine sale of large amounts
of heroin to drug pushers in the United States.&quot;13 In
addition, a theory that addicts began with marijuana use and
moved inexorably to the use of heroin (or morphine or
cocaine)-the progression&quot; or &quot;stepping-stone&quot;
theory-was widely believed.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In this atmosphere, the Boggs </font><font
size="1">Act14 was passed in late 1951. The </font><font size="2">Boggs
Act increased penalties for all drug law violators and for the
first time made penalties for violation of the marijuana laws the
same as those for narcotic drugs. This act also introduced, at
the federal level, the concept of minimum mandatory jail
sentences for drug law offenders.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The Boggs Act-and later amendments which
further increased penalties </font><b><font size="1">15</font></b><font
size="1"> </font><font size="2">-reflected an undeviating
reliance on law enforcement activities and harsh penalties to
deal with the perceived &quot;drug menace.&quot; The Boggs
Act-and the later Narcotic Control Act of 1956-passed after only
cursory hearings, which did not delve into either the causes or
the nature of the use of illicit drugs. The widespread fear of
communism and intolerance of nonconforming views and behavior at
the time made it politically feasible-even desirable-to advocate
reliance on the criminal justice system to control and punish
narcotics users. The need for treatment was ignored. Most
Americans directly affected by these laws were politically
impotent, disliked, and distrusted because of prevailing racial
and ethnic prejudices.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The first notice of change in official
attitudes came in 1963 with President Kennedy's appointment of an
Advisory Commission on Narcotic and Drug Abuse (the Prettyman
Commission) to review the nation's drug problems and the
government's response to them. The Prettyman Commission report </font><font
size="1">16 </font><font size="2">challenged many of the
assumptions which had long dominated official thinking in the
drug area. It recommended a decreased use of minimum mandatory
sentences, an increase in appropriations for research, and the
transfer of the FBN to the Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare. It also recommended that the final judgment on the
legitimate medical use of narcotics be given back to the medical
profession.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The Prettyman Commission noted the
fragmentation of federal activities in the drug field and
recommended that &quot;the President appoint a Special Assistant
for Narcotic and Drug Abuse from the White House staff to provide
continuous advice and assistance in launching a coordinated
attack. </font><font size="1">&quot; 17 </font><font size="2">Although
the commission made many recommendations, few were implemented at
that time.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">One recommendation of the commission which did
receive attention was that a civil commitment system be
established &quot;to provide an alternative method of handling
the federally convicted offender who is a confirmed narcotic or
marijuana abuser.&quot; Such a system was instituted by the
Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966 (NARA).&quot;'
Although NARA ostensibly considered drug addiction a
&quot;medical problem,&quot; addicts committed under NARA
programs were basically perceived as prisoners.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">By the mid-1960s, illicit drug use had become
a highly visible and emotional issue throughout the United
States. It was widely believed that illicit drug use was
increasing rapidly and for the first time reaching into the
suburbs and affecting white middle-class youth. News reports
often tended toward sensationalism in presenting stories on LSD
and hallucinogenic drug use on college campuses. Anti-Vietnam War
protesters became identified with marijuana use. The use of
illicit drugs was, in general, identified as an antisocial
gesture and was associated in the public's mind with mental
illness and rising rates of street crime.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In February 1968 President Johnson established
&quot;a new and powerful Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
(BNDD)&quot; within the justice Department.&quot;' Johnson had
seen that the federal enforcement of narcotics laws was
fragmented. The Federal Bureau of Narcotics in the Treasury
Department had some responsibilities, while the Bureau of Drug
Abuse Control (BDAC)-an agency created only three years earlier
in 1965 in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare-had
been assigned certain regulatory functions having to do with
nonnarcotic drugs. In an attempt to unify the federal response,
the FBN and BDAC were abolished and the new BNDD was given full
authority to enforce all U.S. narcotics laws, from worldwide
operations to work with state and local law enforcement
officials. In addition, BNDD was directed to &quot;conduct an
extensive campaign of research and a nationwide public education
program on drug abuse and its tragic effects.&quot; In fact, in
President Johnson's message to Congress proposing Reorganization
Plan No. 1, the only mention of any federal effort in research-
treatment, or education was in the context of the justice
Department's BNDD. The emphasis was again on law enforcement and
the relationship between drugs and crime.<br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <b><font size="2">Understanding the Growth of the
Governmental Response to Illicit Drugs<br>
</font></b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">During Richard Nixon's presidential terms, the
issue of &quot;drug abuse&quot; was given a higher priority and
greater visibility than at any other time in our country's
history. In January 1969 the annual federal. budget for drug
treatment, education, research, and law enforcement was $81.4
million; five years later it was $760 million-nearly a tenfold
increase. A series of major legislative, organizational, and
programmatic changes accompanied these dramatic budget increases.
The reasons for this enormous increase in the federal response
can be traced to three unforeseen circumstances of need and
opportunity. </font> </p>

<p> <b><font size="2">The Need to Reduce Rates of Urban Street
Crime. </font></b><font size="2">Rising street crime was a key
issue in the 1968 presidential campaign. The urban riots of the
mid-1960s and the rising crime-rate figures issued by the FBI
provided fuel for much of the campaign rhetoric about the growing
&quot;lawlessness&quot; and &quot;violence&quot; of America.
&quot;Law and order&quot; emerged as the dominant domestic theme
of the 1968 Republican presidential campaign </font><font
size="1">.20</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Campaign promises to &quot;get tough&quot;
with urban street crime are historically easier to make than to
fulfill. The jurisdiction and power of the federal government to
prevent burglaries and armed robberies-among the most common
types of urban street crime--are limited. Except in the District
of Columbia, such violations are usually matters for state, not
federal, action. Even if Congress had extended the legal
authority of the federal law enforcement agencies, these agencies
(FBI, IRS, BNDD) did not have the manpower to address urban
street crime effectively.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In spite of the passage of &quot;tough&quot;
legislation such as preventive detention, harsh prison sentences,
and &quot;no-knock&quot; warrantless searches, crime rates
continued to rise, as reported by the FBI, jeopardizing the
administration's promised law and order. Even in the District of
Columbia, where the federal government could exercise some
contrcl, the crime rate increased during the first year of the
Nixon presidency.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Clearly, from a political perspective the
Nixon administration needed to show progress in some area of
crime control before the 1972 election. This was one element
underlying the growth since 1969 of the federal government's
efforts to control the use of illicit drugs.</font> </p>

<p> <b><font size="2">The Public's Increasing Concern About
Heroin Addiction. </font></b><font size="2">The association of
illicit drug use with street crime and violence developed over a
long period of time. By the late 1960s, the relationship between
heroin &quot;addiction' and street crime was generally accepted
as fact, despite the absence of any careful research and
documentation. 22 Heroin had become inextricably linked in the
public's mind with the urban crisis; and as public anxiety about
crime grew, so too did the fear of heroin and heroin addicts.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">The public's fear of heroin was intensified by
reports of increased use of narcotics among American soldiers
stationed in Vietnam. The thought of &quot;soldier-junkies,&quot;
trained in guerrilla warfare, returning to the streets of urban
America heightened public concern and led to further demands for
government action. &quot;Drug abuse&quot; (particularly heroin
addiction) rapidly became a major public concern, as reflected in
the opinion polls of that time, adding another argument for an
expanded government effort.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">But neither the need for an effective crime
reduction program nor the growing public concern about heroin
explain by themselves the increased federal response: a third
element was crucial. In all likelihood the government's efforts
to prevent &quot;drug abuse&quot; would have expanded without
this third element, but it is doubtful that the expansion would
have been anywhere near the same magnitude.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">* In the late 1960s no distinction was made
between heroin use and heroin addiction-all use of heroin was
believed addictive. More recent studies indicate that this is not
necessarily accurate.21<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <b><font size="2">The Emergence of New Approaches to the
Problem of Heroin Addiction. </font></b><font size="2">Three new
avenues of response to the problems of heroin addiction and
heroin-related crime emerged. Although distinct from one another,
these three approaches in time became interrelated in subsequent
government programs. The opportunities they presented led-some
say misled-federal policyrnakers to believe that they could
respond to the problems of heroin addiction more successfully
than previously.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">First, the legislative basis for federal drug
law enforcement efforts changed. Federal regulations and controls
on drugs before 1970 were based primarily on the power to levy
taxes and prohibit traffic in smuggled goods. Thus virtually all
federal drug law enforcement programs were administered by the
Treasury Department-until the creation of the Bureau of Narcotics
and Dangerous Drugs in the justice Department by executive order
in 1968; simultaneously the Treasury Department's Federal Bureau
of Narcotics was abolished. This transfer of jurisdiction was
given a statutory basis in 1970 with the passage of the
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control </font><font
size="1">Act.2&quot;</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">This act addressed a broad range of drug
program efforts, providing increased support for drug treatment,
rehabilitation, and education as well as enforcement. The
enforcement provisions of this legislation (Title II of the act)
were part of a larger attempt to reduce criminal activity through
improved federal law enforcement. Congress and the Nixon
administration sought through this legislation to recodify the
existing drug laws into one comprehensive law. Most narcotics law
enforcement powers were given to the justice Department, thus
allowing the Attorney General to exercise control over all
dangerous drugs (e.g., amphetamines and barbiturates) and
narcotics. This was the first federal law making it illegal to
traffic in or possess certain drugs which did not refer to the
taxing authority. Instead, the justification for federal-as
opposed to state-enforcement was shifted to the power of Congress
to regulate interstate commerce. The concept of the
&quot;interstate commerce&quot; powers of Congress had greatly
expanded in the decades prior to this new drug legislation.
Supreme Court rulings on the &quot;New Deal&quot; legislation of
the 1930s and 1940s and on the civil rights cases of the 1960s
had clearly broadened the scope of activities that Congress could
regulate under its constitutional authority to regulate
&quot;interstate commerce.&quot;</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">This shift in the constitutional basis of drug
law enforcement allowed the federal government to become more
directly involved in suppressing one presumed major cause of
urban street crime about which there was great public fear. It
offered some hope that expanded and intensified efforts to combat
trafficking in illicit drugs could succeed where past efforts had
failed.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">A second new avenue of response centered
around bilateral agreements to reduce the international flow of
illicit drugs-particularly heroin-into the United States. For
more than sixty years, beginning with the Hague International
Opium Convention of 1912, the United States has negotiated
bilateral and multilateral international agreements to keep
illicit opiates out of the country. Since opium, of which heroin
is a derivative, is not grown anywhere in the United States, all
the heroin used by addicts in this country comes from foreign
sources; hence the concept that if opium is not cultivated
elsewhere, heroin will not be available for use here. Since,
however, it is virtually impossible to prevent the growth of the
opium poppy everywhere, a second line of defense has been to
disrupt international trafficking in opium, its chemical
conversion into heroin in foreign laboratories, and its
subsequent shipment into the United States.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In January 1969, up to 80 percent of the
heroin used in the United States was believed to be of Turkish
origin. The major processing country for converting Turkish opium
into heroin for shipment to American East Coast port cities was
reputed to be France. The operations in these two countries were
frequently blamed for the rising rates of heroin addiction
reported in the United States in the late 1960s.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The Nixon administration sought greater
international cooperation to keep illicit drugs from entering the
United States </font><font size="1">.14 </font><font size="2">In
early 1971, just as public concern about heroin was reaching its
peak, separate agreements were reached with France and Turkey
enlisting their formal assistance in keeping heroin out of the
United States. The French government agreed to take steps to
close down the clandestine laboratories operating principally
around Marseilles and to prevent the traffic of opium into, and
heroin out of, France. The agreement with Turkey-the culmination
of five years of negotiations-amounted to a total. ban on -poppy
cultivation in Turkey in return for American financial aid for
crop substitution programs and income compensation for Turkish
farmers.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">It was anticipated that these two agreements
would significantly reduce the flow of heroin to the United
States, and that the resulting shortage would reduce the levels
of heroin addiction and heroin-related crime. Thcy were touted as
major victories on the international front of the new &quot;war
on drug abuse.&quot; The federal government sought to capitalize
on these agreements by negotiating agreements with other
potential &quot;source&quot; and &quot;processing&quot;
countries. The hoped-for success of these efforts to control
international supplies thus emerged as the second new avenue of
the government's heroin control effort.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The third new avenue of response was the use
of methadone to treat heroin addiction. Methadone is a synthetic
analgesic developed by the Germans during World War 11 as a
substitute for morphine. After the war and throughout the 1950s,
methadone was used in the United States as a detoxifying agent
for heroin addicts. In 1964 Drs. Vincent P. Dole and Marie E.
Nyswander of the Rockefeller Institute in New York City found
that they were able to maintain six heroin addicts on a stable
dosage-level of methadone without their craving heroin. Dole and
Nyswander soon began an expanded program of methadone maintenance
to both demonstrate methadone's potential and evaluate the
program's impact. In 1966 they reported the initial results of
their work: Among the most widely publicized of their results was
that criminal activity among the enrolled addicts had been
&quot;virtually eliminated. </font><font size="1">'125 </font><font
size="2">Public and government interest in the concept of
methadone maintenance grew, and by the late 1960s methadone
programs were in operation in many urban centers, providing
addicts with an alternative to the more traditional forms of
treatment which emphasized abstinence, and which had not proved
successful for large numbers of addicts.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">While methadone maintenance programs are
generally considered &quot;treatment,&quot; particularly by their
staffs and clients, the idea of using methadone treatment as part
of the larger national effort to reduce urban street crime had
begun to take hold by late 1969. The proposition put forth was
that if an addict's dependence on heroin was broken (by
substituting legally prescribed methadone), the crime rate would
be reduced, because-so the theory went-addicts committed a large
proportion of the street crime in order to feed their illicit
habits. A 1970 Domestic Council Summary Option Paper on Drugs
stated, &quot;The Federal government has only one economical and
effective technique for reducing crime in the streets-methadone
maintenance. </font><b><font size="1">-26</font></b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Methadone thus offered an important new form
of treatment to heroin addicts as well as a possibility of
reducing urban street crime. Which aspect was considered more
important is difficult to determine. In any event, the emergence
of methadone treatment was a crucial -part of the developing
&quot;solution&quot; to the problems of heroin addiction and
heroin-related crime.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Thus in the late 1960s and early 1970s several
new<b> </b>and potentially significant approaches developed. Many
believed that if effectively applied in concert they could
substantially reduce the rate of heroin addiction and associated
problems, particularly the crimes committed to raise money to
support heroin addiction. These developments, coinciding as they
did with the political commitment to reduce urban street crime
and respond to the growing public concern about heroin addiction,
had much to do with the enormous growth of the federal response
to illicit drugs which began in 1969.<br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>The Federal Response, 1969-1971 <br>
</b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In January 1969 the federal government's
response to illicit drugs as measured in dollars spent was small;
$86 million was spent in fiscal year 1969 (FY 69), and only a
modest increase to $101.9 million was requested for FY 70 </font><font
size="1">.27</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The principal federal agencies involved in the
drug field during this period were the National Institute of
Mental Health (NIMH) in the Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare; the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs in the
justice Department; and the Customs Bureau of the Treasury
Department. These three agencies accounted for the bulk of the
federal drug effort in four operational areas: treatment and
rehabilitation; education, prevention, and training; research;
and law enforcement. NIMH was the major federal sponsor of all
non-law-enforcement programs, while BNDD and Customs each held
some responsibility for the federal drug law enforcement effort.
The emergence of BNDD created an intense bureaucratic rivalry
with Customs regarding jurisdictional responsibilities for drug
law enforcement programs. Although this dispute was supposed to
have been settled in 1969 when BNDD was authorized to conduct
overseas operations and Customs was restricted to border
searches, it has surfaced frequently in subsequent years; even
now the situation seems merely a temporary truce. (See Staff
Paper 2, &quot;Drug Law Enforcement Efforts,&quot; below.)</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">The FY 71 budget was the first to be
completely developed by the Nixon administration, and in it the
federal drug budget more than doubled to a total of $212.5
million. The major increases in the FY 71 budget were for
treatment and rehabilitation and education, prevention, and
training. While the drug law enforcement budget rose by more than
50 percent, it was for the first time surpassed in absolute
numbers by expenditures for treatment and rehabilitation, which
by this time were assuming added dimensions as part of the crime
reduction effort (see Figure 1. 1).</font> </p>

<p> <img src="fada1001.gif"> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Since the use of illicit drugs was of growing
public concern and government interest, federal budget makers
were clearly more receptive to agency budget requests for new
drug programs, and by FY 71 there were fifteen separate federal
agencies involved in some kind of drug-related effort. For some,
such as the Office of Education, the Veterans Administration, and
the Department of Transportation, FY 71 marked the first year
they had undertaken specific drug activities. For others, such as
the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Office of
Economic Opportunity, drug-related expenditures, which until then
had been minimal, rose dramatically. This expansion of the
federal drug budget was accompanied by greater problems of
interagency coordination. Although federal response to the use of
illicit drugs was growing, it generally lacked cohesion and
overall purpose (other than a commitment to &quot;solve the drug
problem&quot;). This lack of coordination led Hutt and Wald to
comment in 1972, &quot;Federal activities in the drug abuse field
tend to be <i>ad hoc </i>reactions to current crises rather than
well-considered, long-term programs.11211</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The proposed FY 72 budget, announced in
February 1971, projected a drug budget of $265 million-an
increase of just over $50 million. This proposal envisioned
federal expenditures of $96 million for law enforcement, $101
million for treatment and rehabilitation, $24 million for
research, and $44 million for education, prevention, and
training. By this time there were sixteen separate federal
agencies involved in the drug effort, with little coordination
between them. The resulting bureaucratic nightmare was
graphically depicted in a government report covering all federal
drug efforts except law enforcement (Figure 1.2).</font> <img
src="fada1002.gif"> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In early 1971, the National Commission on
Marihuana and Drug Abuse began work on the first of two
consecutive one-year studies it was to undertake. The appointment
of this federal study commission, the scope of its work, and the
schedule for the completion of its two reports had been
delineated in the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control
Act of 1970. (The Senate and the House of Representatives each
appointed two members to the thirteen-member commission;
President Nixon selected the remaining nine.) Congress had
stipulated that the commission first complete a comprehensive
study of marijuana-related issues by March 1972 (discussed more
fully in Staff Paper 5, &quot;Marijuana and Cocaine,&quot;
below). in the commission's second year, Congress directed it to
complete a more general examination and analysis of the nature,
causes, and significance of the &quot;drug abuse&quot; problem in
the United States, and further directed it to present
recommendations for legislative and administrativ6 actions
consistent with the commission's findings and conclusions.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">However, on June 17, 1971, long before the
scheduled completion of the commission's second report, President
Nixon sent to Congress a special message on drug abuse in which
he requested a supplemental budget of $155 million and a
reorganization of responsibilities regarding drug treatment,
education, prevention, research, and, most notably, coordination.
Citing the immediacy of the drug problem and the need for a more
effective response, Nixon simultaneously issued an executive
order establishing the position of Special Consultant to the
President for Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs in order to
&quot;institute to the extent legally possible&quot; the
legislation which he proposed to Congress. It was at this point
that the fundamental restructuring of the federal government's
response to illicit drugs began.<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <b><font size="2">President Nixon's Message to Congress, June
17, 1971.19 </font></b><font size="2">President Nixon's message
to Congress on June 17, 1971 raised the issue of illicit drug use
to the highest level of government concern and responsibility.
This statement was the culminating step in the declaration of a
strong and irrevocable public commitment to reduce the crime
heroin addicts were thought to commit and bring the problems of
illicit drug use under control. &quot;If we cannot destroy the
drug menace in America , Nixon informed Congress and the American
public, &quot;then it will surely in time destroy us. I am not
prepared to accept this alternative.&quot; Although the President
spoke of the general problems of &quot;drug abuse,&quot; there is
little doubt that the chief problems and concerns to which he
referred were those relating to heroin addiction.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Clearly, public alarm about heroin-related
crime and addicted Vietnam veterans demanded a more effective
governmental response than previous ones. Equally clear was the
fact that increased funding alone had not been successful.
According to Nixon: &quot;We must now candidly recognize that the
deliberate procedures embodied in present efforts to control drug
abuse are not sufficient in themselves. The problem has assumed
the dimensions of a national emergency.&quot;</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Forceful measures were required, so the
thinking went, if the twin problems of heroin addiction and urban
crime were to be curtailed. Speed was essential to the Nixon
administration because of the political aspects of illicit drug
use. Predictably, the policies and programs it advocated were
consistent with enforcement and quasi-enforcement approaches
which had characterized past federal efforts. The government's
response to the use of illicit drugs in 1971 sprang from the same
assumptions about their innate harmfulness and arrived at
fundamentally the same conclusions as had been espoused for more
than sixty years. The changes proposed were those of technique,
size, and scope only.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The president acknowledged the problems of
undirected growth in the government's response. </font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">We must recognize that piecemeal efforts, even
where individually successful, cannot have a major impact on the
drug abuse problem unless and until they are forged together into
a broader and more integrated program involving all levels of
government and private effort. We need a coordinated effort if we
are to move effectively against drug abuse.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">A two-sided approach was developed to
coordinate the federal drug effort. On the &quot;supply&quot;
side were all federal drug law enforcement efforts to halt the
illegal production, distribution, and use of prohibited
substances. On the &quot;demand&quot; side were all federally
sponsored efforts at treatment and rehabilitation and education,
prevention, training, and research. Each approach was envisioned
as separate and independent of the other, although they shared
the same goals of eliminating illicit drug use and drug-related
crime in America.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">To control &quot;demand&quot; the Nixon
administration proposed a dramatic reorganization which would
temporarily centralize responsibility for all federally sponsored
efforts in drug treatment, rehabilitation, education, prevention,
training, and research in a new White House Agency, the <b>Special
Action Office for Drug Abuse Prevention (SAODAP). </b>The
director of SAODAP was to be immediately accountable to the
President. From an organizational standpoint it made sense to
coordinate the many federal agencies involved. To have ignored
the management problems displayed in Figure 1.2 above would have
led to further chaos and undercut the potential of any federal
response. However, this does not explain why such coordinative
responsibilities were lodged in the White House under
presidential supervision. Other federal programs also involved a
number of federal agencies, yet coordination could usually be
achieved through more regular bureaucratic measures such as
cabinet- or sub-cabinet-level working agreements. What made the
drug issue different?</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">One explanation lies in the deteriorating
relationship at that time between the White House staff and
various federal agencies. Particularly with respect to the
funding of methadone maintenance programs, the White House felt
that there was considerable bureaucratic &quot;foot-dragging. </font><font
size="1">&quot;30 </font><font size="2">Administration officials
had become persuaded of the benefits of methadone maintenance as
a way to reduce &quot;heroin and criminal recidivism,&quot; but
they had been unsuccessful in gaining the full support and
cooperation of NIMH, the agency which normally would have funded
and overseen these programs. NIMH officials were cautious of
government &quot;sanctioning one addiction [to methadone] in
order to reduce the burden on society of heroin addiction,' and
continued to resist White House pressures to fund a greater
number of methadone programs </font><font size="1">.31 </font><font
size="2">The administration contended that NIMH opposed the
programs because to endorse the concept of methadone maintenance
would have been tantamount to admitting the failure of the
psychiatric profession to successfully treat heroin addiction </font><font
size="1">.32</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">While mention of methadone is made only once
in President Nixon's message to Congress, the proposed creation
of SAODAP and the accompanying redelegation of authority would
help circumvent NIMH and increase federal support for methadone.
The administration sought thus to bypass-since it could not
cajole-a reluctant bureaucracy. The president's designation of
Dr. Jerome Jaffe-a prominent supporter of the use of methadone in
treatment-as his Special Consultant for Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs until SAODAP could be legally constituted by Congress left
no doubt as to the administration's intention. Indeed, when Dr.
Jaffe assumed leadership responsibilities in mid-1971, there were
135 federally funded drug treatment programs; eighteen months
later, with a significantly increased drug treatment budget, the
number had nearly tripled to 394 </font><font size="1">.33 </font><font
size="2">Treatment for heroin addiction was emphasized in this
program expansion and the rate of growth of methadone treatment
programs was accelerated.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">A second explanation for centralizing
drug-policy-making responsibilities in the White House is that
the administration anticipated a successful campaign against
illicit drug use and drug-related crime and wanted to take
political credit for it. If the needs were great, so were the
opportunities. The president's message to Congress exuded
confidence in spite of the crisis rhetoric in which it was
couched; the message sought to portray illicit drugs as the
villain in a domestic war which could only be won by forceful
presidential leadership, as the following excerpt suggests.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">Narcotics addiction is a problem which
afflicts both the body and the soul of America. It is a problem
which baffles many Americans. In our history we have faced great
difficulties again and again, wars and depressions and divisions
among our people have tested our will as a people-and we have
prevailed.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The threat of narcotics among our people is
one which properly frightens many Americans. It comes quietly
into homes and destroys children, it moves into neighborhoods and
breaks the fiber of community which </font><font size="1">makes
neighbors.... And we are not without the will to deal with this
matter. We have the moral resources to do the job. Now we need
the authority and the funds to match our moral resources. I am
confident that we will prevail in this struggle as we have in
many others. But time is critical. Every day we lose compounds
the tragedy which drugs inflict on individual Americans. The
final issue is not whether we will conquer drug abuse, but how
soon.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">The message drew upon traditional perceptions
and fears of illicit drugs and illicit drug users in order to
rally public support for a renewed crusade against a social evil.
The rhetoric was consistent with the tenor of the times. Leading
a war against illicit drugs was certain to enhance any
politician's popularity. And, although the public pronouncements
tended towards the dramatic, the reorganization and expansion
called for, particularly regarding federal efforts in drug
treatment and prevention, were clearly warranted.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">The president's message leaves no doubt that
the administration thought a war against illicit drugs could be
won. The president proposed only a three-to-five-year life for
SAODAP because it was to be &quot;an emergency response to a
national problem which we intend to bring under control.&quot;
This &quot;war&quot; was going to be swift, requiring immediate
and decisive action and sufficient financing. SAODAF's role was
to give the White House direct involvement, visibility, and
credit. <br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <b><font size="2">Development of the Expanded Federal
Response<br>
</font></b> </p>

<p> <font size="1">Having made a public commitment to respond
forcefully to the problems of illicit drug use, the
administration commenced a period of whirlwind activity. Each of
the three new avenues of response-methadone treatment,
international negotiations, and domestic drug law enforcement
programs-were vigorously pursued in an attempt to launch a
comprehensive attack on the perceived problems. Funding was
increased commensurately. In his message to Congress the
president had requested a supplemental budget of $155 million to
bolster the new drug programs. When passed by Congress, this
supplemental appropriation raised the FY 72 drug budget to $418
million-four times what it had been only two years earlier.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="1">Treatment. When he took office in 1971,
President Nixon's new drug advisor, Dr. Jerome Jaffe, turned
first to the problems of the Vietnam soldier and veteran, among
whom rates of addiction were reported to be extraordinarily high.
The drug treatment programs of the Veterans Administration (VA)
were expanded; many new centers opened, enabling the VA to
attract more addicted veterans into treatment. And to stem the
reported flow of drug-addicted soldiers returning to the United
States, the </font><font size="2">Defense Department initiated a
massive urinalysis detection program to screen all Vietnam
servicemen for illicit drug use before they left Southeast Asia;
any heroin- or opiate-using soldiers testing positive were to be
detained for treatment and rehabilitation. President Nixon
informed Congress, &quot;We will be requesting legislation to
permit the military services to retain for treatment any
individual due for discharge who is a narcotic addict. All of our
servicemen must be accorded the right to rehabilitation. </font><font
size="1">1134 </font><font size="2">In all, nearly $50 million of
the president's supplemental budget was applied to expanding the
drug treatment and rehabilitation capabilities of the Defense
Department and Veterans Administration.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The SAODAP staff also immediately assumed
responsibility for directing the expansion of drug treatment
programs throughout the United States. Although NIMH received an
additional $51 million for treatment and rehabilitation as a
result of the supplemental budget, raising its total treatment
and rehabilitation budget to $100 million, control of the
expenditure of these funds was largely shifted from NIMH to
SAODAP and the White House staff. With respct to program
expansion, the emphasis was placed on heroin addiction treatment
and &quot;there was a massive expansion of methadone maintenance
programs throughout the country. </font><font size="1">&quot;35</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">The first new goal of treatment was to enable
any addict who wished it to obtain it without delay. This meant
eliminating the waiting lists for entry at many programs, and
expanding treatment in communities where it was needed but not
yet available. When Dr. Jaffe assumed responsibilities in June
1971, federally funded treatment programs were located in 54
cities; only eighteen months later the number of cities involved
had quadrupled to 214 </font><font size="1">.36 </font><font
size="2">The speed and size of this expansion was dramatic by any
account. The earliest available federal estimate places the
number of clients in federally funded treatment programs at just
ovar twenty thousand in October 1971; by December 1972 the figure
was over sixty thousand </font><font size="1">.37</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The only recognized approaches for heroin
addiction other than the expanding methadone treatment were
abstinence oriented and usually took place in a residential
community setting. While popular and sonletimes effective
treatment approaches for small numbers of addicts, these
abstinence programs had not and-according to federal policy
makerscould not have a significant impact on urban crime.
Methadone thus became a new hope, in spite of the objections of
the Food and Drug Administration about insufficient research or
the opposition from minority communities about the underlying
philosophy of using one addictive drug to treat another </font><font
size="1">.311 </font><font size="2">In December 1972, the Food
and Drug Administration published new regulations which loosened
federal controls over methadone, changing its status from that of
an investigational new drug to a new drug requiring ongoing,
long-term study </font><font size="1">.39 </font><font size="2">By
October 1973, nearly <br>
</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">eighty thousand persons were enrolled in
methadone maintenance programs </font><font size="1">.40 </font><font
size="2">Some of these programs were federally funded; all
operated with federal government approval.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">From the government's perspective, methadone
treatment programs had certain advantages over therapeutic
community programs. Methadone allowed greater numbers of people
to be treated in fewer programs, thus making rapid program
expansion easier. For a large number of heroin addicts unable to
successfully remain drug-free, the expansion of methadone
programs offered an invaluable alternative to heroin addiction.
Moreover, the cost per client of methadone maintenance was
substantially less than the cost in a therapeutic community. And
although methadone treatment could not meet the public's demand
for drug abstinence, it could satisfy the even more popular
demand for a reduction in heroin-related crime. Finally,
methadone programs staffed with medical doctors and operated in
more traditional medical clinical style could be more easily
understood by the public. The encounter sessions and heavy
psychological orientation of the therapeutic community were often
misunderstood, even though the drug-free orientation was
commended. Thus, the expansion of heroin treatment
programs-particularly using methadone treatment-became SAODAP's
first objective.<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <b><font size="2">International Activities. </font></b><font
size="2">In his June 1971 message to Congress, President Nixon
had proposed an all-out global war on international drug
trafficking. To dramatize his intentions, Nixon called together
the U.S ambassadors to Turkey, France, Mexico, Luxembourg,
Thailand, the Republic of Vietnam, and the United Nations to
discuss ways to encourage greater cooperation from other nations
in the effort to control the illegal growing and trafficking of
opium worldwide. &quot;I sought to make it . . . clear,&quot; he
told Congress of this meeting, &quot;that I consider the heroin
addiction of American citizens an international problem of grave
concern to this Nation, and I instructed our Ambassadors to make
this clear to their liost governments. We want good relations
with othe@r countries, but we cannot buy good relations at the
expense of temporizing on this prob-</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">lem </font><font size="1">. -41</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Two weeks later President Nixon formally
announced that the Government of Turkey had agreed to impose a
total ban on opium poppy cultivation following the 1972 harvest.
In return the United States pledged $35.7 million in aid over a
five-year period to compensate Turkey for the projected financial
loss on legitimate sales of opium, and to help Turkish farmers
develop substitute crops offering new sources of income. The
agreement was hailed as a &quot;most significant
breakthrough&quot; even though the ban was not to take effect
until a year after its announcement </font><font size="1">.42 </font><font
size="2">The Turkish agreement was intended to help launch a
concentrated American<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">effort to halt all illicit opium production
throughout the world. During the following twelve months,
however, that effort far surpassed any tangible results.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In September 1971 President Nixon established
a new Cabinet Committee on International Narcotics Control, to
oversee the further development of U.S. international drug
control efforts. The Cabinet Committee, chaired by the Secretary
of State, directed the U.S. embassies in fifty-nine countries to
prepare Narcotics Control Action Plans to be used as a basis for
negotiating bilateral agreements with foreign countries in
furtherance of U.S. international drug control programs.
Apparently, however, it was decided that other countries were not
to be offered the same type of broad-based economic assistance
which had been extended to Turkey. Rather, the Narcotics Control
Action Plans were to be more limited in scope, essentially
offering law enforcement assistance to improve the
&quot;intelligence capability and law enforcement capacity of the
host </font><font size="1">. `43 </font><font size="2">Furthermore,
whereas Turkey had been offered the &quot;carrot,&quot; other
nations were threatened with the &quot;stick&quot; of, among
other things, termination of economic and military assistance </font><font
size="1">.44 </font><font size="2">This change in strategy
suggests that the administration was aware, even before the
Turkish ban took effect, of the severe limitations of this
approach. There simply were too many countries where opium could
be grown and converted to heroin for sale in the lucrative U.S.
market </font><font size="1">.45 </font><font size="2">It would
have been difficult to negotiate similar agreements with all
other potential &quot;source&quot; countries, and even if
diplomatically possible the cost would have been prohibitive.
Moreover, because of the remoteness of many areas from their
governments, not every country could successfully impose an opium
ban even if it agreed to try. Gradually, therefore, international
interdiction efforts replaced prevention of opium cultivation as
the major objective of the U.S. international drug control
effort.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Thus, despite active presidential involvement,
no dramatic bilateral agreements other than that with Turkey and
the aforementioned one with France were produced to show success
on the international front.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In addition to bilateral efforts, efforts were
also made to strengthen the enforcement provisions of the 1961
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, the governing international
agreement on illicit drug control. In 1971 the United States
submitted proposed amendments to the Single Convention which were
largely directed toward improving controls on illicit opium
cultivation in source countries. These amendments were formally
agreed upon at a plenipotentiary conference in 1972 and submitted
to the signatory countries for their ratification. The Nixon
administration apparently regarded the amendments as a bold new
approach in international narcotics control, despite the
ineffectiveness of the basic treaty </font><font size="1">.41,</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">In return for strengthening the 1961 Single
Convention, the opium growing countries pressured the United
States to support a second international agreement which would
for the first time place multinational controls on synthetic,
&quot;psychotropic&quot; drugs such as hallucinogens,
amphetamines, barbiturates, and tranquilizers. This treaty, also
drafted in 1971, became known as the Psychotropic Convention.47
The opium-producing countries viewed its ratification as a
demonstration of the industrialized nations' seriousness about
controlling the spread of nonnarcotic drug misuse. American
support of the Psychotropic Convention thus became a necessary
quid pro quo for support from the opium-producing nations on
strengthening the Single Convention.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">President Nixon sent the Psychotropic
Convention to the Senate for approval on June 29, 1971. The
proposed treaty met strong opposition because it threatened to
limit domestic flexibility in regulating various psychoactive
drugs. It was argued that the treaty would further remove the
medical and scientific professions from decision-making
responsibilities in U.S. domestic drug policy. To date neither
the Psychotropic Convention nor the changes in domestic law that
it would have required have been passed.<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <b><font size="2">Domestic Drug Law Enforcement. </font></b><font
size="2">Until 1970 BNDD and its principal predecessor, the
Federal Bureau of Narcotics, were often accused of concentrating
too much law enforcement effort on users and street dealers in
order to inflate the number of arrests made. In 1970 BNDD claimed
this policy had been reversed, with efforts being redirected to
the higher levels of the illicit drug distribution structure.
BNDD director John Ingersoll explained the anticipated result of
this change to a House Appropriations subcommittee in March 1970.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">The shift in emphasis of federal narcotic and
dangerous drug law enforcement from the addict, abuser, and
small-time street peddler to the <b>im</b>portant illicit
traffickers and illegal supply sources will undoubtedly result in
fewer total arrests. But those made should have a greater impact
on the supply of narcotics and drugs available for distribution
to the consumers in this country than a larger number of less
significant arrests. 48</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">However, in 1971 the administration sought to
increase the number of arrests by getting BNDD to move once again
against street-level dealers.49 The administration apparently
believed that this would suggest a more active and successful
&quot;offensive&quot; in its &quot;war&quot; on illicit drugs and
drug users. BNDD resisted the change, contending that such
efforts should be carried out by state and local agencies, and it
continued to go after the higher levels of the drug distribution
systems. Like NIMH, BNDD was not immediately responsive to the
administration's wishes. And so once again the White House
created a new agency under direct White House control. In January
1972 the Office of Drug Abuse Law Enforcement (ODALE) was created
by executive order within the justice Department.50 ODALE was
made &quot;responsible for the development and implementation of
a concentrated program throughout the federal government for the
enforcement of federal laws relating to the prevention of drug
abuse and for cooperation with state and local governments in the
enforcement of their<b> </b>drug abuse laws </font><font size="1">.&quot;51
</font><font size="2">The director of ODALE was also made a
special consultant to the president for drug-abuse law
enforcement, thus becoming the nation's chief drug law
enforcement spokesman.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Within a month after its establishment, ODALE
had selected thirty three target cities and had deployed strike
forces consisting of federal investigators and agents, assistant
U.S. attorneys, and state and local police officers. These strike
forces concentrated on the lower and middle levels of the
domestic heroin distribution systems, and, according to one
observer, -were instructed -to &quot;make arrests by any lawful
means possible, even if it meant bypassing the normal channels. </font><font
size="1">`52 </font><font size="2">By combining the<b> </b>specialized
enforcement authorities and powers of various federal agencies
e.g., the Internal Revenue Service, Customs, BNDD, the
Immigration and Naturalization Service, the Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms Agency, etc. -ODALE was in a unique position to
&quot;bypass normal channels.&quot; The strike forces were
sufficiently funded to be able to make extensive use of
undercover agents and &quot;buy money&quot; to purchase drugs and
pay infofmants; investigative grand juries were empaneled; and
ODALE was empowered to use court-authorized wiretaps and
&quot;no-knock&quot; warrants in making arrests. As expected, the
number of arrests rose quickly and the increased figures were
publicized. Rapidly and dramatically, ODALE became a prominent,
highly visible part of the administration's &quot;war on
drugs.&quot;<br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>The Congressional Response: Passage of the Drug Abuse
Office and Treatment Act of 1972<br>
</b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Congress responded to President Nixon's
challenge for quick and decisive action by passing the Drug Abuse
Office and Treatment Act of 1972 (P. L. 92-255), just nine months
after his June 1971 message and a year in advance of the
scheduled completion of the second report of the National
Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse </font><font size="1">.51 </font><font
size="2">This new legislation reorganized a major part of the
federal drug effort, effected important changes in the roles of
state and local government in the planning and funding of drug
treatment services, and expanded the overall size of the federal
drug effort by voting higher budget authorizations. Compared with
most major legislation, action on this bill was quick and
thorough: Two Senate committees and one House committee held
hearings on the proposed legislation; after the Senate and House
passed differing versions, a Conference<b> </b>Committee ironed
out the differences, and then both bodies passed the compromise
legislation by unanimous votes.<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The final wording of the Drug Abuse Office and
Treatment Act showed Congress and the president to be in general
agreement on the best organizational arrangements for effectively
coordinating the federal drug effort. The basic
&quot;supply&quot; and &quot;demand&quot; approach was adopted,
and SAODAP was established to coordinate and oversee the
development of federal drug-abuse prevention activities,* the
&quot;demand&quot; side of the equation. Congress acceded to the
president's request that SAODAP be made a part of the executive
office of the president. Since at this time the question of the
limits of executive authority was uppermost in the minds of many
legislators, this was generally interpreted as a strong
affirmation of congressional intent to deal decisively with the
drug issue. Congress agreed with the president that SAODAP need
be only a temporary agency, and established June 30, 1975 as the
date by which SAODAP -would be -replaced by a new National
Institute on Drug Abuse, operating within the traditional
channels of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">SAODAP's primary responsibilities were to
reorganize and direct the federal programs in drug treatment,
rehabilitation, education, prevention, training, and research.
Moreover, SAODAP would be responsible for coordinating these
&quot;demand&quot; efforts with the federal drug law enforcement
programs, though the agency would have no authority over the
latter. SAODAP's position was a difficult one: Congress and the
president expected it to coordinate, &quot;from outside and
above,&quot; the activities of fourteen agencies that until then
had existed in relative autonomy; to attain its goal in a short
period of time; and to coordinate these activities in a field
where there was considerable disagreement as to the most
effective means of dealing with the problems.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">*The legislation used the term &quot;drug
abuse prevention&quot; to refer to all non-law-enforcement drug
efforts including treatment and rehabilitation; education,
prevention, and training; and research. <br>
</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">To help the new agency accomplish these
formidable tasks, Congress included in the legislation several
provisions designed to insure a coordinated federal drug effort. </font><font
size="1">54 </font><font size="2">First, it established SAODAP as
a kind of mini-Office of Management and Budget, though limited to
the drug abuse prevention programs of the various federal
agencies. -SAODAP was empowered to reprogram an agency's
drug-abuse prevention funds if necessary to insure greater
conformity with the overall policies and priorities it would set.
Second, Congress established a special fund of $40 million for
SAODAP for each of three fiscal years &quot;to provide additional
incentives to Federal departments and agencies to develop more
effective drug abuse prevention functions and to give the
Director [of SAODAP] the flexibility to encourage, and respond
quickly and efficiently to, the development of promising programs
and approaches.&quot; Although Congress stipulated that at least
90 percent of these funds had to be spent by federal agencies
other than SAODAP, they had to be spent according to SAODAP
directives. Third, SAODAP received the power of &quot;management
oversight review.&quot; This -power, although never actually
exercised, gave it the authority to assume the drug-abuse
prevention functions of an uncooperative federal agency for up to
thirty days. The explicit legislative granting of such power is
very rare; the potential authority is usually enough to persuade
any recalcitrants of the advantages of cooperation.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Although the purpose of this reorganization
was to streamline, coordinate, and make more efficient the
federal response, it also effectively muted opposition. In fact,
when he signed the legislation enacting SAODAP, President Nixon
warned that &quot;heads will roll&quot; if the agency directors
did not cooperate with the new office.51 The president named Dr.
Jaffe -to direct SAODAP and expand the work he had already begun
under executive order. When SAODAP formally began in March 1972,
policy and programmatic decisions had essentially been made; it
was simply a matter of carrying them out. What reservations there
were within and without government were largely ignored or
overridden. Recommendations such as those put forth by the
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse in 1972 and 1973
were quickly rejected because they were inconsistent with the
policies and programs the administration had already chosen to
pursue.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In sum, up<b> </b>to and through the 1972
presidential elections the Nixon administration sought to be <i>(1)
responsive </i>to the public concern about heroin addiction and
heroin-related crime, (2) <i>effective, </i>in contrast to the
lack of success which had characterized past drug efforts, and
(3) <i>quick, </i>so that &quot;progress&quot; could be claimed
at the earliest possible moment. Most of the bureaucratic
restraints which might have impeded the Nixon administration's
&quot;war on drugs&quot; had been overcome, so its potential to
&quot;solve the drug problem&quot; could be tested.<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <b><font size="2">Deemphasis of the Drug Issue and Emergence
of the National Institute on Drug Abuse </font></b><font size="2">(NI15A)
<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Eighteen months after the enactment of the
Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act, and only ten months after
his reelection, President Nixon signaled a change in direction by
announcing in September 1973, &quot;We have turned the corner on
drug addiction in the United States.&quot;511 Although caveats
followed this declaration, the announcement was an important
milestone in the history of the government's response to illicit
drugs. In addition to being a statement of &quot;victory,&quot;
the president's message also implied disengagement from the war.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">In the days and weeks following this
announcement, administration officials offered evidence in
support of the President's statement </font><font size="1">.57 </font><font
size="2">This &quot;evidence&quot; included claims of an apparent
shortage of heroin on the East Coast, an increase in the street
price of the drug, an increase in the number of drug seizures and
arrests, the expansion of drug treatment availability and
utilization, a reported decline in the incidence of new heroin
use, and heroin-related crime being down. Not everyone agreed:
Some challenged the accuracy of the statistics, others challenged
their interpretation. Still others accepted the evidence, but
cautioned that the downward trend might only be temporary.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">In retrospect, it is clear that the &quot;turn
the corner&quot; speech was based on more than statistics. Other
factors were also at work, and a brief review of certain events
which occurred between June 1971 and September 1973 will help to
explain the turnabout.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">First, the 1972 presidential election had
passed. Though it is difficult to assess what part this may have
played in the administration's response to the drug issue, there
is little doubt that it had some importance. Illicit drugs were a
major political issue, and anyone running for national elective
office was expected to address it.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Second, the armies of addicted Vietnam
soldiers never materialized. The severity of the problem had been
overestimated; among those soldiers who did use opium or heroin
in Vietnam, subsequent research showed that relatively few were
either dysfunctional or addicted users after their return to the
United States </font><font size="1">.58</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Third, public interest in the drug issued
waned. There were a host of possible explanations for this: The
problems had been overdrarnatized and public fears exaggerated,
the rate of urban crime had leveled off, other domestic issues
had taken precedence, the media had run out of things to say, or
it was simply part of the natural ebb and flow of public
interest. Whatever the reasons, there is little question that the
public's attention had become diverted elsewhere.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Fourth, the new avenues of response to the use
of illicit drugs, which had been pursued with varying degrees of
success, had in their combined effect failed to measure up to
original expectations, and it seemed unlikely that any further
improvement would result from a widened or intensified effort in
these areas.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">For example, federal law enforcement efforts
against street-level drug activities had backfired. ODALE was not
always well received by local law enforcement agencies, and its
ability to have a significant impact on street-level drug
activities was seriously questioned.59 In April 1973, ODALE
agents were involved in two criticized &quot;no-knock&quot;
entries into homes in Collinsville, Illinois. The events in
Collinsville precipitated a thorough review of the agency and a
reevaluation of the need for unique enforcement authorities
against drug dealers and users. In effect, ODALE had gone too far
in &quot;bypassing the normal channels.&quot; Instead of becoming
a positive symbol of how to win a war on drugs, ODALE became the
focal point of criticisms about the excesses of that war. On June
30, 1973, ODALE was abolished in yet another drug-law-enforcement
agency reorganizations The position of special consultant to the
president for drug-abuse law enforcement matters was also
abolished, and Congress subsequently repealed the no-knock and
preventive detention sections of the federal statutes. Federal
law enforcement strategy reverted to a concentration on the upper
levels of drug distribution systems.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The Turkish opium ban did contribute to a
shortage of heroin in 1973, principally in the eastern United
States. But because the government had been unable to negotiate
any other significant bilateral agreements, it became clear that
the Turkish ban would have only a temporary effect. The period
immediately after the Turkish ban took effect was the high point
in terms of any practical significance which it could have had.
The demand for heroin and the consequent profits to be realized
were bound to generate new supplies and supply routes-it was only
a matter of time. Bilateral agreements thus failed to provide any
lasting &quot;solution.&quot;</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Drug treatment programs, methadone programs in
particular, had been expanded to a point where everyone
voluntarily seeking treatment could get it. Overall, the quality
of the treatment offered in methadone as well as drug-free
programs improved. Program personnel gained experience and with
it increasing expertise. Increased funding assured greater
program stability. However, treatment supply exceeded treatment
demand; in this crucial respect the administration's goal had
been reached: Unless more people were to enter treatment, the
maximum short-term impact of this approach had also probably been
reached.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The administration, through SAODAP, had also
achieved a more coordinated federal effort on the
&quot;demand&quot; side. Much overlapping, duplication, and
inefficiency had been eliminated. Within the framework of its
policies and programs, the federal response was functioning much
more smoothly.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">And the budget was sufficient; the total FY 74
drug budget was $760 million. Lack of funds no longer limited the
potential of the federal drug response; at the same time there
was no indication that increasing the budget further would
measurably improve the situation.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">There seemed little need to any longer
maintain a strong White House identification with the drug issue.
Within the framework of the policies and programs the
administration had chosen to pursue the situation was probably as
good as it would get in the foreseeable future. Politically, this
may have suggested to the federal government that the issue could
be returned to a more &quot;normal&quot; status within the
bureaucracy and be dealt with like most other urban and social
problems.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Whether or not the president's assessment of
the situation in his &quot;turn the corner&quot; speech was
correct, it triggered a turn in government activity in the drug
field. The more extraordinary measures of the previous years
could no longer be justified, On the contrary, it became
necessary for government budget- and policymakers to make major
changes in the federal drug effort in order to prove that a
victory had been won. Even before the president's pronouncement,
drug law enforcement programs had been moved away from active
White House involvement to a newly formed Drug Enforcement
Administration within the Department of justice. Federal efforts
against street-level drug dealers and users were quietly
abandoned. International efforts to curtail illicit drug
cultivation and trafficking continued, but were less publicized.
SAODAP remained in existence until June 30, 1975, but it lost its
influence after the &quot;turn the corner&quot; speech. The trend
in budget requests was also reversed: The overall treatment and
rehabilitation budget for FY 75 (proposed in January 1974) was
$33 million less than in the previous fiscal year, marking the
first drug budget cutback in the Nixon administrations
Furthermore, the administration sought increasingly to shift drug
programming responsibilities to the states, under the aegis of
its &quot;new federalism&quot; policies.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The combined effect of these actions was
significantly to reduce the visibility and controversy of the
federal drug effort. This was beneficial in the sense that the
drug issue was temporarily freed from the political rhetoric that
had bound it. But the loss of momentum was unfortunate to the
extent that the government's opportunity to shape a more
comprehensive approach to drug problems in America was not
decisively acted upon.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">One of the most important and lasting
byproducts of this chain of events was the creation of a new
agency, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) within HEW.
This was created by a departmental reorganization announced by
the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare on September 23,
1973. The announcement occurred more than a year in advance of
the congressional requirement in the Drug Abuse Office and
Treatment Act of 1972 for the creation of such an agency no later
than December 30, 1974 </font><font size="1">.113</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Organizationally, NIDA was made a fourth-level
agency in HEW. As Figure 1.3 illustrates, the director of NIDA is
one of three agency directors reporting to the administrator of
the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental. Health Administration
(ADAMHA). The administrator of ADAMHA is, in turn, one of six
Public Health Service officials reporting to the assistant
secretary for health, who in turn is one of many assistant
secretaries reporting to the secretary of HEW.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Despite this organizational arrangement, NIDA
was charged with providing &quot;leadership, policies and goals
for the Federal effort in the prevention, control and treatment
of narcotic addiction and drug abuse, and the rehabilitation of
affected individuals.&quot; Clearly, NIDA was intended to succeed
SAODAP as the lead agency on the &quot;demand&quot; side of the
federal drug effort.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">But NIDA was not and could not be a substitute
for SAODAP. SAODAP was designed to be a policy and coordinating
office, with minimal direct program responsibilities. NIDA was
given the bulk of drug treatment program responsibilities but
very limited coordinating powers. Much of SAODAP's authority was
contained in P. L. 92-255, and most of those powers were not
transferable to NIDA without congressional approval. Even if the
powers were to be transferred, the decisions and directions taken
by NIDA, buried as it was within HEW, would obviously have
attracted less attention and carried less weight than when the
very same actions were announced by a White House office.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Although the earlier-than-anticipated
emergence of NIDA and diminution of SAODAP made many of those
involved with drug treatment and prevention anxious about the
future, some found solace in the fact that the drug treatment and
prevention effort had been removed from the immediate control of
NIMH. Under the HEW reorganization NIDA was established as
separate and equal to NIMH. Similarly, responsibility in the
alcoholism field had been removed from NIMH and given to another
new separate and equal agency, the National Institute on Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism. The effect of removing NIMH control from
these fields was to allow each to more fully develop its own
approaches. Inasmuch as drug problems in many respects lie
outside traditional mental health concerns, the creation of NIDA
independent of NIMH was applauded by many people in the drug
treatment and prevention fields.<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <img src="fada1003.gif"><font size="2"> <br>
</font> </p>

<p> <b>The Arguments for and against the Continuation of SAODAP<br>
</b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Even though NIDA was in full operation by
mid-1974, SAODAP continued to function until its expiration date
of June 30, 1975, though with greatly reduced staff levels and
diminished bureaucratic status. It was maintained to exercise
those coordinating functions which could not legally be
transferred to NIDA. Moreover, it provided the drug treatment and
prevention fields with a symbolic organizational parity with drug
law enforcement concerns, a role which NIDA could not fulfill.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">By early 1975, questions were being raised
about the implications of SAODAP's impending demise. The future
direction and scope of the federal drug effort seemed uncertain.
Gerald Ford had succeeded Richard Nixon as president, and Ford's
views and commitment regarding the drug field were largely
unknown.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In March 1975, Senator William Hathaway,
chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Narcotics,
introduced legislation amending the Drug Abuse Office and
Treatment Act of 1972. The proposed legislation called for a
modified version of SAODAP, to be called the Office of Drug Abuse
Prevention Policy (ODAPP), which would continue certain
policymaking and coordinating functions of the predecessor
agency. The expiration of SAODAP along with other provisions of
P. L. 92255-including funding authorizations for future federal
treatment, prevention, and research efforts-gave Congress its
first opportunity to review both the 1972 legislation and the
status of the federal response.114</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">This congressional review prompted President
Ford to direct the Domestic Council to undertake its own
assessment in order to define more clearly the administration's
drug policies and prepare the administration's response to any
congressional action </font><font size="1">.6' </font><font
size="2">These congressional and executive office assessments
reconsidered the tone and approach of the government's response
to illicit drug use in a distinctively less politicized way than
had marked the crisis atmosphere during the Nixon administration.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">Both Congress and the administration sought to
back away from the warlike rhetoric of the Nixon administration.
The emphasis on &quot;victories&quot; and &quot;solutions&quot;
was replaced by more cautious statements about &quot;goals&quot;
and &quot;objectives.&quot; Congress amended its Declaration of
National Policy by adopting more temperate wording. The Domestic
Council Report to the president was even more straightforward
with respect to its assessment of goals:</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">We should stop raising unrealistic
expectations of total elimination of drug abuse from our society.
At the same time, we should in no way signal tacit acceptance of
drug abuse or a lessened commitment to continue aggressive
efforts aimed at eliminating it entirely. The sobering fact is
that some members of any society will seek escape from the
stresses of life </font><font size="1">through drug use.
Prevention, education, treatment, and rehabilitation will curtail
their number, but will not eliminate drug use entirely. As long
as there is demand, criminal drug traffickers will make some
supply available, provided that the potential profits outweigh
the risks of detection and punishment. Vigorous supply reduction
efforts will reduce, but not eliminate, supply. And reduction in
the supply of one drug may only cause abuse prone individuals to
turn to another substance.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">All of this indicates that, regrettably, we
will probably always have a drug problem of some proportion.
Therefore we must be prepared to continue our efforts and our
commitment indefinitely, in order to contain the problem at a
minimal level, and in order to minimize the adverse social costs
of drug abuse.&quot;&quot;</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">This acknowledgment of the persistence of drug
problems and the impossibility of achieving a quick victory had
no direct effect on the operational aspects of the various drug
programming efforts; it only sought to adjust public expectations
of them.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">Congress and the Ford administration relieved
some of the anxieties felt in the drug treatment field after the
&quot;turn the corner&quot; speech by halting the one-year budget
cutback which had been initiated with that speech. Although
questions were raised about the adequacy of the administration's
budget proposal, many agencies and individuals were pleased
-simply by this temporizing action.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">More serious difficulties between Congress and
the president arose over whether some modified version of SAODAP
should be continued. Many in Congress argued for such an agency;
President Ford and his administration were opposed to it. The
proponents of a successor agency to SAODAP contended that White
House coordination of the drug effort was still necessary <b>.7 </b>They
held that without some successor to SAODAP the earlier
organizational Difficulties could easily reappear, maintaining
that the logic which dictated congressional approval of SAODAP in
1972 extended to the proposed Office of Drug Abuse Prevention
Policy in 1975. Congressional proponents further argued that
NIDA, as a fourth-level HEW agency, would never be able to
exercise any real control over the &quot;demand&quot; side of the
federal drug effort. They pointed cut that 51 percent of all
federal expenditures for drug prevention programs were made by
agencies other than NIDA, and thus concluded that &quot;for NIDA
to coordinate and lead the Federal drug abuse prevention effort,
both from a structural and from a fiscal perspective, would be
difficult at best and, more likely, actually
impossible.&quot;&quot;&quot;</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">President Ford and the Domestic Council Task
Force agreed on the need for continued coordination, but they
differed with the proponents of ODAPP on the way to achieve it.
Rather than have a special White House agency just to coordinate
the &quot;demand&quot; side of the federal drug effort, President
Ford opted for &quot;strong Cabinet management&quot; of the
program. </font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In April 1976 he created the Cabinet Committee
for Drug Abuse Prevention (CCDAP), chaired by the Secretary of
HEW, which included the Secretaries of Defense and Labor and the
administrator of the Veterans Administration. CCDAF was given
responsibility for the oversight and coordination of all federal
activities involving drug prevention, treatment, and
rehabilitation, integrating the efforts of all the cabinet
departments and agencies involved. Moreover, CCDAP was expected
to &quot;give HEW, ADAMHA, and NIDA the organizational strength
and authority to provide the interdepartmental and interagency
coordination needed to maintain the progress which has been made
in drug abuse treatment and prevention. &quot;</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">ODAPP's sponsors sought to extend its
projected responsibilities of review, -formulation, and
coordination of drug policies and priorities to all drug policies
and programs, including drug law enforcement programs and
international negotiations. This was to be the major difference
between ODAPP and SAODAP, whose authority had been confined to
drug treatment, rehabilitation, education, prevention, and
research. This proposed extension of authority for ODAPP gained
support for several reasons: First, it sought to reconceptualize
the federal drug effort by bridging the gap between the
enforcement and treatment approaches. ODAPP was envisioned as the
forum in government by which the long-standing philosophical
conflicts between the medical and law enforcement communities
could be faced and, ideally, reconciled.70 At the very least,
ODAPP was being designed to insure a more comprehensive review of
the drug programs and policies of the various federal agencies.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">Second, this extension of ODAPP's authority
was proposed at a time when the balance between drug law
enforcement and drug treatment and prevention programs was once
again shifting in favor of law enforcement.71 The drug law
enforcement budget was rising while drug treatment and prevention
funds remained level; and, bureaucratically, DEA was a higher
level agency within the justice Department than was NIDA in HEW.
ODAPP was supported partly in the hope that it could keep a
balance between these two principal agencies and their respective
approaches to the drug problem.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Third, support for ODAPP stemmed from the
congressional desire to have one single administration official
with overall responsibility for national drug policy who would be
accountable to Congress. At the time Congress was considering
ODAPP, officials of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
were refusing to testify before Congress on drug policy issues,
and the directors of the various drug agencies (NIDA and DEA in
particular) spoke only for their own programs and policies. The
unresolved areas, as well as the overall concerns, of national
policy could easily be unintentionally overlooked in this
situation. ODAPP was designed to rectify this.72<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">President Ford and the Domestic Council Task
Force also recognized the need to coordinate treatment and
enforcement approaches. In its report the Domestic Council
stated, &quot;Strong coordinative mechanisms are necessary to
ensure that the efforts of these [Federal] departments and
agencies are integrated into an effective overall program, and
that the approach adopted in each is consistent with the
President's priorities.&quot;&quot; However, the administration
maintained that such coordination could be attained without a
White House agency. Instead, it chose to formalize the division
of the drug functions developed during the Nixon administration.
Thus the government's response split the effort into three
separate areas, each with a &quot;lead agency </font><font
size="1">. '174 </font><font size="2">The Drug Enforcement
Administration was designated as the &quot;lead agency&quot; for
drug law enforcement, the State Department for international
activities, and NIDA for prevention and treatment. To strengthen
interagency coordination within each functional area, President
Ford convened three separate cabinet committees, each with
oversight and coordination responsibilities within one area.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">Going a step further in acknowledging some
need for &quot;program oversight and limited interagency
coordination at the Executive Office level </font><font size="1">&quot;75
</font><font size="2">President Ford and the Domestic Council
accordingly made several more recommendations.76 Foremost among
them was the recommendation that the Strategy Council on Drug
Abuse* be revitalized to provide overall policy guidance, and
that a small staff at OMB be maintained to assist the Strategy
Council and executive office in formulating drug policy. However,
these recommendations fell considerably short of a White House
Office for drug abuse.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">*The Strategy Council, mandated in 1972 by
P.L. 92-255, consists of government officials and private
citizens appointed by the president.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The argument that Congress needed one person
or office to be accountable to it for total federal drug policy
was rejected by the administration. &quot;The best places to get
such information and to seek accountability for progress,&quot;
said President Ford, &quot;are the departments and agencies which
have direct responsibility and program authority.&quot;</font><font
size="1">77</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In point of fact, the arguments raised both
for and against ODAPP were illusory. There were other ways to
satisfy the needs cited by the proponents of ODAPP, and the
creation of ODAPP would not have guaranteed the advantages
envisioned anyway. For example, the Ford administration could
have coordinated its response to the drug problems of America
without an ODAPP, just as it could have allowed the partitions
between the medical and legal approaches to continue despite
ODAPP's presence.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The ODAPP concept was <i>strongly </i>supported
by the majority of individuals, associations, and private
organizations working in the drug treatment, rehabilitation,
education, prevention, and research fields. All had felt
seriously threatened by the funding cutbacks of the Nixon
administration's last budget, and the elimination of SAODAP had
added to the uncertainty about future federal commitment.
Accordingly, these associations and organizations, many of which
had developed during the years of budget expansion, vigorously
lobbied Congress to support the small White House agency for
drugs as a sign of their support for the drug field.
Congressional spokesmen took note of the symbolic importance of
ODAPP, explaining that &quot;there is a clear danger that
elimination of that office [SAODAP or ODAPP] would have enormous
symbolic significance to this field. There is no way in which
this move [the elimination of SAODAP], coupled with recent
proposals to cut funds, can appear to be anything but a drastic
retrenchment in Federal priorities </font><font size="1">.&quot;711</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">The Ford administration's opposition to ODAPP
was also symbolic, but not in relation to the drug field.
President Ford had committed himself to a reduction of executive
office power and a restoration of the powers of the various
cabinet departments and federal agencies. He wished to reverse
the concentration of power in the White House which had
characterized the Nixon administrations trend to which SAODAP was
both a symbolic and a real contributor. To the Ford
administration, the negative symbolism of a new White House drug
office-even a small one-overrode any positive symbolism it might
have conveyed to the drug field.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In March 1976, eight months after SAODAP had
expired, Congress passed legislation creating in the White House
the Office of Drug Abuse Policy (ODAP, a slight shortening of the
originally proposed name) </font><font size="1">.71, </font><font
size="2">Compared to SAODAP, ODAP was organizationally small and
its legislatively granted powers limited, but its coordinating
responsibilities extended to law enforcement and international
negotiations, thus giving it broader scope than its predecessor.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">President Ford signed the legislation creating
ODAP only because sections of the same bill contained the
necessary funding authorizations to continue federal efforts in
drug treatment and prevention. The president remained steadfastly
opposed to ODAP in principle, and in signing the legislation he
said:</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">I have voiced strong opposition to the
reestablishment of a special office for drug abuse in the White
House. I believe that such an office would be duplicative and
unnecessary and that it would detract from strong Cabinet
management of the Federal drug abuse program. Therefore, while I
am signing this bill because of the need for Federal funds for
drug abuse prevention and treatment, I do not intend to seek
appropriations for the new Office of Drug Abuse Policy created by
the bill. 110 </font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">This impasse continued throughout Ford's
presidency; ODAP had been legally constituted but remained a
&quot;paper&quot; agency with neither staff nor funds. Instead,
President Ford continued his plan for supervision of government
response to illicit drug use through three cabinet committees,
one each for law enforcement, international narcotics control,
and treatment and prevention. <br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <b><font size="2">Government Response under Presidents Ford
and Carter<br>
</font></b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Drug problems and issues faded from the
limelight during the Ford administration, a change generally
viewed as salutary when compared to the tumultuous years
preceding it. Funding levels in all areas remained reasonably
stable, as did program operations. Although whatever gains had
resulted from the Turkish opium ban were reversed by the new
availability of Mexican heroin, no new &quot;wars&quot; were
proclaimed. Utilization of existing treatment capacity did
increase throughout the country and funding was increased to
treat several thousand more people. The Drug Enforcement
Administration continued to confiscate large amounts of illicit
drugs, but the overall impact on illicit trafficking was
marginal.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Guided by the Domestic Council's &quot;White
Paper on Drug Abuse,&quot; the Ford administration accepted the
verdict that the &quot;drug problem&quot; could not be
eliminated. Instead of trying to rally public support to end
&quot;drug abuse,&quot; the administration started seeking to
develop greater public tolerance of this ineradicable phenomenon.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">Although the style was different and the goals
less ambitious, the Ford administration's response to illicit
drugs was largely predicated on the same assumptions about the
innate harmfulness of illicit drugs that have guided the
government's response to drugs throughout the twentieth century.
The administration's response continued to rest upon law
enforcement or quasi-enforcement strategies fundamentally
intended to prohibit new or continued use of nonapproved
psychoactive substances. Though these assumptions were not
challenged, the limits of any attempt to &quot;solve&quot; the
problems of illicit drug use were at last openly acknowl-edged-a
significant change from previous administrations.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In his one major public statement on the use
of illicit drugs, President Ford devoted less than three
paragraphs to treatment and prevention issues. The remainder of
his six-page message to Congress&quot; addressed the drug-crime
nexus, law enforcement efforts, proposals for mandatory minimum
sentences for traffickers and bail denial, the activities of
Customs, use of the Internal Revenue Service to go after
traffickers, international control and cooperation, and the like.
Support for programs in treatment and prevention was derived, as
with enforcement, from the longstanding fears and assumptions
about illicit drugs, their users, and their effects on society.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">When Jimmy Carter became president some
observers of the drug field expected swift and significant policy
and programmatic changes to result, in part because of Carter's
close association with Dr. Peter Bourne, a highly regarded drug
program expert. In March 1977, under some pressure from Congress,
President Carter activated ODAP, naming Dr. Bourne as its
director. It was believed that ODAP might devise a more unified
and coordinated government response to illicit drugs, melding the
goals and concerns of the treatment, prevention, and enforcement
communities.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">No sooner had ODAP been activated, however,
than President Carter announced his intention of abolishing the
office. This announcement was made as part of the Reorganization
Plan No. 1 of 1977, in which President Carter sought to
streamline and reduce the White House staff. As a result, ODAP
expired in April 1978, after completing a series of drug policy
studies spanning the treatment, prevention, and enforcement
fields. </font><font size="1">82 </font><font size="2">ODAP's
legal functions were transferred to the president. Dr. Bourne
remained as special assistant to the president in part to
&quot;advise the President on drug policy and assist in the
coordination of interagency efforts,&quot; until his resignation
in July 1978. Several ODAP staff members were transferred to the
Domestic Policy Staff, where they continue to provide some
overall review of drug policy issues. The results of this
reorganization resemble the plan of strong cabinet management
with &quot;some&quot; executive coordination advocated by the
Ford administration.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Shortly after announcing his reorganization
plan, President Carter presented Congress with his first major
message on drug issues.113 His primary concern was the
fragmentation and lack of coordination among drug programs and
agencies. (This organizational problem has persisted in spite of
all the attention it has received.) President Carter stressed the
continuing need for international cooperation, and directed the
individual agencies involved to give the drug issues a high
priority. Like Presidents Nixon and Ford before him, Carter
stressed international law enforcement efforts to eradicate the
illicit cultivation of drugs and interrupt international
trafficking networks. And like his predecessors, he urged
Congress to ratify the Psychotropic Convention.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">With respect to law enforcement, President
Carter announced support for programs which would promise
&quot;swift and severe punishment&quot; to traffickers in drugs.
These programs include the investigation of links between
organized crime and drug trafficking, revocation of passports and
freezing assets of known major traffickers, support of
legislation raising the dollar value of property seized from and
forfeited by a drug violator through administrative action, study
of possible denial of bail or any release prior to trial for
certain major drug-traffic offenders, and the possible emendation
of the Tax Reform Act to allow for easier investigation of major
traffickers (if this would not infringe on the privacy of
citizens). For the most part, these proposals are conceptually
indistinguishable from those made by Presidents Nixon and Ford;
all sought to enact measures that would deter major drug
traffickers in the hope of reducing the availability of illicit
drugs at the street level.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">As for drug treatment, President Carter called
upon NIDA to include more programs for abusers of barbiturates,
amphetamines, and combinations of drugs (including alcohol). He
supported expansion of rehabilitation and job-training programs
for former heroin addicts. President Carter also expressed the
need for better coordination of federally sponsored research
efforts on a variety of drugs, including opiates, alcohol, and
tobacco. He expressed the hope that this would save money and
&quot;lead to greater scientific understanding of addiction
problems.&quot;</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In recent years the barbiturates have been
recognized as a major drug problem (this problem has resulted in
part from their widespread licit medical use). The special
attention that President Carter directed to be given to these and
other sedative-hypnotic drugs will cover the whole gamut of
federal drug response: Prescribing practices of physicians will
be reviewed, more intensive efforts will be made to prosecute
physicians who deliberately overprescribe, DEA will investigate
street marketing activities and audit companies lawfully
manufacturing the drugs, and HEW will study the question whether
barbiturates should remain on the market. In focusing such
specific attention on barbiturate abuse, President Carter took a
significant step toward extending the federal government's
response to drugs beyond a traditional concern with such illicit
drugs as heroin, cocaine, and marijuana.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">And in what amounted to his most significant
policy break with Presidents Nixon and Ford, Carter endorsed the
decriminalization of possession of small amounts of marijuana for
personal use, noting that &quot;penalties against possession of a
drug should not be more damaging to an individual than the use of
the drug itself.&quot;</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Nevertheless, the overall thrust of President
Carter's first major statement on drug issues does not suggest
any fundamental changes in the specifics of government response.
The tone does suggest a less emotional approach than that of the
early 1970s; the inclusion of licit drugs which can be
dangerously misused suggests a broader understanding of the
concept of &quot;drug abuse&quot;; and the adoption of a
marijuana decriminalization position suggests that fundamental
changes in government response could occur after current policies
and programs are clearly, repeatedly shown not to work. But in a
broader context President Carter's drug statement further
reflects the tortuously slow process by which public opinion and
public policy change. <br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>Some Concluding Thoughts <br>
</b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The overriding observation which emerges from
a review of the federal government's history of response to
illicit drugs is that its drug policy changes slowly if at all.
Federal drug programs<i> </i>have changed considerably in the
past decade, but policy remains essentially unchanged. Faith
remains strong in the power of criminal sanctions to deter
illicit drug use and the effectiveness of law enforcement efforts
to eliminate that use which does occur.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Two deeply rooted premises have guided federal
response: One is that there are certain drugs which people <i>should
</i>be prohibited from using under any circumstances. The second
is that the government can then prevent their use. The first
premise is philosophical in nature, the second pragmatic.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The philosophical question of the
justification of prohibition can always be argued at great
length; there is no single &quot;answer&quot; as such. With
respect to the pragmatic issue, the belief that government can
prevent illicit drug use, there is more concrete evidence to
analyze. The experience of the 1970s clearly shows that even with
an extensive, generally efficient, and popularly supported
federal effort, it is impossible to prohibit the presence of
nonapproved drugs in American society. It is difficult to
conceive how that effort might have been expanded or intensified
to be more successful while still respecting the traditional
values of a free society.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Federal policymakers are by now generally
cognizant of the limits of current federal drug policy. Why then
do they continue to pursue the same fundamental policies? Because
the public demands it; to relax the prohibitionary goal is
tantamount to being &quot;soft on drugs&quot; (a most pejorative
term that has been used in ugly ways to cast aspersions on those
who question the wisdom of prohibition). In a democratic society,
policymakers cannot stray too far from what the public wants or
they will simply be replaced. Federal drug policy will not change
substantially until there is public support to do so.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">But federal drug officials have not conveyed
to the public an understanding of the limits to their potential
accomplishments; it is far easier politically to highlight
occasionally successful programs and to emphasize long-range
goals or aspirations. Policyrnakers also seem reluctant to engage
the public in a discussion of the philosophy of drug prohibition.
One reason for this difficulty is that for many years the federal
government fueled the popular demand for drug prohibition. Yet
those who are familiar with drug policy recognize now that the
designation of certain drugs as illicit and as targets for
prohibition has roots in racism, hysteria, and sensationalism. It
is also now apparent, based on current knowledge about drugs and
their effects, that prohibition has been based on much
misinformation and misunderstanding.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In the context of these general observations,
the following concluding thoughts are offered:</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">1. The most important contribution which
federal drug agencies can now make to future drug policy is to
provide the American public with opportunities to carefully and
sensibly reexamine the wisdom of drug prohibition. Even though
they are now more than five years old, the two reports of the
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse would still make
an excellent starting point for this reappraisal process.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">2. Until the drug issue becomes less
vulnerable to sensationalism, there is no way to guarantee that
excesses in the federal drug effort, such as those of the early
1970s, can be prevented. Federal drug policies and programs ought
to be the product of careful, thoughtful consideration.
Impulsive, hastily conceived programs such as ODALE can do great
damage to our society.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">3. The federal drug effort needs greater
coordination; the treatment, enforcement, and international
components cannot be left to go -their own -ways. Coordination
without &quot;teeth&quot; has beer, more superficial. than
substantive.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">4. From a policy, bureaucratic, and budgetary
perspective, criminal justice and drug law enforcement agencies
have been too dominant in our national response to the abuse of
psychoactive drugs. This dominance has not served society well;
rather than bringing out the best in us, it has led us to rely
too heavily on our meaner, more punitive instincts.<br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <b><font size="2">APPENDIX A: A Budget Perspective <br>
</font></b> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Overview of Fiscal Years 1970-1978. It is
impossible to account exactly for all funds expended on the
federal government's response to illicit drugs. The figures
presented in this report are, however, sufficiently accurate to
be used for an overall fiscal analysis and review of significant
trends and priorities. Table 1. 1 presents the federal drug
budget by function for fiscal years 1970-1978.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">From July 1969 through September 1978, the
federal government spent approximately $5.7 billion on its
drug-related efforts. Of this total, $2.4 billion was spent on
treatment and rehabilitation, $2.3 billion on law enforcement,
and the remainder ($.95 billion) was spent on education,
prevention, and training ($.4 billion), research ($.4 billion),
and planning ($.15 billion).</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The effect which the &quot;war on drug
abuse&quot; had on the budget is clearly demonstrable beginning
with FY 72 (which began July 1, 1971, two weeks after President
Nixon's special message to Congress). (See Figure 1.4.) The most
rapid expansion of the federal drug budget occurred during FY 72
and FY 73. After FY 74 and Nixon's &quot;turn the corner&quot;
speech, the rate of budget expansion slowed considerably. (In
fact, if adjusted for inflation, the buying power of the federal
drug effort was lower in FY 78 than it had been since FY 72.)
Still, although the annual rate of growth of the federal drug
budget slowed, the absolute size at which its annual total
more-or-less leveled off was much higher than ever before. The
average annual federal drug expenditure for the years 1974-78 was
over $800 million; for 1973-78-a six-and-one-quarter-year
period-it totaled $5 billion.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Perhaps the most useful index of federal
priorities in the drug area is a comparison of the treatment and
rehabilitation budget with the law enforcement budget. Figure 1.4
displays the rapid growth of the treatment and rehabilitation bud
get between FY 71 and FY 73; however, since FY 73 it has
alternately declined and increased, ending up at nearly the same
level as in FY 73 ($366 million in FY 78 compared to $350 million
in FY 73). The drug law enforcement budget, on the other hand,
has risen steadily, doubling in size from $200 to $400 million in
the same time period. <br>
</font> </p>

<p> <img src="fada1004.gif"><font size="2"> <br>
</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">If we look at these items in a slightly
different way-as a percentage of the total federal drug
expenditure for each year-we find a rapid expansion of the
treatment and rehabilitation strategy between FY 71 and FY 73 and
detectable slippage since FY 73 (Figure 1.5). In contrast, the
percentage of the total drug effort allocated to law enforcement
rose from a low of 29 percent in FY 73 to 45 percent, its highest
level, in FY 78.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">This apparent reversal in strategy in the
period FY 71-73-with treatment more heavily funded than
enforcement-is explainable insofar as one accepts the thesis that
drug treatment programs-in particular, methadone treatment
programs-derived at least part of their government support from
concern more with reducing criminal recidivism that with reducing
heroin recidivism. If so, then recent government response to
illicit drug use has remained rather consistently dominated by an
enforcement approach, as indeed it has since the early 1900s.
Moreover, insofar as drug treatment has been funded because of
its crime reduction potential, it may have been in part
ill-defined as &quot;treatment&quot; in a traditional health
context. The pursuit of this avenue of response-crime reduction
through treatment-may offer a reasonable explanation for the
brief reversal during FY 71-73 in the traditional balance between
treatment and enforcement approaches. If so, this adds greater
credence to the contention that the underlying assumptions <br>
</font> </p>

<p> <img src="fada1005.gif"><font size="2"> </font><font size="1">and
strategies of the government's response to illicit drugs has
changed very little in the 1970s.<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <b><font size="1">The FY </font></b><font size="1">79 <b>Budget
Request. </b>President Carter released his proposed FY 79 budget
on January 20, 1978. Inasmuch as this budget request is the first
one fully prepared by the Carter administration it is logical to
turn to it for any signs of impending changes in the government
response to drugs. The currently available budget documents
suggest that it will remain essentially unchanged. However, a
complete analysis is precluded because neither OMB'nor ODAP has
compiled drug-related expenditures on an agency-by-agency basis
as they previously did every year since 1971. Without that
compilation it is not possible to add in agency expenditures for
third-party reimbursement, nor is it possible to estimate
accurately either the non-line-item expenditures of federal
agencies or how block grants will be used.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">Thus at this time it is not possible to
include the FY 79 figures in our tables and figures. This absence
of an overall analysis of the drug budget by either OMB or ODAP
could allow a return to a situation where agency drug budgets
dictate overall federal drug policy rather than the other way
around.<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <img src="fada1006.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> <font size="1">In the absence of an overall analysis of the
federal drug budget, the budget proposals for NIDA and DEA-the
two principal federal drug agencies-may serve as a useful
surrogate. NIDA's budget will increase to $275.2 million in FY
79, a $13.1 million increase over FY 78. The greater part of this
increase-$11.8 million-is earmarked for research, in response to
the preliminary recommendations of the president's Commission on
Mental Health. NIDA will continue to support a treatment capacity
of 102,000, with a maximum local matching rate of 40 percent; the
treatment budget will remain at $161 million.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">The Drug Enforcement Administration will
receive a modest budgetary increase if President Carter's request
is approved; the DEA budget for FY 79 will be $193 million,
compared to $188.5 million in FY 78. Funding for direct
enforcement activities will increase by $4.2 million to a total
of $137.2 million, while DEA's research and development program
will be cut by more than half to $2.3 million.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">Overall, the FY 79 federal drug budget
proposal seems to maintain the status quo. The total expenditure
will increase a little, as it has in each of the past several
years; the relationship between treatment and enforcement
approaches will remain essentially unchanged.<br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> APPENDIX B: A Comment On The Role of State and Local
Governments* <br>
</p>

<p> <font size="1">The material for this appendix is largely
drawn from a paper by Peter Goldberg, &quot;The Role of the City
in Responding to the Problems of Drug Abuse,&quot; in <i>Rehabilitation
Aspects of Drug Dependence, </i>ed. Arnold Schecter (Cleveland:
CRC Press, 1977).<br>
</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">In addition to the federal government, state
and local governments have been active in the drug field.
However, the activities and directions of state and local
governments vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, thus making
it impossible to generalize about these efforts as if they were
uniform. In recent years, organizations such as the National
Association of State Drug Abuse Program Coordinators, the
National League of Cities, and U.S. Conference of Mayors have
attempted to catalog expenditures at the state and local level
and offer some general analysis of policy decisions and program
directions. The Drug Abuse Council cannot add substantively to
that information.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">One important issue, however, deserves
comment, that of the intergovernmental system for planning and
programming established by the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment
Act of 1972 (P. L. 92-255). The system, perhaps inadvertently,
has resulted in a nearly total absence of any sustained,
systematic large-city government participation in the state or
federal policy making and program planning processes. It is an
inexplicable situation, since the nation's most severe drug
problems are concentrated in its large central cities.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">The conditions of heroin addiction and crime
which initially prompted an expanded federal response to illicit
drug use in the early 1970s were concentrated in the larger
cities of this country. In fact, the increased federal response
was required partly because the scope and extent of the problems
associated with addictive drug use had far transcended the
ability of city governments to respond effectively. Also, state
governments-whose legislatures were frequently dominated by rural
and suburban interests-were often reluctant to become extensively
involved in what they felt was essentially a central-city
problem. Before the passage of the Drug Abuse Office and
Treatment Act of 1972, only New York, California, and Illinois
had undertaken major efforts in drug treatment and prevention.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="1">Nevertheless, when the federal government
began its large-scale expansion of the drug effort, the states
lobbied for and succeeded in obtaining the major role in that
effort. The role of local government was ignored; large
cities-where the social costs of illicit drug use are the most
severe-were left out of the formal policyrnaking and funding
process. This imbalance between city and state responsibilities
can be traced to the congressional authorization of annual
formula (block) grants to states, detailed in Section 409 of the
Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act. In return for the block
grants, Congress required each state to establish a drug abuse
coordinating agency and annually prepare a drug abuse plan to
meet treatment and prevention needs. Thus Congress, in effect,
required even nonurban states such as North Dakota, Vermont, and
Montana-states having comparatively small drug problems-to plan a
drug abuse response effort, while cities such as Newark, Detroit,
New Orleans, Boston, and Los Angeles were ignored in the
legislation.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">The resulting problems were first of all
political. Large-city concerns and needs tend to be
underrepresented at the state level of government, where rural
and suburban interests are disproportionately powerful. Moreover,
blacks and other minority populations have added yet another
political concern, most clearly articulated in a resolution
passed by the National Black Caucus of Local Elected Officials in
June 1974. </font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">Whereas, unfortunately, the problems of drug
abuse have disproportionately affected large numbers of Black and
Spanish-speaking Americans, these minority populations tend to be
most underrepresented at the state level where drug abuse
policies are being increasingly formulated, thus creating a large
discrepancy between those most afflicted by the problems and
those establishing the policies and procedures to solve the
problems.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">In addition to these political concerns, the
drug problems themselves in rural and suburban areas are often
quite different from those in the central city. While heroin may
be the major drug of abuse (alcohol excepted) in the large
cities, other parts of a state are usually concerned with other
drugs. And while treatment may be the most pressing need in
dealing with heroin addiction in the central city, the emphasis
desired or demanded by the rest of the state may be for education
and prevention programs. Although the larger cities may want
increased funding for methadone programs, other areas of the
state where heroin is not a problem may be unsympathetic to this
use of one addictive drug to treat another. In the final
analysis, different units of government are bound to have
different needs, priorities, and philosophies, all justified from
their own perspectives.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">The imbalance between state and large-city
determinations of problems and priorities has become further
aggravated as the principal federal drug treatment and prevention
agency, NIDA, has sought to become more reliant on state plans in
determining federal funding decisions. In fact, NIDA has recently
announced its intention to fund virtually all of its treatment
and prevention efforts through statewide services contracts with
state governments by 1979. It is argued that this will be
administratively efficient; but this increasing substitution of
state decision making for federal does not augur well for the
large cities, where drug and drug-related problems are most
severe.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">In some instances a strong state role has
worked well; this is most often true in states where there are no
large urban centers. But in many other instances, potentially
serious problems between state and large-city governments have
impeded the effective flow of funds and delivery of services.
City organizations such as the National League of Cities and the
U.S. Conference of Mayors have repeatedly expressed their
dissatisfaction with the lack of state responsiveness to large
city needs in the drug area. Representatives of a number of
large-city governments have also voiced strong and specific
complaints about this. There is clearly a need to make some
adjustments in the state planning process so that plans more
adequately and appropriately allow for large-city needs and
participation. Such adjustments can be made without dismantling
the state planning system.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">NIDA and the cities need to communicate more
directly on drug issues and learn more from one another. To an
unfortunate extent federal drug policies are formulated without
discussion or collaboration with local elected officials from
areas where drug and drug-related problems are particularly
severe. This situation must be remedied if our drug policies and
programs are to work more efficiently. NIDA needs to develop
mechanisms by which it can more aggressively and systematically
seek large-city government input in its deliberations, and,
conversely, cities need to develop a better understanding of why
NIDA does what it does. The concept of an Office of Urban
Services within the NIDA bureaucracy to facilitate these crucial
interactions would seem to have merit.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="1">Finally, NIDA should seriously consider
initiating a program to fund city coordinating agencies with
responsibility for developing city-wide drug abuse plans in a
number of cities with the highest concentrations of drug-related
problems. These plans should provide for interaction with the
state government. Cleveland needs such an agency and plan far
more than does the state of Idaho, Atlanta more than Vermont.</font>
</p>

<p> <font size="1">A federal system that funds only state drug
abuse plans and agencies is either focusing solely on
administrative ease or operating in ignorance of the actual
problems. Plans should not proliferate uncontrollably across the
country, but if the federal government is to require planning it
should at least make certain that there will be direct
participation from those areas most afflicted and concerned. An
additional benefit of funding city agencies would be that it
would give local elected officials a dependable and developed
local source of advice and assistance on drug issues and
problems.<br>
<br>
</font> </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>