
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000618-B047-312</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/usdta.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122030938 text/html 186951
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:08:56 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:10:46 GMT
Content-length: 186732
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>U.S. DRUG THREAT ASSESSMENT: 1993</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p> U.S. Department of Justice </p>

<p> Drug Enforcement Administration </p>

<p> U.S. DRUG THREAT ASSESSMENT: 1993 </p>

<p> DRUG INTELLIGENCE REPORT </p>

<p> Availability, Price, Purity, Use, and Trafficking of Drugs in
the United </p>

<p> States </p>

<p> SEPTEMBER 1993 </p>

<p> DEA-93042 </p>

<p> EXECUTIVE ASSESSMENT </p>

<p> COCAINE </p>

<p> Availability/Price/Purity </p>

<p> In 1992, domestic cocaine prices fluctuated as successful law
</p>

<p> enforcement operations led to a short-term (3-month) impact
on cocaine </p>

<p> trafficking from South America. During April through June
1992, </p>

<p> shortages of wholesale quantities of cocaine resulted in an
increase in </p>

<p> the kilogram price in many major U.S. metropolitan areas.
Throughout the </p>

<p> remainder of the year, however, cocaine was readily available
as </p>

<p> kilogram prices in virtually all major metropolitan areas
returned to </p>

<p> lower levels. Preliminary data for early 1993 indicate that
kilogram </p>

<p> prices remain at low levels. </p>

<p> Nationwide purity of cocaine at the kilogram, ounce, and gram
levels </p>

<p> averaged 83, 74, and 64 percent, respectively, during 1992
compared to </p>

<p> 86, 72, and 59 percent, respectively, during 1991. A
temporary decline </p>

<p> in purity at all levels of the traffic was noted during July
through </p>

<p> September 1992. However, by year's end, purity at all levels
had once </p>

<p> again increased. </p>

<p> Use </p>

<p> Regarding the use of cocaine, the National Household Survey
on Drug </p>

<p> Abuse for 1992 indicated that the number of past-year and
past-month </p>

<p> users of cocaine has decreased significantly since 1985.
Nevertheless, </p>

<p> frequent or more intense use of cocaine has not shown a
statistically </p>

<p> significant change during the past several years. </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey on
Drug Abuse, </p>

<p> cocaine use continued to decline among high school seniors
and 10th </p>

<p> graders. Among 8th graders, however, survey data indicated
increased use </p>

<p> of cocaine. </p>

<p> Reporting from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) shows
that the </p>

<p> estimated number of nationwide cocaine-related emergency room
episodes, </p>

<p> which had been increasing at a fairly constant rate from the
early-to- </p>

<p> late 1980s, declined significantly from FY 1989 to FY 1990.
During the </p>

<p> latter half of FY 1991, however, the number of episodes
increased once </p>

<p> again and appears to have stabilized at high levels since
that time. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN also indicates that the smoking of
cocaine continues </p>

<p> to be the predominant route of administration used by
patients admitted </p>

<p> to DAWN emergency rooms for cocaine-related problems. The
percentage of </p>

<p> patients who indicated that smoking was their primary method
of </p>

<p> administration increased from 34.3 percent during FY 1989 to
41.4 </p>

<p> percent in FY 1992. </p>

<p> Rates of cocaine use detected through urinalysis testing of
recently </p>

<p> booked male and females arrestees, as reported by the Drug
Use </p>

<p> Forecasting Program (DUF), remained high in many major U.S.
cities in </p>

<p> 1992. In fact, rates of cocaine use during the past year were
</p>

<p> substantially higher than those for opiate and marijuana use.
</p>

<p> Trafficking </p>

<p> Since early 1992, DEA field divisions have increasingly cited
Central </p>

<p> American countries as transshipment points for U.S.-bound
cocaine </p>

<p> shipments. Reporting indicates cocaine is transported from
source </p>

<p> countries to Central American countries by land, air, and sea
</p>

<p> conveyances. From Central America, cocaine shipments are
transported to </p>

<p> the United States by land, sea, and air directly or </p>

<p> through Mexico. </p>

<p> Cocaine traffickers, perceiving enhanced law enforcement
activity along </p>

<p> the United States-Mexican border and in the western
Caribbean, have </p>

<p> subsequently diversified their smuggling routes into the
United States. </p>

<p> DEA field divisions report that cocaine traffickers are
increasingly </p>

<p> using routes employed four to six years ago. This
diversification </p>

<p> includes greater use of the eastern Caribbean and the eastern
Bahamas as </p>

<p> well as increased importation into the eastern United States.
</p>

<p> The use of maritime containerized cargo to smuggle bulk
quantities of </p>

<p> cocaine into the United States continues to challenge U.S.
Government </p>

<p> drug interdiction efforts. Many DEA field divisions report
the use of </p>

<p> cargo containers to conceal and transport cocaine among
legitimate </p>

<p> goods. Additionally, cocaine trafficking organizations
continue to use </p>

<p> maritime vessels such as pleasure craft and fishing vessels
to smuggle </p>

<p> cocaine from source countries into the United States.
Moreover, </p>

<p> traffickers utilize low-profile vessels designed to elude
radar </p>

<p> detection for smuggling cocaine into Puerto Rico. </p>

<p> Several DEA field divisions report cocaine trafficking
organizations </p>

<p> have increased their use of airdrop operations. Cocaine
traffickers are </p>

<p> airdropping cocaine shipments in the Caribbean and off the
coast of, as </p>

<p> well as within, Central America and Southern Mexico.
Additionally, South </p>

<p> American cocaine traffickers have acquired several large
cargo aircraft, </p>

<p> thereby increasing cargo capacity while overcoming the
limited flight </p>

<p> range of smaller aircraft. </p>

<p> U.S. law enforcement efforts along the United States-Mexican
border </p>

<p> continue to force regional cocaine traffickers to alter their
</p>

<p> operations. DEA and U.S. Border Patrol seizures since early
1992 </p>

<p> indicate that cocaine traffickers have decreased the average
size of </p>

<p> cocaine shipments and shifted transportation routes to less
trafficked </p>

<p> ports of entry. For example, in response to an enhanced law
enforcement </p>

<p> presence in southern California, traffickers are increasingly
using U.S. </p>

<p> ports of entry as far east as McAllen, Texas, to transport
cocaine to </p>

<p> California. </p>

<p> Domestic Distribution </p>

<p> The primary domestic importation points for cocaine remain
Arizona, </p>

<p> southern California, south Florida, and Texas. The principal
cities </p>

<p> utilized by Colombian cartels for distributing bulk
quantities of </p>

<p> cocaine include Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, and New York
City. </p>

<p> Within the United States, cocaine traffickers continue to use
commercial </p>

<p> and private vehicles, trains, airlines, and the postal
service to </p>

<p> transport cocaine. Concealed compartments within vehicles are
commonly </p>

<p> cited by DEA field divisions. Moreover, cocaine traffickers
using </p>

<p> tractor-trailers frequently secrete cocaine in hidden
compartments and </p>

<p> among legitimate produce. Extensive use of commercial trucks
to </p>

<p> transport cocaine from the Los Angeles metropolitan area to
destinations </p>

<p> throughout the United States occurred during the past year. </p>

<p> The Cali Cartel's method of operation in the United States
remains </p>

<p> highly sophisticated and compartmentalized. U.S. bases of
operation are </p>

<p> comprised of multiple cells operating within major
metropolitan areas </p>

<p> including Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York City,
Philadelphia, </p>

<p> and San Francisco. The operators of these cells receive
orders directly </p>

<p> from top-level cartel managers in Colombia, and operate
independently of </p>

<p> other cells within the same metropolitan area. The operators
utilize the </p>

<p> latest technology, such as computers, pagers, facsimile
machines, etc., </p>

<p> in their daily operations. Cellular telephones are often
bought in bulk </p>

<p> quantities and then discarded after being used for several
months or </p>

<p> less in order to thwart law enforcement telephone intercept
efforts. </p>

<p> In general, the Medellin Cartel's method of operation in the
United </p>

<p> States is not as compartmentalized as that of the Cali
Cartel. The drug </p>

<p> trafficking groups which comprise the Medellin Cartel employ
a group </p>

<p> decision-making process at the top level as opposed to a
hierarchical </p>

<p> decision-making process employed by the Cali Cartel. At the
lower </p>

<p> levels, Medellin-related trafficking groups are not as
restricted as </p>

<p> those associated with the Cali Cartel regarding the variety
of </p>

<p> distributors with whom they transact business. </p>

<p> Hispanic trafficking organizations, particularly Colombian
and Mexican, </p>

<p> continue to dominate wholesale cocaine trafficking and
distribution </p>

<p> within the United States. A greater diversity, however, has
become </p>

<p> involved in these activities at all levels of the domestic
traffic since </p>

<p> early 1992. </p>

<p> During 1992, four cocaine conversion laboratories were seized
within the </p>

<p> United States, two in New York City, one in California, and
one in </p>

<p> Florida. To date in 1993, one cocaine base conversion
laboratory was </p>

<p> seized within the United States in Hurleyville, New York. </p>

<p> CRACK COCAINE </p>

<p> Availability/Price/Purity </p>

<p> Crack continues to be readily available in virtually every
major city </p>

<p> and, to a somewhat lesser extent, many small towns and rural
areas in </p>

<p> the United States. Crack manufacturing and distribution have
reached a </p>

<p> saturation point in the larger metropolitan areas. </p>

<p> The national price for a rock or vial of crack ranges from as
low as $2 </p>

<p> to as high as $75, but generally sells for $10 to $50,
depending upon </p>

<p> the size, normally 1/10 to 1/2 gram. Gram prices range from
$45 to $150. </p>

<p> Ounce-quantities can be purchased for $475 to $2,500. When
available in </p>

<p> kilogram quantities, crack prices are comparable to those for
kilogram </p>

<p> quantities of cocaine hydrochloride, ranging from $17,000 to
$35,000. </p>

<p> Analysis of crack samples by DEA laboratories during the
mid-to-late </p>

<p> 1980's revealed that retail purity was consistently high,
averaging 80- </p>

<p> plus percent. Although current retail purity remains
approximately at </p>

<p> that level, sellers in some areas of the country are selling
poor- </p>

<p> quality crack. Adulterants are increasingly being added to
increase the </p>

<p> weight or size of the crack dosage unit. </p>

<p> Use </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1992 showed
that the </p>

<p> number of lifetime, past-year, and past-month users of crack
declined </p>

<p> significantly from 1991 to 1992. Survey data indicate that
314,000 </p>

<p> Americans used crack during the past month and over 805,000
used it </p>

<p> during the </p>

<p> past year. </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National High School Survey on Drug
Abuse, </p>

<p> lifetime use of crack among seniors declined from 1991 to
1992; however, </p>

<p> past-year, past-month, and daily use of crack by this group
remained </p>

<p> relatively stable during that period. Nevertheless, overall
frequency of </p>

<p> crack use among high school seniors has decreased
substantially since </p>

<p> 1987. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN indicates that smoking is the predominant
route of </p>

<p> cocaine administration used by patients admitted to DAWN
emergency rooms </p>

<p> for cocaine-related problems. </p>

<p> Trafficking </p>

<p> The higher levels of crack trafficking are controlled by many
small (up </p>

<p> to 10 members) and mid-sized (10 to 40 members) trafficking </p>

<p> organizations consisting of bands of individuals from
distinct ethnic </p>

<p> groups. The main participants involved in wholesale crack
trafficking </p>

<p> are Los Angeles-based street gangs, Jamaican posses, </p>

<p> and Haitian and Dominican groups. </p>

<p> Saturated markets, low prices, violent competition, and
effective law </p>

<p> enforcement pressure in major urban areas have forced some
crack </p>

<p> trafficking organizations to develop new markets. These
organizations </p>

<p> are moving to smaller cities, towns, and rural areas across
the nation, </p>

<p> creating many problems for local law enforcement and civic
authorities. </p>

<p> The largest and more advanced organizations are crisscrossing
the nation </p>

<p> in this effort, with the Jamaican posses moving generally
westward and </p>

<p> the Crips and Bloods expanding eastward. </p>

<p> HEROIN </p>

<p> Availability/Price/Purity </p>

<p> Within the United States, heroin is readily available in all
the major </p>

<p> metropolitan areas having user populations. During 1992 and
the first </p>

<p> few months of 1993, there was an increase in purity at the
retail level, </p>

<p> and increased supplies available from Southwest Asia. (Note
that high- </p>

<p> purity heroin has been imported from Colombia in increasing
quantities </p>

<p> in the past year. This heroin from Colombia, which underwent
signature </p>

<p> analysis prior to DEA's development of a South American
heroin signature </p>

<p> in July 1993, was analyzed as having a Southwest Asian (SWA)
signature. </p>

<p> As a result, it may account in part for both the increased
purity and </p>

<p> quantity of SWA heroin available in the United States.) </p>

<p> Data from DEA's Domestic Monitor Program indicate the 1992
nationwide </p>

<p> average heroin purity at the retail (street) level was 37
percent, </p>

<p> considerably higher than the average purity of 26.6 percent
recorded in </p>

<p> 1991. Heroin purity at the street level was generally highest
in the </p>

<p> northeastern United States, where a large percentage of the
nation's </p>

<p> user population lives. </p>

<p> According to DEA's Heroin Signature Program (HSP), Southeast
Asian (SEA) </p>

<p> heroin was the predominant type of heroin available in the
United States </p>

<p> for the fifth year in a row, accounting for 44 percent of the
HSP </p>

<p> samples analyzed in FA 1992 and 58 percent of the total net
weight of </p>

<p> these samples. U.S. airports, particularly New York's JFK
International </p>

<p> Airport, are primary entry points for heroin destined for the
U.S. </p>

<p> market, based on seizures analyzed through the HSP. The
nationwide </p>

<p> average net weight of airport seizures was almost 800 grams
and the </p>

<p> average purity of heroin seized at these airports was 73
percent. </p>

<p> Use </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1992
indicated a </p>

<p> decrease in the number of past-year heroin users. Survey data
show that </p>

<p> the number of Americans 12 years of age or older who have
used heroin at </p>

<p> least once in the past year declined from 381,000 in 1991 to
323,000 in </p>

<p> 1992. During that same time frame, however, the number of
past-month </p>

<p> heroin users increased from 83,000 to 107,000. (Estimates of
heroin use </p>

<p> from the Household Survey are considered very conservative
due to the </p>

<p> probable under-coverage of the population of heroin users.) </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey on
Drug Abuse, </p>

<p> heroin use increased among high school seniors. The survey
revealed that </p>

<p> 1.2 percent of the seniors in the class of 1992 had used
heroin at least </p>

<p> once in their lifetime, up from 0.9 percent in the class of
1991, yet </p>

<p> still below the peak of 1.3 percent reported in the classes
of 1989 and </p>

<p> 1990. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number of
nationwide </p>

<p> heroin-related emergency room episodes, which had been
fluctuating </p>

<p> somewhat during the past several years, increased
substantially from the </p>

<p> first to the second half of FY 1992. During that period, the
number of </p>

<p> heroin-related episodes rose from 18,192 to 24,593, an
increase of 35 </p>

<p> percent. Cities showing substantive increases during the
latter half of </p>

<p> FY 1992 in the number of heroin-related emergency room
episodes included </p>

<p> Baltimore, Boston, Los Angeles, New York City, and Seattle. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN also indicates that the injection of
heroin </p>

<p> continues to be the predominant route of administration used
by patients </p>

<p> admitted to emergency rooms for heroin-related problems.
However, the </p>

<p> percentage of patients who indicated that injection was their
primary </p>

<p> route of administration has decreased from 79.1 percent in FY
1989 to </p>

<p> 73.9 percent in FY 1992. During this same period, there was
an increase </p>

<p> in the percentage of patients who snorted heroin. Those who
snorted </p>

<p> heroin rose from 4.8 percent in FY 1989 to 8.8 percent in FY
1992. </p>

<p> Rates of opiate use (to include heroin) detected through
urinalysis </p>

<p> testing of recently booked male and female arrestees, as
reported by the </p>

<p> Drug Use Forecasting Program, remained relatively low and
stable in 1992 </p>

<p> when compared to rates for cocaine and marijuana. </p>

<p> Trafficking </p>

<p> Major SEA heroin trafficking organizations, often under the
control of </p>

<p> Sino-Thai and Chinese criminal groups, oversee the smuggling
of SEA </p>

<p> heroin into the United States, particularly New York City,
and are </p>

<p> primarily responsible for smuggling the largest bulk
shipments, </p>

<p> generally in the multihundred-kilogram range. The largest
shipments are </p>

<p> secreted in containerized freight aboard commercial maritime
vessels and </p>

<p> air freight cargo. Smaller shipments are smuggled in the
luggage of </p>

<p> airline passengers, strapped to the body, or swallowed. </p>

<p> In addition to Chinese and Sino-Thai traffickers, Nigerians
remain </p>

<p> deeply entrenched in the smuggling of SEA heroin. Nigerian
traffickers </p>

<p> rely primarily on dispatching large numbers of internal body
couriers </p>

<p> traveling aboard commercial airlines bound for the United
States. As a </p>

<p> result of enforcement pressure, Nigerians continue to recruit
other </p>

<p> ethnic groups, including other West Africans, Europeans, and
American </p>

<p> citizens, as heroin couriers. </p>

<p> Importation and distribution of SWA heroin is much less
centralized than </p>

<p> that for SEA heroin, both geographically and in regard to
trafficking </p>

<p> groups. Most SWA heroin trafficking groups in the United
States are </p>

<p> highly cohesive and difficult to penetrate because they are
based on </p>

<p> ethnic, familial, and tribal relationships. As a result, SWA
heroin </p>

<p> trafficking and distribution are generally more prevalent in
cities </p>

<p> having large populations from Afghanistan, Greece, Lebanon,
Pakistan, </p>

<p> and Turkey, such as Chicago, Detroit, and New York. </p>

<p> Mexican heroin is produced almost exclusively for the U.S.
heroin </p>

<p> market. The smuggling and distribution of Mexican heroin to
and within </p>

<p> the United States is controlled by organizations composed of
Mexican </p>

<p> nationals and Mexican Americans. Mexican trafficking
organizations are </p>

<p> often made up of family members, lifelong friends, and other
trusted </p>

<p> associates. </p>

<p> The availability of heroin from Colombia increased in the
United States </p>

<p> during the latter half of 1992 and early 1993, according to
seizure </p>

<p> analysis and investigative reporting. At present, Colombian
heroin </p>

<p> traffickers are attempting to establish distribution outlets
in the </p>

<p> United States, particularly in the metropolitan areas of the
northeast </p>

<p> and, as a result, are smuggling a heroin of very high purity,
generally </p>

<p> 80-plus percent. According to the El Paso Intelligence
Center, the </p>

<p> number of Colombian couriers who were arrested on commercial
airlines </p>

<p> carrying heroin into the United States increased from 41 in
1991 to over </p>

<p> 260 in 1992, with most of these arrests occurring at either
Miami or New </p>

<p> York's international airports. </p>

<p> CANNABIS </p>

<p> Availability/Price/Potency </p>

<p> Marijuana, a Schedule I controlled substance and by-product
of the </p>

<p> Cannabis sativa L. plant, remained the most commonly used
illegal drug </p>

<p> in the United States during 1992. Both the cannabis plant and
delta-9 </p>

<p> tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the plant's primary psychoactive
chemical, </p>

<p> are controlled substances. </p>

<p> According to DEA reporting, 34 percent of a non-sinsemilla
plant </p>

<p> contains usable material (the leaf and bud components) and 58
percent of </p>

<p> a sinsemilla plant contains usable material. The yield of a
cannabis </p>

<p> plant is determined by its diameter and the density of the
grow area. </p>

<p> The lower the plant density of the grow area, the higher the
yield of </p>

<p> usable material. The average plant yield for mature,
domestically grown </p>

<p> sinsemilla is approximately 1.25 pounds per plant. The
average plant </p>

<p> yield for mature, domestically grown commercial grade
marijuana is </p>

<p> approximately three-quarters of one pound per plant. </p>

<p> Marijuana prices have increased substantially over the past
decade. </p>

<p> Commercial grade marijuana prices rose from $350 to $600 per
pound 10 </p>

<p> years ago to $300 to $3,000 per pound in 1992. Sinsemilla
prices rose </p>

<p> from $1,000 to $2,000 per pound 10 years ago to $650 to
$9,600 per pound </p>

<p> in 1992. Law enforcement efforts have forced some cultivators
indoors to </p>

<p> avoid detection. Indoor growers cultivate higher potency
sinsemilla </p>

<p> marijuana, which permits them to charge higher prices.
Scarcity caused </p>

<p> by law enforcement operations also has increased prices. </p>

<p> Domestic cultivation trends of significance in recent years
include </p>

<p> cultivator efforts to enhance the potency of marijuana by
using </p>

<p> advanced agronomic techniques. As a result, the average THC
content of </p>

<p> marijuana has risen considerably in the last ten years.
Furthermore, </p>

<p> record-high THC contents were reported in 1992 and 1993.
These record- </p>

<p> high THC contents are an indicator of the continuing trend by
indoor </p>

<p> growers to produce higher potency marijuana. </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National Household Survey on Drug
Abuse, </p>

<p> approximately 67.5 million Americans have tried marijuana at
least once </p>

<p> in their lifetime compared to 61.9 million in 1985.
Nevertheless, survey </p>

<p> data indicate that the frequency of marijuana use has
declined </p>

<p> substantially from 1985 to 1992. Overall, past-year,
past-month, and </p>

<p> past-week use of the drug nave diminished by nearly 45
percent during </p>

<p> that period </p>

<p> According to the National High School Survey on Drug Abuse,
the long- </p>

<p> term decline in the use of marijuana among 12th graders
continued in </p>

<p> 1992. However, there was also a decrease in the proportion of
12th </p>

<p> graders who believed there was &quot;great risk&quot;
associated with regular </p>

<p> marijuana use, possibly presaging a reversal of the downward
use </p>

<p> pattern. In addition, among 8th graders, lifetime, past-year,
and past- </p>

<p> month use of marijuana marginally increased from 1991 to
1992. Moreover, </p>

<p> 8th graders in the class of 1992 were less likely to view
marijuana use </p>

<p> as dangerous compared to 8th graders in the class of 1991.
Also, the </p>

<p> proportion of 8th graders who personally disapproved of
marijuana use </p>

<p> declined from 1991 to 1992. These shifts in perception may
explain the </p>

<p> increased use of marijuana among 8th graders. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number of
metropolitan area </p>

<p> marijuana-related emergency room episodes, which had declined
from FY </p>

<p> 1989 to FY 1991, increased once again during FY 1992. The
large </p>

<p> majority, approximately 80 percent, of patients treated for
cannabis- </p>

<p> related hospital emergencies use marijuana with other
substances. </p>

<p> Patients use marijuana most frequently with alcohol and
cocaine. </p>

<p> Marijuana use detected through urinalysis testing of recently
booked </p>

<p> male and female arrestees, as reported by the Drug Use
Forecasting </p>

<p> Program, increased significantly in many major U.S. cities in
1992. </p>

<p> Trafficking </p>

<p> Mexico accounted for most of the foreign marijuana available
in the </p>

<p> United States during 1992. Colombia ranked as a distant
second as a </p>

<p> foreign source of marijuana. Commencing in early 1992,
Jamaican </p>

<p> traffickers increased marijuana shipments to the United
States. </p>

<p> DEA, in conjunction with Federal and State law enforcement
agencies, </p>

<p> conducted an aggressive cannabis eradication program in 1992.
The effort </p>

<p> resulted in the eradication of millions of cannabis plants,
the arrest </p>

<p> of thousands of violators, the forfeiture of millions of
dollars in </p>

<p> assets, and the seizure of several thousand weapons.
Moreover, the </p>

<p> number of indoor growing operations seized in 1992 (3,849)
reached an </p>

<p> all-time high. The movement toward indoor production is
believed due </p>

<p> primarily to successful law enforcement efforts to curtail
outdoor </p>

<p> cultivation. </p>

<p> The five major cultivated cannabis-producing States in 1992
were </p>

<p> Tennessee, Kentucky, Indiana, Illinois, and Hawaii,
respectively. These </p>

<p> five States accounted for approximately 44 percent of the
cultivated </p>

<p> cannabis eradicated during 1992. </p>

<p> METHAMPHETAMINE </p>

<p> Availability/Price/Purity </p>

<p> Methamphetamine is the most prevalent clandestinely
manufactured </p>

<p> controlled substance in the United States. Availability is
concentrated </p>

<p> primarily in the western and southwestern United States where
most </p>

<p> clandestine methamphetamine manufacture occurs. </p>

<p> The price of methamphetamine at the wholesale (pound) level
has remained </p>

<p> relatively constant during the past four years. Currently, </p>

<p> methamphetamine prices range from $5,000 to $22,000 per
pound, $300 to </p>

<p> $2,500 per ounce, and $45 to $200 per gram. </p>

<p> Nationwide purity of methamphetamine at the ounce and gram
levels </p>

<p> averaged 46 and 53 percent, respectively, during 1992,
compared to 35 </p>

<p> and 34 percent, respectively, during 1991. (Pound purity
levels are </p>

<p> unavailable due to infrequency of purchases at that level.) </p>

<p> Use </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1991 showed
that an </p>

<p> estimated 5.2 million Americans, 12 years of age and older,
have used </p>

<p> methamphetamine at least once in their lifetime. (Survey data
for prior </p>

<p> years are unavailable. Survey data for 1992 are not yet
available.) </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number of
metropolitan area </p>

<p> methamphetamine-related emergency room episodes decreased at
a </p>

<p> relatively steady rate from the first half of FY 1989 through
the first </p>

<p> half of FY 1992. However, this downward trend reversed itself
during the </p>

<p> latter half of FY 1992. During the second half of FY 1992,
there was a </p>

<p> 52-percent increase in the number of emergency room episodes
involving </p>

<p> methamphetamine. </p>

<p> DAWN emergency room data also indicate that methamphetamine
abuse is </p>

<p> concentrated in the metropolitan areas of San Diego, San
Francisco, and </p>

<p> Los Angeles. In San Diego and Los Angeles,
methamphetamine-related </p>

<p> hospital emergencies increased sharply during the latter half
of 1992. </p>

<p> Illicit Manufacture </p>

<p> According to DEA reporting, 288 domestic methamphetamine
laboratories </p>

<p> were seized during 1992, accounting for 87 percent of all
clandestine </p>

<p> dangerous drug laboratory seizures. The 1992 figure
represents a nine- </p>

<p> percent decrease from the previous year's total of 315
laboratories </p>

<p> seized and continues the downward trend in laboratory
seizures, which </p>

<p> began in 1990. </p>

<p> The main reason for the decrease in laboratory seizures is
the ongoing </p>

<p> enforcement of Federal and State chemical-control
legislation. The 1988 </p>

<p> Chemical Diversion and Trafficking Act (CDTA) became
effective in 1989, </p>

<p> and enables the Federal Government to regulate listed
essential </p>

<p> chemicals used in the clandestine synthesis of dangerous
drugs. Over the </p>

<p> past three years, most States have passed legislation similar
to the </p>

<p> CDTA. </p>

<p> Approximately 83 percent of the methamphetamine laboratory
seizures </p>

<p> during 1992 occurred in the DEA Dallas, Denver, Los Angeles,
Phoenix, </p>

<p> San Diego, San Francisco, and Seattle, Field Divisions. This
clearly </p>

<p> indicates that the manufacture of methamphetamine is still
based </p>

<p> primarily in the western and southwestern United States. </p>

<p> Manufacturing/Distribution Organizations </p>

<p> Throughout the United States, numerous individuals, groups,
and </p>

<p> organizations-from independent entrepreneurs and outlaw
motorcycle gangs </p>

<p> to Mexican poly-drug trafficking organizations-currently
manufacture and </p>

<p> distribute methamphetamine. (Although late arrivals in the </p>

<p> methamphetamine arena, Mexican traffickers are capable of
using their </p>

<p> high-volume production methods and large-scale distribution
networks to </p>

<p> substantially increase the drug's availability in the United
States. For </p>

<p> this reason, domestic law enforcement considers the Mexican
poly-drug </p>

<p> traffickers involvement in methamphetamine a significant
threat.) </p>

<p> Chemical Diversion </p>

<p> Chemical control legislation enacted at the Federal and State
level has </p>

<p> made it increasingly difficult for laboratory operators to
obtain needed </p>

<p> chemicals. Consequently, trafficking organizations have been
forced to </p>

<p> seek new sources and develop ways in which to circumvent the
law. </p>

<p> LSD </p>

<p> Availability/Price/Purity </p>

<p> Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) availability has increased
in the last </p>

<p> two to three years and it is available in at least retail
quantities in </p>

<p> virtually every State in the United States. The sources of
supply for </p>

<p> most of the LSD available in the United States are located in
the </p>

<p> northern California area. </p>

<p> LSD is relatively inexpensive with an average street dosage
unit or </p>

<p> &quot;hit&quot; costing approximately five dollars, and often
as little as one or </p>

<p> two dollars. Retail-level doses are seen primarily in blotter
paper </p>

<p> form. </p>

<p> Currently, LSD potency or strength, which ranges from 20 to
80 </p>

<p> micrograms per dosage unit, is considerably below levels
reported during </p>

<p> the 1960s and early 1970s when potency ranged from 100 to 200
micrograms </p>

<p> (or higher) per dosage unit. </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1991
estimated that 11.8 </p>

<p> million Americans 12 years of age or older have used LSD at
least once </p>

<p> in their lifetime compared to 8.4 million in 1985. (Survey
data for 1992 </p>

<p> are not yet available.) </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National High School Survey on Drug
Abuse, current </p>

<p> (monthly) use of LSD among 10th and 12th grade students
remained </p>

<p> relatively stable from 1991 to 1992. Among 8th graders,
however, current </p>

<p> use of LSD increased during that same time frame from 0.6
percent to 0.9 </p>

<p> percent. Moreover, past-year use of LSD rose in all three
grade levels </p>

<p> from 1991 to 1992. In fact, past-year use of LSD among
seniors in the </p>

<p> class of 1992 increased to the highest level since at least
1985. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number of
nationwide LSD- </p>

<p> related hospital emergency room episodes increased from FY
1989 to FY </p>

<p> 1990. Although abuse patterns have been somewhat erratic
since that </p>

<p> period, the current number of LSD-related episodes remain
above those </p>

<p> reported during FY 1989. </p>

<p> Illicit Manufacture </p>

<p> An increasing number of individuals are attempting to
manufacture LSD. </p>

<p> Many of these individuals are not associated with the
traditional </p>

<p> northern California groups that are believed to have produced
most of </p>

<p> the LSD available in the United States since the late 1960s. </p>

<p> Distribution </p>

<p> At the wholesale production and distribution level, LSD
remains tightly </p>

<p> controlled by California-based organizations, which have
operated with </p>

<p> relative impunity for over two decades. Mid-level
distribution networks </p>

<p> in the United States are generally comprised of young adults
who have </p>

<p> known each other through long years of association and common
interests. </p>

<p> Public and private mail systems appear to be the primary
means used for </p>

<p> the transportation and distribution of retail and wholesale
quantities </p>

<p> of LSD. </p>

<p> A total of six clandestine synthesis LSD laboratories have
been seized </p>

<p> since 1981; however, these were all seized prior to 1987. </p>

<p> PCP </p>

<p> Availability/Price </p>

<p> Phencyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, is available in
varying </p>

<p> degrees in a limited number of U.S. cities. During 1992, PCP
in liquid </p>

<p> form, the most common form available in the United States,
sold for $150 </p>

<p> to $1,000 per ounce nationally. The lowest liquid ounce
prices were </p>

<p> reported in Los Angeles, the source for most of the PCP
trafficked in </p>

<p> the United States. </p>

<p> PCP enjoyed a brief popularity in the late 1960's and again
from the </p>

<p> mid-to- late 1970's. In 1978, PCP was transferred from
Schedule III to </p>

<p> Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act, thus
classifying it as a </p>

<p> drug with a high potential for abuse. From the period 1981
through 1985, </p>

<p> abuse of the drug escalated significantly, particularly among
persons </p>

<p> under the age of 21. Around 1986, and continuing through the
late 1980's </p>

<p> and early 1990's, demand for PCP was displaced in large
measure by the </p>

<p> widespread availability and use of crack cocaine. More
recently, </p>

<p> however, there are indications that PCP abuse is increasing
once again </p>

<p> in a number of cities. </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse showed that
lifetime and </p>

<p> past-year PCP use among the U.S. household population
decreased from </p>

<p> 1985 to 1990; however, 1991 and 1992 survey data indicate an
end to this </p>

<p> downward use pattern. On the other hand, according to the
1992 National </p>

<p> High School Senior Survey on Drug Abuse, PCP use among 12th
graders has </p>

<p> declined significantly during the past seven years. This
diminished use </p>

<p> is believed due in large part to a significant increase among
12th </p>

<p> graders in the perceived risk of harm associated with PCP
usage. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number of
metropolitan-area </p>

<p> PCP-related emergency room episodes, which had been declining
at a </p>

<p> substantial rate during the past three years, rose from 1,353
during the </p>

<p> first half of FY 1992 to 2,380 during the second half of FY
1992, a more </p>

<p> than 75-percent increase. Cities having high or increased PCP
abuse </p>

<p> rates during the second half of FY 1992 included Baltimore,
Chicago, Los </p>

<p> Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and
Washington, </p>

<p> D.C. </p>

<p> Trafficking and Illicit Manufacture </p>

<p> Reporting indicates that the majority of the nation's PCP
supply is </p>

<p> manufactured and distributed by Los Angeles-based street
gangs. While </p>

<p> buses, trains, and airlines are used to transport PCP from
California </p>

<p> sources of supply, private automobiles are believed to be the
primary </p>

<p> means for transporting PCP across the country. </p>

<p> Four PCP laboratories were seized in 1992 compared to three
in 1991. No </p>

<p> PCP laboratories have been seized thus far in 1993. PCP
laboratory </p>

<p> seizures since the mid-1980's have ranged from three to 21
per year, </p>

<p> totals which are considerably less than the high of 79
reported in 1978. </p>

<p> COCAINE </p>

<p> AVAILABILITY/PRICE/PURITY </p>

<p> In 1992, domestic cocaine prices fluctuated due to successful
domestic </p>

<p> and international law enforcement operations, which caused a
short-term </p>

<p> (3-month) impact on cocaine trafficking from South America.
Following a </p>

<p> period of adjustment, cocaine traffickers once again found
the means to </p>

<p> facilitate the shipment of multiton quantities of cocaine to
the United </p>

<p> States. In 1992, cocaine prices ranged from $11,000 to
$42,000 per </p>

<p> kilogram nationally in comparison to 1991 prices, which
ranged from </p>

<p> $11,000 to $40,000 per kilogram nationally. During April
through June </p>

<p> 1992, shortages of wholesale quantities of cocaine resulted
in an </p>

<p> increase in the kilogram price in many major U.S.
metropolitan areas. </p>

<p> Throughout the remainder of the year, however, cocaine was
readily </p>

<p> available as kilogram prices in virtually all major
metropolitan areas </p>

<p> returned to lower levels. Preliminary data for early 1993
indicate that </p>

<p> kilogram prices remain at low levels. </p>

<p> Nationwide purity of cocaine at the kilogram, ounce, and gram
levels </p>

<p> averaged 83, 74, and 64 percent, respectively, during 1992,
compared to </p>

<p> 86, 72, and 59 percent, respectively, during 1991. A
temporary decline </p>

<p> in purity at all levels of the traffic was noted during July
through </p>

<p> September 1992; however, by year's end, purity at all levels
had </p>

<p> increased once again. </p>

<p> Nationwide purity of cocaine at the kilogram, ounce, and gram
levels </p>

<p> averaged 83, 74, and 64 percent, respectively, during 1992,
compared to </p>

<p> 86, 72, and 59 percent, respectively, during 1991. A
temporary decline </p>

<p> in purity at all levels of the traffic was noted during July
through </p>

<p> September 1992; however, by year's end, purity at all levels
had </p>

<p> increased once again. </p>

<p> USE </p>

<p> The 1992 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (see
appendix) showed </p>

<p> that the number of past-year and past-month users of cocaine
has </p>

<p> decreased significantly since the peak year of 1985. During
1992, five </p>

<p> million Americans 12 years of age and older had used cocaine
in the past </p>

<p> year compared to 12.2 million in 1985. In 1992, 1.3 million
had used </p>

<p> cocaine in the past month compared to 5.8 million in 1985.
Nevertheless, </p>

<p> frequent or more intense use of cocaine has not shown
statistically </p>

<p> significant change during the past several years. Among the
five million </p>

<p> people who used cocaine in the past year, 642,000 used it
once a week or </p>

<p> more in 1992 compared to 625,000 in 1991 and 662,00 in 1990. </p>

<p> The survey also showed that approximately 80 percent of
past-month </p>

<p> cocaine users were young adults ages 18 to 34 in 1992. As in
the past, </p>

<p> the rate of past-month cocaine use in 1992 was highest among
young </p>

<p> adults 18 to 25 years old (1.8 percent of the U.S.
population) and ages </p>

<p> 26 to 34 years (1.4 percent of the U.S. population). The
past-month </p>

<p> cocaine prevalence rate for the 12- to 17-year-old age group
has </p>

<p> decreased from 1.1 percent of the U.S. population in 1988 to
0.3 percent </p>

<p> in 1992. Similarly, the 18- to 25-year-old age group has
experienced </p>

<p> dramatic decreases in prevalence from 4.5 percent of the U.S.
population </p>

<p> in 1988 to 1.8 percent in 1992. For the 26- to 34-year-old
age group, </p>

<p> the rate has declined from 2.6 percent to 1.4 percent. The
rate for </p>

<p> persons aged 35 and older has shown variability, but remained
virtually </p>

<p> unchanged since 1988 (0.3 percent of the U.S. population and
0.2 percent </p>

<p> in 1992). Lastly, the prevalence rate of past-month cocaine
use among </p>

<p> the total U.S. population was estimated at 0.6 percent in
1992 compared </p>

<p> to 1.5 percent in 1988 and 0.9 percent in 1991. </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey on
Drug </p>

<p> Abuse(see appendix for additional survey information),
cocaine use </p>

<p> continued to decline among high school seniors. Survey
results showed </p>

<p> 6.1 percent of seniors in the class of 1992 said they had
used cocaine </p>

<p> at least once in their lifetime, down from 7.8 percent in the
class of </p>

<p> 1991 and down from a peak of 17.3 percent in the class of
1985. Among </p>

<p> 10th graders, lifetime cocaine use decreased from 4.1 percent
in 1991 to </p>

<p> 3.3 percent in 1992. Among 8th graders, however, lifetime use
of cocaine </p>

<p> increased from 2.3 percent in 1991 to 2.9 percent in 1992,
and past-year </p>

<p> use increased from 1.1 percent to 1.5 percent. </p>

<p> Other findings from the survey indicate that fewer 8th
graders in 1992 </p>

<p> associated great risk of harm with occasional cocaine or
crack cocaine </p>

<p> use than did 8th graders in 1991. There was also a decrease
in the </p>

<p> proportion of 10th graders saying there is great risk of harm
with </p>

<p> occasional cocaine use. </p>

<p> Reporting from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) (see
appendix for </p>

<p> further information on DAWN) shows that the estimated number
of </p>

<p> nationwide cocaine-related emergency room episodes, which had
been </p>

<p> increasing at a fairly constant rate from the early-to-late
1980's, </p>

<p> declined significantly from FY 1989 to FY 1990. During the
latter half </p>

<p> of FY 1991, however, the number of episodes increased once
again and </p>

<p> appears to have stabilized at high levels since that time. A
number of </p>

<p> drug epidemiologists and treatment specialists believe a
possible </p>

<p> explanation for this trend reversal is that many hard-core
cocaine users </p>

<p> are now experiencing the consequences of long-term addiction.
As a </p>

<p> result, an increasing number of users are seeking public
medical </p>

<p> assistance. </p>

<p> Reporting from the Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) (see
appendix for </p>

<p> further information on DAWN) shows that the estimated number
of </p>

<p> nationwide cocaine-related emergency room episodes, which had
been </p>

<p> increasing at a fairly constant rate from the early-to-late
1980's, </p>

<p> declined significantly from FY 1989 to FY 1990. During the
latter half </p>

<p> of FY 1991, however, the number of episodes increased once
again and </p>

<p> appears to have stabilized at high levels since that time. A
number of </p>

<p> drug epidemiologists and treatment specialists believe a
possible </p>

<p> explanation for this trend reversal is that many hard-core
cocaine users </p>

<p> are now experiencing the consequences of long-term addiction.
As a </p>

<p> result, an increasing number of users are seeking public
medical </p>

<p> assistance. </p>

<p> Nationwide, during the fourth quarter of FY 1992,
approximately one in </p>

<p> four(28.3%) emergency room drug abuse episodes involved
cocaine. </p>

<p> Metropolitan areas having a significantly higher proportion
of drug </p>

<p> emergencies involving cocaine include: Baltimore (63.5%),
Atlanta </p>

<p> (56.3%), Philadelphia (54.1%), New Orleans (48.2%), Chicago
(46.7%), New </p>

<p> York (46.3%), Newark (44.2%), Detroit (41.4%), Miami (39.1%),
</p>

<p> Washington, D.C. (37.5%), St. Louis (36.0%), and Boston
(34.8%). </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN also indicates that smoking continues to
be the </p>

<p> predominant route of administration used by patients admitted
to DAWN </p>

<p> emergency rooms for cocaine-related problems. The percentage
of patients </p>

<p> who indicated that smoking was their primary method of
administration </p>

<p> increased from 34.3 percent during FY 1989 to 41.4 percent in
FY 1992. </p>

<p> During the same time frame, there was a decrease in the
percentage of </p>

<p> patients who injected or snorted cocaine. Those who injected
or snorted </p>

<p> cocaine decreased from 22.0 percent and 14.0 percent,
respectively, </p>

<p> during FY 1989, to 20.2 percent and 11.1 percent,
respectively, during </p>

<p> FY 1992. </p>

<p> Rates of cocaine use detected through urinalysis testing of
recently </p>

<p> booked male and female arrestees, as reported by the Drug Use
</p>

<p> Forecasting Program (DUF) (see appendix for further
information on DUF), </p>

<p> remained high in many major U.S. cities in 1992. In fact,
rates of </p>

<p> cocaine seducing the past year were substantially higher than
those for </p>

<p> opiate and marijuana use. Among the highest was Philadelphia,
where 63 </p>

<p> percent of the sampled population tested positive for cocaine
use. In </p>

<p> New York City, the figure was 62 percent; in Atlanta, 58
percent; in </p>

<p> Chicago, 56 percent; in Miami, 56 percent; in Cleveland, 53
percent; and </p>

<p> in Los Angeles, 52 percent. Cocaine use among recently booked
female </p>

<p> arrestees was also high in many cities. In New York City, 72
percent of </p>

<p> the female arrestees sampled tested positive for the use of
cocaine; in </p>

<p> Philadelphia, 67 percent; in Cleveland, 66 percent; in
Washington, D.C., </p>

<p> 64 percent; in Kansas City, 62 percent; in St. Louis, 62
percent; and in </p>

<p> Detroit, 62 percent. </p>

<p> TRAFFICKING </p>

<p> General Overview </p>

<p> The primary domestic importation points for cocaine destined
for U.S. </p>

<p> consumption remain Arizona, southern California, south
Florida, and </p>

<p> Texas. The principal cities utilized by Colombian cartels for
</p>

<p> distribution of multi-hundred or multi-thousand kilogram
quantities of </p>

<p> cocaine include Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, and New York.
While the </p>

<p> Medellin Cartel remains a significant supplier of cocaine to
the major </p>

<p> U.S. distribution cities, the Cali Cartel continues to
control most of </p>

<p> the cocaine brought into New York City, Miami, and Los
Angeles. Staging </p>

<p> sites in the southwestern United States, where some
stockpiling occurs </p>

<p> while awaiting transportation, are supplied with cocaine by
Mexican </p>

<p> smugglers using couriers or tractor-trailers, other vehicles,
and </p>

<p> commercial cargo. Organized groups of Cubans, Dominicans,
Jamaicans, </p>

<p> Mexicans, and African-American gangs provide retail-level
distribution </p>

<p> of the drug in major U.S. cities. In addition, both the
Medellin and </p>

<p> Cali Cartels maintain operational headquarters in major U.S.
cities to </p>

<p> control wholesale distribution networks. During the last
year, as in the </p>

<p> past, traffickers shifted or diversified trafficking routes
following </p>

<p> major seizures. Traffickers appear to be only temporarily
affected by </p>

<p> the interdiction of pipelines and are taking an average of 10
to 14 days </p>

<p> to reestablish operations. This suggests continued use of
imaginative </p>

<p> concealment methods and the use or maintenance of
multiple-delivery </p>

<p> pipelines and systems to avoid law enforcement. </p>

<p> Routes </p>

<p> Cocaine traffickers perceiving enhanced law enforcement
activity along </p>

<p> the United States-Mexican border and in the western Caribbean
have </p>

<p> subsequently diversified their smuggling routes into the
United States. </p>

<p> DEA field divisions report that cocaine traffickers are
increasingly </p>

<p> using routes employed four to six years ago. This
diversification </p>

<p> includes greater use of the eastern Caribbean and the eastern
Bahamas as </p>

<p> well as increased importation into the eastern United States.
This trend </p>

<p> was highlighted by the July 1992 seizure of 5.2 metric tons
of cocaine </p>

<p> in Panama which was destined for Baltimore. Moreover, DEA
Miami reports </p>

<p> that the Medellin Cartel has established a significant
presence in The </p>

<p> Bahamas, utilizing the area as a transit point for cocaine en
route to </p>

<p> south Florida. </p>

<p> Increased cocaine trafficking through the eastern Caribbean
includes </p>

<p> greater use of Puerto Rico, which appears to be a primary
target of </p>

<p> cocaine traffickers who use it as a transshipment point for
cocaine </p>

<p> destined for the United States, Canada, and Europe. While the
smuggling </p>

<p> of cocaine by general aviation aircraft into Puerto Rico
continues, </p>

<p> maritime smuggling is the primary method of transporting
cocaine to the </p>

<p> island. The appeal of Puerto Rico as a cocaine transit point
is enhanced </p>

<p> by two factors: the first is the proximity of Puerto Rico to
South </p>

<p> America, and the second is that once cocaine is successfully
smuggled </p>

<p> into Puerto Rico, it can be shipped to the continental United
States </p>

<p> with little likelihood of U.S. Customs screening. </p>

<p> Since early 1992, DEA field divisions have increasingly cited
Central </p>

<p> American countries as transshipment points for U.S.-bound
cocaine </p>

<p> shipments. This was highlighted by the April 1992 seizure of
6.7 metric </p>

<p> tons of cocaine in Miami transshipped through Guatemala and
by the July </p>

<p> 1992 seizure in Panama noted previously. During the past
year, every </p>

<p> Central American country was cited as a transshipment point
for U.S.- </p>

<p> boundcocaine. Reporting indicates cocaine is transported from
source </p>

<p> countries to Central American countries by land, air, and sea
</p>

<p> conveyances. From Central America, cocaine shipments are
transported to </p>

<p> the United States by land, sea, and air directly or through
Mexico. </p>

<p> U.S. law enforcement efforts along the United States-Mexican
border </p>

<p> continue to force regional cocaine traffickers to alter their
</p>

<p> operations. DEA and U.S. Border Patrol seizures since early
1992 </p>

<p> indicate that cocaine traffickers are increasingly
transporting smaller </p>

<p> (10 to 50 kilograms) cocaine shipments across less trafficked
ports of </p>

<p> entry such as Calexico and Tecate, as opposed to transporting
large </p>

<p> (multihundred kilogram) cocaine shipments across more
frequently used </p>

<p> border crossing points such as San Ysidro. Additionally, in
response to </p>

<p> law enforcement in southern California, traffickers
increasingly use </p>

<p> U.S. ports of entry as far east as McAllen, Texas, to smuggle
cocaine to </p>

<p> California. Methods of Transportation and Concealment </p>

<p> Maritime Transportation </p>

<p> The use of maritime containerized cargo to smuggle bulk
quantities of </p>

<p> cocaine into the United States continues to challenge U.S.
Government </p>

<p> drug interdiction efforts. Many DEA field divisions report
the use of </p>

<p> cargo containers to conceal and transport cocaine among
legitimate </p>

<p> goods. Additionally, cocaine is sometimes hidden in the walls
and </p>

<p> support beams of cargo containers as well as in, or attached
to, the </p>

<p> vessels themselves. DEA reporting indicates an increased
demand by </p>

<p> cocaine traffickers for cargo ships in order to transport
bulk </p>

<p> quantities of U.S.-bound cocaine. Furthermore, U.S. Customs
reports the </p>

<p> large volume of cargo arriving at domestic ports, coupled
with the U.S. </p>

<p> Customs capability of inspecting only a small portion of this
cargo, </p>

<p> continue to be factors operating in favor of smuggling
organizations. </p>

<p> The use of low-profile vessels by cocaine traffickers has
made maritime </p>

<p> interdiction extremely difficult off the coast of Puerto
Rico. DEA </p>

<p> reporting indicates these vessels, fabricated of wood and/or
fiberglass </p>

<p> and measuring up to only 40 feet in length, are difficult to
visually </p>

<p> detect since their coloring blends with the ocean. Moreover,
their </p>

<p> profiles of only one to two feet above the water are not
always </p>

<p> detectable by radar. Investigative reporting indicates these
vessels </p>

<p> transport up to one metric ton of cocaine and sail directly
from </p>

<p> Colombia to Puerto Rico without being detected. </p>

<p> Cocaine trafficking organizations also rely heavily on the
use of </p>

<p> noncommercial maritime vessels. Pleasure craft and fishing
vessels are </p>

<p> used to smuggle cocaine from source countries into the United
States. </p>

<p> Pleasure craft carrying cocaine enter U.S. waters by blending
in with </p>

<p> weekend &quot;traffic &quot;along the southeastern coast
where weekend vessel </p>

<p> activity is heavy. Fishing vessels are also used to carry
cocaine </p>

<p> directly into the United States as well as to transfer
cocaine to other </p>

<p> vessels off the coast. </p>

<p> Air Transportation </p>

<p> DEA San Diego, Los Angeles, and Miami report cocaine
trafficking </p>

<p> organizations have increased their use of airdrop operations.
Cocaine </p>

<p> traffickers are airdropping cocaine shipments in the
Caribbean and off </p>

<p> the coast of, as well as within, Central America and southern
Mexico. </p>

<p> A combination of law enforcement successes, including those
of the </p>

<p> United States-Mexican Northern Border Response Force, and
conflicts </p>

<p> between trafficking organizations for control of clandestine
airstrips </p>

<p> have contributed to trafficker avoidance of landing aircraft
in northern </p>

<p> Mexico. Consequently, a number of smuggling organizations,
including </p>

<p> traffickers associated with the Cali Cartel, feel it is less
risky to </p>

<p> airdrop cocaine shipments to ground or maritime crews in
Central America </p>

<p> or the Caribbean than to land aircraft in northern Mexico. </p>

<p> South American cocaine traffickers have recently acquired
several large </p>

<p> cargo aircraft for the transport of cocaine, thereby
increasing cargo </p>

<p> capacity while overcoming the limited flight range of smaller
aircraft. </p>

<p> Moreover, cocaine traffickers within The Bahamas and
elsewhere in the </p>

<p> Caribbean continue to use smaller aircraft as decoys to
divert law </p>

<p> enforcement interdiction assets from actual smuggling
operations being </p>

<p> conducted in a different locale. </p>

<p> Land Transportation </p>

<p> Cocaine couriers employ several methods to counter trafficker
profiles </p>

<p> at or near the United States-Mexican border; these methods
include </p>

<p> traveling in family-type groups with women and children to
avoid </p>

<p> suspicion at checkpoints, hiring non-Mexicans to transport
cocaine from </p>

<p> United States-Mexican border areas into Los Angeles, and
recruiting </p>

<p> Anglo drivers and females to transport cocaine shipments. </p>

<p> Kilogram bricks continue to be the predominant form of
packaged cocaine </p>

<p> smuggled into the United States. During the past year, DEA
field </p>

<p> divisions have frequently cited rubber/waterproofed packaging
of </p>

<p> cocaine. Additionally, seizures of multihundred kilograms of
cocaine </p>

<p> concealed in U-Haul cardboard boxes and 55-gallon drums
increased. Tile- </p>

<p> shaped cocaine (2&quot;x 8&quot;x 8&quot;), vacuum-packed in
metallic-type material, </p>

<p> has also been reported. </p>

<p> DEA and the U.S. Customs Service reported traffickers smuggle
liquefied </p>

<p> cocaine into the United States concealed in water tanks of
mobile homes </p>

<p> and recreational vehicles. Traffickers also have labeled
55-gallon drums </p>

<p> of liquid cocaine to reflect the climatic conditions of the
locale where </p>

<p> the drums are shipped, i.e., a shipment to Chicago in the
winter is </p>

<p> labeled &quot;antifreeze.&quot; During May 1992, U.S. Customs
in Houston made the </p>

<p> first seizure of liquid cocaine at Houston Intercontinental
Airport from </p>

<p> an Ecuadorian national enroute to New York City. DEA Miami
reported </p>

<p> small amounts of liquid cocaine are sometimes concealed
within liquor </p>

<p> bottles. Moreover, DEA San Diego and Baltimore reported
traffickers are </p>

<p> smuggling liquid cocaine into their areas of jurisdiction. </p>

<p> Within the United States, cocaine traffickers continue to use
commercial </p>

<p> and private vehicles, trains, airlines, and the postal
service to ship </p>

<p> cocaine. The use of concealed compartments within vehicles is
commonly </p>

<p> cited by DEA field divisions. During the past year, several
cocaine </p>

<p> seizures involved multiple concealment sites within the same
vehicle, a </p>

<p> smuggling technique associated with marijuana trafficking.
Popular </p>

<p> vehicles among traffickers for transporting cocaine include
Nissan </p>

<p> vehicles and mini-vans. Additionally, some transportation
organizations </p>

<p> use rental vehicles to circumvent vehicle seizures. </p>

<p> Cocaine traffickers who use tractor-trailers employ several
methods to </p>

<p> circumvent law enforcement. There is extensive use of
elaborate hidden </p>

<p> compartments to secrete cocaine within tractor-trailers.
Additionally, </p>

<p> cocaine is often hidden among legitimate produce such as
onions and </p>

<p> watermelons. On the West Coast, tractor-trailers obtain
produce in the </p>

<p> San Joaquin Valley to conceal cocaine destined for the
Midwest and East </p>

<p> Coast cities. Concealment of cocaine in tractor-trailers also
includes </p>

<p> the use of compartments in air-conditioning units, radiators,
and </p>

<p> batteries, containers welded in tire rims, and false walls.
In the </p>

<p> Southwest, large commercial vehicles and trucks are a primary
method for </p>

<p> transporting cocaine. An increase has been noted in the use
of tractor- </p>

<p> trailers to transport bulk cocaine shipments into the Chicago
area. DEA </p>

<p> reports truckers transporting cocaine sealed in odor-reducing
wax among </p>

<p> legitimate cargo to avoid detection at checkpoints and
scales. Extensive </p>

<p> use of commercial trucks to transport cocaine from the Los
Angeles </p>

<p> metropolitan area to destinations throughout the United
States has </p>

<p> occurred during the past year. In addition, traffickers
continue to seek </p>

<p> opportunities to recruit U.S. port officials to facilitate
large cocaine </p>

<p> shipments into the United States from Mexico by
tractor-trailer. </p>

<p> Domestic Distribution </p>

<p> The Cali Cartel's method of operation in the United States
remains </p>

<p> highly sophisticated and compartmentalized. U.S. bases of
operation are </p>

<p> comprised of multiple cells operating within major
metropolitan areas to </p>

<p> include Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York,
Philadelphia, and San </p>

<p> Francisco. The operators of these cells receive orders
directly from </p>

<p> top-level cartel managers in Colombia and operate
independently of other </p>

<p> cells within the same metropolitan area. Cell operators
utilize the </p>

<p> latest technology, such as computers, pagers, and facsimile
machines, in </p>

<p> their daily operations. Cellular telephones are often bought
in bulk </p>

<p> quantities and discarded after being used for several months
or less in </p>

<p> order to thwart law enforcement telephone intercept efforts. </p>

<p> In general, the Medellin Cartel's method of operation in the
United </p>

<p> States is not as compartmentalized as that of the Cali
Cartel. The drug </p>

<p> trafficking groups, which comprise the Medellin Cartel,
employ a group </p>

<p> decision-making process at the top level as opposed to the
hierarchical </p>

<p> decision-making process employed by the Cali Cartel. At the
lower </p>

<p> levels, trafficking groups can transact business with less
restrictions </p>

<p> on their choice of business associates. </p>

<p> Peruvian traffickers reportedly ship cocaine concealed in
maritime </p>

<p> vessels and aircraft to the United States and distribute it
in the </p>

<p> Houston area independent of Colombian organizations. The use
of Peru as </p>

<p> a source area for multiton shipments of cocaine was evidenced
during </p>

<p> January 1992 by the seizure of five metric tons of cocaine
aboard a </p>

<p> maritime vessel. The vessel originated in Peru and was
reportedly </p>

<p> destined for the United States and Canada when it was
interdicted in the </p>

<p> Caribbean. </p>

<p> Hispanic organizations, particularly Colombian and Mexican,
continue to </p>

<p> dominate wholesale cocaine trafficking and distribution
within the </p>

<p> United States. However, since early 1992, diverse ethnic
groups, </p>

<p> including those of Middle Eastern, East European, Central
Asian, and </p>

<p> East Asian descent, have become involved in these activities
at all </p>

<p> levels of the domestic traffic. </p>

<p> Cocaine violators in urban areas, such as Boston and Atlanta,
have </p>

<p> expanded their distribution networks into rural areas, which
have </p>

<p> limited law enforcement resources, thereby reducing the risk
of </p>

<p> investigation and arrest. </p>

<p> MISCELLANEOUS </p>

<p> During 1992, the exchange of cocaine for heroin was reported
in Boston, </p>

<p> Calexico, New York City, and San Diego. The frequency of such
exchanges </p>

<p> appears to be increasing and involves foreign and domestic
heroin </p>

<p> traffickers seeking cocaine sources in the United States. In
addition, </p>

<p> during the past year, Southwest Asian heroin trafficking
organizations </p>

<p> sent heroin and opium via the international mail system to
affiliates in </p>

<p> the United States who then purchased cocaine for export to
Europe. </p>

<p> In 1992, four cocaine base conversion laboratories were
seized within </p>

<p> the United States; two in New York City, one in California
and one in </p>

<p> Florida. One of the laboratories seized in New York City was </p>

<p> operational. This represented the first functioning cocaine
laboratory </p>

<p> seized in that city since 1987. Additionally, the operational
New York </p>

<p> City laboratory used a vapor eliminating device. The device,
the first </p>

<p> encountered by DEA that employed dry ice, allowed the
laboratory to </p>

<p> function in a densely populated area without the strong
chemical odors </p>

<p> normally associated with clandestine cocaine conversion
laboratories. To </p>

<p> date in 1993, only one cocaine base conversion laboratory has
been </p>

<p> seized within the United States in Hurleyville, New York. </p>

<p> Drug traffickers use high-tech equipment, including
night-vision goggles </p>

<p> and radios with scramblers, as well as military hardware
including </p>

<p> assault rifles, hand grenades, and bulletproof vests.
Trafficking </p>

<p> organizations use scouts with radios to monitor law
enforcement </p>

<p> activities along the United States-Mexican border. A Texas
cocaine </p>

<p> organization recently attempted to purchase hand-held radios
for </p>

<p> surveillance and body armor for their street-level dealers.
Traffickers </p>

<p> have become more sophisticated in the use of electronics
including </p>

<p> scanners with police frequencies. </p>

<p> Countermeasures employed by cocaine traffickers against U.S.
law </p>

<p> enforcement include the use of counter-surveillance and paid
informants. </p>

<p> Some traffickers study law enforcement methods of operation
by reviewing </p>

<p> evidence documents during court proceedings. Reportedly,
defense </p>

<p> attorneys employed by traffickers obtain investigative
documents through </p>

<p> the &quot;right of the discovery process&quot; and then
transmit by facsimile </p>

<p> informational reports to Colombia. </p>

<p> CRACK COCAINE </p>

<p> AVAILABILITY/PRICE/PURITY </p>

<p> The simplicity of the crack conversion process allows any
person with </p>

<p> access to cocaine hydrochloride (HCl) to be a potential
source of crack. </p>

<p> Because cocaine HCl is plentiful and cheap and can be
obtained in </p>

<p> virtually every area of the country, crack is, therefore,
widely </p>

<p> available. </p>

<p> Crack is reported by drug epidemiologists and treatment
professionals to </p>

<p> be the illegal drug of choice in many U.S. cities. Notable
exceptions </p>

<p> include cities and towns along the southwest border, where
drug </p>

<p> traffickers are primarily concerned with transshipping the
large amounts </p>

<p> of cocaine HCl, marijuana, and heroin that are smuggled into
the United </p>

<p> States, and certain areas within several north-central and
northeastern </p>

<p> States that lack large ethnic minority communities,
traditional </p>

<p> strongholds for crack distribution and abuse. Nonetheless,
three Haitian </p>

<p> crack sellers were recently arrested in Portland, Maine,
indicating that </p>

<p> no region is immune to crack trafficking. </p>

<p> Crack distribution and use appear to have reached the
saturation point </p>

<p> in large urban areas throughout the country. Intensive
competition in </p>

<p> the mid-to-late 1980's inundated the largest consumer pools
with crack. </p>

<p> As a result, a number of crack trafficking groups have
relocated or </p>

<p> extended their operations to smaller cities, towns, and rural
areas; the </p>

<p> primary motivation for this is profit. Simply put, a rock or
vial of </p>

<p> crack that sells for $5 to $10 in a large, well-populated
area will </p>

<p> command a significantly higher price, usually $25 to $40 in a
smaller, </p>

<p> less populated area. </p>

<p> The national price for a rock or vial of crack ranges from as
low as $2 </p>

<p> to as high as $75 but it generally sells for $10 to $50,
depending upon </p>

<p> the size, normally 1/10 to 1/2 gram. In general, the larger
cities have </p>

<p> the lowest retail prices. Reporting from New York City
indicates a </p>

<p> dosage unit of crack sells for as low as two dollars, while a
single </p>

<p> puff on a crack pipe can be obtained for as little as 75
cents. </p>

<p> Reporting from Philadelphia and Detroit indicates that crack
can be </p>

<p> purchased for as low as $2.50 and $3.00 per dosage unit,
respectively. </p>

<p> Prices for gram quantities of crack generally range from $45
to $150 </p>

<p> nationally. At the ounce and kilogram level, crack prices are
comparable </p>

<p> to cocaine HCl prices and usually range from $475 to $2,500
per ounce </p>

<p> and from $17,000 to $35,000 per kilogram. </p>

<p> In the mid-to-late 1980's, a readily available supply of
inexpensive and </p>

<p> high quality crack at the retail level virtually eliminated
any need for </p>

<p> users to perform the crack conversion process themselves.
Indeed, </p>

<p> quality control was a major factor in marketing the drug.
Analysis of </p>

<p> crack samples by DEA laboratories revealed that purity was
consistently </p>

<p> high during that period, averaging 80-plus percent. </p>

<p> Although retail purity remains high, averaging almost 83
percent in </p>

<p> 1992, sellers in some areas of the country, such as New York,
Los </p>

<p> Angeles, and several cities in the Southeast, are selling
poor-quality </p>

<p> crack, cut with adulterants such as lidocaine and procaine.
These </p>

<p> adulterants increase the weight or the size of the crack and,
therefore, </p>

<p> the profits. Many retailers will sell recently prepared crack
that has </p>

<p> not been dried thoroughly and is still wet from the
conversion process. </p>

<p> This practice is most profitable when dealing in wholesale
quantities </p>

<p> where transactions are strictly determined by weight. At the
dosage unit </p>

<p> or retail level, where the size of the rock is of greater
concern, </p>

<p> procaine serves to increase the dimensions of the rock by
adding holes </p>

<p> or pockets of air, giving rise to the street term
&quot;blow-up.&quot; Obviously, </p>

<p> the smaller the amount of pure cocaine present in the rock,
the less </p>

<p> intense euphoric reaction the user will experience. In
addition, a </p>

<p> limited number of retailers are selling bogus or
&quot;beat&quot; crack to </p>

<p> unfamiliar customers because their regular customers consume
virtually </p>

<p> the entire supply. Substitutes include soap, chalk, plaster,
peanuts, </p>

<p> popcorn, and candle wax, which is known on the street as
&quot;perp.&quot; </p>

<p> Practices such as these are creating an increasing number of </p>

<p> dissatisfied and wary customers. An almost inexhaustible
supply of </p>

<p> cheap, high-purity cocaine HCl, combined with a relatively
simple and </p>

<p> safe production process, makes home conversion by the crack
user more </p>

<p> appealing than the risk of purchasing and smoking low-quality
or sham </p>

<p> crack. In fact, sellers in some northeastern cities sell two
qualities </p>

<p> of cocaine HCl, a high-purity powder for users who will
perform the </p>

<p> conversion to crack themselves, and a low-purity powder for
ingestion </p>

<p> through snorting only. It has also been reported that users
in Chicago </p>

<p> prefer the freebase method of conversion in the belief that
this method </p>

<p> yields a higher purity product than the crack conversion
process. </p>

<p> USE </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1992 showed
that the </p>

<p> number of lifetime, past-year and past-month users of crack
declined </p>

<p> significantly from 1991 to 1992. The highest percentages of
crack use </p>

<p> were among those who were disproportionately represented in </p>

<p> socioeconomic groups that have historically faced increased
health </p>

<p> risks, including African-Americans, the unemployed, and
high-school </p>

<p> dropouts, as well as young adults aged 18 to 34. </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National High School Survey on Drug
Abuse, </p>

<p> lifetime use of crack among high school seniors declined from
1991 to </p>

<p> 1992; however, past-year, past-month, and daily use of crack
by this </p>

<p> group remained relatively stable during that period.
Nevertheless, </p>

<p> overall frequency of crack use among high school seniors has
decreased </p>

<p> substantially since 1987. </p>

<p> Of particular concern is the slight rise in frequency of
crack use among </p>

<p> 8th graders. From 1991 to 1992, survey data indicate that an
increasing </p>

<p> number of 8th grade students had used crack during their
lifetime as </p>

<p> well as on a yearly and monthly basis. Also, fewer 8th
graders in 1992 </p>

<p> associated great risk of harm with occasional crack use than
did 8th </p>

<p> graders in 1991. </p>

<p> TRAFFICKING </p>

<p> Trafficking/Distribution Levels </p>

<p> Crack trafficking is conducted at three broad levels, namely,
wholesale </p>

<p> trafficking, mid-level distribution, and retail selling. It
must be </p>

<p> emphasized that these classifications are not concrete and
the </p>

<p> activities of a specific violator or group may vary. For
example, as </p>

<p> will be explained later, the functions of a Jamaican posse
may encompass </p>

<p> all three levels within the same organization. </p>

<p> Wholesale Trafficking: Crack traffickers purchase cocaine HCl
in </p>

<p> kilogram or multikilogram allotments from traditional cocaine
HCl </p>

<p> sources, including Colombians and Mexicans. The wholesale
traffickers </p>

<p> will either package the cocaine HCl into ounce quantities or
convert it </p>

<p> into crack themselves and then divide it into ounces for sale
at the </p>

<p> next level. Wholesalers usually represent large groups that
are </p>

<p> responsible for the majority of the interstate transportation
of crack </p>

<p> and cocaine HCl intended for crack conversion. </p>

<p> The higher levels of crack trafficking are controlled by many
small (up </p>

<p> to 10 members) and mid-sized (10 to 40 members) trafficking </p>

<p> organizations consisting of bands of individuals from
distinct ethnic </p>

<p> groups. The main participants involved in wholesale crack
trafficking </p>

<p> are Los Angeles-based street gangs, Jamaican posses, and
Haitian and </p>

<p> Dominican groups. Without exception, each of these groups
started out as </p>

<p> poly-drug traffickers, dealing primarily in marijuana and
cocaine HCl, </p>

<p> and continue to sell these drugs. Similarly, street-level
sellers often </p>

<p> sell retail units of other drugs in addition to crack. </p>

<p> Mid-level Distribution: Distributors further divide the
ounces of crack </p>

<p> into dosage units for sale at the retail level. If they
purchase cocaine </p>

<p> HCl, they can perform the conversion process easily
themselves. These </p>

<p> distributors often operate crack houses or manage
street-corner sales </p>

<p> locations and supervise up to 20 individual sellers.
Mid-level </p>

<p> distributors can be either members of larger groups or
independent </p>

<p> operators. </p>

<p> Retail-level Sales: Sellers carry dosage units of crack
totaling no more </p>

<p> than a few grams at any one time. Workers in crack houses
will sell </p>

<p> dosage units from the one or two ounces that are delivered by
the mid- </p>

<p> level distributors. Retailers are typically young males who
are </p>

<p> unemployed or destitute and many of them are crack addicts
themselves. </p>

<p> At the retail level, crack is sold by countless individual
sellers, </p>

<p> usually in inner-city sections of large metropolitan areas.
Upon arrest, </p>

<p> these retailers are almost immediately replaced. While crack
sellers and </p>

<p> users are present in virtually every ethnic community and
economic </p>

<p> group, the majority are from low-income, urban
African-American and </p>

<p> Hispanic neighborhoods. </p>

<p> Trafficking Networks </p>

<p> Over the past few years, crack trafficking has expanded from
the large </p>

<p> urban centers to smaller cities, towns, and rural areas
across the </p>

<p> United States. Major crack trafficking groups, such as the
Crips, the </p>

<p> Bloods, and Jamaicans, are successfully extending their
networks from </p>

<p> large cities, including Detroit, Los Angeles, Miami, and New
York City, </p>

<p> to street corners and dwellings in virtually every State
including </p>

<p> Alaska and Hawaii. This is occurring primarily for two
reasons. First, </p>

<p> these groups are attempting to enlarge their customer pools
and increase </p>

<p> their potential profits; second, the threat of disruption by
law </p>

<p> enforcement pressure or aggressive competition has generated
the search </p>

<p> for less hostile environments. </p>

<p> Jamaican posses are making advances away from the traditional
</p>

<p> strongholds of Miami and New York City, targeting new crack
markets. </p>

<p> Areas witnessing increased posse activity include Dallas and
Kansas </p>

<p> City; Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, West Virginia; and the
Florida </p>

<p> Panhandle. Jamaican posses reportedly have been distributing
crack as </p>

<p> far westward as south-central Los Angeles. In a similar
manner, the </p>

<p> Crips and the Bloods or their affiliates have been moving
eastward into </p>

<p> cities such as Birmingham, Denver, Detroit, Las Vegas, and
Phoenix, as </p>

<p> well as into West Coast cities such as Seattle. Recent
reports in the </p>

<p> media suggest that these gangs are also moving into New York
City. In </p>

<p> effect, posses and gangs have crisscrossed the nation with
crack- </p>

<p> trafficking networks. </p>

<p> When crack first became available in New York City, it was
sold by small </p>

<p> local bands of independent street sellers. Quite soon,
however, these </p>

<p> sellers were incorporated into the lowest level of large
organized </p>

<p> networks. The most successful groups increased their
membership by </p>

<p> adopting other gangs through strong-armed persuasion or
eliminated their </p>

<p> leadership altogether. As the groups grew larger, they
attracted more </p>

<p> law enforcement attention. In the late 1980's, New York
City's two </p>

<p> largest crack distribution organizations, Lido and Based
Balls, were </p>

<p> successfully dismantled by Federal, State, and local law
enforcement </p>

<p> agencies. </p>

<p> Currently, the larger groups in the United States are trying
to insulate </p>

<p> themselves from law enforcement detection by scaling down and
</p>

<p> streamlining their crack production and sales operations. The
tedious </p>

<p> and labor-intensive process of shaving off dosage unit size
rocks of </p>

<p> crack from larger chunks and packaging them in countless tiny
plastic </p>

<p> bags or vials in cumbersome factory style operations is ill
suited to </p>

<p> the clandestine nature of drug distribution. Recent
disruption of a </p>

<p> large number of organizations by law enforcement has created
a </p>

<p> distribution and sales system composed of many small groups
operating in </p>

<p> a limited number of neighborhoods. </p>

<p> Trafficking Groups </p>

<p> The major crack trafficking organizations consist of street
gangs, such </p>

<p> as the Crips and the Bloods, and groups of Jamaicans,
Haitians, and </p>

<p> Dominicans. They all use similar trafficking and distribution
techniques </p>

<p> and are engaged in interstate and intrastate transportation
of wholesale </p>

<p> amounts of crack and cocaine HCl. They also have the
knowledge, </p>

<p> experience, drug connections, manpower, and firepower to ply
their trade </p>

<p> over long distances. </p>

<p> The majority of the information contained in this section was
obtained </p>

<p> from the Middle Atlantic-Great Lakes Organized Crime Law
Enforcement </p>

<p> Network Fifth Annual Conferences on International Caribbean
Organized </p>

<p> Crime held June 15-19, 1992, and June 29 through July 2,
1993, in </p>

<p> Baltimore. </p>

<p> Jamaicans: One of the most effective crack trafficking groups
in the </p>

<p> United States is the Jamaican posse. Posses consist of gangs
of Jamaican </p>

<p> immigrants, often illegal aliens, that are involved in many
criminal </p>

<p> activities other than drug trafficking, including robbery,
fraud, and </p>

<p> money laundering. From these activities, posses receive an
estimated one </p>

<p> billion dollars annually drug proceeds. </p>

<p> The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) estimates
that, </p>

<p> currently, there are approximately 35 posses operating in the
United </p>

<p> States with total membership numbering at least 11,000. Most
posses </p>

<p> maintain some type of link to the larger, more established
groups or </p>

<p> parent posses in New York City or Miami, such as the Shower,
Spangler, </p>

<p> Dunkirk, and Jungle posses. New York City is generally
considered to be </p>

<p> the hub of Jamaican posse activity. </p>

<p> Jamaican posses are extremely violent, competitive, and
individualistic. </p>

<p> As a result, the structure of Jamaican organized crime will
remain </p>

<p> fragmented, lacking disciplined organizations and alliances
which are </p>

<p> common characteristics of traditional organized crime. Also,
successful </p>

<p> prosecution by Federal authorities over the past several
years has </p>

<p> disrupted much of the organization and control of the most
prominent </p>

<p> posses that operated nationwide. As a result of these
factors, a large </p>

<p> number of newly named splinter groups have evolved under the
direction </p>

<p> of new posse bosses. </p>

<p> Jamaican posses are attempting to insulate themselves from
law </p>

<p> enforcement pressure and violent competition by distancing
themselves </p>

<p> from the often dangerous day-to-day operation of crack houses
and by </p>

<p> distributing larger amounts of cocaine, in effect simply
supplying those </p>

<p> same crack houses and street level distribution sites.
Jamaicans are </p>

<p> also initiating alliances with members of other ethnic drug
trafficking </p>

<p> groups. For example, Jamaicans have been attempting to
establish </p>

<p> connections with Colombian and Mexican wholesale suppliers of
cocaine in </p>

<p> order to eliminate middlemen and related additional costs.
Also, </p>

<p> Jamaicans have been employing other minorities such as
Haitians because </p>

<p> they are willing to work for less in the lower levels of the </p>

<p> distribution chain. </p>

<p> Jamaicans also are distributing other illegal drugs such as
heroin and </p>

<p> marijuana; a few have been able to realize higher profits
from heroin </p>

<p> distribution. Moreover, some Jamaicans have returned to
trafficking </p>

<p> marijuana because the Federal penalties for marijuana
trafficking are </p>

<p> less severe than those for crack and cocaine HCl, yet the
profit </p>

<p> potential is almost as high. </p>

<p> A common method of operation by Jamaican posses is termed
&quot;drip&quot; </p>

<p> trafficking. In an attempt to escape law enforcement efforts
and to </p>

<p> protect against seizure, loss, or theft by competitors,
Jamaican posses </p>

<p> do not stockpile large amounts of drugs and money; rather,
they move </p>

<p> smaller quantities more often and more quickly. </p>

<p> In their efforts to expand crack sales and increase profits,
Jamaican </p>

<p> posses are branching out to other cities and rural areas to
establish </p>

<p> new drug markets where competition from rival gangs and law
enforcement </p>

<p> activity is lessened. This migration has been observed in
Dallas, </p>

<p> Denver, Kansas City, Washington, D.C., and northern Florida. </p>

<p> The Southwest border area has seen a significant influx of
Jamaican </p>

<p> traffickers during the last five years because cocaine HCl
and marijuana </p>

<p> are much cheaper to purchase in that region of the country.
As a result, </p>

<p> they have set up storefronts, usually garages, hair salons,
or music </p>

<p> stores, to mask distribution outlets and to launder proceeds.
Since </p>

<p> weapons can be purchased for less in Texas than in other
southern </p>

<p> States, Jamaicans often use females to make straw purchases
of guns </p>

<p> which are then sent to New York and other cities in the
Northeast. </p>

<p> Drugs, proceeds, and weapons are all shipped to different
locations </p>

<p> using a variety of means. Commercial airlines have proven to
be an </p>

<p> effective method of transportation. When interdiction efforts
at </p>

<p> particular airports become prohibitive, couriers drive to
airports in </p>

<p> other cities to elude law enforcement. Buses, trains, and
rental </p>

<p> vehicles are also popular methods of shipment. False
compartments are </p>

<p> frequently built into vehicles for transportation of drugs,
money, and </p>

<p> weapons. Additionally, mail services such as United Parcel
Service and </p>

<p> Federal Express are used to ship drugs and profits for the
Jamaican </p>

<p> posses. </p>

<p> Dominicans: While some official estimates of the number of
Dominicans </p>

<p> living in New York City are as low as 350,000, ATF claims the
actual </p>

<p> number, including illegal aliens, may be closer to 1,000,000.
</p>

<p> The hierarchy of Dominican gangs is slightly different than
that of the </p>

<p> Jamaicans in that the Dominican bosses usually run their
networks from </p>

<p> the Dominican Republic directly, traveling to and from the
United States </p>

<p> as needed. Dominican gangs are always armed and employ modern
equipment </p>

<p> and techniques in their daily operations, including
walkie-talkies, </p>

<p> &quot;kel&quot; transmitting devices, booby traps (to protect
drugs and money from </p>

<p> police action as well as from theft by competitors), and use
of counter- </p>

<p> surveillance, which they practiced in the Dominican Republic
in order to </p>

<p> elude the police. </p>

<p> Like the Jamaican posses, the Dominican traffickers are very
violent and </p>

<p> competitive and, as a result, do not easily form tightly
structured and </p>

<p> disciplined organizations. Although some reports suggest the
emergence </p>

<p> of a Dominican drug cartel, no evidence has been brought
forth to verify </p>

<p> the existence of an organization capable of orchestrating
large-scale </p>

<p> importation and trafficking activities. However, this
eventuality should </p>

<p> not be dismissed because, since the early 1980's, the
Dominican Republic </p>

<p> has been used by Colombians as a refueling and transshipment
point for </p>

<p> drugs destined for the United States and cooperation between
Colombian </p>

<p> and Dominican traffickers has flourished. </p>

<p> Dominicans have made gains in establishing money-laundering
operations </p>

<p> and front companies, most commonly travel agencies and check
cashing </p>

<p> businesses. At times, they purchase businesses outright or
make deals </p>

<p> with the owners or proprietors to carry out their orders. It
is not </p>

<p> known to what extent drug proceeds are sent directly to the
Dominican </p>

<p> Republic. Overall money transfers are estimated to be
approximately $800 </p>

<p> million per year. </p>

<p> Haitians: Haitian drug traffickers in the United States have
been able </p>

<p> to strengthen their status in the drug trade through two
significant </p>

<p> events. First, an influx of Haitian immigrants since the
early 1970's </p>

<p> has provided a large pool of recruits for the drug trade.
Second, by the </p>

<p> late 1980's, Haiti had become an important way station for
cocaine HCl </p>

<p> shipped into the United States by the Colombian cartels. </p>

<p> At present, Haitian crack traffickers operate in a limited
number of </p>

<p> major cities, primarily Miami and New York, and have not
extended their </p>

<p> operations as the Jamaicans have. Many Haitian sellers are
moving their </p>

<p> way up the distribution hierarchy by working at the lower
levels of </p>

<p> crack operations run by other ethnic groups. </p>

<p> Street Gangs: Street gangs, operating under the umbrella
names of the </p>

<p> Crips and the Bloods, extended their networks from the
streets of Los </p>

<p> Angeles to many major American cities in the last half of the
1980's. </p>

<p> Sales of crack and cocaine HCl brought them power and
influence during </p>

<p> that time. Gang members learned quickly that the cheap
cocaine available </p>

<p> in Los Angeles could be sold as cocaine HCl or crack at great
profit in </p>

<p> other parts of the country. </p>

<p> Los Angeles street gangs are very loosely organized in small
units or </p>

<p> &quot;sets&quot; falling under the auspices of the two
predominant gangs, the </p>

<p> Crips and the Bloods. The general street gang structure
begins with </p>

<p> diverse groups of gang members acting as street-level sellers
conducting </p>

<p> transactions in amounts up to several grams or even ounces on
the street </p>

<p> or in rock houses. A few of these sellers rise to become
mid-level </p>

<p> distributors, dealing in amounts of up to one kilogram or
more and </p>

<p> working between the street-level sellers and the major
traffickers. </p>

<p> Capable of brokering multimillion dollar deals, the major
traffickers, </p>

<p> often referred to as &quot;high rollers,&quot; are not
usually visible gang </p>

<p> members and often have direct contacts with Colombian
wholesale cocaine </p>

<p> suppliers. </p>

<p> Initially, gangs sold marijuana and PCP prior to entering
into cocaine </p>

<p> HCl and crack trafficking, distribution, and sales.
Eventually, they </p>

<p> developed a mode of operation that closely resembles the
Jamaican model. </p>

<p> Typically, gang members travel to and establish crack
operations in </p>

<p> smaller cities and towns where there is little police
pressure and </p>

<p> competition from rivals. They often gain entry into a
community by </p>

<p> visiting or living with friends or relatives. In addition to
securing </p>

<p> lodgings, these visits provide access to young people,
potential </p>

<p> recruits and customers, and help them attain legitimacy and
acceptance </p>

<p> within the community. Soon, the gang members will seek out in
many </p>

<p> instances low-income single mothers and offer them $100 a day
to use </p>

<p> their apartment or house as a crack conversion or
distribution site. A </p>

<p> common marketing technique known as &quot;double up&quot; is
used by these street </p>

<p> gangs to attract new customers and involves the sale of two
dosage units </p>

<p> of crack for the price of one. </p>

<p> Sales Locations </p>

<p> With few exceptions, crack distribution takes place either in
urban or </p>

<p> suburban dwellings of all types or at inner-city street
corner </p>

<p> locations. Virtually every large city in America has seen the
emergence </p>

<p> of both of these retail sales locations. The prevalence of
one site over </p>

<p> the other may be directly linked to two factors. </p>

<p> First, weather plays a major role in determining the chosen
method of </p>

<p> crack distribution. For example, in cities with cold winters,
sellers </p>

<p> will set up crack houses to escape the elements themselves
and to offer </p>

<p> customers more hospitable accommodations. In summer, the
operation may </p>

<p> be moved outdoors where increased pedestrian traffic provides
the </p>

<p> necessary cover for street corner sales. </p>

<p> Second, the presence of significant law enforcement activity
may force </p>

<p> street corner retailers to set up indoor crack facilities to
evade </p>

<p> detection. Conversely, if gangs are suffering substantial
losses due to </p>

<p> police raids on established crack houses, they may dispatch
sellers to </p>

<p> specific, pre-designated street corner sales locations. </p>

<p> The sale of crack at street corner locations is considered to
be ideal </p>

<p> because it provides sellers many avenues of escape when faced
with </p>

<p> police pressure. If a particular street becomes too
&quot;hot&quot; with police </p>

<p> activity, the retailers merely move a few blocks away and
continue </p>

<p> selling. Moreover, tactics can be employed to mask street
corner sales </p>

<p> of crack. In New York City, crack distributors have been
known to </p>

<p> dispatch a seller along with up to 10 people dressed exactly
alike to </p>

<p> work a street corner in an attempt to disrupt surveillance
efforts. In </p>

<p> addition, street corner operations do not require
expenditures for rent </p>

<p> and utilities, as is the case with crack houses. </p>

<p> HEROIN </p>

<p> AVAILABILITY/PRICE/PURITY </p>

<p> Within the United States, heroin is readily available in all
major </p>

<p> metropolitan areas having user populations. During 1992 and
the first </p>

<p> few months of 1993, there was an increase in purity
nationwide at the </p>

<p> retail level and increased supplies available from Southwest
Asia. (It </p>

<p> should be noted that high purity heroin has been imported
from Colombia </p>

<p> in increasing quantities in the past year. This heroin from
Colombia, </p>

<p> which underwent signature analysis prior to DEA's development
of a South </p>

<p> American heroin signature in July 1993, was analyzed as
having a </p>

<p> Southwest Asian (SWA) signature. As a result, it may account
in part for </p>

<p> both the increased purity and quantity of SWA heroin in the
United </p>

<p> States.) At present, street-level purity, the key indicator
of </p>

<p> availability, is at high levels, particularly in the
northeastern </p>

<p> metropolitan areas. </p>

<p> Heroin from every major source area is available in the
United States, </p>

<p> which is the most lucrative wholesale and retail level heroin
market in </p>

<p> the world. The origin of heroin smuggled into the United
States and the </p>

<p> proportion from each source area is tracked by DEA's Heroin
Signature </p>

<p> Program (HSP). Each year an in-depth chemical analysis is
performed on </p>

<p> 600 to 800 samples taken from heroin seizures and purchases
made in the </p>

<p> United States. The samples selected for signature analysis
include all </p>

<p> DEA seizures at U.S. points of entry and other
seizures/purchases </p>

<p> selected at random from DEA, in addition to Federal Bureau of
</p>

<p> Investigation, and U.S. Customs Service seizures and
purchases. As a </p>

<p> result of signature analysis, DEA chemists are able to
associate the </p>

<p> heroin sample with a heroin manufacturing process unique to a
particular </p>

<p> geographic source area. The proportion of samples associated
with each </p>

<p> geographic area is measured both in terms of the number of
samples from </p>

<p> each geographic source area and, since 1989, the net weight
of the </p>

<p> heroin samples from each area. </p>

<p> In 1991, Southeast Asia (SEA) was the prevalent source area
for heroin </p>

<p> in the United States for the fourth year in a row, accounting
for 58 </p>

<p> percent of the heroin samples analyzed through the HSP. SWA
heroin and </p>

<p> Mexican source heroin accounted for half of the remaining
samples with </p>

<p> 21 percent apiece. In 1992, the results of the HSP were
skewed by the </p>

<p> introduction of a number of samples of purported Colombian
heroin. </p>

<p> Because a specific signature for heroin from Colombia was not
available </p>

<p> then, most heroin samples of alleged Colombian origin are
analyzed as </p>

<p> having a Southwest Asian signature. With this in mind,
preliminary HSP </p>

<p> figures for 1992 reflect that 44 percent of the heroin
samples analyzed </p>

<p> were from Southeast Asia, 39 percent from Southwest Asia or
Colombia, </p>

<p> and the remaining 17 percent from Mexico. </p>

<p> Signature analysis also reveals that SEA heroin accounted for
88 percent </p>

<p> of the total net weight of the heroin samples analyzed in
1991, and 58 </p>

<p> percent in 1992. SWA heroin (including heroin from Colombia)
accounted </p>

<p> for nine and 32 percent of the total net weight of the heroin
samples </p>

<p> analyzed in 1991 and 1992, respectively. Mexican heroin
accounted for </p>

<p> three percent of the total net weight in 1991 and 10 percent
in 1992. </p>

<p> U.S. airports, particularly New York's JFK International
Airport, are </p>

<p> primary entry points for heroin shipments destined for the
U.S. market. </p>

<p> The HSP shows that 91 percent (454 out of 498) of the heroin
seizures </p>

<p> that took place at the U.S. border and points of entry during
1992 </p>

<p> occurred at airports, and that over 75 percent of the airport
seizures </p>

<p> occurred at New York's JFK International Airport. The
nationwide average </p>

<p> net weight airport seizure was almost 800 grams and the
average purity </p>

<p> of the heroin seized at these airports was 73 percent. </p>

<p> Nationally, in 1992, a kilogram of SEA heroin sold for
$90,000 to </p>

<p> $250,000. In the northeastern United States, SEA heroin is
also commonly </p>

<p> sold in units (700 grams), which sell for $90,000 to
$115,000. The price </p>

<p> for SWA heroin ranged from $80,000 to $200,000 per kilogram.
Wholesale </p>

<p> level prices for Mexican heroin were the lowest of any type
of heroin </p>

<p> and ranged from $50,000 to $150,000. The wide range in the
price of a </p>

<p> kilogram reflects several variables including buyer/seller
relationship, </p>

<p> quantity purchased, purchase frequency, purity, and
transportation </p>

<p> costs. Numerous and diverse foreign sources of supply also
account for </p>

<p> the wide variances. </p>

<p> At the mid-level of the traffic, where dealers sell
quantities ranging </p>

<p> from an ounce to multiounces, SEA heroin and SWA heroin sold
for $5,500 </p>

<p> to $12,000 per ounce. Mexican black tar heroin sold for
between $1,800 </p>

<p> and $4,000 per ounce, and Mexican brown powder heroin prices
ranged from </p>

<p> $ 1,000 to $ 1,800 per ounce. </p>

<p> Domestic prices for Colombian-source heroin are generally
compatible </p>

<p> with the prices for heroin from Southeast and Southwest Asia.
Kilogram </p>

<p> prices quoted in undercover negotiations range up to $150,000
and vary </p>

<p> depending on final point of delivery. In actual undercover
purchases of </p>

<p> smaller amounts, one-eighth of a kilogram cost $23,500,
one-fourth of a </p>

<p> kilogram cost $42,500, and one-half kilogram sold for
$62,250. </p>

<p> Heroin is sold at the retail level in the United States at
prices </p>

<p> ranging from $10 to $50 and in quantities ranging from 10 to
50 </p>

<p> milligrams. The retail price remains relatively constant at
this level </p>

<p> because retail-level purity, rather than retail-level price,
is adjusted </p>

<p> by the distributors to account for availability and to
manipulate profit </p>

<p> margins. </p>

<p> The HSP provides purity information on heroin shipments
smuggled into </p>

<p> the United States at the importation, or wholesale, level.
For all types </p>

<p> of heroin at this level, the nationwide average purity in
1992 was 64 </p>

<p> percent. SWA heroin was the purest form available at the
wholesale </p>

<p> level, averaging 72 percent. SEA heroin nationwide averaged
slightly </p>

<p> lower at 68 percent, while Mexican heroin averaged 33
percent. </p>

<p> At the retail level, purity is tracked by DEA's Domestic
Monitor Program </p>

<p> (DMP), a heroin purchase program designed to provide price,
purity, and </p>

<p> geographic source area data on heroin being distributed on
the streets </p>

<p> of U.S. cities. The program is conducted quarterly in one
city from each </p>

<p> of DEA's 19 field divisions and San Juan, Puerto Rico. </p>

<p> According to DMP data for 1992, the nationwide average purity
for retail </p>

<p> level heroin was 37 percent. This percentage was much higher
than the </p>

<p> average of 6.9 percent recorded a decade ago and also
considerably </p>

<p> higher than the average purity of 26.6 percent recorded in
1991. The </p>

<p> increase in average purity corresponded directly to an
increase in </p>

<p> availability of high purity SEA and SWA heroin. Although
Mexican heroin </p>

<p> has been traditionally of lower purity than other heroin
types in recent </p>

<p> years, it too increased in purity at the street level.
Street-level </p>

<p> purity of SWA heroin analyzed in the DMP during 1992 was the
highest for </p>

<p> all sources, averaging 55.8 percent, while Mexican heroin, at
25.6 </p>

<p> percent, almost doubled between 1991 and 1992. SEA heroin
remained </p>

<p> widely available in the northeastern United States with an
average </p>

<p> purity of 34.4 percent. </p>

<p> Heroin purity at the street level was generally highest in
the </p>

<p> northeastern United States, where a large percentage of the
nation's </p>

<p> user population lives. In New York City, one of the major
importation </p>

<p> and distribution centers for SEA and SWA heroin, the average
purity at </p>

<p> the street level for these types of heroin was, respectively,
54.3 </p>

<p> percent and 69.7 percent. Boston recorded the highest average
purity of </p>

<p> retail level heroin in all of the DMP cities with an average
of 73.7 </p>

<p> percent during 1992. </p>

<p> USE </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1992
indicated a </p>

<p> decrease in the number of past-year heroin users. Survey data
show that </p>

<p> the number of Americans 12 years of age or older who have
used heroin at </p>

<p> least once in the past year declined from 381,000 in 1991 to
323,000 in </p>

<p> 1992. During that same time frame, however, the number of
past-month </p>

<p> heroin users increased from 83,000 to 107,000. The increase
in the </p>

<p> number of lifetime heroin users to 2,653,000 in 1991 appears
to have </p>

<p> been an anomaly, as the 1992 estimate has declined to
1,840,000. </p>

<p> (Estimates of heroin use from the Household Survey are
considered very </p>

<p> conservative due to the probable under coverage of the
population of </p>

<p> heroin users.) </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey on
Drug Abuse, </p>

<p> heroin use increased among high school seniors. Although 1.2
percent of </p>

<p> the seniors in the class of 1992 reported they had used
heroin at least </p>

<p> once in their lifetime, up from 0.9 percent in the class of
1991, it was </p>

<p> still below the peak of 1.3 percent reported in the classes
of 1989 and </p>

<p> 1990. Moreover, for the first time in recent years, there was
a </p>

<p> statistically significant decline among seniors in the
perceived risk of </p>

<p> harm associated with heroin use. </p>

<p> The National High School Survey also shows that lifetime
heroin use </p>

<p> among 8th graders increased from 1.2 percent in 1991 to 1.4
percent in </p>

<p> 1992, past year use remained steady, and past-month use
increased from a </p>

<p> 0.3 percent in 1991 to 0.4 percent in 1992. Among 10th
graders, both </p>

<p> lifetime and past-month use remained stable from 1991 to
1992, while </p>

<p> past-year heroin use increased form 0.5 percent to 0.6
percent. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number of
nationwide </p>

<p> heroin-related emergency room episodes, which had been
fluctuating </p>

<p> somewhat during the past several years, increased
substantially from the </p>

<p> first to second half of FY 1992. During that time frame, the
number of </p>

<p> heroin-related episodes rose from 18,192 to 24,593, an
increase of 35 </p>

<p> percent. Cities showing substantive increases during the
latter half of </p>

<p> FY 1992 in the number of heroin-related emergency room
episodes included </p>

<p> Baltimore, Boston, Los Angeles, New York City, and Seattle. </p>

<p> Possible explanations for the rising levels of heroin-related
emergency </p>

<p> room episodes have been provided by a number of drug
epidemiologists and </p>

<p> treatment specialists. Reports indicate that segments of the
crack </p>

<p> cocaine user population are using or switching to heroin as a
means to </p>

<p> mitigate the depressive effects associated with withdrawal
from crack. </p>

<p> There are additional reports of the appearance, in a limited
number of </p>

<p> areas, of new distributors attempting to establish markets as
well as </p>

<p> the growing involvement of youth gangs in the heroin traffic.
Moreover, </p>

<p> heroin is now being sold in white as well as African-American
and </p>

<p> Hispanic neighborhoods in a limited number of cities. In New
York City, </p>

<p> anecdotal information indicates that more teenagers and
females are </p>

<p> selling heroin than in the past. Lastly, there is a
perception among </p>

<p> some users that heroin is a safer drug than cocaine, while
certain </p>

<p> others consider heroin use to be &quot;cool.&quot; The latter
represents a radical </p>

<p> departure from previous attitudes toward heroin use. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN also indicates that the injection of
heroin </p>

<p> continues to be the predominant route of administration used
by patients </p>

<p> admitted to DAWN emergency rooms for heroin-related problems.
However, </p>

<p> the percentage of patients who indicated that injection was
their </p>

<p> primary route of administration has decreased from 79.1
percent in FY </p>

<p> 1989 to 73.9 percent in FY 1992. During this same time frame,
there was </p>

<p> an increase in the percentage of patients who snorted heroin.
Those who </p>

<p> snorted heroin rose from 4.8 percent in FY 1989 to 8.8
percent in FY </p>

<p> 1992. Increases in snorting are attributed, in part, to a
fear of </p>

<p> contracting AIDS through needle sharing and the availability
of high- </p>

<p> purity heroin on the street. </p>

<p> Opiate use (to include heroin) among recently booked
arrestees as </p>

<p> reported by the DUF Program remained relatively low and
stable in 1992 </p>

<p> when compared to rates for cocaine and marijuana. Cities
having the </p>

<p> highest percentage of positive urinalysis tests for heroin
among booked </p>

<p> male arrestees in the first half of 1992 were Chicago at 19
percent; New </p>

<p> York City at 18 percent; San Antonio at 15 percent; San Diego
at 16 </p>

<p> percent; Washington, D.C., at 11 percent; Los Angeles at 11
percent; and </p>

<p> Philadelphia at 12 percent. Female arrestees tested positive
at high </p>

<p> rates in New York City (24%), Portland (22%), Washington,
D.C., (19%), </p>

<p> San Diego (17%), Detroit (15%), Phoenix (15%), San Antonio
(14%), and </p>

<p> Los Angeles (13%). </p>

<p> TRAFFICKING </p>

<p> SEA Heroin Trafficking </p>

<p> Major SEA heroin trafficking organizations, often under the
control of </p>

<p> Sino-Thai and Chinese criminal groups, oversee the smuggling
of SEA </p>

<p> heroin into the United States. Chinese traffickers in the
United States </p>

<p> with links to these international criminal groups are the
most prolific </p>

<p> importers and distributors of heroin from Southeast Asia.
Chinese or </p>

<p> Thai nationals are often used to transport the heroin and are
generally </p>

<p> responsible for the largest bulk shipments, in the
multihundred kilogram </p>

<p> range, of SEA heroin smuggled into the United States. </p>

<p> Around 1986, these Chinese smuggling groups took over the
multibillion </p>

<p> dollar wholesale heroin trade that had been controlled for
over two </p>

<p> decades by Traditional Organized Crime groups in the United
States. Over </p>

<p> the next few years, ethnic Chinese traffickers flooded the
northeastern </p>

<p> United States, the largest heroin market in the country, with
bulk </p>

<p> shipments of high-purity SEA heroin. In recent years, these
highly </p>

<p> structured clandestine Chinese organizations have increased
the size and </p>

<p> number of heroin shipments to the United States. In the wake
of </p>

<p> increased availability, the layers of mid-level distributors
in the New </p>

<p> York City area were eliminated and Chinese wholesalers sold
directly to </p>

<p> Dominican street-level dealers, a development that resulted
in enhanced </p>

<p> heroin purity at the street level. </p>

<p> SEA heroin traffickers use a variety of transportation routes
to smuggle </p>

<p> heroin into the United States from the Far East. One of the
major routes </p>

<p> originates in Bangkok and terminates in New York City, the
largest </p>

<p> heroin importation and distribution center in the United
States. (Each </p>

<p> year since 1986, roughly half of DEA's nationwide seizures
occur in the </p>

<p> New York City metropolitan area.) Maritime cargo shipments
are the </p>

<p> primary transport method for smugglers using this route and
the </p>

<p> shipments may transit a variety of countries including Hong
Kong, Japan, </p>

<p> Korea, the Philippines, Singapore, and Taiwan. Many shipments
from the </p>

<p> Far East are also transshipped through Canada and then into
the </p>

<p> northeastern United States. Traffickers smuggle heroin
shipments aboard </p>

<p> commercial airlines originating in Bangkok and then transit
almost any </p>

<p> Asian city, as well as a number of cities in Europe and
Canada. In </p>

<p> addition to New York City, other U.S. cities in the
Northeast, including </p>

<p> Boston and Philadelphia, are also used as entry points.
Traffickers also </p>

<p> use West Coast cities such as Los Angeles, San Francisco, and
Seattle as </p>

<p> entry points for heroin shipments destined for the Northeast.
</p>

<p> Chinese traffickers employ a variety of smuggling methods.
Generally, </p>

<p> the size of the heroin shipment determines the smuggling
method. The </p>

<p> largest shipments, ranging from 50- to multihundred-kilogram
quantities, </p>

<p> are secreted in containerized freight aboard commercial
marine vessels </p>

<p> and air freight cargo. Smaller shipments are concealed in the
luggage of </p>

<p> airline passengers, strapped to the body, or swallowed. SEA
heroin </p>

<p> smugglers also use the mails and delivery services to
transport </p>

<p> multigram to kilogram quantities into the country. </p>

<p> Traffickers using commercial cargo originating in source
countries </p>

<p> frequently attempt to disguise the origin of the cargo
shipment by first </p>

<p> transshipping containers through several other countries or
by </p>

<p> falsifying the container documentation. In 1992, 35 kilograms
of heroin, </p>

<p> which were shipped from Singapore concealed in ceramic tiles,
were </p>

<p> seized in Newark, New Jersey. In May 1991, the largest heroin
seizure in </p>

<p> U.S. history occurred near Oakland, California, when 494
kilograms of </p>

<p> SEA heroin were seized from a commercial cargo of plastic
bags aboard a </p>

<p> merchant vessel. The shipment originated in Thailand and was </p>

<p> transshipped through Taiwan prior to importation into the
United States. </p>

<p> In addition to the Chinese and Sino-Thai traffickers,
Nigerians remain </p>

<p> deeply entrenched in the smuggling of SEA heroin. Nigerian
traffickers </p>

<p> dispatch large numbers of internal body couriers traveling
aboard </p>

<p> commercial airlines bound for the United States. These
&quot;swallowers,&quot; </p>

<p> including Nigerians as well as other nationalities recruited
as </p>

<p> couriers, can smuggle up to two-kilogram amounts of SEA
heroin per trip. </p>

<p> Moreover, recent reporting suggests that a number of Nigerian
</p>

<p> trafficking groups are experimenting with smuggling larger </p>

<p> (multikilogram) shipments of heroin concealed in commercial
maritime </p>

<p> cargo. </p>

<p> Most Nigerian organizations are based in Lagos, Nigeria.
Since they are </p>

<p> formed along tribal lines at the senior levels, the
organizations are </p>

<p> close-knit. Drug barons who control the Nigerian
organizations remain </p>

<p> well-insulated by directing lower-level traffickers to
recruit the </p>

<p> numerous couriers, often non-Nigerians, and to organize
travel to the </p>

<p> United States. In 1992, Nigerians returned almost all profits
generated </p>

<p> in the United States to Lagos, Nigeria, or to Europe for
laundering. </p>

<p> As a result of enforcement pressure, Nigerians continue to
recruit other </p>

<p> ethnic groups, including other West Africans, Europeans, and
American </p>

<p> citizens, as heroin couriers. New York's JFK International
Airport was </p>

<p> the entry point used most frequently by Nigerian trafficking </p>

<p> organizations in 1992. However, during the past year,
Nigerian </p>

<p> traffickers diversified both the smuggling routes used to
reach the </p>

<p> United States and their points of entry into the country. For
example, </p>

<p> West Africans, in all likelihood controlled by Nigerians,
made a limited </p>

<p> number of attempts to smuggle heroin through entry points
along the </p>

<p> United States Southwest border and the Canadian border during
1992. </p>

<p> Nigerians have established heroin distribution networks in
U.S. cities </p>

<p> with well-established Nigerian populations such as Atlanta,
Baltimore, </p>

<p> Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Newark, New York, and Washington,
D.C. These </p>

<p> networks are capable of supplying heroin ranging from
100-gram to </p>

<p> multikilogram quantities on a regular basis. During 1992,
reporting from </p>

<p> a DEA investigation in Dallas indicated that Nigerian heroin
traffickers </p>

<p> collaborated with members of Jamaican posses in distributing
heroin from </p>

<p> Jamaican-controlled crack houses in Dallas and hired posse
members as </p>

<p> enforcers to protect Nigerian operations. </p>

<p> SWA Heroin Trafficking </p>

<p> SWA heroin in the United States increased in availability and
purity </p>

<p> during 1992 and the first few months of 1993. While some of
the rise in </p>

<p> purity levels for SWA heroin is in all likelihood
attributable to the </p>

<p> influx of high-purity heroin from Colombia, investigative
reporting and </p>

<p> laboratory analysis show that traditional SWA heroin
traffickers are </p>

<p> also smuggling a purer form of heroin into the United States.
</p>

<p> Importation and distribution of SWA heroin is much less
centralized than </p>

<p> that for SEA heroin, both geographically and in regard to
trafficking </p>

<p> groups. A number of ethnic groups from Southwest Asia, the
Middle East, </p>

<p> and Europe are active in smuggling SWA heroin into the United
States, </p>

<p> and its distribution; these ethnic groups include Afghans,
Greeks, </p>

<p> Iranians, Israelis, Lebanese, Pakistanis, and Turks. SWA
heroin is </p>

<p> transported to the United States directly from producing
countries, as </p>

<p> well as transshipped through Europe and Africa. Significant
quantities </p>

<p> of SWA heroin bound for the United States are also
transshipped through </p>

<p> the Canadian cities of Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver.
Although New </p>

<p> York City is a major SWA heroin importation and distribution
center, </p>

<p> heroin is also smuggled into and distributed throughout the
Northeast; </p>

<p> in Mid-Atlantic cities such as Baltimore and Washington,
D.C.; in some </p>

<p> cities on the West Coast such as Los Angeles, San Diego, and
San </p>

<p> Francisco; in some Midwestern cities including Chicago and
Detroit; and </p>

<p> in Puerto Rico. Other points of entry for SWA heroin include
Houston and </p>

<p> Miami. </p>

<p> Most SWA heroin trafficking groups in the United States are
highly </p>

<p> cohesive and difficult to penetrate because they are based on
ethnic, </p>

<p> familial, and tribal relationships. SWA heroin importers and
wholesale </p>

<p> level distributors generally are very cautious and rarely
transact with </p>

<p> outsiders. As a result, SWA heroin trafficking and
distribution are </p>

<p> generally more prevalent in cities that have large
populations from </p>

<p> Afghanistan, Greece, Lebanon, Pakistan, and Turkey, such as
Chicago, </p>

<p> Detroit, and New York City. </p>

<p> SWA heroin traffickers rely less on commercial cargo as a
smuggling </p>

<p> method than their counterparts from Southeast Asia.
Generally, SWA </p>

<p> heroin traffickers, unlike Chinese traffickers, do not
smuggle heroin on </p>

<p> a large scale, such as multiple bulk shipments. However, they
are able </p>

<p> to regularly smuggle shipments ranging from one to 20
kilograms and, on </p>

<p> occasion, larger amounts. Many SWA heroin trafficking
organizations use </p>

<p> commercial cargo and couriers aboard commercial airlines to
smuggle one </p>

<p> to five kilograms on a steady basis. However, several
organizations are </p>

<p> capable of smuggling from five- to 10 kilogram shipments
aboard maritime </p>

<p> vessels on a fairly regular basis. </p>

<p> Pakistani traffickers, who smuggle SWA heroin, control
importation </p>

<p> routes into the United States and distribution networks in
New York City </p>

<p> and other cities in the East and Midwest. This heroin is
occasionally </p>

<p> transshipped through California as well. Pakistani
traffickers are adept </p>

<p> at developing new smuggling techniques and unique concealment
methods, </p>

<p> such as specially designed vests with pockets to conceal
heroin, which </p>

<p> are worn underneath the clothes of couriers on airlines. </p>

<p> Pakistanis regularly transact business with Afghan and Indian
</p>

<p> traffickers, and other ethnic groups from Southwest and South
Asia. Some </p>

<p> Nigerians still smuggle and distribute SWA heroin but most
are now more </p>

<p> active in trafficking SEA heroin. </p>

<p> Lebanese trafficking groups appear to be increasing their
level of </p>

<p> smuggling into and distribution in the United States,
particularly in </p>

<p> Boston, Detroit, and New York, cities with large Lebanese
communities. </p>

<p> Moreover, some SWA heroin originally destined for the
European market is </p>

<p> now smuggled into the United States because Lebanese
traffickers, in an </p>

<p> effort to maximize profit margins, are exchanging SWA heroin
for cocaine </p>

<p> with Colombian cocaine organizations. (At the wholesale
level, heroin </p>

<p> prices in the United States are higher than in Europe, while
cocaine </p>

<p> prices in Europe are higher than in the United States.) </p>

<p> Mexican Heroin Trafficking </p>

<p> Mexican heroin, in brown powder form as well as the more
widely </p>

<p> available black tar form, is produced almost exclusively for
the U.S. </p>

<p> heroin market. The smuggling and distribution of Mexican
heroin to and </p>

<p> within the United States is controlled by organizations
composed of </p>

<p> Mexican nationals and Mexican-Americans. Mexican trafficking </p>

<p> organizations are often made up of family members, lifelong
friends, and </p>

<p> other trusted associates. </p>

<p> While some Mexican organizations control the entire process
from opium </p>

<p> production and heroin processing in Mexico to the management
of </p>

<p> transportation and distribution networks in the United
States, other </p>

<p> trafficking organizations operate independently on a smaller
scale. </p>

<p> Mexico's extensive land border with the United States
provides smugglers </p>

<p> numerous entry points into the country. Heroin is smuggled
across the </p>

<p> U.S. Southwest border in relatively small amounts, most often
ranging </p>

<p> from gram- to multiounce quantities, by large numbers of
illegal </p>

<p> immigrants and migrant workers. Occasionally, there are large
seizures, </p>

<p> such as the April 1993 seizure of approximately 10 kilograms
of black </p>

<p> tar heroin at Blythe, California, but such amounts are the
exception. </p>

<p> Generally, Mexican heroin seizures do not exceed one or two
kilograms. </p>

<p> The use of numerous couriers to smuggle relatively small
quantities of </p>

<p> Mexican heroin is characteristic of the smuggling methods
employed by </p>

<p> Mexican heroin traffickers. These traffickers take advantage
of their </p>

<p> close proximity to the United States by stockpiling the
larger </p>

<p> quantities of heroin in Mexico and then smuggling smaller
amounts as </p>

<p> transactions in the United States are arranged. Most
traffickers believe </p>

<p> their heroin stockpiles are less susceptible to law
enforcement in </p>

<p> Mexico, and by storing heroin there they minimize the danger
of U.S. </p>

<p> authorities seizing significant amounts of heroin. According
to </p>

<p> investigative reporting, even large poly-drug Mexican
organizations, </p>

<p> which are capable of smuggling multiton quantities of cocaine
and </p>

<p> marijuana, limit smuggling of Mexican heroin into the United
States to </p>

<p> kilogram and smaller amounts. </p>

<p> Traffickers who distribute Mexican heroin within the United
States are </p>

<p> generally Mexican immigrants, primarily from the States of
Durango, </p>

<p> Michoacan, Nuevo Leon, and Sinaloa. Mexican organizations
control </p>

<p> distribution at the wholesale level but are not generally
involved in </p>

<p> street sales which are often managed by local gangs. </p>

<p> Smuggling methods include concealment in motor vehicles,
public </p>

<p> transportation vehicles, internal and external body carry,
and </p>

<p> commercial package express services. Females are used much
more </p>

<p> frequently than males as couriers for transporting heroin and
money </p>

<p> across the border. </p>

<p> Once the heroin is smuggled into the United States,
transportation is </p>

<p> arranged to metropolitan areas in the western and
southwestern States </p>

<p> where there are sizable populations of Mexican immigrants.
Heroin is </p>

<p> also transported to the Chicago, Denver, and St. Louis
metropolitan </p>

<p> areas, primary markets for Mexican heroin. In the United
States, Mexican </p>

<p> black tar heroin is usually sold by the &quot;piece&quot; or
Mexican ounce, which </p>

<p> weighs 25 grams. </p>

<p> Colombian Heroin Trafficking </p>

<p> The availability of heroin from Colombia increased in the
United States </p>

<p> during the latter half of 1992 and early 1993, according to
seizure </p>

<p> analysis and investigative reporting. While most evidence
suggests that </p>

<p> Colombian traffickers are still operating at a fairly low
level, the </p>

<p> potential of the Colombian heroin threat is serious,
primarily because </p>

<p> of the smuggling resources controlled by the Colombian
cocaine cartels. </p>

<p> At present, Colombian heroin traffickers are attempting to
establish </p>

<p> distribution outlets in the United States, particularly in
the </p>

<p> metropolitan areas of the Northeast, and, as a result, are
smuggling a </p>

<p> heroin of very high purity, generally 80-plus percent. The
high purity </p>

<p> is essential in order for the Colombian traffickers to break
into the </p>

<p> fiercely competitive retail heroin markets in Boston, Newark,
New York </p>

<p> City, and Philadelphia, where street level purity averages
over 50 </p>

<p> percent. Colombian heroin is also available in southern New
England </p>

<p> cities, such as Hartford and Bridgeport, Connecticut, and
Providence, </p>

<p> Rhode Island, where, according to reporting from the Boston
Field </p>

<p> Division, Cali Cartel cocaine networks are operating.
Currently, </p>

<p> significant investigations of Colombian heroin trafficking
organizations </p>

<p> are underway in Miami, Newark, New York City, San Diego, and
San Juan, </p>

<p> Puerto Rico. </p>

<p> Since 1991, most of the Colombian heroin smuggled into the
United States </p>

<p> has been transported by couriers aboard commercial airlines,
a method </p>

<p> requiring numerous couriers carrying amounts ranging up to a
kilogram </p>

<p> per trip. Colombian couriers commonly transport the heroin in
false- </p>

<p> sided briefcases and luggage, inside hollowed-out shoe soles,
or by </p>

<p> internal body carry methods. Much of this activity appears to
be the </p>

<p> work of smaller, independent Colombian traffickers, according
to </p>

<p> investigative reporting from the DEA Bogota Country Office. </p>

<p> According to the El Paso Intelligence Center, the number of
Colombian </p>

<p> couriers who were arrested on commercial airlines carrying
heroin into </p>

<p> the United States increased from 41 in 1991 to over 260 in
1992; most of </p>

<p> these seizures occurred at either Miami or New York's
international </p>

<p> airports. The majority of Colombian couriers arrested in
Miami confessed </p>

<p> to being en route to New York City or possessed follow-on
tickets for </p>

<p> that destination. Individuals with an end destination of
Miami were </p>

<p> often instructed to check into a local hotel and await
further </p>

<p> instructions. </p>

<p> The primary method of smuggling (ingestion) employed by
Colombian </p>

<p> traffickers and the seizure amounts (usually less than 500
grams) </p>

<p> indicate that Colombian traffickers presently are not able to
supply </p>

<p> heroin on the same scale as Chinese, Nigerian, or Southwest
Asian </p>

<p> traffickers. To date, the largest shipment seized involved a
June 1992 </p>

<p> airdrop of just under 15 kilograms of heroin on a Puerto
Rican beach; </p>

<p> this shipment may have been tied to the Colombian cocaine
cartels. </p>

<p> However, as the cocaine cartels become more involved in
heroin smuggling </p>

<p> and distribution, the seriousness of the threat will increase
</p>

<p> significantly, given their vast resources, control over
trafficking </p>

<p> routes, and access to a stable cocaine (crack) clientele in
the United </p>

<p> States. </p>

<p> CANNABIS </p>

<p> AVAILABILITY/PRICE/POTENCY </p>

<p> Marijuana, a Schedule I controlled substance and by-product
of the </p>

<p> Cannabis sativa L. plant, remained the most commonly used
illegal drug </p>

<p> in the United States during 1992. Both the cannabis plant and
delta-9 </p>

<p> tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the plant's primary psycho-active
chemical, </p>

<p> are controlled substances. The flowering tops, also known as
colas or </p>

<p> buds, are valued because of their higher THC content. The
flowering tops </p>

<p> and leaves are collected, dried, and then smoked in a pipe or
as a </p>

<p> cigarette. Hashish, which is processed from cannabis, is also
valued to </p>

<p> a limited extent by some individuals in the United States. </p>

<p> Typically, 34 percent of a non-sinsemilla (pollinated) plant
contains </p>

<p> usable material (the leaf and bud components) and 58 percent
of a </p>

<p> sinsemilla (unpollinated female) plant contains usable
material. The </p>

<p> higher the plant density of the grow area, the lower the
yield of usable </p>

<p> material. In addition, the diameter of the plant is more
important than </p>

<p> the height for yield predictions. Indoor plants are generally
smaller </p>

<p> than outdoor plants due to space limitations. The average
plant yield </p>

<p> for mature, domestically grown sinsemilla is approximately
1.25 pounds </p>

<p> per plant. The average plant yield for mature, domestically
grown </p>

<p> commercial grade marijuana is approximately three-quarters of
one pound </p>

<p> per plant. </p>

<p> Marijuana prices have increased substantially over the past
decade. </p>

<p> Prices for a pound of commercial grade marijuana during the
early 1980's </p>

<p> ranged from $350 to $600, while in 1992 the cost ranged from
$300 to </p>

<p> $3,000. Sinsemilla with its inherently higher THC content,
ranged from </p>

<p> $1,000 to $2,000 ten years ago. In 1992, the price ranged
from $650 to </p>

<p> $9,600 per pound. Successful law enforcement efforts have
forced some </p>

<p> cultivators to move indoors. Cultivators have increasingly
moved indoors </p>

<p> to avoid detection and to exploit the profit potential of
potent </p>

<p> sinsemilla marijuana. Indoor growers cultivate sinsemilla
because the </p>

<p> higher THC content of sinsemilla permits growers to charge
higher </p>

<p> prices. Scarcity created by law enforcement operations has
also </p>

<p> increased prices in some areas. </p>

<p> Domestic cultivation trends of significance in recent years
include </p>

<p> cultivator efforts to enhance the potency of marijuana by
making use of </p>

<p> advanced agronomic practices such as hydroponics and cloning.
Such </p>

<p> techniques also involve the use of special fertilizers, plant
hormones, </p>

<p> steroids, and carbon monoxide. During the late 1970's and
early 1980's, </p>

<p> the THC content of commercial grade marijuana averaged under
two </p>

<p> percent. By comparison, the average in 1992 was 3.68 percent.
The </p>

<p> average THC content of sinsemilla in 1992 was 8.34 percent
which </p>

<p> compares to an average of approximately six percent in the
late 1970's </p>

<p> and early 1980's. Moreover, in February 1993, a new U.S.
record was </p>

<p> recorded for the highest concentration of THC analyzed in a
marijuana </p>

<p> sample. The sample had a THC content of 29.86 percent which
is nearly 32 </p>

<p> percent higher than the previous record of 22.67 percent
reported during </p>

<p> 1992. The record high THC content of this sample is an
indicator of the </p>

<p> continuing trend by indoor growers to produce higher potency
marijuana </p>

<p> over recent years. </p>

<p> USE </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National Household Survey on Drug
Abuse, </p>

<p> approximately 67.5 million Americans have tried marijuana at
least once </p>

<p> in their lifetime. Of these, approximately 2.2 million were
from 12 to </p>

<p> 17 years of age, nearly 13.5 million were from 18 to 25 years
of age, </p>

<p> and almost 52 million were 26 years of age and older. Of the
17.4 </p>

<p> million people who used marijuana at least once in the past
year, nine </p>

<p> million used the drug once a month during 1992, and 5.2
million used it </p>

<p> once a week or more. Survey data also indicate that the
frequency of </p>

<p> marijuana use has declined substantially from 1985 to 1992.
Overall, </p>

<p> past-year, past-month and past-week use of the drug have
diminished by </p>

<p> nearly 45 percent during that time frame. </p>

<p> According to the National High School Senior Survey on Drug
Abuse, the </p>

<p> long-term decline in the use of marijuana among seniors
continued in </p>

<p> 1992. However, there was also a decrease in the proportion of
that </p>

<p> population who believed there was a &quot;great risk&quot; of
harm associated with </p>

<p> regular marijuana use, possibly presaging a reversal of the
downward use </p>

<p> pattern. In addition, among 8th graders, lifetime, past-year,
and past- </p>

<p> month use of marijuana marginally increased from 1991 to
1992. Moreover, </p>

<p> 8th graders in the class of 1992 were less likely to view
marijuana use </p>

<p> as dangerous compared to 8th graders in the class of 1991.
Also, the </p>

<p> proportion of 8th graders who personally disapproved of
marijuana use </p>

<p> declined from 1991 to 1992. These shifts in perception may
explain the </p>

<p> increased use of marijuana among 8th graders. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number of
metropolitan area </p>

<p> marijuana-related emergency room episodes, which had declined
from FY </p>

<p> 1989 to FY 1991, increased once again during FY 1992. In
fact, the </p>

<p> number of marijuana-related emergency room episodes rose from
9,231 in </p>

<p> FY 1991 to 12,108 in FY 1992, an increase of more than 30
percent. DAWN </p>

<p> reporting also shows that nearly one-half of the patients
treated for </p>

<p> cannabis-related hospital emergency room episodes during the
first six </p>

<p> months of 1992 were under 26 years of age; approximately 70
percent of </p>

<p> these patients were male. The large majority, approximately
80 percent, </p>

<p> used marijuana in combination with other substances. Patients
most </p>

<p> frequently used marijuana in combination with alcohol. The
next most </p>

<p> common combination involved the use of marijuana with
cocaine. </p>

<p> Marijuana use among recently booked male arrestees as
reported by the </p>

<p> DUF Program increased in many major U.S. cities in 1992. The
highest </p>

<p> levels of marijuana use were reported in Omaha, where 38
percent of the </p>

<p> sampled population tested positive through urinalysis. In
Indianapolis, </p>

<p> the figure was 35 percent; in San Diego, 35 percent; in
Denver, 34 </p>

<p> percent; in Ft. Lauderdale, 32 percent; and in Miami, 30
percent. </p>

<p> Marijuana use among recently booked female arrestees also
increased in </p>

<p> many cities. In Indianapolis, 26 percent of the female
arrestees sampled </p>

<p> tested positive for the use of marijuana; in San Diego, 25
percent; in </p>

<p> Dallas, 24 percent; in Ft. Lauderdale, 21 percent; in Denver,
19 </p>

<p> percent; and in Kansas City, 18 percent. </p>

<p> TRAFFICKING </p>

<p> Mexico accounted for most of the foreign marijuana available
in the </p>

<p> United States during 1992. Mexican marijuana is smuggled into
the </p>

<p> southwestern United States by vehicles, private aircraft,
armed </p>

<p> backpackers, and horse or mule caravans. Colombia ranks as a
distant </p>

<p> second behind Mexico as a foreign source of marijuana.
Colombian </p>

<p> marijuana is smuggled into the United States by noncommercial
vessels </p>

<p> using traditional maritime routes. Jamaican traffickers have
increased </p>

<p> marijuana shipments since January 1992. Jamaican marijuana is
smuggled </p>

<p> into the United States by private and commercial aircraft,
and maritime </p>

<p> vessels. </p>

<p> DOMESTIC CULTIVATION/ERADICATION </p>

<p> An estimated 6,000 to 6,500 metric tons of cannabis were
cultivated in </p>

<p> the United States during 1992. During that year,
approximately 3,405 </p>

<p> metric tons, representing 7.49 million cultivated plants,
were </p>

<p> eradicated. Reporting indicates that 31 percent of the
cannabis plants </p>

<p> eradicated during 1992 was sinsemilla. </p>

<p> The five major cultivated cannabis-producing States in 1992
were </p>

<p> Tennessee, Kentucky, Indiana, Illinois, and Hawaii,
respectively. These </p>

<p> States accounted for approximately 44 percent of the
cultivated cannabis </p>

<p> eradicated during 1992. Reports from Indiana and Nebraska
over the last </p>

<p> two years could signal a possible new trend in marijuana
production. The </p>

<p> two States report an increase in tended/enhanced ditchweed, a
form of </p>

<p> marijuana, which grows in the wild. Although ditchweed has
low potency, </p>

<p> it is mixed with cultivated marijuana to increase quantity. </p>

<p> There has been an increase in the cultivation of cannabis
indoors year- </p>

<p> round in elaborately supported operations that have ranged
from several </p>

<p> plants grown in closets to thousands of plants grown in
specially </p>

<p> constructed underground sites capable of producing marijuana
worth </p>

<p> millions of dollars. Growers also continued to plant cannabis
in remote </p>

<p> outdoor areas, often concealed or camouflaged by surrounding
vegetation. </p>

<p> During 1992, the 13th annual DEA-sponsored Domestic Cannabis
Eradication </p>

<p> and Suppression Program (DCE/SP) was conducted in conjunction
with other </p>

<p> Federal, State and local law enforcement authorities in 50
States. The </p>

<p> National Guard and Civil Air Patrol also participated. The
DCE/SP </p>

<p> resulted in the eradication of 7.49 million cultivated
cannabis plants, </p>

<p> 264 million low-potency ditchweed plants, the arrest of
12,369 </p>

<p> violators, and the seizure of 5,541 weapons. Moreover, the
number of </p>

<p> indoor growing operations seized in 1992 reached an all-time
high of </p>

<p> 3,849, up from 2,848 seized in 1991. Indoor cultivation
operations were </p>

<p> confiscated in all 50 States during 1992, with the greatest
number, 561, </p>

<p> seized in the State of Washington. The movement toward indoor
production </p>

<p> is believed due primarily to successful law enforcement
efforts to </p>

<p> curtail outdoor cultivation. The average indoor cultivation
operation </p>

<p> has approximately 100 plants. In addition, an average of one
weapon was </p>

<p> seized from each indoor operation. </p>

<p> In recent years, the DCE/SP has placed increasing emphasis on
the </p>

<p> investigation and prosecution of major domestic cannabis
cultivators and </p>

<p> trafficking organizations. The net result during 1992 was the
seizure of </p>

<p> assets valued at over $69.3 million, over twice the amount
seized in </p>

<p> 1989 ($29.5 million). The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
National Park </p>

<p> Service, and Bureau of Indian Affairs also have long-term
programs to </p>

<p> combat cannabis cultivation on public lands. </p>

<p> One of the major accomplishments of the DCE/SP continues to
be Hawaii's </p>

<p> Operation WIPEOUT. During 1991, it was estimated that the
program </p>

<p> eradicated approximately 85 percent of Hawaii's summer
cannabis crop. </p>

<p> During 1992, Operation WIPEOUT's continued success was
evidenced by </p>

<p> reports that mainland smugglers were attempting to smuggle
marijuana </p>

<p> into Hawaii in order to fill the vacuum. Operation WIPEOUT is
now </p>

<p> conducted as a maintenance program. Every 90 days, the
WIPEOUT teams </p>

<p> conduct aerial surveillance and eradicate what few cannabis
plants they </p>

<p> find before the plants reach maturity. More emphasis is also
being </p>

<p> placed on arresting cultivators. </p>

<p> Another major accomplishment of the DCE/SP was the successful
lobbying </p>

<p> efforts to convince the California State Government to
consider </p>

<p> herbicidal spraying as a means of eradication. To date, the
California </p>

<p> State Government continues to study the proposal. Previous
requests to </p>

<p> use herbicidal spraying in California were met with strong
resistance </p>

<p> based on environmental, as well as political, concerns.
Spraying will be </p>

<p> conducted in limited areas on a trial basis. Kansas, South
Dakota, and </p>

<p> Texas are also considering herbicidal spray programs. </p>

<p> DEA continues to conduct a special enforcement program
entitled </p>

<p> Operation GREEN MERCHANT that targets major indoor growing
operations. </p>

<p> To date, DEA, together with State and local authorities has
seized </p>

<p> nearly 4,000 growing operations, arrested over 1,500
violators, and </p>

<p> frozen millions of dollars in illicitly acquired profits and
assets. </p>

<p> METHAMPHETAMINE </p>

<p> AVAILABILITY/PRICE/PURITY </p>

<p> Methamphetamine is available in varying quantities in most
areas of the </p>

<p> United States, except for the northeastern and Mid-Atlantic
regions </p>

<p> where, for the most part, it is encountered infrequently.
Availability </p>

<p> is primarily concentrated in the western and southwestern
United States </p>

<p> where most clandestine laboratory activity occurs.
Methamphetamine is </p>

<p> also available in limited retail amounts in the Southeast and
somewhat </p>

<p> larger quantities in the Midwest. </p>

<p> The production of methamphetamine, as evidenced by the number
of </p>

<p> reported clandestine laboratory seizures to DEA, has
decreased each year </p>

<p> since 1989. During 1992, 288 methamphetamine laboratories
were seized. </p>

<p> This is in comparison to 652 laboratories seized in 1989, 429
in 1990, </p>

<p> and 315 in 1991. </p>

<p> The decrease in laboratory seizures is attributed to the
ongoing </p>

<p> enforcement of Federal and State chemical control
legislation. The 1988 </p>

<p> Chemical Diversion and Trafficking Act (CDTA) became
effective in 1989, </p>

<p> and enables the Federal Government to regulate listed
precursor and </p>

<p> essential chemicals used in the clandestine synthesis of
dangerous </p>

<p> drugs. Over the last three years, most States have passed
legislation </p>

<p> similar to the CDTA. </p>

<p> The price of methamphetamine at the wholesale (pound) level
has remained </p>

<p> relatively constant during the past four years. In 1992,
methamphetamine </p>

<p> prices ranged from $5,000 to $22,000 per pound, $300 to
$2,500 per </p>

<p> ounce, and $45 to $200 per gram. </p>

<p> Nationwide purity of methamphetamine at the ounce and gram
levels </p>

<p> averaged 46 and 53 percent, respectively, during 1992,
compared to 35 </p>

<p> and 34 percent, respectively, during 1991. (Pound-purity
levels are </p>

<p> unavailable due to infrequency of purchases at that level.) </p>

<p> USE </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1991 showed
that an </p>

<p> estimated 5.2 million Americans 12 years of age and older
have used </p>

<p> methamphetamine at least once in their lifetime. (Lifetime
prevalence </p>

<p> rates for 1985, 1988, and 1990 are not available. The
lifetime </p>

<p> prevalence rate for 1992 is not yet available. Data
concerning past- </p>

<p> year, past-month, weekly, and daily prevalence rates for
methamphetamine </p>

<p> are also unavailable.) </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number of
metropolitan area </p>

<p> methamphetamine-related emergency room episodes decreased at
a </p>

<p> relatively steady rate from the first half of FY 1989 through
the first </p>

<p> half of FY 1992. However, this downward trend reversed itself
during the </p>

<p> latter half of FY 1992. During the second half of FY 1992,
there was a </p>

<p> 52-percent increase in the number of emergency room episodes
involving </p>

<p> methamphetamine. Despite this, second-half FY 1992 emergency
room </p>

<p> episodes remained below those reported in FY 1989. </p>

<p> DAWN emergency room data indicate that methamphetamine abuse
is </p>

<p> concentrated in the metropolitan areas of San Diego, San
Francisco, and </p>

<p> Los Angeles In San Diego and Los Angeles,
methamphetamine-related </p>

<p> hospital emergencies increased sharply during the latter half
of 1992. </p>

<p> Nationally, approximately 75 percent of the patients treated
for drug </p>

<p> abuse episodes involving methamphetamine were white; nearly
65 percent </p>

<p> were male; approximately 25 percent were between 18 and 25
years of age, </p>

<p> and 40 percent were between the ages of 26 and 34. </p>

<p> Approximately 45 percent of patients treated in emergency
rooms as a </p>

<p> result of methamphetamine abuse indicated that their use of </p>

<p> methamphetamine was due to dependence. Approximately 20
percent had come </p>

<p> to the emergency room because of an overdose, approximately
30 percent </p>

<p> as a result of an unexpected reaction to the drug, and more
than 20 </p>

<p> percent came due to the chronic effects associated with
methamphetamine </p>

<p> abuse. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN also indicates that the injection of
methamphetamine </p>

<p> continues to be the predominant route of administration used
by patients </p>

<p> admitted to DAWN emergency rooms for methamphetamine-related
problems. </p>

<p> Despite this, the percentage of patients who indicated that
injection </p>

<p> was their primary method of administration decreased slightly
during the </p>

<p> past year from 38.4 percent in FY 1991 to 34.9 percent in FY
1992. </p>

<p> Moreover, there has been an increase in the percentage of
patients who </p>

<p> smoked methamphetamine during the past several years. Those
who smoked </p>

<p> methamphetamine increased from 3.9 percent during FY 1989 to
6.8 percent </p>

<p> during FY 1992. </p>

<p> ILLICIT MANUFACTURE </p>

<p> Laboratory Seizures </p>

<p> Although clandestine methamphetamine laboratory seizures
declined during </p>

<p> 1992, methamphetamine remained the most prevalent,
clandestinely </p>

<p> manufactured controlled substance in the United States.
According to DEA </p>

<p> reporting, 288 methamphetamine laboratories were seized
during 1992, </p>

<p> which accounted for 87 percent of all clandestine dangerous
drug </p>

<p> laboratory seizures. The 1992 figure represents a nine
percent decrease </p>

<p> from the previous year's total of 315 laboratories seized and
continues </p>

<p> the downward trend in laboratory seizures that began in 1990.
</p>

<p> DEA field divisions in Dallas, Denver, Los Angeles, Phoenix,
San Diego, </p>

<p> San Francisco, and Seattle, seized approximately 83 percent
of all </p>

<p> methamphetamine laboratories during 1992. This clearly
indicates that </p>

<p> the clandestine manufacture of methamphetamine is still
primarily based </p>

<p> in the western and southwestern United States. </p>

<p> Methamphetamine laboratory seizures declined from 1991 to
1992 in 14 DEA </p>

<p> field divisions including the San Francisco Division which
continued to </p>

<p> report the highest number of seizures. Sixty-seven
clandestine </p>

<p> methamphetamine laboratories were seized during 1992 by the
San </p>

<p> Francisco Division compared to 81 in 1991. However, DEA's Los
Angeles, </p>

<p> San Diego, Phoenix, Dallas, and St. Louis offices reported an
increase </p>

<p> in the number of laboratories seized within their respective
areas. </p>

<p> Clandestine laboratories have been seized from every
imaginable location </p>

<p> from suburban homes, garages, apartments, mobile trailers,
urban </p>

<p> dwellings, and industrial areas to specially-designed
underground </p>

<p> vaults. The laboratories have been camouflaged,
booby-trapped, buried </p>

<p> underground, conveyed, and abandoned. </p>

<p> Laboratory Operations </p>

<p> Laboratories are usually constructed in very rural areas
across the </p>

<p> United States; however, an increasing number of small
laboratories are </p>

<p> being located in urban and suburban neighborhoods where they
pose a </p>

<p> significant threat to health and safety. Not only are
methamphetamine </p>

<p> laboratories used to produce an illegal, often deadly drug,
but they </p>

<p> have caused explosions, fires, and toxic fumes. Chemicals
associated </p>

<p> with clandestine laboratories have proven to be environmental
pollutants </p>

<p> and health hazards. </p>

<p> Clandestine laboratories are usually operated on an irregular
basis </p>

<p> rather than on a regular schedule. Operators often produce a
batch of </p>

<p> methamphetamine then disassemble the laboratory and store it
or move it </p>

<p> to another location while they acquire additional chemicals.
Storage </p>

<p> facilities are often utilized to house (safeguard) chemicals,
glassware, </p>

<p> and the finished product. An operator will often utilize
different </p>

<p> locations to manufacture methamphetamine. Therefore, it is
not uncommon </p>

<p> for an organization to have multiple laboratory sites.
Relocating the </p>

<p> laboratory affords some protection against detection by law
enforcement </p>

<p> authorities. </p>

<p> Clandestine laboratory operators are often well-armed, and
their </p>

<p> laboratories are occasionally booby-trapped as a security
precaution. </p>

<p> Numerous weapons, including explosives, are routinely
confiscated in </p>

<p> conjunction with clandestine laboratory seizures. Public
safety, and </p>

<p> environmental concerns are of little importance to illicit
drug </p>

<p> laboratory operators. Every year, a number of clandestine
laboratories </p>

<p> experience fires or explosions which lead to their discovery.
Laboratory </p>

<p> operators often waste essential chemicals as they attempt to
synthesize </p>

<p> a high-quality batch of finished product. They usually
dispose of these </p>

<p> and other hazardous chemical wastes by unsafe and illegal
methods, often </p>

<p> dumping these wastes on the ground or in nearby streams and
lakes, </p>

<p> pouring them into local sewage systems, or burying them
underground. </p>

<p> Individuals who synthesize methamphetamine are commonly
referred to as </p>

<p> &quot;chemists&quot; or &quot;cooks.&quot; This level of
education and knowledge of </p>

<p> chemistry can vary from high school dropouts with no real
chemical </p>

<p> knowledge to professional chemists with graduate degrees in
chemistry. </p>

<p> These &quot;cooks&quot; most typically have very little
formal training; rather, </p>

<p> they frequently follow a handwritten recipe or have learned
to </p>

<p> synthesize methamphetamine from underground publications, </p>

<p> apprenticeships, or during incarceration. There are, however,
a number </p>

<p> of &quot;chemists&quot; that are fairly adept or
knowledgeable with regard to </p>

<p> synthesizing methamphetamine. These individuals utilize
chemicals more </p>

<p> efficiently, thus increasing the yield ratio of chemicals to
finished </p>

<p> product. In addition, the &quot;chemist&quot; has the
proficiency to solve </p>

<p> problems which may occur during the manufacturing process.
This is in </p>

<p> contrast to operators who simply follow a recipe and who are
generally </p>

<p> unqualified to perform corrective measures. </p>

<p> MANUFACTURING METHODOLOGIES </p>

<p> Although the manufacture of methamphetamine can be
accomplished by a </p>

<p> variety of chemical synthesis methods, it is most commonly
produced </p>

<p> using the phenyl-2-propanone (P2P) or ephedrine reduction
routes of </p>

<p> synthesis. The ephedrine reduction method was once most often
used in </p>

<p> clandestine laboratories located in California, and has since
become </p>

<p> widespread throughout much of the United States. It is
preferred over </p>

<p> the P2P method of methamphetamine production for three
reasons. First, </p>

<p> it is a simpler route of synthesis; second, the effects of
the resulting </p>

<p> product are more pronounced; and, third, ephedrine is more
readily </p>

<p> available to clandestine laboratories in California and in
the </p>

<p> Southwest. </p>

<p> A relatively new and simple procedure to synthesize
methamphetamine has </p>

<p> been noted using a variation of the ephedrine reduction
method. The </p>

<p> process is being called a &quot;cold cook&quot; method on the
streets because an </p>

<p> external heat source is not required for the synthesis to
proceed. The </p>

<p> method uses commonly available material and chemicals to
manufacture </p>

<p> between one to two ounces of methamphetamine per batch. The
process is </p>

<p> commonly performed in such readily available containers as
two 32-ounce </p>

<p> sports drinking bottles, insulated coffee cups, mugs, or in
modified </p>

<p> laboratory glassware. </p>

<p> CHEMICAL DIVERSION </p>

<p> Integral to the manufacture of illicit methamphetamine are
the chemicals </p>

<p> and equipment necessary to operate a clandestine laboratory.
Whether the </p>

<p> phenyl-2-propanone, ephedrine reduction, or other method of
synthesis is </p>

<p> used, various combinations of chemicals, glassware, and
equipment are </p>

<p> required. The acquisition of chemicals is, therefore, a vital
and </p>

<p> readily identifiable component of the illicit trafficking
cycle. </p>

<p> Chemical control legislation enacted at the Federal and State
level has </p>

<p> made it increasingly difficult for operators to obtain needed
chemicals. </p>

<p> Consequently, trafficking organizations are constantly
seeking new </p>

<p> sources and developing ways in which to circumvent the law.
They </p>

<p> manufacture some of their own chemicals, utilize
&quot;runners&quot; to purchase </p>

<p> necessary chemicals under threshold amounts, and experiment
with </p>

<p> alternate, non-regulated chemicals. Laboratory operators
obtain </p>

<p> regulated chemicals, such as ephedrine, by purchasing
over-the-counter </p>

<p> products which are exempt from the provisions of the CDTA.
Chemicals are </p>

<p> also acquired from &quot;rogue&quot; chemical companies or in
States which have </p>

<p> less restrictive chemical laws or in such countries as Mexico
and </p>

<p> Canada. </p>

<p> MANUFACTURlNG/DISTRIBUTION ORGANIZATIONS </p>

<p> Methamphetamine manufacturing/distribution operations vary
greatly in </p>

<p> size, structure, and degree of sophistication. Some
laboratory operators </p>

<p> act as their own chemists; others hire chemists to run the
laboratories </p>

<p> for them. Many manufacturers are independent producers who
cook for </p>

<p> various organized groups. This is particularly true of larger
</p>

<p> organizations which may hire or contract chemists to
manufacture </p>

<p> methamphetamine in return for cash, finished product, or a
combination </p>

<p> of the two. Other cooks manufacture for themselves rather
than for a </p>

<p> particular organization. Leasing storage facilities,
procuring </p>

<p> chemicals, securing the laboratory site, and setting up
glassware and </p>

<p> equipment may be the responsibility of one person or many
different </p>

<p> individuals. Several individuals may simply work together to
combine </p>

<p> their expertise, chemicals, etc., on an ad hoc basis. The
number of </p>

<p> individuals which comprise an operation and the function each
performs </p>

<p> differs from one organization to the next. </p>

<p> Throughout the United States, numerous individuals, groups,
and </p>

<p> organizations from independent entrepreneurs and outlaw
motorcycle gangs </p>

<p> to Mexican poly-drug trafficking organizations currently
manufacture and </p>

<p> distribute methamphetamine. Nationally, independent
entrepreneurs </p>

<p> represent the largest identifiable group involved in
methamphetamine- </p>

<p> related investigations. To a lesser degree, outlaw motorcycle
gangs </p>

<p> continue to play a role in the distribution aspect and
influence </p>

<p> production in certain areas. They most typically insulate
themselves by </p>

<p> financing manufacturing operations rather than becoming
directly </p>

<p> involved themselves. </p>

<p> The most noteworthy trend in recent years is currently taking
place in </p>

<p> California where Mexican traffickers dominate the large-scale
production </p>

<p> and distribution of methamphetamine in the San Diego,
Riverside, San </p>

<p> Bernadino, and Fresno areas. In fact, the high volume of
methamphetamine </p>

<p> manufactured and distributed is the distinguishing
characteristic of </p>

<p> Mexican traffickers involved in dangerous drug production. </p>

<p> Numerous 22-liter setups are frequently utilized in
laboratories </p>

<p> operated by Mexican traffickers to produce an average of 20
to 80 pounds </p>

<p> during each manufacturing process. Traffickers set up
laboratories or </p>

<p> &quot;cooks&quot; in very remote areas throughout southern
and parts of northern </p>

<p> California Organizations may purchase property or pay for the
short-term </p>

<p> use of a site in order to acquire a secure manufacturing
location. An </p>

<p> organization may utilize one location multiple times. </p>

<p> Mexican illegal aliens are most frequently encountered at
these </p>

<p> laboratory sites. In some cases, they are hired as helpers or
to </p>

<p> maintain the reaction process, while the actual chemist
visits </p>

<p> periodically to ensure the operation is functioning properly.
In other </p>

<p> cases, Mexican illegal aliens are responsible for all facets
of the </p>

<p> manufacturing process. Chemicals are generally stored in
stash houses </p>

<p> and brought to the laboratory site on a limited basis. The
amount of </p>

<p> chemicals present at the laboratory is usually restricted to
what is </p>

<p> required to complete a particular cook. </p>

<p> Chemicals are procured for these laboratories from sources in
the United </p>

<p> States and Mexico. Chemical brokers recruit runners to make
purchases at </p>

<p> rogue chemical companies. Additionally, ephedrine, a
precursor for </p>

<p> methamphetamine, is easily accessible to Mexican traffickers;
the </p>

<p> chemical is currently shipped, without restriction, from
Germany to </p>

<p> Mexico and subsequently smuggled across the United
States-Mexican border </p>

<p> in privately owned vehicles. Moreover, brokers supply
chemicals to </p>

<p> numerous manufacturing organizations. Organizations assist
each other in </p>

<p> obtaining chemicals and glassware. A certain amount of
cooperation </p>

<p> exists among many of these organizations; links between these
groups </p>

<p> were already established through their long-standing cocaine,
heroin, </p>

<p> and marijuana connections. </p>

<p> There are indications that groups which previously
manufactured </p>

<p> methamphetamine are now finding it more cost effective to
purchase it </p>

<p> from Mexican sources. In addition, there is limited evidence
to suggest </p>

<p> that Mexican traffickers may be attempting to expand their
operations to </p>

<p> other areas of the country. There are also indications that </p>

<p> methamphetamine is currently being manufactured in Mexico and
</p>

<p> subsequently smuggled into the United States. </p>

<p> SOURCE AREAS </p>

<p> California is a primary source for methamphetamine in many
areas </p>

<p> throughout the United States. However, the manner in which
manufacturing </p>

<p> operations are carried out often makes it difficult to
determine the </p>

<p> origin of the source of supply. Operators manufacturing in a
particular </p>

<p> area may distribute the finished product to associates
residing locally, </p>

<p> in neighboring States, or in other geographic areas.
Privately owned </p>

<p> vehicles are the modes of transportation used most frequently
in the </p>

<p> nationwide distribution of methamphetamine. </p>

<p> LSD </p>

<p> AVAILABILITY/PRICE/POTENCY </p>

<p> DEA reporting indicates that LSD (Iysergic acid diethylamide)
is </p>

<p> available in at least retail quantities in virtually every
State in the </p>

<p> United States and that availability is increasing in a number
of States. </p>

<p> Reporting also indicates that an increasing number of
individuals or </p>

<p> groups are manufacturing and distributing or attempting to
manufacture </p>

<p> and distribute LSD in the United States. In the last two
years, DEA </p>

<p> seized or purchased LSD in 33 States and Washington, D.C. LSD
</p>

<p> availability has been reported by either DEA offices or State
and local </p>

<p> police authorities in many of the remaining 17 States.
Northern </p>

<p> California appears to be the source of supply for most of the
LSD </p>

<p> available in the United States. </p>

<p> LSD is available in several forms, including blotter paper,
tablets, </p>

<p> gelatin, sugar cubes, and liquid. Tablets can be purchased in
several </p>

<p> areas, however, most of the retail doses are in the
blotter-paper form. </p>

<p> Microdots are available in California, Illinois, Indiana,
Michigan, New </p>

<p> Jersey, and Vermont. Gelatin in the &quot;windowpane&quot;
variety has been </p>

<p> reported in Michigan and sugar cubes are available in
Colorado and the </p>

<p> Washington, D.C., area. Personal-use doses of liquid LSD in
vials have </p>

<p> also been reported in Colorado, Illinois, New York, and West
Virginia. </p>

<p> LSD is relatively inexpensive. The average price is
approximately five </p>

<p> dollars per retail dosage unit and costs less than one dollar
per dosage </p>

<p> unit in wholesale lots of 1,000 dosage units or more. When
compared with </p>

<p> marijuana, which sells for $40 to $450 per ounce, LSD is
perceived by </p>

<p> many drug users as a bargain, especially if one considers the
duration </p>

<p> of its effects which can persist for up to 12 hours in higher
doses. </p>

<p> Although there has been some fluctuation in the price of LSD
nationally </p>

<p> during the past several years, overall prices remain
relatively low. </p>

<p> LSD potency or strength is measured in micrograms. In the
1960's and </p>

<p> early 1970's, LSD potency generally ranged from 100 to 200
micrograms </p>

<p> per dosage unit or higher. Analysis of exhibits during the
late 1970's </p>

<p> indicated an average potency in the 30- to 50-microgram
range. From the </p>

<p> mid-1980's to the present, LSD potency has remained
considerably below </p>

<p> levels reported during the 1960's and early 1970's and has
generally </p>

<p> been in the range of 20 to 80 micrograms per dosage unit. As
a result of </p>

<p> this comparatively low dosage level, many users perceive LSD
as &quot;safe,&quot; </p>

<p> thus enhancing the drug's attractiveness. </p>

<p> USE </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse data for LSD are
limited to </p>

<p> estimates of lifetime use, defined as the use of LSD at least
once in a </p>

<p> person's lifetime. During 1991, 11.8 million Americans, 12
years of age </p>

<p> and older, reported having used LSD at least once compared to
8.4 </p>

<p> million in 1985, an increase of 40 percent. The data reveal
two </p>

<p> significant expansions in the number of lifetime users of
LSD; one </p>

<p> expansion occurred from 1985 to 1988 and the other from 1990
to 1991. </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National High School Survey on Drug
Abuse, past </p>

<p> year use of LSD among seniors in the class of 1992 increased
to the </p>

<p> highest level since at least 1985. Current (monthly) use of
LSD among </p>

<p> 10th and 12th grade students remained relatively stable from
1991 to </p>

<p> 1992. Among 8th graders, however, current use of LSD
increased during </p>

<p> that same time frame from 0.6 percent to 0.9 percent.
Moreover, past- </p>

<p> year use of LSD rose in all three grade levels from 1991 to
1992. </p>

<p> DAWN reports indicate that the estimated number of nationwide
LSD- </p>

<p> related hospital emergency room episodes increased from FY
1989 to FY </p>

<p> 1990. Although abuse patterns have been somewhat erratic
since that </p>

<p> period, the current number of LSD-related episodes remain
above those </p>

<p> reported during FY 1989. </p>

<p> ILLICIT MANUFACTURE AND TRAFFICKING </p>

<p> A total of six clandestine synthesis LSD laboratories have
been seized </p>

<p> since 1981; however, these were all seized prior to 1987. </p>

<p> LSD producers fall into two groups. The first is composed of
chemists, </p>

<p> manufacturers, and distributors, located in northern
California, who </p>

<p> work together in close association; they are normally major </p>

<p> manufacturers capable of distributing LSD nationwide. The
second group </p>

<p> of producers work independently. The independent producers
are </p>

<p> encountered in almost any part of the country, however, their
product is </p>

<p> intended for local consumption only. </p>

<p> Wholesale LSD trafficking patterns are not well understood;
however, </p>

<p> three theoretical models have been developed, which outline </p>

<p> organizational structures, production methods, and
trafficking patterns. </p>

<p> These theoretical models may help to explain how clandestine
LSD </p>

<p> activity occurs. Law enforcement officials call these
organizational </p>

<p> patterns: the Independent Entrepreneurial Model, the
Inner/Outer Circle </p>

<p> Group Model, and the Association Model. </p>

<p> The Independent Entrepreneurial Model: A number of law
enforcement </p>

<p> officials believe some LSD manufacturers and distributors,
who are not </p>

<p> part of the northern California group, entered the market due
to </p>

<p> increased demand and the opportunity for high returns on a
small </p>

<p> investment. Examples of this type of loosely-structured
organization </p>

<p> have been noted in cases in Austin, Texas; New Orleans,
Louisiana; </p>

<p> Hartford, Connecticut; and Denver and Boulder, Colorado. The
common </p>

<p> feature in each of these cases was an individual or a small
group of </p>

<p> individuals who manufactured LSD independently from any
California </p>

<p> source of supply. Some entrepreneurs who have manufactured or
have </p>

<p> attempted to manufacture LSD have been known to law
enforcement </p>

<p> officials for years; however, the number of independent
traffickers </p>

<p> appears to have increased recently. </p>

<p> The Inner Circle/Outer Circle or Single Group Model: This
model is </p>

<p> thought to be organized under one close-knit group, the inner
circle, </p>

<p> which controls the vast majority of LSD manufacturing and
distribution </p>

<p> in the United States. The inner circle is probably composed
of five to </p>

<p> 10 principal individuals who possess specialized functions.
These </p>

<p> specialists would include chemists, bulk storage custodians, </p>

<p> financial/transportation specialists, and executives who
manage overall </p>

<p> operations. The inner circle controls the means of
manufacture; they </p>

<p> assemble, operate, disassemble, and store laboratory
equipment; and keep </p>

<p> a reserve amount of LSD on hand for distribution. They sell
from 10- to </p>

<p> 200-gram lots to a limited number of multigram distributors.
This inner </p>

<p> circle presumably accrues multimillion-dollar profits and
only conducts </p>

<p> business with the next level of distribution referred to as
the &quot;outer </p>

<p> circle.&quot; </p>

<p> The outer circle consists of multigram distributors who
supply a number </p>

<p> of teams, groups, or individuals. They sell LSD at $1,000 to
$3,000 per </p>

<p> gram and accrue an estimated $300,000 to $600,000 per year. </p>

<p> Close Association Model (An alternative theory to the Inner
Circle/Outer </p>

<p> Circle or Single Group Model): In this model, a small group
of people </p>

<p> located in northern California, who have known each other for
over two </p>

<p> decades, control the manufacture and distribution of LSD.
However, in </p>

<p> contrast with the Inner Circle/Outer Circle theory, these
people do not </p>

<p> work in one structured organization. They come together, as
necessary, </p>

<p> to acquire chemists, chemicals, working capital, etc. They
work as </p>

<p> consultants or advisors to each other in order to meet their
common goal </p>

<p> of producing and distributing LSD. They may work together as
a unit to </p>

<p> prepare and distribute one batch of LSD, but after that is
accomplished, </p>

<p> they leave the association until another opportunity arises.
They have </p>

<p> strong loyalty to each other and are living comfortably, but
they are </p>

<p> not thought to be motivated primarily by profit. </p>

<p> DISTRIBUTION </p>

<p> Lower-level distribution of LSD usually occurs in three ways.
First, an </p>

<p> individual attends a rock concert, meets a source of supply,
and </p>

<p> exchanges telephone numbers with the source of supply.
Normally, these </p>

<p> purchases are for retail quantities of up to 100 doses.
Second, if this </p>

<p> individual decides to continue distributing, he/she would
then call the </p>

<p> source for additional amounts. Usually the source has either
continued </p>

<p> on the concert tour or has returned home, which is frequently
northern </p>

<p> California. If the source intends to stay on the tour-making
subsequent </p>

<p> communication difficult-the source provides the telephone
number of an </p>

<p> associate for future orders. After the initial purchase,
almost all </p>

<p> transactions are made via the public and private mail
systems. Payments </p>

<p> to a source of supply are usually made through legitimate
money wiring </p>

<p> services. Third, some dealers travel directly to California
to meet </p>

<p> their sources of supply. </p>

<p> Reporting indicates that shipment methods used to transport
both large </p>

<p> and small quantities of LSD are often similar. LSD is
frequently </p>

<p> concealed in greeting cards, in cassette tapes, or in
articles of </p>

<p> clothing that are mailed to a post office box established by
the </p>

<p> recipient. This post office box is usually listed under a
fictitious </p>

<p> name or business. Normally, no return address is provided on
the package </p>

<p> or envelope. Moreover, it is suspected that some multigram
distributors </p>

<p> will travel to their source in order to obtain supplies. </p>

<p> Retail or user level quantities range from one- to 10-dosage
units. Low- </p>

<p> level distributors sell 50- to 100-dosage-unit quantities.
Mid-level </p>

<p> distributors sell 1,000-dosage-unit quantities as well as
multiples of </p>

<p> 1,000 units. These distributors normally have more than one
source of </p>

<p> supply and sell to several lower-level dealers. The sources
of supply </p>

<p> for gram-distributors are in all likelihood located in
northern </p>

<p> California. These sources normally convert LSD from powder or
liquid </p>

<p> form to blotter form. Multigram distributors travel to
California to </p>

<p> obtain LSD personally and are in association with numerous
lower-level </p>

<p> dealers. </p>

<p> PCP </p>

<p> AVAILABILITY/PRICE </p>

<p> Phencyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, is available in
varying </p>

<p> degrees in a limited number of U.S. cities, primarily
Baltimore, </p>

<p> Chicago, Los Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia, San
Francisco, and </p>

<p> Washington, D.C. During 1992, PCP in liquid form, the most
common form </p>

<p> available in the United States, sold for $150 to $1,000 per
ounce </p>

<p> nationally. The lowest liquid-ounce prices were reported in
Los Angeles, </p>

<p> the source for most of the PCP trafficked in the United
States, where </p>

<p> such quantities sold for $150 to $300. Nationwide, the price
for PCP in </p>

<p> powdered form ranged from $400 to $2,000 per ounce. During
1992, the </p>

<p> price for a gallon of PCP ranged from $3,000 to $10,000 in
Los Angeles </p>

<p> and up to $13,000 in New York City. Individual cigarettes
saturated with </p>

<p> PCP sold for between $5 dollars and $70 nationwide. </p>

<p> USE </p>

<p> PCP is sold on the street under numerous names including:
Angel Dust, </p>

<p> Crystal, Supergrass, Killer Joints, Ozone, Wack, Embalming
Fluid, and </p>

<p> Rocket Fuel. These names reflect the range of its bizarre and
volatile </p>

<p> effects. The liquid form of PCP is the most commonly
encountered, but it </p>

<p> is also sold in tablets, capsules, and as a powder. PCP is
typically </p>

<p> applied to a leafy material such as mint, parsley, oregano,
or </p>

<p> marijuana, and then smoked. PCP has been used to adulterate </p>

<p> commercially-manufactured cigarettes, usually by dipping them
in liquid </p>

<p> PCP, which is PCP dissolved in ether. The most popular
commercial </p>

<p> cigarettes are dark paper-wrapped brands such as Shermans or
Tijuana </p>

<p> Smalls. PCP can also be injected hypodermically into
cigarettes. </p>

<p> In 1957, PCP was developed as a human anesthetic and later
used in </p>

<p> veterinary medicine as a powerful tranquilizer. In 1965,
medical use for </p>

<p> humans was discontinued because of adverse side effects such
as </p>

<p> confusion and delirium. In 1978, its commercial manufacture
was </p>

<p> discontinued and PCP was transferred from Schedule III to
Schedule II of </p>

<p> the Controlled Substances Act, thus classifying it as a drug
with a high </p>

<p> potential for abuse. </p>

<p> PCP enjoyed a brief popularity in the late 1960's when it was
trafficked </p>

<p> as a &quot;Magic Peace Pill.&quot; Abuse of the drug
resurfaced from the mid-to- </p>

<p> late 1970's because of low price and powerful effects. From
the period </p>

<p> 1981 through 1985, abuse of the drug escalated significantly,
</p>

<p> particularly among persons under the age of 21. Cities which
experienced </p>

<p> significant PCP availability and abuse levels in the
early-to-mid-1980's </p>

<p> included Baltimore, Chicago, Detroit, Los Angeles, New
Orleans, New York </p>

<p> City, San Diego, San Francisco, St. Louis, and Washington,
D.C. </p>

<p> Around 1986, and continuing through the early 1990's, demand
for PCP was </p>

<p> displaced in large measure by the widespread availability and
use of </p>

<p> crack cocaine. More recently, however, there are indications
that PCP </p>

<p> abuse is increasing once again in a number of cities. </p>

<p> The National Household Survey on Drug Abuse showed that
lifetime and </p>

<p> past-year PCP use among the U.S. household population
decreased from </p>

<p> 1985 to 1990; however, 1991 and 1992 survey data indicate an
end to this </p>

<p> downward use pattern. From 1990 to 1992, the number of
Americans aged 12 </p>

<p> years and older, who used PCP at least once, increased from
six million </p>

<p> to 8.2 million, while the number who had used PCP in the past
year </p>

<p> increased from 307,000 to 467,000. Nevertheless, the number
of past-year </p>

<p> users in 1992 remained significantly below the number
reported in 1985 </p>

<p> when approximately 1.2 million Americans reported using PCP
at least </p>

<p> once yearly. </p>

<p> According to the 1992 National High School Senior Survey on
Drug Abuse, </p>

<p> PCP use among 12th graders has declined significantly during
the past </p>

<p> seven years. From 1985 to 1992, the percentage of seniors who
used PCP </p>

<p> at least once in their lifetime decreased from 4.9 percent to
2.4 </p>

<p> percent. Comparable declines were also reported during that
same period </p>

<p> in the percentage of seniors who used PCP during the past
year and past </p>

<p> month as well as on a daily basis. This diminished use is
believed to be </p>

<p> due in large part to a significant increase among 12th
graders in the </p>

<p> perceived risk of harm associated with PCP usage. </p>

<p> Reporting from DAWN shows that the estimated number of
metropolitan-area </p>

<p> PCP-related emergency room episodes, which had been declining
at a </p>

<p> substantial rate during the past three years, rose from 1,353
during the </p>

<p> first half of FY 1992 to 2,380 during the second half of FY
1992, more </p>

<p> than a 75-percent increase. Cities having high or increased
PCP abuse </p>

<p> rates during the second half of FY 1992 included Baltimore,
Chicago, Los </p>

<p> Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and
Washington, </p>

<p> D.C. </p>

<p> TRAFFICKING AND ILLICIT MANUFACTURE </p>

<p> Reporting indicates that the majority of the nation's PCP
supply is </p>

<p> manufactured and distributed by Los Angeles-based street
gangs. While </p>

<p> buses, trains, and airlines are used to transport PCP from
California </p>

<p> sources of supply, private automobiles are believed to be the
primary </p>

<p> means for transporting PCP across the country. Female
couriers are used </p>

<p> very frequently and the amounts transported generally range
from one to </p>

<p> two quarts. PCP traffickers also use the U.S. mail system and
express </p>

<p> delivery services to transport PCP. </p>

<p> Four PCP laboratories were seized in 1992 compared to three
in 1991. Two </p>

<p> of the 1992 seizures were in northern California and one each
near </p>

<p> Chicago and Philadelphia. PCP laboratory seizures since the
mid-1980's </p>

<p> have ranged from three to 21 per year, totals which are
considerably </p>

<p> less than the high of 79 reported in 1978. No PCP
laboratories have been </p>

<p> seized thus far in 1993. </p>

<p> APPENDIX </p>

<p> The NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY ON DRUG ABUSE, sponsored by the
Substance </p>

<p> Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), is
a series of </p>

<p> national surveys to measure the prevalence and frequency of
drug use </p>

<p> among the U.S. household population aged 12 and over. The
survey samples </p>

<p> the civilian non-institutionalized population living in
households, </p>

<p> college dormitories, and military installations and,
therefore, does not </p>

<p> include some segments of the U.S. population which may
contain a </p>

<p> substantial proportion of drug users, such as transients and
those who </p>

<p> are incarcerated. The SAMHSA publishes survey results on an
annual </p>

<p> basis. </p>

<p> The NATIONAL HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR SURVEY is a series of
nationwide studies </p>

<p> of drug use frequency and related attitudes among high school
seniors in </p>

<p> the United States. The survey is conducted annually by the
University of </p>

<p> Michigan's Institute for Social Research and funded by
research grants </p>

<p> from the SAMHSA. In addition to high school seniors, the
study includes </p>

<p> the recently-added national surveys of 8th and 10th grade
students. For </p>

<p> the 1992 survey, approximately 50,000 8th-, 10th-, and
12th-grade </p>

<p> students across the country were questioned. </p>

<p> The DRUG ABUSE WARNING NETWORK (DAWN) is a large-scale data
collection </p>

<p> system implemented in 1972 and designed to be an indicator of
the </p>

<p> severity, scope, and nature of the nation's substance abuse
problem. The </p>

<p> purpose of DAWN is to provide data on the incidence of drug
abuse </p>

<p> related episodes from participating hospital emergency rooms
located in </p>

<p> 21 U.S. metropolitan areas. DAWN is managed by the SAMHSA. </p>

<p> The NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF JUSTICE (NIJ) established the Drug
Use </p>

<p> Forecasting Program (DUF) in 1987 to identify and monitor
trends in drug </p>

<p> use among arrestees in the United States. Each quarter, at
central </p>

<p> booking facilities in 24 participating jurisdictions,
arrestees are </p>

<p> asked to participate in a voluntary, anonymous interview and
to provide </p>

<p> a urine specimen. Urine samples are analyzed to detect the
use of </p>

<p> cocaine, opiates, marijuana, PCP, methadone, benzodiazines
(such as </p>

<p> Valium), methaqualone, propoxyphene (such as Darvon),
barbiturates, and </p>

<p> amphetamines. The results of the urinalysis testing are
published by the </p>

<p> NIJ on a quarterly and annual basis. </p>

<p> DISTRIBUTION </p>

<p> The White House </p>

<p> National Security Council </p>

<p> Office of National Drug Control Policy </p>

<p> Department of Justice </p>

<p> Federal Bureau of Investigation/DlU </p>

<p> Federal Bureau of Prisons </p>

<p> Immigration and Naturalization Service </p>

<p> INTERPOL/USNCB </p>

<p> Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces </p>

<p> U.S. Marshals Service </p>

<p> Department of the Treasury </p>

<p> Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms </p>

<p> Internal Revenue Service </p>

<p> U.S. Customs Service </p>

<p> U.S. Secret Service </p>

<p> Department of Defense </p>

<p> Defense Intelligence Agency </p>

<p> National Security Agency </p>

<p> Central Intelligence Agency/CNC </p>

<p> Department of State </p>

<p> U.S. Coast Guard </p>

<p> DEA Headquarters, DEA Field Offices, DEA Laboratories </p>

<p> El Paso Intelligence Center </p>

<p> Financial Crimes Enforcement Network </p>

<p> National Drug Intelligence Center </p>

<p> International Association of Chiefs of Police (Narcotics
Committee) </p>

<p> National Alliance of State Drug Enforcement Agencies </p>

<p> National Sheriffs' Association </p>

<p> [NOTE: The published report from which this information was
input </p>

<p> includes additional text and accompanying tables and
figures.] <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>