
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B09-193</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA007-000075-B040-42</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/resources/uncsdfeb.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222071544 text/html 28902
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:16:04 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 28730
Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:08 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD><BODY bgcolor="#ffffff" TEXT="#000000">
<TITLE> UNCSD Secretary General's Report on Chapter 13, Feb 1997
 </TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY><CENTER> <b><h1>UNCSD Secretary General's Report on Chapter 13, Feb 1997</H1></B></CENTER><p>




*****************************************************<br>
This document has been posted online by the United Nations
Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development
(DPCSD).  Reproduction and dissemination of the document - in
electronic and/or printed format - is encouraged, provided
acknowledgment is made of the role of the United Nations in making
it available.<br>
*****************************************************<p>

                     <CENTER>      ADVANCED UNEDITED COPY</CENTER>
                    <CENTER>     MANAGING FRAGILE ECOSYSTEMS:</CENTER> 
                   <CENTER> SUSTAINABLE MOUNTAIN DEVELOPMENT  1/</CENTER>
                       <CENTER> Report of the Secretary-General</CENTER><p>


           <CENTER>            CONTENTS  </CENTER>    

                            <CENTER>          Paragraphs Page</CENTER><p>


<TABLE>
    <TR><TH> I.    KEY OBJECTIVES         </TH>                      <TH>     1 -
2    <TH>  2</TH></TR>

    <TH>  II.   SUCCESSES
</TH><TH>3 - 9 </TH>   <TH> 2</TH></TR>

     <TH> III.  PROMISING CHANGES            </TH>            <TH>   10 - 16</TH><TH>
5  </TH>   </TR>

   <TH>   IV.   UNFULFILLED EXPECTATIONS   </TH>       <TH>  17 - 20    </TH><TH>7</TH></TR>

     <TH> V.    EMERGING PRIORITIES   </TH>                       <TH> 21 - 31</TH><TH>
8</TH></TR>
</TABLE><p>
          
<CENTER>                   I.  KEY OBJECTIVES</CENTER><P>

1.    This report focuses on a limited number of key objectives of
chapter 13 of Agenda 21, including those which are considered the
most relevant in the post-UNCED context and which have been
identified as "priority concerns" in chapter 13 follow-up. These
objectives are related to Programme Area A: Generating and
strengthening knowledge about the ecology and sustainable
development of mountain ecosystems; and Programme Area B:
Promoting integrated watershed development and alternative
livelihood opportunities. The two areas are often dealt with
together in the framework of an integrated ecosystems approach to
sustainable mountain development.  However, key objectives dealt
with in this report go beyond those identified in these two
programme areas of chapter 13 and include new themes which have
come to light more recently.<P>

2.    More specifically, chapter 13 focuses mainly on the
following objectives:<P>

      (a) Raising awareness of the importance of and improving
understanding of sustainable mountain development issues at
global, regional and national levels;<BR>
      (b) Protecting natural resources and developing technical
and institutional arrangements for natural disaster reduction;<BR>
      (c) Strengthening a global information network and database
for organizations, governments and individuals concerned with
mountain issues;<BR>
      (d) Strengthening country capacity to improve planning,
implementation and monitoring of sustainable mountain development
programmes and activities;<BR>
      (e) Combating poverty through the promotion of sustainable
income-generating activities and improvement of infrastructure and
social services, in particular to protect the livelihood of local
communities and indigenous people; and <BR>
      (f) Formulating and negotiating regional or sub-regional
mountain conventions and possibly developing a global mountain
charter.<P>


                          <CENTER>      II. SUCCESSES</CENTER><p>


3.      As thinking about sustainable mountain development has
evolved over the five years since Rio, the issues raised in
chapter 13 (which is often referred to as the "Mountain Agenda")
have expanded beyond the original themes of the chapter to
include, for example, new emphasis on conservation, culture,
sacred values and landscape diversity. The element of spirituality
surrounding mountains and the often special relationship between
mountain peoples and the land they live on and care for has gained
greater recognition over recent years and has become an essential
driving force in the movement to conserve mountain environments
and cultures. Recently, especially in Africa, the contribution of
mountain ranges to water resource flows, and more specifically in
the chain linking water to food security, has been highlighted.
There is also increasing recognition of the importance of mountain
areas in terms of biodiversity conservation, economic potential
and protection of downstream interests. This has led to a greater
willingness to address development and conservation needs through
investment programmes in areas that have traditionally been
neglected in national level development planning.<p>

4.  Progress has been made in creating greater awareness of the
"Mountain Agenda" and improving coordination of efforts to protect
fragile mountain ecosystems and promote sustainable mountain
development. This has been achieved largely as a result of the
international and regional intergovernmental and non-governmental
organization (NGO) consultations which have provided focus on key
mountain issues and led to recommendations relevant at both global
and regional levels. Regional intergovernmental consultations have
been held for Asia (1994), Latin America (1995), Europe (two
sessions, 1996) and Africa (1996); a regional NGO consultation was
also held for Europe (1996). Other important meetings include the
International NGO Consultation on the Mountain Agenda held in
Lima, Peru in February 1995, and other regional, sub-regional and
national initiatives such as the Second International Symposium on
"Sustainable Mountain Development: Managing Fragile Ecosystems in
the Andes" (Bolivia, 1995); the International Symposium
"Karakorum-Hindukush-Himalaya: Dynamics of Change" (Pakistan,
1995); the International Symposium on Agricultural Development in
Mountain and Hill Areas (China, 1996); Rwenzori mountains
conference (Uganda, 1996); and the International Conference on
"Ecohydrology of High Mountain Areas" (Nepal, 1996). In addition,
awareness of the importance of transboundary cooperation in
mountain protected areas has been increased as a result of the
Transboundary Mountain Protected Area Workshop held in Australia
in 1995.<p>


5.  New institutional arrangements at global and regional level
have also contributed to progress in achieving and improving
communications networking and in providing an information
clearing-house function. This has been achieved in part through
the creation in 1995 of the Mountain Forum, a network of
organizations and institutions with a shared interest in
sustainable mountain development. With major financial support
provided by the Swiss Government, the Mountain Forum operates
primarily as a decentralized structure with regional focal points
established to coordinate networking activities. The Consortium
for the Sustainable Development of the Andean Ecoregion (CONDESAN)
convened by the International Potato Center (CIP), a member of the
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR),
has been selected as the focal point for Latin America and the
Caribbean. The International Centre for Integrated Mountain
Development (ICIMOD) is coordinating networking in Asia and the
Pacific, both at the regional level, through the Asia Pacific
Mountain Network, and at the sub-regional level since
establishment of the North and Central Asia Mountain Network.
Together with The Mountain Institute, these organizations make up
the Mountain Forum's Interim Facilitating Committee, which has
been set up at the global level with the specific purpose of
assisting in building the network.  Regional networks are also
being established in Europe and Africa, mainly through NGO
efforts. The Mountain Forum is one of several innovative
partnerships and alliances being studied under the Global
Excellence in Management (GEM) Initiative by Case Western Reserve
University in the United States. Documenting the way in which the
Mountain Forum is expanding capacity beyond its own organizational
boundaries is expected to be an important outcome of the study.
Another important example of new regional cooperation is the
Asociacio'n de Montan~as Andinas, whose main objective is to
contribute to implementation of Chapter 13 in the Andes.<P>

                     <CENTER>       III.  PROMISING CHANGES</CENTER><P>

10.   New forms of partnership are coming about as a result of
increased collaboration and interaction between the public and
private sectors in which governments, non-governmental and
intergovernmental organizations have found common ground and
engaged in constructive dialogue. There has been a concerted and
participatory effort, particularly over the past three years, to
amplify the original aims and objectives of Chapter 13 by forging
consensus on priorities, and identifying the differing strengths
and capacities of public, private and NGO sectors to contribute to
implementation.  In addition, there has been greater emphasis on
including local populations and community groups in identifying
and planning mountain development activities.  New partnerships
are also being realized between mountain research and development
interests. International research institutes such as CIP, ICIMOD,
the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) (in
particular through the African Highlands Initiative), and the
joint United Nations University (UNU)/International Mountain
Society (IMS) project, which have either a specific mountain focus
or include strong mountain research programmes, have been active
members of the interagency network on mountains. This has served
to strengthen the linkages and interaction between mountain
research and development interests. Organizations including the
World Conservation Union (IUCN), the International Center for
Alpine Environments (ICALPE) and the International Livestock
Research Institute (ILRI) have increased their involvement in
mountain conservation and development, and developed new
partnerships through their roles in planning and implementing the
regional intergovernmental consultations in Europe and Africa. <P>

11.   Although there are still relatively few activities which
have been initiated directly as a result of Chapter 13, the
willingness of most regions of the world to engage in
intergovernmental and non-governmental consultations on the topic
of sustainable mountain development has been an important step in
implementation since UNCED. This process has allowed for clearer
definition of the challenges facing each region and possible
responses to them, and a stronger sense of involvement and
commitment on the part of governments and other concerned
stakeholders as the discussion has focused on issues of greater
direct relevance at the regional and national level.  This
consultation process has been carried out over a relatively short
period, only having begun in late 1994, with the majority of
meetings having taken place during 1996.  Although so far there
has been insufficient interest by governments of North America to
hold an intergovernmental consultation there, an NGO-organized
meeting to which governments would also be invited, is currently
under discussion.  As a result of these regional meetings, greater
activity is expected at national and regional levels in terms of
specific mountain development and conservation programmes and
reinforced institutional arrangements. Regional networks, in
addition to those in Asia and Latin America, are also being
established in Europe and Africa, following the consultations held
in 1996. In accordance with the recommendations of the third
session of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD), upon
completion of the regional consultations a wider international
meeting on sustainable mountain development is expected to be
held. Several governments have already expressed their support for
holding such a meeting, the objectives of which, however, would
need to be clearly defined and perceived as timely and relevant to
on-going implemenation to the countries and organizations involved .<P>

12.   The maintainance and generation of database and information
systems to facilitate the integrated management and environmental
assessment of mountain ecosystems has seen little progress to
date,  however this is expected to change in the near future given
the new and evolving institutional arrangements and new
technologies becoming available for this type of work. In the area
of conventional dissemination of scientific and developmental
information on mountains, the quarterly journal Mountain Research
and Development, co-published by UNU and IMS, continues as the
only scholarly publication of its kind world-wide. <P>

13.   Improvements to the ecological knowledge base regarding
technologies and agricultural and conservation practices in the
mountain regions of the world have been slow but recently
increasing. Most conservation and development programmes in
mountain areas now contain specific components aimed at improving
databases on biological resources. On the other hand, economic,
sociological and cultural information are still largely
unavailable. Greater emphasis is being placed on the importance of
understanding and promoting appropriate indigenous and locally
adapted technologies.  <P>

14.   Transnational cooperation has also been improving. There is
an increased willingness to work across national borders marked by
mountain chains, in particular, for scientific reasons such as to
study the behaviour of migratory species, for environmental
conservation purposes, and for ecological/economic reasons among
countries sharing major water courses. Transborder collaboration
among biosphere reserves is a new emerging topic in UNESCO's
"Programme on Man and the Biosphere", in particular in Eastern and
Central Europe. There is also a need for greater cooperation among
countries sharing water resources, especially in many regions of
the world where there is growing demand for water.  <P>

15.   Work has progressed on the better understanding and
dissemination of information regarding environmental risks and
natural disasters in mountain ecosystems. At the twentieth session
of the FAO/European Forestry Commission Working Party on the
Management of Mountain Watersheds, held in Lillehammer, Norway in
July 1996, the topic of mitigation of natural disasters in
mountain areas received significant attention, both in the
European and global context. This topic was also dealt with in
depth at the June 1996 meeting of  INTERPRAEVENT, a group of
European experts meeting in Garmisch, Germany to discuss
cooperation in research, technology transfer, planning and
development relating to natural resources management in mountain
areas, where protection of alpine areas against natural disasters
(e.g. floods, avalanches and mudflows) was discussed at length.
ICIMOD has also been very active in this field and has recently
launched a training programme for mountain risk engineering in the
Himalayas. Also, the IUFRO Working Group on Natural Disasters
plans to hold a meeting in the framework of the 11th World
Forestry Congress (Antalya, Turkey, 13-22 October 1997). The
meeting will consider, inter alia, hazard prevention measures in
mountain regions. This cross-cutting issue is expected to receive
increasing attention in the near future as a result of greater
awareness created through international initiatives, such as the
1994 World Conference on Natural Disaster Reduction, and new and
on-going efforts by international  bodies such as those mentioned
above.  <P>

16.   Perhaps most importantly, and underlying most other factors
which have contributed to the relatively successful implementation
of Chapter 13, is the notion of commitment.  Many of those who
advocate the sustainable development and conservation of mountain
regions and peoples speak with conviction and deep emotional
commitment to many of the causes espoused by the mountain chapter.
The various stakeholders working on mountain related issues, be
they from local communities, NGOs, governments, or international
organizations, often share a common view of the importance and
uniqueness of mountain areas and cultures and carry out their work
with a strong sense of dedication. Their conviction, and the
partnerships that were forged prior to Rio, were instrumental in
gaining chapter status for mountains under Agenda 21 and in
maintaining close collaboration throughout the post-Rio period.<P>

                      <CENTER>   IV.  UNFULFILLED EXPECTATIONS</CENTER>

17.   Several objectives of Chapter 13 remain unfulfilled, or have
seen little or no progress towards implementation. These include:<P>

(a)   Survey work <P>

18.   Adequate progress has still to be made in undertaking
integrated survey work of the different natural resources and
their use in mountain ecosystems and carrying out related
activities needed to strengthen knowledge about the ecology of
mountain ecosystems.  Although greater progress is being made at
the regional level, a longer time frame than the five years since
Rio will be required to achieve a more thorough understanding of
the knowledge base globally.<P>

(b)   National level institutional arrangements  <P>

19.   Although the issue has been raised in various fora since
UNCED, there continues to be a lack of new institutional
arrangements at national level to enable a more comprehensive and
integrated approach to mountain conservation and development. In
spite of increased international attention since UNCED (through
Chapter 13 follow-up) on the need for reform, examples of
departments, programmes or legislation that deal with mountain
issues in a more integrated way are still rare. This has been an
inhibiting factor in carrying out comprehensive national mountain
development planning; <P>

(c)   Special attention to mountainous island countries and
landlocked countries  <P>

20.   Little attention has been paid so far to the need for
specific consideration for mountainous island countries and
landlocked mountainous countries. Island countries face a unique
situation, especially with regard to water resources. Greater
efforts are needed to better understand the technical issues
facing this category of countries.<P>

                         <CENTER>   V.  EMERGING PRIORITIES</CENTER><P>

21.   Upon completion of the current consultation process for
Chapter 13 follow-up in late 1996, many of the issues concerning
sustainable mountain development, which have so far been discussed
in rather general terms at the global level, will have also
benefitted from discussion in a regional context, allowing for
further elaboration,  refinement and regionally specific proposals
for action. This process has allowed an increased focus on
specific objectives of Chapter 13 and better understanding of how
they can best be achieved. Some key objectives which have emerged
during UNCED and the five-year review period, and for which it now
seems likely that obstacles to achievement can be overcome,
include the following: <P>
  
(a)   Special status of mountain areas  <P>

22.   One of the important achievements of the Chapter 13 review
process has been greater recognition of mountain areas as special
and distinct from lowland areas, and therefore worthy of special
attention. This recognition is seen as a key factor in the recent
change of attitude of governments, intergovernmental organizations
and NGOs to pay greater attention to mountain conservation and
development and in the mobilization of the resources that will be
needed for increased investment in mountain areas. Greater action
at national level is required, including, for example, formulation
of national mountain development plans as part of national
development plans.<P>

(b)    Legal and institutional mechanisms  <P>
      
23.   There is also greater recognition of the need for new or
reinforced legal mechanisms (charters, conventions, national
legislation, etc.) to protect fragile mountain ecosystems and
promote sustainable and equitable development in mountain regions.
Additionally, governments, IGOs and NGOs agree that more suitable
institutional mechanisms are required to assure an integrated
approach in view of the complexity of mountain ecosystems and the
socio- economic issues at stake. <P>

(c)   Investment in mountain development and conservation  <P>

24.   More mountain-specific investment programmes and greater
mobilization of financial resources for mountain development and
conservation programmes will be required in order for real
progress to take place on the "Mountain Agenda". In some cases
this may mean formulating and financing programmes which are
focused exclusively on mountain areas; other situations may lend
themselves to expanding conservation and development programmes
that have been designed for lowland areas to include mountain
areas as well. There are promising signs of greater willingness on
the part of governments to increase investment levels in mountain
areas, which have historically been neglected. In addition,
bi-lateral and multi-lateral donors have expressed greater
willingness to assist mountainous developing countries in
elaborating and implementing mountain development plans and
programmes, in accordance with increased attention being given to
mountain regions and a redefinition of priorities. Greater
investment potential in upland areas is motivated not only by the
need to protect downstream infrastructure and populations, but
also by the realization of the importance of economic development
of mountain populations, for their own benefit and the potential
contribution to national economies, as well as by an increasing
awareness of the importance of biodiversity conservation. <P>

(d)   Resources flows  <P>

25.   Related to (c) above, there remains the need for clearer
understanding of resource flows to and from mountain areas which
will lead to increased income to mountain communities and a fairer
distribution of earnings from natural resources exploitation and
services provided in mountain areas. Increased attention is
already being paid to this important issue, as evidenced by the
electronic conference hosted by the Mountain Forum in 1996,
entitled "Paying for Mountains: Innovative Mechanisms and
Promising Examples for Financing Conservation and Sustainable
Development". The increased attention being paid to this issue,
especially as certain mountain resources (e.g. water) become more
scarce and acquire greater economic value, is expected to result
in more studies undertaken to improve understanding of the overall
flow of resources and services.<P>

(e)   Status of women and children  <P>

26.   The need for greater empowerment, equity and equality of
mountain women has been expressed as an important concern
throughout the period of UNCED and Chapter 13 follow-up. These
issues are expected to receive greater attention in terms of
policy, legislation and institutional reform with growing
awareness and recognition of the role and needs of women related
to mountain development. A recent publication by UNICEF (Children,
Women and Poverty in Mountain Ecosystems, New York, 1996),
produced in collaboration with UNU and IMS, is already drawing
attention to the basic causes of poverty in mountain areas and the
need for policy revisions.<P>

(f)   Cultural integrity and biological diversity  <P>

27.   There is growing recognition of mountain areas as valuable
sites for preserving cultural integrity and conserving biological
diversity. This has come about through increased awareness of
specific mountain cultures and their important role in maintaining
mountain ecosystems, and the greater recognition of endemism of
plant and animal species in mountain areas. More concerted action
is needed to address these increasingly important areas of concern.<P>

(g)   Monitoring progress  <P>

28.   As the "Mountain Agenda" moves forward and mountain
development and conservation efforts grow, it will be necessary to
be able to gauge progress and the extent to which it is
sustainable. An enhanced ability to carry out assessment and
monitoring of mountain development and conservation activities
will be required. The development of a set of criteria and
indicators for sustainable mountain development has been underway
since late 1995. This work is currently being refined with the aim
of providing a practical tool for use at the national or
sub-national level.<P>

(h)   Exchange of experience and information collection and
dissemination  <P>

29.   More direct exchange of experience and information, both
among mountain people themselves and among other resource
management practitioners working in mountain areas is needed.
Exchange visits between groups of farmers from neighboring upland
communities have proved to be among the most effective means of
stimulating new ideas and transferring knowledge in many mountain
conservation and development projects throughout the world in
recent years.  The networks which have been created over the past
few years, especially through activities of the Mountain Forum and
from regional intergovernmental and NGO consultations, should be
fully exploited to stimulate and enhance this type of direct
exchange at all levels. There is also a need for greater
accessibility of existing information to end-users, both at policy
and operational levels. In fact, knowledge and information
dissemination was identified at the 1996 European
Intergovernmental Consultation on chapter 13 as a priority area to
be addressed. Some key issues raised include: the need to
standardize data and data collection;  greater accessibility of
scientific data to decision-makers;  the need for improved
inter-ministerial communication on mountain issues;  and a need
for more interdisciplinary and applied research on mountains. <P>

(i)   Food security  <P>

30.   As highlighted at the World Food Summit held by FAO in Rome
in November 1996, the issue of food security has become a top
priority for the global community. Accordingly, efforts to
eradicate hunger and malnutrition are expected to receive greater
attention under the mountain chapter, along with the overall
objective of poverty alleviation in mountain regions. New
initiatives in this area should focus specifically on strategies
to enhance food security in a sustainable manner, inter alia,
through the sustainable flow of water resources and their
efficient use for agricultural and other production systems.<P>

(j)   Mountain forests  <p>

31.   As new interest and attention is being devoted to the forest
policy debate, especially since the establishment by the CSD of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests, new opportunities are
available to further discuss the important role played by forests
in mountain areas with respect to issues such as hazard
prevention, biodiversity conservation and livelihood
opportunities. New institutions and fora, including the European
Observatory on Mountain Forests and the IUFRO Task Force on
Forests and Mountain Development, have recently been established
to focus specifically on these types of issues. FAO is also giving
greater recognition to the importance of forests in mountain
regions and is currently in the process of preparing a publication
on the management of mountain forests.<p>

                           <CENTER>          Notes</CENTER>

1/   This report reviews progress made in the implementation of
the objectives set out in Chapter 13 of Agenda 21 (Managing
fragile ecosystems: sustainable mountain development), taking into
account the decisions taken by the CSD on this subject at its
Third Session in 1995. The report was prepared by FAO as task
manager for chapter 13 of Agenda 21, in accordance with
arrangements agreed to by the Inter-Agency Committee on
Sustainable Development (IACSD). It is the result of consultation
and information exchange between United Nations.<p>


</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>