
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B28-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B020-118</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ledain/nonmed7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122135240 text/html 52958
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:52:27 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:59:39 GMT
Content-length: 52740
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Canadian Government Commission - Some Causes of Nonmedical
Drug Use</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<h2>CHAPTER FOUR </h2>

<h2>SOME CAUSES OF NON-MEDICAL DRUG USE</h2>

<p> </p>

<p>316. The recommendations of the Minister of National Health
and Welfare which gave rise to the appointment of the Commission,
and the Commission's terms of reference, place particular stress
on the desire to understand the causes of the non-medical use of
drugs. We regard our inquiry into these aspects of the phenomenon
to be one of our most important functions. The terms of reference
speak of motivation, and they speak of the social, economic,
educational and philosophical factors that have led to such use. </p>

<p>317. By cause we understand not merely the immediate, direct
motivation for a particular drug experience, but the larger
social significance of the phenomenon - how it relates to various
aspects of life today - family relations, education, work,
institutions, and conditions of life generally. In what way is it
a response to the problems of modern living? What are its
philosophical or spiritual implications? What does it say about
our value structure? How does it reflect the way people think
about the future? </p>

<p>At this time it is clearly impossible to provide a full and
comprehensive statement of cause in these terms. At best we can
hope to convey some of the interpretive themes and to describe
some of the characteristics that have struck us as significant
that seem to have the merit of illuminating from one perspective
or another this complex phenomenon. We seek to do this for a
variety of reasons: to report in general some of our reactions
and impressions; to assist in a preliminary way to add to the
common understanding of a phenomenon that has aroused great
interest, but that has also caused concern and anxiety, and has
brought anguish to many parents; to suggest to citizens,
especially parents and guardians; avenues of approach that may be
helpful to them in understanding with sympathy and perhaps
empathy a social fact that is to them strange and bewildering. </p>

<p>But we must emphasize the to tentative nature of these
comments. They are not to be taken as a conceptual framework for
an understanding of the changes or responses about which we are
concerned. They do not constitute such a framework for the
Commission. They are impressions. We intend to test them as
rigorously as possible by intensive investigation. We invite
critical comment from all quarters. In this way the interim
report may serve a useful dialectical function, assisting us in
consultation with our fellow citizens, to arrive at a full and
sound understanding of this phenomenon. </p>

<p>318. The first problem we face is how to get at the facts of
motivation and other related factors. What are we to accept as
evidence of these facts? These are very subjective matters. Can
we ever be sure that we know the truth? Whether we can or not, it
seems to us that we must rely primarily on what drug users
themselves say about their personal motivation and other factors
predisposing them to use drugs. These statements must be weighed
for credibility and carefully considered for proper
interpretation but they are the primary and best source of an
understanding of motivation. This was the approach followed by
William James in his <i>Varieties of Religious Experience,</i> a
phenomenon which has certain affinities with the subject-matter
of our inquiry. The best evidence of the experience, the
subjective effects of which may be presumed to be the primary
motivation of cause, comes from the words of those who have
undergone it. This is not to say that insight cannot be gained
from the observations and interpretations of psychologists,
social philosophers, sociologists and other informed and
qualified students of our society. Thus we shall have recourse,
in trying to explain this phenomenon, to both the words of drug
users and the interpretations of observers. Finally, we shall
offer our own interpretation, although this can only be a
tentative one at this time - one that is offered as a basis for
further consideration and discussion by the people of Canada. </p>

<p>319. Our inquiry has taken several forms: the public hearing
of the traditional kind in which briefs have been submitted but
in which there has been a full opportunity for questioning and
discussion by everyone present; private hearings with groups and
individuals; numerous discussions with drug users and various
experts having not only theoretical insight into the problem but
active points of contact with it through some professional
involvement; presentation of evidence regarding law enforcement
and correction; and we have heard from experts in the areas of
education; medical services; family life and social welfare.
Although we intend to inquire further into motivation (as well as
extent of use, perception of the problem, and general attitudes)
in the surveys to be carried out this year, we do not necessarily
rely on the answers to survey questionnaires as the most reliable
evidence of motivation. Motivation is too subtle, complex, and
full of nuance to be adequately elicited through questionnaires.
We place as much or more reliance on the impressions derived from
hearing individual drug users speak at length in public and
private meetings about their experience and what they think to be
the causes. In many ways we are closer here to the art of the
novelist than that of the social scientist. We can only offer
hypotheses - the validity and acceptance of which will depend on
their ability to make sense of this phenomenon - to provide a
meaning which is satisfactory to Canadians. It is like the
ultimate test of any philosophy or religion. But it is important
to emphasize once again that what is recorded here is merely our
first impression gleaned from initial contacts during the first
six months or so of our inquiry. </p>

<p>320. The explanations of motivation and the other related
factors vary considerably. They vary between the different
drug-using populations and they vary within a particular
population. It is idle to seek a single, unifying explanation or
theory. This whole area is characterized by bewildering diversity
and conflicting impressions, but certain dominant themes do seem
to emerge. </p>

<p>321. The motivational patterns underlying drug use also vary
to some extent from drug to drug. In the case of cannabis, a
major factor appears to be the simple pleasure of the experience.
Time after time witnesses have said to us in effect: 'We do it
for fun. Do not try to find a complicated explanation for it. We
do it for pleasure.' This is the explanation frequently offered
for the use of cannabis, particularly by college students and
adults in the working world. A mother of four and a teacher said:
'When I smoke grass I do it in the same social way that I take a
glass of wine at dinner or have a drink at a party. I do not feel
that it is one of the great and beautiful experiences of my life,
I simply feel that it is pleasant and I think it ought to be
legalized.' </p>

<p>A person involved in work with drug users expressed it this
way: 'I think maybe it is time we stopped all the sociological
nonsense about social milieux, and how your daddy fell off a
horse, and how your mommy burnt the pablum or whatever it is - or
what kind of sociological trip you want to blast off on, and just
say in front what you mean which is &quot;I get loaded because I
love to do it&quot;.' </p>

<p>322. Many of us think of human behaviour in general as a
consequence of needs that are either inherited or learned. There
is some tendency to think of behaviour such as drug use as a
consequence of pathological need patterns. However, we feel it
would be a serious error, at least as far as cannabis use is
concerned, to think of use as symbolic of or manifesting a
pathological, psychological or even sociological state. Simple
pleasure, similar to that claimed for the moderate use of
alcohol, or food, or sex, is frequently offered as the general
explanation for most current drug use. This is particularly true
of the growing number of adult users (who share perhaps little
else but their taste for cannabis with the members of the 'hip'
culture). It is no doubt true that for some the use of drugs is a
reflection of personal and social problem. But the desire for
certain kinds of psychological gratification or release is not
peculiar to the drug user or to our generations. It is an old and
universal theme of human history. Man has always sought
gratifications of the kind afforded by the psychotropic drugs. </p>

<p>323. They will vary with the particular drug used and, to some
extent, with the personality of the user. In the case of <i>cannabis,
</i>the positive points which are claimed for it include the
following: it is a relaxant, it is disinhibiting; it increases
self-confidence and the feeling of creativity (whether justified
by objective results or not); it increases sensual awareness and
appreciation; it facilities concentration and gives one a greater
sense of control over time; it facilitates this way makes it
easier to accept others; it serves a sacramental function in
promoting a sense of spiritual community among users; it is a
shared pleasure; because it is illicit and the object of strong
disapproval from those who are, by and large, opposed<i> </i>to
social change, it is a symbol of protest and a means of
strengthening the sense of identity among those who are strongly
critical of certain aspects of our society and value structure
today. </p>

<p>324. Those who have used cannabis are not unanimous in its
praise, although clearly the vast majority am to regard it as
either a harmless pastime or the source of real advantages and
gain. Those who have used the drug and then criticize it tend
most often to say it can dominate a weak personality; it can take
too much time; it can become an excuse for procrastination; it
lessens the ability to persevere with unpleasant, boring or
routine tasks. </p>

<p>325. Often a cannabis user has said, 'We can't explain it to
you. Why don't you try it?' It has been implied that there is
something ineffable about the experience, although this is more
often the case when speaking of the effects of LSD. Sometimes one
wonders if what is being conveyed is not a certain sense of
exclusiveness, a smugness of the initiated. But we prefer to
believe that it is the subtle and multifaceted aspect of its
psychological and social significance for the average user that
makes words seem inadequate to convey the whole of its meaning.
Indeed, many users have insisted that the makers of cannabis are
able to communicate without the use of words; that they recognize
and understand one another and share important assumptions and
attitudes. Whether this silent communication is more than the
knowledge of a common experience is not clear. But users speak of
a sense of affinity, a larger consciousness, of which they are
made to feel a party by the drug experience. </p>

<p>326. Thus there is unquestionably a strong suggestion of
community, of cultural solidarity, among cannabis users. And
there is a definite tendency to proselytize, to encourage others
to take up the practice. It may be partly due to the illicit
status of the practice which makes users want to increase the
numbers involved and thus the concern of society about its
present policy. But there is also a definite impression that the
cannabis user seeks to convert others to what he sincerely
believes to be a superior outlook and life style. The smoking of
cannabis becomes a rite of initiation to a new society and value
system. These are aspects of cannabis use, particularly among the
younger, more idealistic members of our society, which merit
serious consideration in any attempt to measure its potential for
growth. </p>

<p>327. We gather from the statements of cannabis users that the
drug is predominantly used in groups to enhance, enrich and ease
social intercourse. However, the statements of LSD users imply
that their experience is much more. LSD is spoken of as a very
profound experience, not to be lightly entered into. With some it
is never to be repeated; with others, its profound character, the
sense of venture into the unknown, the very real risks of adverse
effect, make it a practice which seems likely to remain fairly
restricted. It is cheaper than psychoanalysis but appears to
carry with it some of the same implications- the promise of
greater, self-knowledge and self-acceptance but at the same time
uncertainty as to the personality that will emerge. Except for a
relatively few devotees, LSD is not a regular experience having
social or communal significance. It is rather a venture into
self-discovery which sometimes takes on turning point
significance for the subject. The self-revelation experienced may
or may not become a basis for attitudinal change. It is thus a
foundational experience rather than a casual one, as is the case
of cannabis. </p>

<p>328. It is with reference to LSD that the most serious claims
for spiritual significance are made, Timothy Leary has spoken in
terms of a new quest for religious truth and experience. 'It's
the same old pursuit. The aims of our religion are those of every
religion of the past: we work to find the God within, the
divinity which lies within each person's body.'1 Users frequently
speak of the LSD experience in mystical terms. There is repeated
testimony to a feeling of oneness with others - of a loss of the
sense of personal identity in a sense of being a part of
everything that is around one. There is a pantheistic sense of
affinity and identification. </p>

<p>329. While pleasure, curiosity, the desire to experiment, and
even the sense of adventure, are dominant motivations in drug
use, there is no doubt that a search for self-knowledge and
self-integration and for spiritual meanings are strong
motivations with many. We have been profoundly impressed by the
natural and unaffected manner in which drug users have responded
to the question of religious significance. They are not
embarrassed by the mention of God. Indeed, as Paul Goodman has
observed, their reactions are in interesting contrast to those of
the 'God is dead' theologian. It may be an exaggeration to say
that we are witnessing the manifestations of a genuine religious
revival, but there does appear to be a definite revival of
interest in the religious or spiritual attitude towards life. As
one drug user put it: 'The whole culture is saying, &quot;Where
is God?&quot; I don't believe in your institutions, but now I
know it's there someplace.' Another witness said, 'I just find
that a lot of people are becoming a lot more aware of what's
happening and joining in on a universal cause, a cosmic sort of
joyousness and people are getting interested in spiritual things
as well, because this is what our generation and the previous
generations have lacked&#133;.' </p>

<p>330. Drug use is by no means indispensable to the new outlook.
Some people are fortunate enough to be what users call a natural
'turn on'. It is conceded that you can be 'turned on' without
drugs - vital, human, and aware of all your senses, enjoying
authentic, non-exploitative human relations, and alive to beauty
and the possibilities of the moment. Indeed, there is an active
doctrine of transcendence which sees drug use as a catalytic or
transitional thing to be abandoned as soon as it has enabled you
to glimpse another way of looking at things and of relating to
life and people. The doctrine of transcendence carries much hope
for the future. One witness said.- 'I don't do too many drugs
anymore because I have gone beyond them. They have taught me the
lesson and there isn't so much need for them any more. I mean
it's still fun to get stoned but there's a lot more to it. There
is more to it than just fun. After you have learned the lesson,
you have fun in virtually anything.' </p>

<p>331. Many users have stated that the insights gained through
drug use have carried over and remained with them, continuing to
shape their attitudes and outlook and style of relating when they
were not using drugs. In other words the drug has been a means of
discovering a new way to be more relaxed and self-accepting, more
accepting and indeed loving, more appreciative of the intensity
and value of being human in the moment, less anxious about time
and specific goals. In listening to these statements one can not
help feeling that this discovery was often made in other ways in
the past - through traditional religious experience, for
instance. </p>

<p>Modern drug use would definitely seem to be related in some
measure to the collapse of religious values - the ability to find
a religious meaning of fife. The positive values that young
people claim to find in the drug experience bear a striking
similarity to traditional religious values, including the concern
with the soul, or inner self. The spirit of renunciation, the
emphasis on openness and the closely knit community, are part of
it, but there is definitely the sense of identification with
something larger, something to which one belongs as part of the
human race. </p>

<p>332. Young drug users are highly critical of many aspects of
our modern life. In this they are perhaps not much different,
than the critical minority that one finds in each generation. But
one has its own unique history and has lived through a formative
period unlike any other. What are the distinguishing features of
that background? In what way is it truly different from the one
which shaped the outlook of previous generations of young people?
The distinguishing marks would seem to be: a generalized
middle-class affluence, a very rapid rate of technological
change; the oppressive, almost foreboding character of certain
problems or menaces which cast a serious doubt about man's
ability to survive - nuclear power, overpopulation, environmental
pollution, racial hostility and the widening gap between wealth
and poverty. All these and other aspects of the human predicament
today impart a distinctive character to the outlook and response
of our youth. An example of the criticism of the economic system
is the following statement by a university student: </p>

<p>I think it is essential that there should be some manner by
which we could break down the economic system. We still need
productivity. But you can get away from the economic basis, from
the competitive basis on which people, once they have gone into
something, have to beat you down. You have this aspect of wanting
to share which we should develop. You should be willing to share
together. But you can still have productivity without
competition. </p>

<p>333. To this point we have been concerned largely with the
statements and interpretations of drug users themselves. We turn
now to interpretation - our own and that of other commentators.
Present-day affluence plays a curious role. Without it there
could not be the freedom for speculation and experiment - the
luxury of cultivating the inner self. At the same time it repels.
It is both taken for granted and repudiated. There is a love-hate
relationship. The drug-taking minority of this generation cannot
be inspired by the goals of their fathers. They do not feel the
same urgency to achieve material success and do not seek
self-fulfilment that way. It may be that they see no way of
achieving their own sense of personal identity in attempting to
repeat, probably with less success, what their fathers have
already done. There is reason to believe that young people from
less comfortable circumstances are more strongly motivated
towards traditional career patterns and material success. But
there would seem to be more than merely trying to find a role
different from that of one's father. The materially more
sophisticated young people, those more familiar with material
well-being and less anxious about their ability to maintain it,
think they see a future in which it will be impossible to avoid.
They envisage a society which will be obliged to assure a
sufficient amount of material security to everyone in order to
maintain itself politically and economically. They therefore
conclude that it is a goal for which it is now unnecessary to
plan or to which it is futile to devote a significant amount of
ones time and energy. </p>

<p>334. There is also a strong impression that young people are,
as it were, unconsciously adapting time when there will be much
less work to go around. The rapid rate of technological change
and the pervading threat of work obsolescence makes them very
uncertain about their own occupational future. They seem to
suspect that a high proportion of them may have to learn to live
happily with relatively little work. Those of us who are
well-established in work tend to talk glibly of a future in which
there will be increasing leisure. Little thought or practical
effort has been devoted to the problem of how to fill that
leisure in constructive and satisfying ways. The exploration of
the inner self, the expansion of consciousness, the development
of spiritual potential, may well be purposes to which young
people are turning in anticipation of a life in which they will
have to find sustaining interest in the absence of external
demands and challenges. </p>

<p>335. Young people speak often of a desire to overcome the
division of life into work and play, to achieve a way of life
that is less divided, less seemingly schizophrenic, and more
unified, They seem to be talking about the increasingly rare
privilege of work that one can fully enjoy - of work that is like
one's play. They claim to he prepared to make considerable
renunciations or sacrifice of traditional satisfactions like
status and material success for work in which they can take
pleasure. Indeed, one of their frequent commentaries on the older
generation is that it does not seem to enjoy its work, that it
does not seem to be happy. This is said sadly, even
sympathetically. It is not said contemptuously. The young say, in
effect, 'Why should we repeat this pattern?' The use of drugs for
many is part of a largely hedonistic life style in which
happiness and pleasure are taken as self-evidently valid goals of
human life. </p>

<p>336. Role rejection is an important theme of the cultural
reaction that is associated with much of contemporary drug use.
One young person suggested that letting one's hair grow was in
part at least a rejection of the manhood role. Young people do
not deny the historic validity or necessity of these roles for
the older generation nor the positive achievements which must be
credited to them; they simply say that they are no longer
relevant or desirable. The role which many reject is that of the
achievement-oriented male, committed, body and soul to the big
corporation, and feeling increasingly the need to give proofs of
his masculinity. Some have spoken of drugs as dehabituating,
desophisticating, and deconceptualizing - as helping the
personality to break out of old moulds. They speak of a release
or recovery of child-like innocence - the essential perspective
of the artist. </p>

<p>337. There can be no doubt that there is a search for
authenticity in thought, in stance, in personal relations. The
drug becomes a means of dissolving the mask, of escaping from
pretence, affectation and stereotyped reaction and attitude,
although their place may be taken by other stereotypes - a
cultist enthusiasm which expresses itself in knowing smiles and a
private language. What happens under LSD is far from clear, but
users speak of blowing holes in the conscious mind through which
bits of the subconscious emerge, to be always accessible in the
future. It is the language of self-discovery - the eternal search
for the main-springs of one's personality - the attempt to find
liberation from psychological burdens, from 'hang ups', as they
are popularly called. </p>

<p>These human desires, these goals, are not new: they may be
summed up as the attempt to become a 'real person'. This has been
a goal of religious or spiritual concern down through the
centuries; the attempt to pull together the dispersed or
fragmented pieces of the self. It is often expressed as the
search for an identity. </p>

<p>338. There is in man a powerful and long-term tendency to
attempt to weave the experience and perceptions of the individual
into a logically consistent whole, centred when possible on a
single cosmological principle or theme. In such a whole, man
seeks for a meaning to life in the broad sense, for goals towards
which to direct himself and the means by which he can reasonably
hope to attain these goals. Through such a structure man hopes to
find the nature of his own relationship to existence in general
and to his fellows. When such a synthesis of experience is
available, not only to an individual but in a form that can be
shared and accepted by some large numbers of people, it can
become the ideological basis for social life and, as such, serve
as a unifying principle for a society. Such syntheses of
experiences were achieved by minds such as those of Saint Thomas
Aquinas, John Calvin and Karl Marx. In the absence of such
syntheses, man and society suffer. The responses that are made by
man in periods of ideological vacuum often appear strikingly
similar. For instance, there seem to be striking parallels
between the orientation of the stoics and cynics at the time of
the collapse of the Greek world, and the response of the 'Beat
Generation' and the 'Hippies'. In both instances the individual
seems to withdraw from his society and to seek reality within
himself. </p>

<p>339. Are there special elements in the present human situation
that impose particular stresses and burdens that would account
for the increasing dependence of old and young on drugs? In this
context we repeatedly encounter the term 'alienation'. The use of
this term has been discussed by Kenneth Keniston in these words:2
</p>

<p>Although formal discussions of alienation itself are largely
limited to the last 150 years, the theme of alienation - of
estrangement, outcastness and loss - is an archetypal theme in
human life and history.... The ambiguous concept of alienation
has in recent years become increasingly fashionable and, partly
as result, increasingly devoid of any specific meaning. More and
more the term is used to characterize whatever the author
considers the dominant maladies of the twentieth century; and
since views differ as to what these maladies are, the meaning of
alienation fluctuates with each writer. . . . Writers like Fromm,
Kahler and Pappenheim use 'alienation' to describe a variety of
conditions ranging from separation of man from nature to the loss
of pre-capitalist work relationships, from man's defensive use of
language to his estrangement from his own creative potential, and
from the worker's loss of control over the productive process to
the individual's feeling of social or political powerlessness. Of
course, the purpose of such writers is to suggest that all of
these different phenomena are connected, that all result from
some characteristic of modern society. </p>

<p>In the testimony we have heard, the term 'alienation' is most
often used to refer to the estrangement of many young people and
adults from the institutions, processes and dominant economic,
social and political values of our society; to this inability to
think of a good and meaningful life being available to them in
the society; to their sense of inability to affect or influence
the course that society will follow or the great issues of peace
and war, poverty, pollution and others. </p>

<p>340. Many of our modern youth are undoubtedly suffering from
too great self-expectation. This is partly the result of
exaggerated paternal expectation - parents confusing their own
affluence (which may be as often the product of an aggressive
acquisitiveness as innate intelligence) with the inherited
characteristics which they are capable of passing on. It is also
partly the result of a sense of wider opportunity reflected in
universal education. More is possible; more is expected. There
develops a disquieting gap between expectation and ability. Dr
Vivian Rakoff said: 'We use drugs to find out how far we can go,
rather than as a device for passivity. Drugs can be a spurious
way to fill the gap between aspiration and capacity.' </p>

<p>341. Witnesses appearing before the Commission have sometimes
referred to the word <i>'anomie' </i>to express one of the
possible 'causes' of the non-medical use of drugs. Whether these
speakers referred to the literal 'Anomie' or to some other state
of confusion or estrangement closer to 'alienation' is not easy
to determine. But, in fact, and in any case, the Commission was
told that a certain anomie in which the Canadian society lives
does call for a response, a reaction: self-search, integration,
new values, evasion, etc. Literally, anomie means 'normlessness'.
This state, well described by the French sociologist, Emile
Durkheim (especially in relation to suicide), does not often
result from the total absence of norms but emerges from the
co-existence of conflicting norms, rendering the aiming towards
precise goals very difficult; contradicting values are expressing
themselves through co-existing norms. </p>

<p>The Commission thinks that the concept of anomie and the
existence of anomie situations may be part of the explanation
that it will be trying to discern, in the course of its mandate.
However, anomie and alienation are used all encompassingly as two
of the 'causes' of nearly all social problems,<b> </b>these
concepts will have to be treated carefully, and critically. The
term 'anomie' is neither specific nor very useful operationally
(it cannot account for a specific problem. e.g., How is it that
all people living under anomic conditions do not resort to
drugs?) </p>

<p>342. Contemporary drug use is also associated with a loss of
faith in reason and a new emphasis on emotion. As one young high
school student put it, 'Young people today want to learn feelings
more than facts.' Paul Goodman has described the loss of faith
thus:3 </p>

<p>There is a lapse of faith in science. Science has not produced
the general happiness that people expected, and now it has come
under the sway of greed and power; whatever its beneficent past,
people fear that its further progress will do more harm than
good. And rationality itself is discredited. Probably it is more
significant than we like to think that intelligent young people
dabble in astrology, witchcraft, psychedelic dreams, and whatever
else is despised by science; in some sense they are not kidding.
They need to control their fate, but they hate scientific
explanations. </p>

<p>Keniston has spoken of a 'cult of experience' and declares:4 </p>

<p>Central to this cult is a focus on the present - on today, on
the here-and-now. Thus, rather than to defer gratification and
enjoyment for a distant future, immediate pleasure and
satisfaction are emphasized. Rather than reverence for the
traditions of the past, experience in the present is stressed.
Psychologically, then, such human qualities as control, planning,
waiting, saving, and postponing on the one hand, and revering,
recalling, remembering and respecting on the other, are equally
de-emphasized. In contrast, activity, adventure, responsiveness,
genuineness, spontaneity and sentience are the new experimental
values. Since neither the future nor the past can be assumed to
hold life's meaning, the meaning of life must be sought within
present experience, within the self, within its activity and
responsiveness in the here-and-now. </p>

<p>343. This emphasis on feeling, and immediate experience
reflects itself in an interest in the arts and in nature. Many
young people speak of a heightened appreciation of the beauties
of nature. This is related to the aesthetic repugnance they feel
towards many of the physical aspects of modern urban life. One<b>
</b>student said that he did not feel any desire for drugs for
two weeks when he was on a canoe trip in the Canadian north. The
drugs may often be an attempt to escape from a pervading urban
ugliness into a world of interior beauty. </p>

<p>344. We suspect that much contemporary drug use simply serves
the purpose of relieving the stress and tension which most
people, young and old, experience in modern living. Certainly
this is a dominant function of alcohol and nicotine which are
still the most prevalent drugs in all age groups, (see Chapter
Three). It is also true of the large quantities of barbiturates
consumed by adults. In the vast majority of cases it is idle to
look beyond the relief of tension for an explanation. This is the
pleasure or gratification most generally sought by the drug
user.5 </p>

<p>Chemical comforts are extremely varied in their chemical
nature, but what they do have in common is their ability to
produce pleasure. In this it can be noted that people only become
dependent on substances which they report produce pleasure and
the dependency potential of any substance, drug or food, may be
predicted by seeing how much pleasure it gives to the patient.
The pleasure they produce is reduction of tension, in addition to
any other social or physical effects they might have. </p>

<p>345. Some commentators have identified a degree of strain that
is peculiar to the impact of communications in our age. Keniston
has referred to it as 'stimulus flooding and psychological
numbing'. Dr Paul Christie, the superintendent of the Queen
Street Mental Health Centre in Toronto has spoken of 'chronic
confusion'. As Keniston puts it: 6 </p>

<p>One of the conditions of life in any modern technological
society is continual sensory, intellectual, and emotional
stimulation which produces or requires a<b> </b>high tendency
towards psychological numbing&#133; the quantity, intensity and
variety of inputs to which the average American is subjected in
an average day probably has no precedent in any other historical
society.... The problem arises, however, because the shells we
erect to protect ourselves from the clamours of the inner and
outer world often prove harder and less permeable than we had
originally wanted.... Thus, in at least a minority of Americans,
the normal capacity to defend oneself against undue stimulation
and inner excitation is exaggerated and automatized, so that it
not only protects but walls off the individual from inner and
outer experience ... the feeling and fear of psychological
numbing leads to a pursuit, even a cult, of experiences for its
own sake. </p>

<p>346. Many observers tend to characterize the psychological
predisposition to the use of <i>methamphetamines </i>('speed') as
one of deep depression. Wilfrid Clement, who has had extensive
clinical experience with 'speed freaks', has expressed the
opinion that 'we are faced with major generalized social
depression as a reaction to our technological society'. Both Mr
Herb Tookey and Mr Barry Luger, who have had a great deal of
contact with the 'speed' community through their work with <i>The
Trailer </i>in Toronto (see Chapter Six), have emphasized this
depression. Tookey says, 'The methedrine user is usually
chronically depressed with a passive-dependent personality.'7 The
depression seems to come from the feeling of powerlessness and
inability to cope with various environmental problems and the
demands of modern life. Luger puts it this way: 'Most potential
speed freaks are depressed because of their past environmental
and institutional problems and see no positive experiences in the
foreseeable future. They were not able to cope with the problems
at home, at school or with their middle-class group.'8 The
depression, Tookey says, is 'often manifested behaviourally by a
lack of goal orientated behaviour. The methedrine user has
considerable difficulty in constructing and carrying out long
range plans (i.e. getting and maintaining a job, going to school,
etc.)' The feeling of being able to cope is very important.
'Coupled with chronic depression', says Tookey, 'is episodic
angry agitation which appears to result from, feelings of
impotency, rejection, inferiority, and lack of control over the
environment.'9 </p>

<p>The 'speed freak' can be seen as a casualty of the increasing
complexity of the demands for adaptation and survival in a
technological society. Says Tookey, 'The &quot;speed freak&quot;
usually hits poor interpersonal skills and invariably is unable
to make the discriminations necessary to deal with a complex
technological society.'10 Clement sees the problem as one of
adaptation in a time of rapid change and contrasts the 'speed
freak' with what he calls the 'super-adaptive' youth. Clement
expresses the view that the 'speed freak's' depression relates to
his perception of his peers and their relative ability to cope
with the demands on them - not only the demands of the
educational system but also the demands of social adaptation.
They experience anxiety about their function and identity in the
future. They can see peers able to tolerate the speed and
bewildering demands of modern life. The sight of the
'super-adaptive' peer fills the average young person with a sense
of inadequacy. The contrast in abilities is shown most clearly in
after-school activity - in response to the demands of
sociability. </p>

<p>The desire for a supportive, reinforcing community is a strong
motivation for the use of speed. 'For the vast majority', says
Tookey, 'the speed community provides a very strong, though
anonymous identity. Paradoxically, identity is found by losing
personal identity to the group. &quot;I'm a speed freak&quot;.'11
The speed freak community has few moral standards but it shows a
rough loyalty to its members. John Bradford, President of
Rochdale College, said, 'One reason why kids use speed is that
they are trying to imitate a life style they're not part of and
don't understand.' He was referring to the life style of the
'heads' - the users of psychedelics. </p>

<p>347. Many young people profess to have little belief in the
future - to find it difficult to visualize a future for
themselves. In one small group we met with during our hearings
one of the women said, 'Very few in our generation believe we are
going to live to be forty.' There was general agreement in the
group, with this statement. Paul Goodman in his article, <i>'The
New Reformation', </i>has emphasized this point: 'Again and again
students have told me that they take it for granted they will not
survive the next ten years. '12 </p>

<p>348. There is also a suggestion that this emphasis on
experience in the present reflects a reaction against the
constraints on the personality produced by the habit-forming,
role-imposing, conformity of modern society. It is a reaction
against role and rule - an attempt to find spontaneity, variety,
and unstructured expression in personality and experience. This
reflects again the importance of the dehabituating effect of the
drugs - their capacity to break down moulds into which behaviour
and personality are threatened with confinement by the various
pressures towards conformity. Benjamin DeMott has written very
perceptively of this reaction in an article entitled <i>'The
Sixties: A Cultural Revolution'. </i>He emphasizes that it is
common to all age groups. DeMott sums up this new longing and
reaching out which cuts across all age groups as: 13 </p>

<p>The will to possess one's experience rather than be possessed
by it, the longing to live one's own life rather than be lived by
it, the drive for a more various selfhood than men have known
before. ... Young, old, black, white, rich and poor are pursuing
the dream of a more vital experience ... at the root of our
yearning stand the twin convictions: that we can be more, as men,
than we're permitted to be by the rule of role and profession,
and that the life of dailiness and habit, the life that lives us,
precedes us, directs us to the point of suppressing moral
conscience and imagination, is in truth no life at all. </p>

<p>One witness reflected something of the same emphasis in his
explanation of the effects of drugs: </p>

<p>Marijuana makes a person child-like. LSD and mescaline are a
ticket to childhood. They are desophisticators, they break down
the conceptual structure through which the person interprets or
views the world. Categories which were always perfectly
acceptable are now of questionable value, things which were never
noticed or were always taken for granted now jump out to the
person presenting unsolvable metaphysical problems. Every event
has deep meaning, every thought is profound. </p>

<p>349. This phenomenon can also be viewed from the perspectives
of psychiatry and abnormal psychology. There are many in the
public who tend to view the non-medical use of drugs as
symptomatic of a pathological psychological state. There is no
doubt but that some of those who use drugs such as cannabis or
LSD are mentally ill; this is also true of some proportion of
those who use alcohol and the mental illness is causative to some
degree of their use. However, it is the view of the Commission
that the majority of drug users do not take drugs as a result of
pathological motivation. Nevertheless it is desirable to draw
attention to some of the psychological and psychiatric problems
that are suggested to be contributing factors underlying
non-medical drug use. </p>

<p>350. From the psychological point of view, overstimulation and
exposure to an overwhelming stressful and complex environment,
which requires the individual to perform too many and too
difficult differentiations and to solve problems which surpass
his coping ability, are likely to lead to a disturbance ('a
jamming') of his capacity to deal effectively with the excessive
in-put to his central nervous system. In animals, such situations
produce pathological states of maladaptive behaviour which are
often referred to as 'experimental neuroses'. In man, it is
likely that similar mechanisms prevail, and pathological states
of neurosis or personality disorder, even psychosis, may develop
under these conditions. </p>

<p>Looking once more at the experimental animal model, it is
interesting that animals whose behaviour has become severely
disturbed through environmentally-produced stress can be
temporarily 'normalized' by the administration of tranquillizing
drugs. Animals under these conditions prefer, in fact, water with
added alcohol or tranquillizing drugs to plain water. </p>

<p>This suggests that severely disturbed humans, too, may often
resort to drugs which produce relaxation of 'instant rest'<b> </b>as
a temporary escape from intolerable tensions in a world which
offers less and less natural opportunities to do so. It is
noteworthy and apparently paradoxical, that amphetamines - the
stimulating 'speed' drugs - are among the most effective medical
means of alleviating states of pathological nervous over-activity
in children, and that these drugs can often help such children to
regain increased self-confidence and greater powers of
concentration. Claims for similar effects of 'speed' are often
made by the teenager who is plagued by the awareness of his own
inadequacy. This may be interpreted as the choice of a different
'chemical defence' against the threat of an overwhelming
environment - instead of 'instant rest', the young person chooses
'instant efficiency'. Thus, the non-medical use of psychotropic
drugs may frequently be an abortive and poorly directed attempt
by an emotionally sick person to treat his own condition. But
because he does not know precisely how, when and in what dosage
to apply these drugs, he not only usually fails in his attempts
but more often than not makes things worse. </p>

<p>351. In the language of ego psychology, a person's ability to
cope with external demands depends on his ego structure; that is,
that part of the personality which mediates between inner needs
and outer reality. Ego strength, in turn, depends on undisturbed
processes of growth, development and maturation throughout
childhood. Since a child is an extremely vulnerable organism,
disruptive early experiences may lead to imbalanced development
and result in a poorly adjusted personality structure. Such a
maladjusted person would then be inadequately equipped to deal
with the complex demands of today's world. </p>

<p>352. The Commission has very often been told by young people
that they reject all that is traditional conventional and
stereotyped, because they consider it to be hypocritical, phony,
dehumanizing, threatening, and ugly. As a result, they may,
become alienated and some may be plunged into a frantic search
for an identity which may be acceptable to them by their own
standards. This search for identity may go in two directions, one
leading to a pathological adjustment - the other simply to a
non-pathological parting from conformity. </p>

<p>In the pathological outcome, the individual may substitute a
spurious identity for an authentic one, for instance, by
accepting his belonging to a drug community as his new identity.
Also, by displacing his inner needs, projecting his aspirations
and denying his limitations, the person might settle for a
drug-induced illusion of false power, rather than real
achievement, and for chemically induced comfort rather than true
resolution of conflicts and tensions. </p>

<p>By contrast, in the non-pathological choice, the drug user may
opt exclusively for the inner world of personal experience and
genuine emotional awareness instead of the despised external
hall-marks of success in the world of our present-day society, as
we have often been told by young people. In making this choice,
the young individual apparently replaces the prevailing social,
technological and scientific values which require consensual
verification, with the immanent and immutable values of
emotional, interpersonal, spiritual, creative - but not
necessarily productive - achievement. It might well be reassuring
to him that personal experience, emotional awareness,
spirituality and creativeness are forever free from the danger of
being usurped by dehumanizing automation (the one power the
neo-nonconformist hates and fears perhaps more than anything
else, as we have repeatedly been told). However, this choice of
deliberate withdrawal and restructuring of his value system is
probably only open to a highly differentiated, sensitive and
introspective person. </p>

<p>353. Many others who reject today's society probably do so for
more personal and less philosophical reasons - for instance,
because of unresolved conflicts with their parents and with
authority in general. Many also adopt more pathological defences,
rather than an orderly withdrawal, as their way of rejecting the
'establishment'. Such defences - when induced and sustained by
psychotropic drugs - may consist in the vicarious building of an
illusionary world with LSD or in frenzied and aggressive
overstimulation with the help of 'speed', or in a passive walling
off and isolation of the self from all contacts, with cannabis. </p>

<p>354. Even more pathological responses may occur as disguised
self-destructive behaviour. For instance, some 'speed' users who
inject almost suicidal doses of methamphetamine into their veins
without any regard for their safety and health, may actually be
trying to test the truth of the youth slogan 'Speed Kills'. The
role of the doomed person who is at once a martyr sacrificing
himself, a hero braving the confrontation with certain
destruction and a gambler playing dice with death, is a role
which seems to have a strong seductive pull for some young people
who are morbidly hungry for compassion, admiration and
excitement. For these individuals the slogan 'Speed Kills', may,
paradoxically, carry more attractive than deterrent power - and
thus may not serve the purpose for which it is being promoted. </p>

<p>355. The sick individual who relies on cannabis, speed or
other psychotropic drugs, almost as his only means of escape, who
uses them always as a crutch, and structures his whole existence
around them as the only providers of pleasure (the 'pothead', the
'speed-freak, and the 'acidhead'), is in need of medical and
psychiatric, or psychological treatment. Prolonged counselling,
psychotherapy and comprehensive social follow-up care are usually
required. Medically prescribed and supervised drug treatment may
also be indicated in many cases. </p>

<p>On the other hand, the neo-noncomformist who is using drugs
but is not sick in the medical or psychiatric sense, may not need
treatment. If it seems desirable to bring about a change in his
behaviour, only a philosophical and spiritual reorientation,
which would have to touch the cultural roots of his values and
existential attitudes, could achieve this goal. </p>

<p><img src="../../../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom"> </p>

<h3>REFERENCES</h3>

<p><img src="../../../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom"> </p>

<p>1. Leary, T. Statement prepared for a Canadian audience in
1967. </p>

<p>2. Keniston, K. <i>The Uncommitted Alienated youth in American
society. </i>New York: Delta, 1965. </p>

<p>3. Goodman, P. The new reformation. <i>New York Times Maga</i>zine,
September 14,1969. </p>

<p>4. See reference 2. </p>

<p>5. Holmes, S. J. Keeping perspective re: Chemical comforts.
Paper delivered to the College of Family Physicians of Canada,
October 2, 1969. </p>

<p>6. See reference 2. </p>

<p>7. Tookey, H. The increasing use of methamphetamine ('speed')
among young people. 1969. Mimeo. </p>

<p>8. Luger, D. Basic facts on speed. 1969. Mimeo. </p>

<p>9. See reference 7. </p>

<p>10. Ibid. </p>

<p>11. Ibid. </p>

<p>12. See reference 3. </p>

<p>13. De Mott, B. The Sixties: A cultural revolution. <i>New
York Times Magazine, </i>December 14,1969. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>