
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B027-309</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/opiumchina1899.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095625 text/html 13659
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:56:15 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:25 GMT
Content-length: 13443
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Opinions of over 100 Physicians on the use of Opium in
China - 1899</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">Opinions of over 100 Physicians on the use of
Opium in China</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Compiled by William Hector Park</font></p>

<p><font size="3">American Presbyterian Mission Press, Shanghai,
1899</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Alcohol and Opium Compared.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">By W.H. Park, M.D.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">[ALCOHOL] 1. Of the millions of regular users
of alcohol a lamentably large number become slaves to the alcohol
habit.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2. Numbers of people boast of their
&quot;personal liberty&quot; and claim that they can drink or not
just as they choose. All moderate drinkers (people who never get
drunk, and yet who take wine or beer daily with their meals and
social glasses of something stronger as occasions arise) claim
that they are not slaves to alcohol, that they are not weakened
by it physically, and that its withdrawal entails no special
inconvenience; and they would be highly insulted if any one
should intimate that they are being thereby morally or socially
degraded.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3. Nevertheless, every one nipping alcohol
occasionally is in danger of forming the alcohol habit, and if
one takes it daily for any length of time the danger is
increased. The only safe rule is never to touch it. The slavish
appetite is developed gradually in most cases, and, in strong
willed people, its confirmation may be a matter of years.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">4. People take to drink on account of trouble
and sorrow, and sometimes for pain and disease, some claiming
that it is prophylactic against certain diseases.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">5. I had a classmate who said his father told
him he might take a little whiskey whenever he felt ill, and he
had not experienced a well day since.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">6. A sailor once told me how he alone of a
whole ship's company escaped yellow fever in a certain South
American city by lying ashore &quot;dead drunk&quot; the whole
time the ship was in port.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">7. The claim is constantly made that a moderate
amount of alcohol consumed daily can be reckoned as food and that
it is only excess that is injurious. Some recent French
authorities have set one liter of wine per day as the maximum
amount a healthy man can imbibe without injury.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">8. &quot;All excess is injurious. North-pole
voyages, military expeditions (experiences in India and the
Ashantee march), and the diminished power of resistance to the
cold shown by drunkards, have conclusively demonstrated that
alcohol does not supply the place of other foods; and that those
habituated to its use, damaged as they are in their vital organs,
do not possess the same endurance of fatigue and the same power
of resistance to external morbific influences as do the healthy.
Furthermore, clinical experience has amply proved that topers do
not bear chloroform well, that they succumb more quickly to
injuries and surgical operations, and that they possess much less
power of resistance than the temperate to the inroads of acute
disease.&quot;--Bartholow.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">9. That the drunkard wastes his time is no
small indictment against the alcohol habit.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10. In this country if a drinker falls ill, as
a rule, he stops his allowance, and if the disease proves a
chronic one, he never goes back to it. 11. A physician can direct
his patient to abstain from drink with a fair prospect of being
obeyed.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">12. Persons who give way to drink, and become
inebriates, are in these days regarded by some as moral imbeciles
who if they did not drink would take up some other vice just as
bad or perhaps worse. Banish the saloon, however, and in my
opinion the majority of them would become respectable citizens.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">13. We look down on saloons and underground
places where liquor is sold and gambling allowed, and often refer
to them as &quot;hells.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">14. In most drunkards there still seems to be
some spark of manhood left, still something to which we can
appeal, still some hope of reformation.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">15. Alcohol is not often used for suicidal
purposes.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">16. The drunkard neglects wife and children,
pawns their clothes for drink, beats, and on occasion murders
them.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">17. The drunkard is aggressive, quarrelsome and
ready to fight.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">18. The drunkard becomes befuddled and loses
all the money he has on his person, or grows generous and gives
it away, or wastes his substance in riotous living.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">19. Alcoholism tends to beggary, and nearly all
beggars, thieves and tramps are given to drink.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">20. Alcohol has been used all over China from
time immemorial and yet drunkards are comparatively rare.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">[OPIUM]</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1. Of the million of regular users of opium all
become slaves to the opium habit.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2. A few Chinese, who only smoke occasionally,
in transacting business or on meeting a friend, claim that they
can smoke or not just as they choose, but no one who smokes
daily, be the amount ever so small, makes any such claim. When a
man admits that he &quot;smokes a pipe or two&quot; he knows, and
his friends know, that he is a confirmed opium smoker. He also
knows that he is weakened physically and that he cannot give it
up without inconvenience--nay, even suffering--and he is not
insulted if you tell him he is being thereby morally and
physically degraded.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3. Every one &quot;hitting the pipe&quot;
occasionally is in danger of forming the opium habit, and if one
smokes daily for any length of time the danger is not simply
increased--it becomes absolute. The habit is certain and the
confirmation thereof sure. The habit is formed quickly. Not one
in a thousand, be the will ever so strong, can smoke opium daily
for a year (I might almost say for three months) without forming
the opium habit.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">4 and 5. People take opium on account of
trouble and sorrow, and as for pain and disease it is the
greatest earthly soother. That opium will relieve pain and may be
prophylactic against certain disease is no argument in favor of
allowing its unrestricted sales among any people. On the
contrary, the opium habit being so much worse than the diseases
it may alleviate or prevent, this is the strongest possible
argument in favor of its restriction. If it permanently cured all
pain and prevented all disease all would be tempted to take to it
and the human race would be in danger of extermination.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">6. How would one's parents and friends at home
feel if he should write that he had rendered himself proof
against all the deadly diseases of the East by becoming an opium
smoker!</font></p>

<p><font size="3">7. Opium can never be reckoned as a food. It is
true that the opium smoker eats less, but this is because his
secretions are diminished so that he becomes constipated, and as
it were uses his food over and over again. Ugh! It makes me sick
to think about it. No wonder he suffers from auto-toxaemia, and
becomes yellow, weak and emaciated. The amount of opium a healthy
person can consume daily without injury is absolutely nil. There
is no room for the comparative degree in opium smoking. Any
amount is already too much.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">8. All opium smoking is injurious. An opium
smoking soldier is not worth the powder and lead it would take to
kill him. The weakness and the diminished power of endurance
shown by opium smokers have conclusively demonstrated that opium
does not supply the place of the food it supplants; and that
those habituated to its use, damaged as they are in every fiber,
do not possess the same endurance of fatigue and the same power
of resistance to external morbific influences as to the healthy.
Furthermore, clinical experience has amply proved that opium
smokers do not bear chloroform well, that they succumb more
quickly to injuries and surgical operations, and that they
possess much less power of resistance than non-smokers to the
inroads of acute disease.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">9. Many rich Chinese smoke all night and sleep
nearly all day. Artisans, coolies, etc., waste from one to four
hours at the pipe, and this waste occurs not once or twice a week
but every day in the year without curtailment and without fail.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10. If a smoker gets ill, except in some acute
violent sickness such as pneumonia, he smokes more and more, and
the more chronic the disease the more firmly established the
habit.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">11. A physician directing an opium smoker to
stop smoking is only wasting his breath--he might as well talk to
the winds.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">12. In this country nearly all moral imbeciles
are opium smokers, but it by no means follows that all opium
smokers are moral imbeciles. Without opium in China 80 percent of
the present smokers would, in all probability, be respectable
citizens.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">13. A friend of mine once asked a beggar, who
slept next door to an opium den, where he lived, and he replied,
&quot;Next door to hell.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">14. In the opium smoker there does not seem to
be one spark of manhood left, nothing to which we can appeal. In
pleading with him we feel utterly helpless and hopeless. It is
well for Job's reputation that he never had to deal with opium
smokers.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">15. Opium is the handiest of all suicidal
agents. Mr. Bourne, acting chief justice of Shanghai, says, in
speaking of Yunnan:--&quot;Another bad result of the opium being
so ready at hand is the frequency of suicides, especially among
women. We heard of a case in which a mother and daughter-in-law
both took opium and died, because of a quarrel over the breaking
of a tea cup.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">16. The opium smoker neglects wife and
children, pawns their clothes for opium, drives them to commit
suicide and on occasion sells them, it may be, into something
worse than slavery.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">17. If the smoker can get his allowance he is
quiet and retiring, but an opium-smoking chair coolie or boatman
will out-quarrel creation to get the wherewithal to fill his
pipe, and no greater sharks disgrace the earth than the yamen
runners of China, who are all the time &quot;raising the autumn
wind&quot; to get the money to buy opium.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">18. The smoker keeps a clear head in regard to
money matters, and except for wasting it for opium he is often
more careful in spending it than non-smokers. Rich, stingy
fathers, whose sons are spending money fast and furious with wine
and women, sometimes hire parasites to lead them into opium
smoking with a hope to saving money.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">19. Opium smoking tends to beggary, and in
China nearly all beggars, thieves and sharpers are given to
opium.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">20. Opium has been used all over China for only
about sixty years and yet, according to the Encyclopedia
Britannica, one-fourth to three- tenths of the people are already
opium smokers. </font></p>

<p><font size="3"> </font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>