
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-74</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B006-274</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/drugwars.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035534 text/html 13710
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:55:21 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:57 GMT
Content-length: 13492
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Drug wars: Menace to America</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h1>Drug wars: Menace to America </h1>

<p><b>Tod Mikuriya, M.D.<br>
</b></p>

<hr>

<p>The escalating increasingly desperate authoritarian efforts to
stem the rising tide of lawlessness caused by drug prohibition
are held in check only by the limitations of shrinking budgets.
These measures have failed by any standards. </p>

<p>Worse, the side effects harm the community through the
overloading of the enforcement/corrections, social, and health
services resources. </p>

<p>Individuals and society are victimized directly and indirectly
by this harmful social policy. </p>

<p>At the core are ignorance and denial that afflict policy
makers at all levels of government and society. </p>

<p>Denial takes many forms... from the economic- the usual free
market mercantilists who fail to include these commodities in
their spreadsheets and ignore these market forces... to the
fundamentalist religious who shut out the facts with moralistic
homilies. Authoritarian public officials facilitate these
policies. </p>

<p>In this tricentennial of the Salem witch trials we are in the
grips of another attack of the &quot;American disease&quot;:
Prohibition. The War on Drugs. </p>

<p>This collective moralistic delusion is seemingly unique in
western civilization. Over a century ago America went through a
painful civil war on drugs that culminated in prohibition of
alcohol from 1919 to 1933. </p>

<p>The agitprop contemporary &quot;War on Drugs&quot; is even
nastier and more intrusive than Prohibition. Added evils include:
</p>

<ul>
    <li>International piracy </li>
    <li>International kidnapping </li>
    <li>Mining of harbors </li>
    <li>Poisoning of forests with herbicides </li>
    <li>De stabilization of Columbia, Peru, Panama, and Nicaragua
    </li>
    <li>Funding anti-government terrorism </li>
    <li>Iran-Contra Scandal </li>
    <li>BCCI Scandal </li>
    <li>Punishment of the user </li>
    <li>Uropharmacomancy- divination of status and freedom by
        urine tests </li>
    <li>Confiscation of property- civil forfeiture criminal abuse
        of civil law </li>
    <li>Default vigilantism of neighbors forced into using small
        claims court </li>
    <li>Funding of police operations with proceeds from seized
        property </li>
    <li>Entrapment with police offering to buy drugs </li>
    <li>Entrapment with police offering to sell drugs </li>
    <li>Entrapment with police manufacturing drugs. </li>
    <li>Encouraging children to turn parents in to police for
        drug involvement </li>
    <li>Taking babies away from mothers who test positive for
        drugs </li>
    <li>No-knock entry and other civil rights attenuation </li>
    <li>Driver's license suspension for unrelated drug crimes </li>
    <li>Warrantless systematic searches on public transportation </li>
    <li>Mandatory minimum sentences derived from irrational
        formulae </li>
    <li>Overcrowding jails, prisons, and probation </li>
    <li>Surveillance of chemical and laboratory apparatus
        transactions </li>
    <li>Reporting of cash transactions over $9,999 </li>
    <li>Confiscation of growing lights </li>
    <li>Seizure of mailing lists from growing supplies stores </li>
    <li>Setting up growing supplies stores to solicit and entrap
        cannabis growers. </li>
    <li>Obtaining public utility records to target potential
        cannabis growers. </li>
    <li>Militarization at state and federal levels- &quot;Posse
        Comitatus&quot; </li>
    <li>Downgrading evidence requirements to &quot;good
        faith&quot; from probable cause. </li>
    <li>Depriving students of federal loans and grants.<br>
    </li>
</ul>

<p>The corruption, violence, and divisive consequences appear to
be lessons that we have forgotten today as social policy mistakes
are repeated.. </p>

<p>The bribing of police, prosecutors, attorneys, and judges </p>

<p>Capitalization of crime by a black marketplace: drugs for
guns. </p>

<p>Subversion of International Law </p>

<p>Funding firearms for the young </p>

<p>Murder and mayhem facilitated </p>

<p>Materialism and alienation </p>

<p>Destruction of families </p>

<p>Abuse of children- robbed of childhood and trust<br>
</p>

<p>At the local level there is little more that can be done that
can be paid for by the public. Vigilante activities while
commendable in their initiative have great potential for abuse.
All pretext to due process and civil liberties are then
hopelessly abandoned to the mob. </p>

<p>Structural emblematic efforts like school uniforms, anti drug
rallies, and exhortations by public figures are feel good
exercises- Like inveighing against Satan. All the while we do
battle with the enemy- us. </p>

<p>The exercises in group think are not unlike the two minutes of
hate rallies depicted in Orwell's 1984. Unlike the centrally
controlled hermetic authoritarian state such efforts are
ineffectual. In the torrent of advertisements to self medicate
anti-drug appeals are ineffectual or ironically humorous. </p>

<p>The ignoring of the reasons and etiologies of the reasons for
the involvement in illicit drugs will delay the solving the
problems attached to a situation is bad and getting worse.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><b>Poisoning of the font of knowledge: </b></p>

<p align="center"><b>&quot;He who pays the piper calls the
tune&quot;<br>
</b></p>

<p>A significant component is the special interest control of
information. Until this problem is acknowledged and solved there
can be no progress. </p>

<p>A drug craving and drug dependent society is facilitated and
exploited by the drug industries. </p>

<p>Sales of over the counter and prescription drugs are
stimulated by intensive advertising campaigns that
&quot;educate&quot; the public starting at a young age. </p>

<p>Spuds MacKenzie and Joe Camel don't make it into the Partners
for a Drug Free America ads as scapegoats. </p>

<p>Most drug prevention education is ineffectual propaganda. </p>

<p>Send them a signal rather than tell the truth. </p>

<p>Beer advertisements encourage dangerous behavior. </p>

<p>Some wine advertisements do not depict wine as a foodstuff. </p>

<p>Over the counter drugs promotions set up a drug-craving
public. </p>

<p>No self-regulation skills are taught to children.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<h2>Solutions </h2>

<p>Development of legalized drugs available through non-profit
pharmacy-based drug users' cooperatives eliminates &quot;crack
houses&quot; or &quot;shooting galleries&quot;. Drug dealers
would disappear from the streets. Criminal enterprise zones are
obsolete. </p>

<p>Restoration of the infrastructure of sports, arts, and music
needs to be top priority. </p>

<p>Jobs and educational opportunity are required to fulfill
dreams instead of the need to distract from or suppress
frustrated, angry, and hopeless feelings. </p>

<p>Drug abusers are unhappy. They suffer from waking perpetual
nightmares of disempowerment. </p>

<p>It is high irony that the illicit free market has brought
money into the minority communities where the federal programs
have failed. It is blind stupidity to ignore the connection
between illicit drugs and guns. If drugs were legalized their
meaning are redefined from expensive forbidden fruit to
affordable commodity. Coca derivatives are then like the other
stimulant, caffeine. There would undoubtedly be some abusive use,
but of a more treatable nature. </p>

<p>The side effects of the imposition of the moralistic model of
the &quot;War on Drugs have been far worse than the drugs
themselves. This illicit mercantile enterprise creates nightmares
that primarily affects the poor. The failure of leaders at all
levels to address this economic reality must be blamed for this
growing social problem. </p>

<p>Treatment for drug abuse would be available upon demand if it
were supported by transaction fees from the sale of drugs. A
harmfulness tax (Grinspoon) or pricing structure commensurate
with potential toxicity would provide additional income for
treatment and abuse prevention. </p>

<p>Advertising of drugs rather than censored by government should
be from self-discipline by the industry. Removal of the exemption
from product liability laws for alcohol and tobacco would insure
self discipline in advertising. </p>

<p>Institutionalized or socialized use behavior will minimize
abusive use. The concept of the &quot;designated driver&quot; is
exemplary of the kind of custom that facilitates alcohol risk
management. <br>
</p>

<p><b>Foreign policy</b> </p>

<p>The economically irrational prohibitionist policy suborns the
Monroe Doctrine with the inadvertent empowerment of authoritarian
regimes that are hostile to the United States. Their hostility is
beyond economic control of the OAS or the World Bank since they
are now funded by the illicit drugs. Good-bye United Fruit. Hello
unnamed successors to Medellin and Cali cartels. </p>

<p>The Sendero Luminosa despite the capture of their leader and
the corrupt military in Peru has set back the emergence of
democracy. The Drug Enforcement Administration and their
&quot;advisors&quot; continue to aggravate the situation.
throughout Latin America. </p>

<p>Columbia continues to suffer terrorism and destruction of
their judiciary. the economy hammered by undercutting the coffee
market. </p>

<p>Panama escalates the money laundering and transshipment.
Business as usual even though president George Bush captured
General Manuel Noriega, former friend and CIA and Drug
Enforcement Administration employee. Operation &quot;Just
Cause&quot; perpetrated urban undevelopment and
&quot;installation&quot; (like a new motor in an old car) of a
&quot;new&quot; government. </p>

<p>The Iran-Contra guns for drugs scandal continues to attenuate
the legitimacy and efficacy in both foreign and domestic policy.
Besides the embargo and mining of the tiny poor country of
Nicaragua with illegal support of the guerrilla army, Lt. Colonel
Oliver North lied to Congress to support former president Ronald
Reagan and his vice president George Bush, commander designate of
the War Against Drugs. </p>

<p>Mexico continues to suffer U.S. raids and interference with
their government by the DEA. Border traffic continues to suffer
disruption and human rights abuses from the drug law enforcement.
</p>

<p>American drug prohibition dims the future of democracy in the
hemisphere. </p>

<p>America exports criminal mercantile opportunity. </p>

<p><b>Prohibitionism, the American Disease </b></p>

<p>American recurrent Prohibitionism is a peculiar majoritarian
auto immune social disease regarded with perplexity by the rest
of the world. With all the exemplary features of America, this
anachronistic problem sadly detracts from world leadership. </p>

<p>American drug prohibition darkens the prospects for the
country's future. Demagogues facilitated by profit-driven special
interest groups create policy and laws that erodes evermore
rights of their citizens. Gradually, and by small increments what
protections were once taken for granted have disappeared. </p>

<p>Lulled into a narcotism induced by television and materialism,
the Trojan horse of authoritarianism has breached the gates of
the city, its moralistic armed clergy busily snuffing out pockets
of critical thinking- ever striving to make the world safe for
profitable hypocrisy. </p>

<p>Alexis de Toqueville's warning of an all pervasive tutelary
power ruling through the manipulation of a distracted
materialistic populace becomes an approaching reality. </p>

<p>THM 12-3-92 </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>