
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-41</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B014-247</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/plea.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101654 text/html 16017
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:16:44 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:28 GMT
Content-length: 15799
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>A Plea for Sanity ...</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_other_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="other.htm">Other Publications related to drug policy</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="25252" -->

<h1>A Plea for Sanity ...<br>
</h1>

<p><b>© Michael Booth 1996</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>The thirty years or so since illicit drug use emerged as a
modern social phenomenon have been marked by inquiry after
inquiry and report after report. Every one of these inquiries and
reports has come to basically the same conclusion, that our
current policy of prohibiting some drugs is not working, and,
more to the point, that it cannot work. This week still more
Australian politicians are about to consider another proposal
that has the potential to start us down a path that might well be
able to circumvent the considerable costs that our current drugs
policies have burdened us with. </p>

<p>The Ministerial Council on Drug Strategies, which is made up
of Health and Police Ministers from every Parliament in Australia
will meet later this week in Hobart in order to consider a
proposal put by the ACT government after four years of detailed
research, a proposal for a trial with the aim of investigating
the controlled supply of heroin as a treatment for dependent
heroin users. </p>

<p>This latest excursion by governments into the field of drug
policy reform comes just after the failure of the Victorian
Premier's Drug Advisory Council, or the Pennington Report, which
recommended wholesale changes to marijuana laws. In fact the bulk
of Pennington's report, which was drafted without any police
serving on the Advisory Council, was fairly innocuous. The report
made eight general and some seventy two specific recommendations
that address: sustained local and statewide action; law
enforcement; legislative change; support and treatment; and
information and education. Most of these recommendations were
uncontroversial motherhood type statements which did not attract
much comment at all, let alone any criticism. </p>

<p>The conservative thinkers and anti-drug warriors who are
standing in the way of meaningful reform of drugs policy must
have had apoplexy when they read recommendation 7 of the
Pennington Report. This particular recommendation called on the
Victorian government to amend the 1981 Drugs Poisons and
Controlled Substances Act must have given the anti-drug warriors
apoplexy. The twelve specific recommendations that detail the
amendments to the Controlled Substances Act calls for the use and
possession of less than 25 grams of marijuana to no longer be an
offence, the cultivation of up to five plants per household no
longer be an offence, the trafficking of marijuana to an adult be
dealt with by a caution, while trafficking to a minor continues
to be subject to heavy penalties. Local governments be given the
power to regulate offensive behaviour under the influence of
marijuana under the Summary Offences Act 1966. All convictions
for possession and use of small amounts of marijuana to be
expunged. The initial penalty for the use and possession of small
quantities of hard drugs to be a police caution and referral to a
drug assessment and treatment service, with escalating penalties
for subsequent offences. Imprisonment should be used as a last
resort penalty for drug users. Drug trafficking offences should
remain on the books, and be augmented by new penalties against
driving under the influence of drugs. </p>

<p>Despite the all too public focus on marijuana, the Advisory
Council was originally established in the wake of a flood of
heroin onto the streets of Victoria, and a subsequent spate of
overdose deaths. The Advisory Council noted the connection
between marijuana and heroin - they are both illegal - and based
their recommendations on the desirability of removing the most
widely used illicit drug - marijuana - from the same channels of
distribution and supply that also bring one of the least widely
used, but nevertheless destructive drugs - heroin - to young
Australians. </p>

<p>Sadly the Pennington report fell on largely deaf ears. The
Victorian Police Commissioner weighed into the debate, saying
that to implement the findings of the Advisory Council report
would be to &quot;raise the white flag of surrender&quot; in the
war on drugs. Disparaging remarks about the thrust of the report,
and the general unwillingness of politicians to provide any
leadership on drugs policy saw Premier Kennett, despite his
reputation as a &quot;can-do&quot; leader who is not afraid to
tackle the hard questions, back pedal from his public commitment
to implement the findings of the report. </p>

<p>Now there are more politicians considering a different aspect
of reform to drug policy - the proposal to investigate the
usefulness of heroin in the treatment of opiate dependent drug
users. No laws have to be changed, no international treaties
repudiated. There is no proposal to make heroin freely available
through supermarkets. There is instead an extremely modest and
conservative proposition before the Ministers to commit
themselves to a research project. It says much for the politics
of drug policy reform that even the ACT heroin trial is likely to
be knocked back. </p>

<p>In the last few years heroin use has emerged from the hidden
depths of the sub-culture that it has inhabited since Keith
Richards and Lou Reed made it trendy and fashionable in the early
1970s. The last six months or so have seen articles about heroin
in publications like JUICE, Rolling Stone, the Sydney Morning
Herald, as well as more conservative magazines like Marie Claire
and Cosmopolitan, the latter with a lingerie clad model injecting
herself. The films Pulp Fiction and Trainspotting has put the
spotlight squarely on heroin use, and there is also the three
part documentary series currently being shown on ABC television,
Dealing With The Demon. </p>

<p>All of this public scrutiny of heroin has led some
commentators to argue that it is the attention paid to and the
coverage of heroin in popular culture that is responsible for the
upswing in heroin use. Given the essentially conservative nature
of our mass media it is much more likely that all the coverage of
heroin is a reflection of heroin use, and not a promotion of it.
Regardless, Australia is indeed experiencing something of a surge
in the use of heroin, and there is thus increased pressure on
many parties to do something about it. </p>

<p>For most in society, &quot;doing something about the drug
problem&quot; has meant increased penalties for use and
trafficking, as well as associated legislation that can
confiscate any assets from accused drug dealers, the reporting of
cash transactions, increased police powers of surveillance and
detention, and so forth. Indeed, the Royal Commission into the
NSW Police Service has heard evidence from one disgraced police
officer after another that it was their ineffectiveness at
keeping drugs off the streets that led them to set themselves up
as judge, jury, and executioner, and plant drugs on suspects,
forge and falsify confessions, and finally, go into business
themselves on the grounds that someone was always going to sell
drugs, and it might as well be them. </p>

<p>The report of the Victorian Premiers Drug Advisory Council is
not without flaws. It has a somewhat mechanical view of drugs and
drug use that overlooks the fact that drugs are first and
foremost a phenomenon of culture and lifestyle, and that drug
taking behaviour is learned behaviour. Despite its defects,
however, the report does implicitly recognise the futility of
trying to control drugs by placing an outright ban on them,
arguing instead that in order to alter the impact of drugs on
society we have to alter the circumstances in which people are
introduced to drugs, and the circumstances in which people
purchase and consume drugs. </p>

<p>The vote later this week on the ACT heroin trial, as was the
case with the Pennington Report, has given a number of
opportunities to address much of the harm done by drugs in
society, the more so given that all that the politicians
concerned have to do is to concur with the admittedly difficult
decisions and recommendations that have resulted from the
independent and scholarly inquiries that have examined drugs
policies. Those arguing for drugs policy reform will probably be
disappointed, though, as these latest carefully researched and
thought out recommendations finish up following the findings and
recommendations of every other major inquiry into drug policies,
findings and recommendations which have also recognised the sheer
impossibility of using a policy of prohibition to minimise the
damage done to our society by the use of drugs. </p>

<p>Herein lies the real tragedy. The politics of drug law reform
will ensure the triumph of the irrational and illogical views of
those like the Victorian Police Commissioner, who argued that
proposed new laws that permitted households to grow five
marijuana plants for personal consumption were simply
unenforceable. The irony lies with the inability of the
Commissioner to see that current drug laws that totally prohibit
the growing, possession and use of marijuana are similarly
unenforceable. </p>

<p>The anti-drug warriors who are manning the barricades to
protect society against the flow of illicit drugs are somewhat
like the French generals who placed their faith in the Maginot
Line to stop the German army. While the police and other social
conservatives are trying to argue that reforming the laws will
open up Australia to illicit drugs they are overlooking the fact
that, like the Maginot Line, their own line in the &quot;war on
drugs&quot; has been breached in so many places as to be
practically and symbolically useless. Drugs are widespread in
society. There is no way that law reform can possibly make drugs
any more widespread than they currently are now. </p>

<p>Those opposing drug law reform might argue that changing the
laws will send the &quot;wrong message to society, but they must
also stop and consider what sort of message is sent to society by
the blind and stubborn refusal to even examine the evidence on
drug use, and to consider alternatives to a set of policies that
have manifestly failed, and must manifestly fail, in achieving
their aims and objectives. </p>

<p>No better argument against law enforcement can be imagined
than to consider what might happen if the forces of prohibition
and law enforcement were to become stunningly successful. Imagine
that every drug dealer and drug user in Australia were to come
forward and line up outside Police Headquarters one morning, each
with a bag of dope in one hand and a signed confession in the
other. It sounds like a law enforcement officer's dream come
true, they wouldn't even have to go to all the trouble of
tracking down the drug users and dealers, all they would have to
do would be to process the self confessed offenders, and punish
them according to the law. Drug problem solved. </p>

<p>In fact such a scenario is the stuff of nightmares for
Australian Police Forces. During 1995 nearly forty per cent of
all Australian males admitted to having used illicit drugs, as
did nearly thirty per cent of females. State and Commonwealth
legal systems would collapse under the weight of a strategy that
actually detected and prosecuted all the millions of those
Australians, most of whom must be otherwise law abiding and tax
paying citizens. Assuming that the those arguing against drug
policy reform are not asking Australians to write a blank cheque
to detect and prosecute drug offences, they should be able to say
to what extent the law can, and should be enforceable. Even a
cursory examination of the figures will show that the laws
against drugs are not, and can never be enforceable. Even if the
Victorian Police Commissioner wanted to argue that the police
concentrate on those drugs that are demonstrably more dangerous
than marijuana, drugs like amphetamines, heroin, cocaine, and
ecstasy, he will still have to acknowledge that the policy he is
supporting is trying to regulate the behaviour of an enormous
number of Victorians, a number that would overwhelm his police
force and the court system should his preferred strategy of law
enforcement actually be successful. </p>

<p>Our current drug laws and policies are the result of a
mish-mash of historical accident, racial prejudice, international
geopolitics, outdated morals, misleading ideas about medicine and
health, and the natural conservatism of Australian society and
the politicians who have resolutely refused to display any
leadership. It might be argued that our current laws and
policies, given their origins, are just too hard to change. It
might also be argued that it doesn't matter much anyway. Those
who want drugs can get them, and the rest of us can hide behind
the ineffectual remnants of the Maginot Line in the war on drugs,
secure in the knowledge that we are not sending the &quot;wrong
message&quot;, whatever that may be. </p>

<p>It does matter, though. Hundreds of young Australians are
suffering and dying as a result of these laws, laws that cannot
prevent a flood of impure heroin that is leading to increased
numbers of overdoses, and increased levels of hepatitis through
needle sharing, laws that make marijuana the most profitable cash
crop in the country and ensure that the profits go to criminal
figures and corrupt cops, laws that ensure that some of the
people who use a particular drug are punished and marginalised,
while other users get off scot free, and users of other drugs
altogether are given the protection of the law and the assistance
of society. Isn't it time for a change. John Howard climbed on
top of thirty five dead Australians to introduce a politically
difficult decision to ban semi-automatic weapons. Surely it isn't
asking too much of him to listen to the experts, and climb on top
of the thousands and thousands casualties of the drug laws to
argue for another politically difficult decision? </p>

<p>finis </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_other_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="other.htm">Other Publications related to drug policy</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="25252" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>