
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B32-6</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B045-28</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/staff6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131454 text/html 40474
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:14:41 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:42 GMT
Content-length: 40256
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Dealing With Drug Abuse - Altered States of Consciousness</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->

<h1>Dealing with Drug Abuse </h1>

<p><b>A Report to the Ford Foundation</b> </p>

<p>THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT </p>

<p align="center">STAFF PAPER 6 </p>

<p><font size="5">Altered States of Consciousness<br>
</font><i>by Andrew T. Weil, M.D.</i></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><br>
<font size="2">The Pharmacology of Consciousness-altering Drugs</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Altered States of Consciousness, Drugs, and
Society <br>
<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>THE PHARMACOLOGY OF
CONSCIOUSNESS</i>-<i>ALTERING DRUGS <br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="2">The single most important fact to emerge from
research on consciousness-altering drugs in this century is that
individual responses to them result from set and setting as much
as from the drug itself. Occasionally particular combinations of
set and setting completely reverse the &quot;pharmacological
action&quot; of a drug as described in a text on pharmacology.
For example, with proper suggestion and in a restful setting,
amphetamines can produce sedation. Drug, set, and setting,
therefore, appear to be interdependent in shaping drug responses;
no one factor seems vastly more determining than any other.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">This principle is logical enough. No
physiological event takes place without a corresponding event in
the central nervous system. Therefore, every &quot;bodily&quot;
response is actually a psychosomatic response. In the case of
medical drugs like digitalis and atropine, no one is very much
interested in the psychic component of response, so that we have
come to think of these substances as producing constant
physiological responses (although there is still enough variation
from patient to patient to make their clinical administration a
ticklish business). In the case of &quot;psychoactive&quot; drugs
like heroin and LSD, the psychic component of response becomes
the focus of attention; but, because we do not understand it
according to present models of consciousness, we try in vain to
make these drugs, too, fit our simplistic conceptions of
pharmacology. How nice it would be if we could derive a method of
predicting an individual's response to a psychoactive drug from
purely pharmacological considerations. But we cannot do so.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Two upsetting conclusions follow from this line
of reasoning: First, it is impossible to talk meaningfully about
the effects of psychoactive drugs, except by reference to their
effects on specific individuals on specific occasions; and
secondly, pharmacology is not a useful approach to understanding
the effects of these drugs either on individuals or on society. A
pharmacologist, of course, would disagree with me, but his view
of things would be as biased in its own way as that of the
law-enforcement officer who favors continued efforts to stop
people from using drugs by means of the criminal law. Most of
what is written about LSD and heroin in pharmacology texts is
meaningless in this sense: It says nothing about what will happen
to you if you take LSD at eight o'clock tonight; gives you no
power to help me if I come to you for assistance in breaking a
heroin habit; and is quite irrelevant to any considerations of
what the United States ought to do about the continuing increase
in negative use of these drugs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">What we need is a new science of consciousness,
based on subjective experience rather than on objective
physiology. The materialistic psychology that has dominated
Western thought about consciousness is no longer adequate to the
task of explaining the mind in terms that are useful to us. (An
especially galling aspect of the drug problem for the medical
profession is that psychologically ignorant users of drugs appear
to have more practical information about their effects than
doctors have.) I predict that, from an experiential viewpoint,
many unifying principles of drug states will become visible. In
the pharmacological model, there is some unity; for example,
alcohol, barbiturates, and minor tranquilizers are grouped
together as sedative-hypnotics-a useful grouping, because it
alerts us to the danger that drugs like chlordiazepoxide
(Librium) and meprobamate (Equanil) produce a dependence
resembling dependence on alcohol. But pharmacology offers no clue
why the psychological changes of a marijuana high have much in
common with those of an LSD trip, or why heroin users may be able
to satisfy their need for a certain experience by inhaling
nitrous oxide, a general anesthetic.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In the following pages, I will review briefly
what is known and what is not known about the major
pharmacological classes of psychoactive drugs-briefly, because,
in view of the limited usefulness of this scheme of
classification, it is not worth discussing, except at the most
general level. <br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">SEDATIVE-HYPNOTICS <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Alcohol and the barbiturates are associated
with stubborn forms of drug dependence, marked by relatively
constant, doserelated physiological changes, some of which become
irreversible over time. These changes include tolerance (probably
the clinical correlate of the induction of degradative enzymes in
the liver) and withdrawal (a syndrome that persists until
metabolism readjusts to its predrug state). Unlike narcotics,
alcohol and barbiturates cause life-threatening reactions when
they are withdrawn from addicted persons. Chronic use of
sedative-hypnotics is associated with structural damage to the
nervous system; this association is stronger than for any of the
other classes of drugs discussed below. Alcoholism is
particularly associated with chronic liver disease, possibly
because alcohol is directly toxic to liver cells. Barbiturates
are often implicated in accidental selfpoisonings, because
tolerance to the lethal dose does not develop as fast as
tolerance to the hypnotic dose. The minor tranquilizers have been
promoted as anti-anxiety agents, but they behave just like mild
sedative-hypnotics.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Most persons use sedative-hypnotics to reduce
anxiety by substituting a &quot;high&quot; state of consciousness
that permits sleep, relaxation, or the mild disinhibition valued
in certain social encounters.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">These drugs are associated with dependence
because (1) they do not affect the source of anxiety; (2) the
development of tolerance encourages more and more frequent use;
(3) their use in our culture is strongly linked to destructive
(especially self destructive) behavior patterns; and (4) people
in our society do not know how to make use of altered states of
consciousness.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The pharmacological model of- these drugs
offers no hope of cure or prevention of dependence on
sedative-hypnotics. It can, however, offer treatment of acute
toxic episodes and withdrawal reactions. It seems unlikely that
elucidation of the exact metabolic derangements underlying
dependence will open the way to any pharmacological means of
intervening in the course of the disease.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Nothing important is known about the action of
these drugs on the mind. Since their major action is depression
of neurological activity in the central nervous system, it has
been assumed that the &quot;paradoxical stimulation&quot;
observed with low doses (the high that precedes the stupor of
alcohol intoxication) is the result of inhibition of inhibitory
brain centers (which are conveniently postulated to respond to
lower doses). However, some researchers have suggested that low
doses may have direct excitatory action on nerve cells. That this
kind of debate should still be going on in 1970 suggests how far
we are from understanding conscious experience in physiological
terms. (If alcohol intoxication were looked at by an experiential
science of consciousness, it might turn out that the high is not
causally related to the drug, which might be a pure depressant,
after all.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It is ironic that we have chosen our one
sanctioned intoxicant from this class of drugs. In no other class
is pharmacological action (in this case, on liver and nerve-cell
metabolism) so clearly related to long-range physiological
deterioration.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">NARCOTICS<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Like sedative-hypnotics, narcotics are central
depressants that produce stubborn dependence. Unlike
sedative-hypnotics, they are not directly associated with
long-range physiological damage or life-threatening withdrawal
reactions. Tolerance to narcotics develops faster than tolerance
to sedative-hypnotics; hence, visible dependence develops faster.
Because narcotics are illegal, their use is much more bound up
with antisocial, negative, and, often, self-destructive behavior.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">&quot;Addiction&quot; to and
&quot;withdrawal&quot; from narcotics have become stereotypes in
the public mind, but reality does not often conform to these
conceptions. Far from being a physiological constant, dependent
on dose and frequency of administration of a drug, the physical
craving for narcotics is very much a matter of set and setting.
Some individuals, when they find tolerance appearing, work out a
method of spacing injections of heroin so that they never become
really &quot;hooked,&quot; even though they use the drug
regularly for years. (The number of such persons is unknown but
may be greater than the number of hooked addicts; they often lead
stable lives and may never come to the attention of groups
concerned with narcotics.) Other people seem not to be able to
handle the development of tolerance and quickly go on to
experience strong physiological dependence. Similarly, withdrawal
reactions from narcotics are strongly shaped by
nonpharmacological factors. In a supportive setting with strong
positive suggestion, a heroin addict can undergo comfortable
withdrawal with no medication other than aspirin.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Narcotics do not affect the primary reception
of pain or other sensory stimuli; rather, they alter secondary
perception. A person in pain, given morphine, might say,
&quot;The pain is still there, but it doesn't bother me.&quot; In
other words, the pain is perceived through an altered state of
consciousness. Pharmacological research on narcotics has been
unproductive. In the first place, no real success has been
achieved in separating the analgesic and addicting properties of
this class of compounds. Secondly, the metabolic changes
accompanying narcotics dependence are beyond our present
understanding; even if they were understood, there is no reason
to think our difficulties with addiction would be any fewer.
Thirdly, no purely pharmacological method of controlling
addiction has come along.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The problems associated with heroin (death from
overdose; hepatitis; crime; mental and physical deterioration)
appear to have no causal relationship to the pharmacological
action of the drug. Rather, they correlate better with features
of the social context in which heroin exists in our country. In
fact, the discrepancy between pharmacology and experience is best
illustrated by phenomena accompanying dependence on drugs of this
class.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED DRUGS <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Drugs that stimulate the central and
sympathetic nervous systems include the amphetamines (a chemical
class), several drugs that are chemically but not
pharmacologically distinct from the amphetamines (like
methylphenidate-Ritalin; and phemnetrazine-Preludin) , and
cocaine. These drugs cause the release of norepinephrine from
adrenergic nerve endings. Tolerance to them develops very
quickly, but withdrawal from them, although sometimes a
psychological ordeal, has few physiological accompaniments in
contrast to withdrawal from sedative-hypnotics or narcotics.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Little is known about the neurological
consequences of chronic, heavy use of amphetamines. Speed freaks
who take enormous doses of amphetamines intravenously develop a
paranoid psychosis that looks suspiciously organic and may be
correlated with depletion of the body's stores of norepinepbrine.
(It may just as well be correlated with the prolonged wakefulness
induced by these drugs.) To date, there is no firm evidence of
actual neurological deterioration resulting from any of these
drugs, including cocaine. Although low doses do not change eating
behavior in most people (contrary to the claims of
pharmaceutical-industry advertising), very high doses do shut off
the hypothalamic hunger center and can result in severe
malnutrition. The high incidence of hepatitis among amphetamine
users has led to speculation that the drug may be directly toxic
to liver cells. (If this hepatitis is, indeed, chemical, it may
also be due to a common contaminant of black-market methadrine.)</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Until recently, amphetamine dependence was
considered less serious than narcotic dependence, because it was
&quot;Iess<b> </b>physiological.&quot; In fact, however,
amphetamine dependence is more serious, because it is inherently
less stable. When a person begins to use a tolerance-producing
drug, he must soon face the problem of trying to stabilize his
use in order to keep his life from being disrupted. More than any
other class of drugs, the amphetamines foil a user's attempt to
reach equilibrium with his habit, because they induce such
powerful and unrelenting tolerance. Consequently, users develop
erratic patterns of use, such as &quot;spree shooting&quot; and
alternation with barbiturates and, eventually, with heroin. The
high correlation of amphetamine use with impulsive and violent
behavior is consistent with this pharmacological instability.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Abusive oral use of diet pills may be
associated with serious psychological problems but is not
accompanied by the physical changes associated with intravenous
use.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">HALLUCINOGENS<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Hallucinogens stimulate the central and
sympathetic nervous systems (some are simple derivatives of
amphetamine) but, in addition, induce perceptual changes and the
kinds of mental states associated with trance, mystic rapture,
and psychosis. Except for the visual hallucinations (in
particular, the everchanging, geometric patterns seen on
surfaces), most of these effects are common in altered states of
consciousness unrelated to drugs. The hallucinogens differ from
one another only in duration of action and in relative prominence
of stimulant versus psychic effects. Pharmacological research
tells us little more about them than about the amphetamines; it
offers no satisfactory explanation for the effects of
hallucinogens on consciousness. No one takes these drugs
frequently enough to get into pharmacological trouble with them.
(Tolerance is so rapid that regular consumption is impractical;
you can't stay high on LSD for too long at one stretch.)
Therefore, the pharmacological body of data is quite irrelevant
to our understanding of the difficulties people get into with
hallucinogens. Also, there is no indication that use of these
drugs is associated with physical damage of any kind, in either
short- or long-term use.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Most bad trips on hallucinogens are
nonpharmacological panic reactions. Others are nonspecific toxic
psychoses-overdose reactions that disappear when the drug wears
off.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">MARIJUANA<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Marijuana differs from the hallucinogens in two
ways: It does not cause hallucinations, and it is not a
stimulant. In fact, marijuana has virtually no significant
pharmacological actions, which probably accounts for its
popularity. It provides a high with minimal physiological
accompaniment, so that people who are anxious about it can easily
pretend to themselves that they have done nothing to their bodies
or minds. For the same reason, it is useless to study marijuana
in the pharmacological laboratory, because there is no
physiological handle on the phenomenon under consideration.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Except for the possibility of lung disease
related to chronic inhalation of the drug, there is no evidence
that marijuana is physically harmful in short- or long-term
usage. No other drug is like marijuana in having so few
physiological effects. For this reason, it seems wise to think of
marijuana as a class unto itself, no more closely related to the
hallucinogens than to the sedative hypnotics. Its unique chemical
structure is consistent with this idea.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">TOXINS, </font><font size="1">GENERAL
ANESTHETICS, AND SPECIAL SUBSTANCES</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Persons who enjoy the altered state of
consciousness called delirium (actually, a nonspecific response
of the brain to a toxin) will occasionally induce it by inhaling
volatile solvents and petroleum distillates such as glue.
Repeated use of defiriants appears to be correlated with
structural damage to the central nervous system. In addition,
petroleum distillates are frequently toxic to the liver,
especially when taken with alcohol. Delirium is characterized by
confusion, disorientation, and hallucination; it is sometimes
called &quot;acute brain syndrome&quot; or &quot;toxic
psychosis,&quot; and it can also occur in response to overdoses
of any of the classes of drugs mentioned above, including
marijuana.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">General anesthesia is an altered state of
consciousness induced by a heterogenous class of chemicals, some
of which (ether and nitrous oxide) are occasionally taken for
nonmedical purposes. It is instructive to reflect that no
satisfactory theory has been proposed thus far to explain general
anesthesia in pbarmacological or neurophysiological terms, even
though millions of persons have been put into this state under
close observation. Because the psychic phenomena of general
anesthesia can be reproduced nonchemically (by hypnosis, for
example), it is tempting to speculate that this altered state of
consciousness, too, would be better understood from the point of
view of subjective experience rather than from the point of view
of objective pharmacology.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Drug users who are deprived of their usual
drugs sometimes resort to special substances like nutmeg and
morning-glory seeds to get high. Many natural products of very
diverse pharmacology have been so employed, and it seems likely
that set and setting determine whether they produce pleasant
altered states of consciousness, sickness, or, indeed, no effects
at all.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>ALTERED STATES OF
CONSCIOUSNESS,</i></font> </p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>DRUGS, AND SOCIETY <br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="2">The general thesis of this paper is that drug
experience can be understood only if it is viewed as an altered
state of consciousness rather than as a pharmacological event. A
subthesis is that this approach will make it possible for society
to reduce significantly the problems now associated with the use
of psychoactive drugs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">All of us experience occasional states of
consciousness different from our ordinary waking state.
Obviously, sleep is such a state. Less obviously, perhaps, are
daydreaming and movie watching unusual modes of awareness. Other
distinct varieties of conscious states are trance, hypnosis,
psychosis, general anesthesia, delirium, meditation, and mystic
rapture. In our country, until recently, there has been no
serious investigation of altered states of consciousness as such,
because most Western scientists who study the mind regard
consciousness as annoyingly nonmaterial and, therefore,
inaccessible to direct investigation. Their research has focused
on the objective correlates of consciousness instead of on
consciousness itself. In the East, on the other hand, where
nonmateriality is not seen as a bar to direct investigation, much
thought has been devoted to altered states of consciousness, and
a science of consciousness based on subjective experience has
developed.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It would make sense to study all forms of
nonordinary consciousness together, because they seem to have
much in common. For example, trance, whether spontaneous or
induced by a hypnotist, is in many ways simply an extension of
the daydreaming state in which a person's awareness is focused
and directed inward rather than outward. Except for its voluntary
and purposeful nature, meditation is not easily distinguishable
from trance. Zen masters warn their meditating students to ignore
makyo-sensory distortions that often take the form of visions
seen by mystics in rapturous states or hallucinations similar to
those of schizophrenics. And, curiously, the state of being high
on drugs shares many characteristics with these other forms of
altered consciousness, regardless of what drug induces the high.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">It is my contention that the desire to alter
consciousness is an innate psychological drive arising out of the
neurological structure of the human brain. Strong evidence for
this idea comes from observations of very young children, who
regularly use techniques of consciousness alteration on
themselves and one another when they think no adults are watching
them. These methods include whirling until vertigo and collapse
ensue, hyperventilating and then having another child squeeze
one's chest to produce unconsciousness, and being choked around
the neck to cause fainting. Such practices appear to be
universal, irrespective of culture, and present at ages when
social conditioning is unlikely to be an important influence (for
example, in two- and three-year-olds). Psychiatrists have paid
little attention to these common activities of children. Freud,
who did note them, called them &quot;sexual
equivalents&quot;-which they may be, although that formulation is
not very useful for our purposes.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">As children grow older, they soon learn that
experiences of the same sort may be had chemically-for instance,
by inhaling the fumes of volatile solvents found around the
house. General anesthesia is another chemically induced altered
state of consciousness that many children are exposed to in their
early years. (The current drug-using generation was extensively
tonsillectomized, by the way.) Until a few years ago, most
children in our society who wanted to continue indulging in these
states were content to use alcohol, the one intoxicant we make
available legally. (Incidentally, there are some good reasons
that alcohol may not be a wise choice for sole legal
intoxicant-apart from its devastating medical effects.) Now,
large numbers of young people are seeking chemical alterations of
consciousness through a variety of illegal and medically
disapproved drugs. It is possible to see this change as primarily
a reaction to other social upheavals-and, certainly, much has
been written about the social causes of drug use. It may be more
useful, however, to consider what many drug users themselves say:
They choose illegal drugs over alcohol in order to get better
highs. There is no question that social factors influence the
forms of drug use in a society, or that changes in patterns of
use of intoxicants go along with major cultural upheavals, but we
must remember that every culture throughout history has made use
of chemicals to alter consciousness.* Instead of looking for
explanations of drug taking in a foreign war or in domestic
tension, therefore, perhaps we should pay more careful attention
to how we allow people to satisfy chemically their innate drive
to experience other states of awareness.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Most societies, like our own, are uncomfortable
about having people go off into trances, mystic raptures, and
hallucinatory intoxications. Indeed, the reason we have laws
against possession of drugs in the first place is to discourage
people from getting high. But innate, neuropsychological drives
cannot be banned by legislation. They will be satisfied at any
cost. And the cost in our country is very great, for, by trying
to deny young people these important experiences, we maximize the
probability that they will obtain them in negative ways-that is,
in ways harmful to themselves and to society.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Why are altered states of consciousness
important? Primarily because they seem to be doorways to the next
stages of evolutionary development of the human nervous system.
We commonly assume that a major division of our nervous system
(the autonomic system) is involuntary-beyond our conscious
control -and that this leaves us open to many kinds of illnesses
we can do nothing about (for example, cardiovascular diseases).
Yet, hypnotized subjects often show an astonishing degree of
autonomic control, to the extent of developing authentic blisters
when touched with cold objects represented to them as being red
hot. And Yogis frequently demonstrate voluntary control of heart
action and blood flow that astonishes physicians; they themselves
ascribe their successes to regular periods of meditative effort,
asserting that there is no limit to what consciousness can effect
through the &quot;involuntary&quot; nervous system. In addition,
creative genius has long been observed to correlate well with
psychosis, and much of the world's highest religious and
philosophic thought has come out of altered states of
consciousness.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">At the very least, altered states of
consciousness appear to have potential for strongly positive
psychic development. Most Americans do not get the chance to
exploit this potential, because their society gives them no
support. The prevailing attitude toward psychosis is
representative. We define this experience as a disease, compel
people who have it to adopt the role of sick, disabled patients,
and then ply them with special kinds of sedatives that we call
&quot;antipsychotic agents&quot; but that simply make it hard for
them to think and to express their altered state of consciousness
in ways disturbing to the staffs of psychiatric hospitals. The
individual learns from early childhood to be guilty about, or
afraid of, episodes of nonordinary awareness and is forced to
pursue antisocial behavior patterns if he wants to continue
having such episodes. Negative drug taking has become a popular
form of this kind of behavior.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I implied earlier that alcohol may not fulfill
the need for alteration of consciousness as well as other drugs.
Like all psychoactive drugs, it does induce a high with positive
potential. (A vast body of prose, poetry, and song from all ages
testifies to this &quot;good side&quot; of alcohol.) The trouble,
however, is that an alcohol high is difficult to control; in
drinking, one slips easily into the dose range where the effects
become unpleasant (nausea, dizziness, uncoordination) and
interfere with mental activity. Marijuana, on the other hand,
maintains a &quot;useful&quot; high over an extremely wide dose
range and allows a remarkable degree of control over the
experience. But, as with other drugs, set and setting determine
the effects of marijuana by interacting with the drug's<b> </b>pharmacological
action. Unfortunately, current social factors create strongly
negative sets and settings, thus increasing the likelihood that
users will be drawn into the negative side of consciousness
alteration instead of being encouraged to explore its positive
potential. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">By focusing our attention on drugs rather than
on the states of consciousness people seek in them, we develop
notions that lead to unwise behavior. Users who think that highs
come from joints and pills rather than from their own nervous
systems get into trouble when the joints and pills no longer work
so well (a universal experience among regular consumers of all
drugs) : Their drug use becomes increasingly neurotic-more and
more frequent and compulsive with less and less reward. In fact,
this misconception is the initial step in the development of drug
dependence, regardless of whether the drug is marijuana or
heroin, whether it produces physiological dependence or not. And
dependence cannot be broken until the misconception is
straightened out, even though the physiological need is
terminated. (Hence the failure of methadone to cure addicts of
being addicts.) By contrast, a user who realizes that he has been
using the drug merely as a trigger or excuse for having an
experience that is a natural and potentially valuable element of
human consciousness comes to see that the drugged state is not
exactly synonymous with the experience he wants. He begins to
look for ways to isolate the desired aspect of the chemically
induced state and often finds that some form of meditation will
satisfy his desire to get high more effectively. One sees a great
many experienced drug takers give up drugs for meditation, but
one does not see any meditators give up meditation for drugs.
This observation has led some drug educators to hope that young
people can be encouraged to abandon drugs in favor of systems
like the transcendental meditation of Maharishi Mahesh. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Society labors under the same delusions as
dependent users. It thinks that problems come from drugs rather
than from people. Therefore, it tries to stop people from using
drugs or to make drugs disappear rather than to educate people
about the &quot;right&quot; use of drugs. No drug is inherently
good or evil; all have potential for positive use, as much as for
negative use. The point is not to deny people the experience of
chemically altered consciousness but to show them how to have it
in forms that are not harmful to themselves or to society. And
the way to do that is to recognize the simple truth that the
experience comes from the mind, not from the drug. (Once you have
learned from a drug what being high really is, you can begin to
reproduce such state without the drug; all persons who accomplish
this feat testify that the nonpharmacological high is superior.)
Ironically, society's efforts to stop drug abuse are the very
factors causing drug abuse. There really is no Drug Problem at
all, rather a Drug-Problem Problem. And it will continue growing
until we admit that drugs have a positive potential that can be
realized.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Many non-Western societies have experimented
with this alternative. The primitive Indian tribes of the Amazon
basin, for example, make free use of drugs but have no problems
of abuse. That is, although these groups use a multitude of
hallucinogenic barks seeds, and leaves, no one takes the drugs to
express hostility toward society, to drop out of the social
process, to rebel against his parents or teachers, or to hurt
himself. These Indians admit that their world contains substances
that alter consciousness; they do not try to make them go away or
to prevent theiruse. They accept the fact that people, especially
children, seekout altered states of consciousness. And, rather
than attempt to deny their children experiences they know to be
important, they allow them to have them under the guidance of
experts in such matters, usually the tribal shamans. Recognizing
that drugs have potential for harm, the shaman surrounds their
use with ritual and conveys the rationale of this ritual to his
charges. Furthermore, the states of consciousness induced by
drugs in these remote areas are used for positive ends, and are
not just lapsed into out of boredom or frustration. Some drugs
are used only by shamans, for communing with the spirit world or
for diagnosing illness; others are used by adolescents in
coming-of-age rites; still others are consumed by the whole tribe
as recreational intoxicants on special occasions.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I am not suggesting that we return to a
primitive life in the jungle, but I do think we have much to
learn from these Amazonian peoples. One reason we are so locked
into wrong ways of thinking about drugs is that no one can see a
goal worth working for, only problems to work against. The Indian
model is an ideal -not something to be substituted overnight for
our present situation, but something to be kept in mind as the
direction to move toward. Let me list the three chief features of
this ideal system as proposals for our own society:<i> <br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><i>1. Recognition of the importance of altered
states of consciousness and the existence of a normal drive to
experience them. </i>There is a considerable lack of
enlightenment in scientific circles concerning the nature of
consciousness, in both its ordinary and its nonordinary forms,
and there would doubtless be resistance from the professional
community to these propositions. But, because consciousness is,
above all, a matter of inner experience, most laymen are quite
willing to accept these ideas. Many adults have simply forgotten
their childhood experiences with altered states of consciousness
and recall them vividly as soon as they try to. Therefore, I
think the possibilities for re-education are good.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">As thinking about drugs moves in this
direction, society will become less and less inclined to try to
frustrate the human need for periods of altered awareness, so
that the role of the criminal law in this area should diminish.
At the same time ' there may be a culmination of the present
efforts of younger scientists to bring the study of altered
states of consciousness into the &quot;respectable&quot;
disciplines and institutions. A very great body of information
exists on these states; it simply needs collecting and arranging,
so that we can begin to correlate it with what we know
objectively about the nervous system.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2"><i>2. Provision for the experience of altered
states of consciousness in growing children. </i>Rather than
drive children to seek out these states surreptitiously, we must
aim to do as the Indians do: let children learn by experience
under the watchful guidance of an elder. &quot;Drug
education&quot; in the United States means thinly disguised
attempts to scare children away from drugs. True education would
let those who wanted to explore consciousness do so without guilt
and with adult support and supervision. Such explorations should
include drug experience, because drugs are legitimate tools for
altering awareness. Because they have a potential for negative
use, they cannot be used wantonly but must be used in certain
prescribed ways, at certain times, and for certain purposes.
Thus, we must develop a &quot;ritual&quot; for drug experience
analogous to the Indian tribal rituals. We will also need analogs
of the shamans-persons who, by virtue of their own experience
with altered states of consciousness, are qualified to supervise
the education of the young.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2"><i>3. Incorporation of the experience into
society for positive ends. </i>It is not enough that we come to
tolerate alterations of consciousness. We must put them to use
for the good of individuals and society. We have come to think of
drug experience as an escape from reality; but, if it is so in
our society, we have made it so. People who can openly and
purposefully spend time away from ordinary consciousness seem
superior when they function <b>in </b>ordinary consciousness.
They are healthier, both physically and mentally; they lead more
productive lives; and they can become numerous enough to
constitute a great natural resource in any society. In addition,
they may be utilizing their nervous systems to their fullest
potentials goal most of us are far from reaching.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">To these three aims, I would add a fourth, not
derived from the Indian pattern:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><i>4. Encouragement of individuals to satisfy
their needs for altered consciousness by means that do not
require external tools. </i>Any tools used to alter
consciousness-not just drugs-tend to cause dependence, because
they delude people into believing that the experience comes from
them rather than involuntarily from within the mind. To guard
against this tendency, therefore, we must educate people and not
try to do away with the tools. Our goal should be to train people
to live safely in a world where there are things with potential
for both harm and good, to show them that inimical forces can be
changed into friendly ones. To do this, we should not try to
shield young people from things that may harm them; they must
learn by experience. Perhaps it is possible to convince
adolescents that meditation is better than drugs as an approach
to altered consciousness, but they will not believe it unless
they have been through drug experience and seen its limitations
for themselves.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I will conclude by affirming my belief that
this system is a real possibility and not a hopeless,
unattainable ideal. As such, it is well worth working toward. The
first step need be nothing more than to stop what we are now
doing to prevent us from reaching the goal. And that is nearly
everything we are doing in the name of combating drug abuse.<br>
<br>
</font></p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>