
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B23-41</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B027-9</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141122 text/html 11978
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:11:12 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:41 GMT
Content-length: 11760
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Opium Monopoly - India</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM MONOPOLY </h1>

<p><b>BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE</b> </p>

<h2>X -- INDIA </h2>

<hr>

<p>INDIA is the source and fount of the British opium trade, and
it is from Indian opium that the drug is chiefly supplied to the
world. As we have said before, it is a government monopoly.
Cultivators, who wish to plant poppies, may borrow money from the
Government free of interest, the sole condition being that the
crop be sold back to the Government again. It is manufactured
into opium at the Government factory at Ghazipur, and once a
month, the Government holds auctions at Calcutta, by means of
which the drug finds its way into the trade channels of the
world-illicit and otherwise.* </p>

<p>*This description of the Opium Department is to be found in
Statistics of British India, Financial Statistics, Vol. 11, 8th
Issue, page 159: </p>

<p>OPIUM. The region in which the poppy was cultivated in 1916-17
for the manufacture of &quot;Bengal opium&quot; comprises 32
districts of the United Provinces of Agra and Ouhd. The whole
Department has, with effect from the 29th September, 1910, been
under the control of one Opium Agent, with headquarters at
Ghazipur. At Ghazipur there is a Government factory where the
crude opium is manufactured into the form in which it passes into
consumption. The cultivation of the poppy and the manufacture of
opium are regulated by Act XIII of 1857, as amended by Act I of
1911, and are under the general control of the Lieutenant
Governor and the Board of Revenue of the United Provinces, and
the immediate supervision of the Opium Agent at Ghazipur. The
possession, transport, import and export of opium are regulated
by rules framed under the Indian Opium Act. Cultivation is
permitted only under licenses granted under the authority of the
Opium Agent. The area to be cultivated is fixed by the license,
and the cultivator is bound to sell the whole of his production
to the Opium Department at the rate fixed by Government..........
Advances, on which no interest is charged, are given to licensed
cultivators at the time of executing the agreement and from time
to time (though ordinarily no more than two advances are given)
until final delivery. In March, April and May the opium is made
over to the officers of the Department, and weighed and tested,
and as soon as possible afterwards each cultivator's accounts are
adjusted, and the balance due is paid him. After weighment the
opium is forwarded to the Government factory at Ghazipur, where
it is manufactured in 3 forms-(a) opium intended for export to
foreign countries, departmentally known as &quot;provision
opium&quot;(b) opium intended for consumption in India and Burma,
departmentally known as &quot;excise opium&quot; and (c) medical
opium for export to London. Provision opium is made up in the
form of balls or cakes, each weighing 3.5 lbs., and is packed in
chests, each chest containing forty cakes, weighing 140 1/7 lbs.
It is generally of 71' efficiency. Excise opium is made up in
cubical packets, each weighing one seer, 60 of which are packed
in a case. It is of higher consistency than the &quot;provision
opium.&quot; Medical opium is made up into cakes weighing 2 lbs.
Provision opium is sold by public auction in Calcutta. A
notification is published annually, generally about the month of
June, stating the number of chests which will be put up for sale
in each month of the next calendar year, and the quantities so
notified are not altered without three months notice. Sales are
conducted month by month by the Bengal Government; 7,000 chests
were notified for sale in 1917 for shipment to non-China markets.
The number of chests actually sold was 4,615. In addition to
this, 4,500 chests were sold to the Government of the Straits
Settlements, 2,200 to the Government of Netherland Indies, and 00
to the Government of Hongkong. The duty levied by Government on
each chest may be taken to be the difference between the average
price realized and the average cost. </p>

<p>The following facts are taken from &quot; Statistics of
British India. Financial Statistics, Volume II,Eighth
Issue,&quot; to be found at the New York Public Library: </p>

<p>AREA UNDER POPPY CULTIVATION </p>

<p>Acreage: </p>

<p>1910-11 362,868 </p>

<p>1911-12 200,672 </p>

<p>1912-13 178,263 </p>

<p>1913-14 144,561 </p>

<p>1914-15 164,911 </p>

<p>1915-16 167,155 </p>

<p>1916-17 204,186 </p>

<p>In the hey-day of the China trade, 613,996 acres were under
cultivation in the years 1905-6, consequently this is a drop in
the extent of acreage. But, as we have said before, the closing
of the China market simply means that other outlets must be
found, and apparently they are being found, since from I914
onwards, the acreage devoted to poppy planting is slowly
increasing again. </p>

<p>The opium manufactured in the Government factory is of three
kinds-provision opium for export; excise opium, for consumption
in India, and medical opium, for export to London. It is this
latter form of opium which, according to Mr. MacDonald, in his
&quot;Trade Politics and Christianity in Africa and the
East&quot; is being manufactured into morphia by three British
firms, two in Edinburgh and one in London, which morphia the
Japanese are buying and smuggling into North China. </p>

<p>The &quot;Statistics of British India&quot; shows the
countries into which Indian opium has been exported: we will take
the figures for the last five years, which show the number of
chests sent out. </p>

<p><img src="img00003.gif" align="bottom" width="195"
height="543"> <br>
</p>

<p>In some countries we see a falling off, as in China.
Cochin-China, the French colony, shows a considerable
increase--the little Annarnites, Tonquinese, Cambodgians and
other inhabitants of this colony of the French Republic being
shown what's what. Mauretius, a British Colony five hundred miles
off the coast of Madagascar, in the Indian ocean, seems to be
coming on. The falling off in shipments to the United Kingdom may
possibly have been due to the war and the scarcity of ships.
&quot;Other countries&quot; seem to be holding their own. With
the end of the war, the increase in ships, and general trade
revival, we may yet see compensation for the loss of China. With
the increase of drug addicts in the United States, it may be that
in time America will no longer be classed under &quot;other
countries&quot; but will have a column all to itself. </p>

<p>In another table we find a comparison as to the number of
chests of provision or export opium and of excise opium, or that
intended for consumption in India. Thus: <br>
</p>

<p><img src="img00004.gif" align="bottom" width="350"
height="144"> </p>

<p>Each chest contains roughly about one hundred and forty
pounds. <br>
</p>

<p>REVENUE </p>

<p>The revenue of India is derived from various sources, and is
classified under eight heads. Thus: for 1916-17-<br>
</p>

<p><img src="img00005.gif" align="bottom" width="349"
height="383"> </p>

<p>Out of these eight classifications, opium comes fourth on the
list. </p>

<p>But in addition to the direct opium revenue, we must add
another item, Excise, which is found under the third heading,
taxation. In the &quot;India Office List for i9i8&quot; we find
&quot;Excise&quot; explained as follows: Page 383: &quot;Excise
and Customs: Excise duties in India are levied with the two fold
object of raising revenue and restricting the use of intoxicants
and narcotics.&quot; In the same book, on page 385, we also read:
&quot;Excise and Customs Revenues: The total of the excise and
customs revenues on liquors and drugs in i 9 i 5-i 6 was in round
figures ten million pounds. This total gives an average of rather
more than ninepence a head on the whole population of British
India as the revenue charge on drink and drugs during the
year.&quot; </p>

<p>These excise duties are collected on spirits, beer, opium and
intoxicating drugs, such as ganja, charas, and bhang, all forms
or preparations of Indian hemp (Cannabis Indica), known in some
countries as hashish. In 1917-18 there were 17,369 drug shops
throughout India. The excise duties collected from these sources
was pretty evenly distributed. Excise revenue for a period of
years is as follows:<br>
</p>

<p><img src="img00006.gif" align="bottom" width="334"
height="194"> </p>

<p>The &quot;Statistics of British India for 1918&quot; has this
to say on the subject of Excise (page 218): &quot;Revenue: During
the ten years ending with 1916-17 the net receipts from Excise
duties increased . . . at the rate of 47 per cent. The receipts
from opium (consumed in India, not exported) being at the rate of
44 per cent. The net receipts from liquors and from drugs other
than opium . . . the increase at the rate Of 48 per cent. This
large increase is due not merely to the expansion of consumption,
but also to the imposition of progressively higher rates of duty
and the increasingly extensive control of the excise
administration. The revenue from drugs, (excluding opium) has
risen in ten years . . . the increase being at the rate of 67 per
cent.&quot; </p>

<p>A national psychology that can review these figures with
complacency, satisfaction and pride is not akin to American
psychology. A nation that can subjugate 300,000,000 helpless
people, and then turn them into drug addicts-for the sake of
revenue is a nation which commits a cold blooded atrocity
unparalleled by any atrocities committed in the rage and heat of
war. The Blue Book shows no horror at these figures. Complacent
approval greets the increase of 44 per cent of opium consumption,
and the increase of 67 per cent in the use of other habit-forming
drugs. Approval, and a shrewd appreciation of the possibilities
for more revenue from &quot;progressively higher rates of
duty,&quot; knowing well that drug addicts will sell soul and
body in order to procure their daily supply.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>