
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-60</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B012-121</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/cbos.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050141 text/html 17877
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:35 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:08:31 GMT
Content-length: 17659
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Cannabis: the brain's other supplier</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38171" -->

<h1>Cannabis: the brain's other supplier</h1>

<p><b>Rosie Mestel</b> </p>

<p><b>reprinted from the New Scientist 31 July 1993</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>Introductory Comment by R. Givens. </p>

<p>The fact that THC has naturally occurring analogs in the human
body flies in the face of REEFER MADNESS propaganda. A natural
compound with specific receptors and a non-toxic disposal system
makes it extremely unlikely that marijuana causes any health
damage. This logic is supported by over 5,000 years of recorded
use without a recorded death. Now we know why. Cannabis is as
natural as vitamin C. </p>

<hr>

<p>THREE years ago, Israeli archaeologists stumbled upon a 1600
year-old tragedy: the remains of a narrow hipped teenage girl
with the skeleton of a full term fetus still cradled in her
abdomen. With her were grey ashes that contained traces of
tetrahydrocannabinol, the active ingredient of marijuana. Could
it be that the midwife had administered the plant in a last ditch
effort to bring on labour or to ease her pain? </p>

<p>Today, in nearby Jerusalem, another chemical is in the news-
this one extracted not from ancient ashes but from fresh,
pulverized pig brain. It is anandamide, a newly christened
chemical that might do naturally in our heads what marijuana does
when we choose to smoke it. Anandamide's discovery, along with
that of the molecule it binds to in the brain, has marijuana
researchers buzzing with the best high they have had in years.
The findings provide new hope for therapies that draw on the
weed's long list of anecdotal medical uses: as a pain killer,
appetite stimulant or nausea suppressant, to name a few. They
also throw open the windows onto the mysterious workings of our
brains. </p>

<p>Research into marijuana, or Cannabis sativa , has long been
marginalised by official disapproval of the weed and its use. It
is, after all, classed as a drug with no medical merit, and its
recreational use is widely frowned upon. But it was not always
so. For thousands of years, India revered the plant for its
effects on the mind. In China, where opium was the mind-bending
drug of choice, the cannabis plant was used for medicines and its
tough fibres for making clothes. The West also used marijuana:
Queen Victoria's doctor administered it for Her Majesty's
menstrual cramps; George Washington and Thomas Jefferson both
grew the plant on their southern estates as a source of fibre for
ropes and sails. (History does not record whether either of these
presidents ever tried smoking their crop and, if so, whether they
inhaled or not.) </p>

<p>But as demand for hempen rope and cloth diminished, and the
recreational use of marijuana increased, anti-marijuana feeling
grew, reaching a peak in the 1930s. &quot;If the hideous monster
Frankenstein came face to face with the monster marijuana he
would drop dead of fright,&quot; trumpeted Harry Anslinger,
commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and a leading
anti-cannabis crusader of the times. In 1937, marijuana use was
outlawed in the United States. By 1971 even its medical use was
banned in the US and Britain. </p>

<p>Marijuana may have been outlawed, but marijuana research was
not, though it is not most government's top funding priority. in
1964 Raphael Mechoulam, an Israeli chemist, identified and
synthesised the main mind-altering substance in the plant,
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol, the most abundant of the 60 related
chemicals. Scientists speculated that THC did its deed by
sticking randomly to brain cells, interfering with their ability
to communicate by altering the electrical properties of their
membranes, much as alcohol does. </p>

<p>More recently came other exciting finds: in 1988, Allyn
Howlett of St Louis University Medical School discovered a
specific protein receptor for THC in mouse nerve cells- a protein
that only THC and its relatives dock onto. Two years later, Tom
Bonner's group at the National Institute of Mental Health
pinpointed the DNA that encodes the same receptor in rats. It is
now known that humans have the receptor, too. </p>

<p>Finding a cannabinoid receptor implies that THC-unlike alcohol
- has a quite precise modus operandi that taps into a specific
brain function. Presumably the drug binds to nerves that have the
receptor, and the nerves respond by altering their behavior. The
classic effects of marijuana smoking are the consequences:
changes in mood, memory, appetite, movement and perception,
including pain. Researchers think THC affects so many mental
processes because receptors are found in many brain regions,
especially in those that perform tasks known to be disturbed
during THC intoxication: in the banana-shaped hippocampus,
crucial for proper memory; in the crumpled cerebral cortex, home
of higher thinking; and in the primitive basal ganglion
controller of movement. </p>

<p>Once a specially tailored receptor was found, the next step
was simple- in theory, anyway. &quot;The receptor had to be there
for a purpose -- presumably it didn't evolve so people could
smoke cannabis and get high,&quot; says Roger Pertwee, a
pharmacologist at Aberdeen University. Instead, there had to be a
natural chemical inside of us that fitted onto the receptor and
sent some biochemical signal cascading through the nerve cell to
do who knows what. But plucking that one chemical out of a brain
stuffed with millions of others was never going to be easy. </p>

<p>Blissful thinking </p>

<p>Several laboratories set to work on the problem and ,
fittingly, Mechoulam's was the first to come up with an answer,
in the form of a greasy, hairpin-shaped chemical. The researchers
dubbed it anandamide, from &quot;ananda&quot;, the Sanskrit word
for bliss. &quot;The guy discovers the active ingredient of
marijuana back in the 1960s, and now, almost 30 years later to
the day, he discovers anandamide,&quot; says Paul Consroe, a
neuropharmacologist at the University of Arizona. &quot;Isn't it
great?&quot; </p>

<p>Mechoulam's strategy was to chase after chemicals that, like
THC, are soluble in fat. By teasing these substances away from
those that are water soluble, his group extracted a substance
from pig brain that did indeed bind to the cannabinoid receptor.
But did it act like THC? To find out they sent their specimen to
Pertwee who had devised a test for cannabinoids that involved
monitoring a substance's ability to stop nerve twitching in mouse
tissue, when dropped on certain nerves. &quot;When it arrived,
there was so little of it in the phial I couldn't even see
it,&quot; Pertwee recalls. &quot;We didn't know what it was--
just that it was a greasy substance.&quot; But the tests went
well: anandamide depressed the twitch just like THC, and last
December the researchers published their results in Science. </p>

<p>The mouse result gave Mechoulam and his group the
encouragement they needed to extract more anandamide from pig
brains and then analyse and synthesise the chemical in the lab.
They also wanted more evidence that anandamide docked
specifically onto the cannabinoid receptor and acted like THC,
which has a very different molecular structure. And so, with Zvi
Vogel and colleagues at the Weizmann Institute near Tel Aviv,
they came up with a plan. </p>

<p>They would add the DNA encoding the cannabinoid receptor to
hamster or monkey cells growing in dishes. The cells equipped
with this DNA would then produce masses of receptor, which would
sit in the cell membrane ready and available for any chemical
&quot;key&quot; that should happen along. Vogel's researchers
would add anandamide to the cells and watch what happened. </p>

<p>The results, published in July's issue of the Journal of
Neurochemistry, were clear: anandamide acted as a key, and a
precise one at that, sticking only to the cells containing the
receptor, and not to others. What's more, when anandamide stuck
to the cells, it triggered biochemical changes similar to those
associated with THC and related chemicals. Not only did
anandamide fit the same lock as THC, but it appeared to open
similar doors in the brain. </p>

<p>More tests followed in a number of laboratories, and these
researchers found that in every way that has been tested so far,
anandamide acts very much like THC. But why would we want such a
mind-altering substance in our brains? </p>

<p>Studies on another class of drugs provide a useful parallel.
Opiates such as morphine and heroin act upon the body's nervous
system to cause euphoria and block pain. In 1973, natural opoids,
which behave in the same way as opiates, but have a different
structure, were pulled out of the body. It appears that when the
body is under serious assault, nerve cells spit out these opoids,
which promptly bind to other nerve cells to stop pain signals
dead in their tracks. At the same time, they fasten onto sites in
the brain to induce a feeling of wellbeing. </p>

<p>Anandamide, like the natural opoids, will probably have its
own specific set of jobs to perform in the brain and body. The
effects of THC give a rough guide to what these might be:
involvement in mood, memory and pain are obvious examples. </p>

<p>But what would the brain be without anandamide? Researchers
intend to find out. Bonner is gearing up to produce a genetically
engineered mouse that has no cannabinoid receptors: no receptors,
no anandamide function. Others want to tinker with anandamide to
make a version that binds to the receptor but doesn't trigger any
change in the nerve's behavior. Added to a mouse, it would stop
the body's real, internal anandamide from doing its job. </p>

<p>Researchers are also excited by anandamide's possible role in
mental and neurological disease. There are also other questions
to be asked. If anandamide, like THC, hampers memory, could a
drug with the opposite effects-- a &quot;memory pill&quot;*-- be
made? &quot;It's all speculation for now,&quot; says Steven
Childers, a pharmacologist at Bowman Gray School of Medicine,
North Carolina. </p>

<p>&quot;But we like to think about these things.&quot; It will
take more time before anandamide is firmly established as the
bona fide partner to the cannabinoid receptor. Meanwhile,
Mechoulam's lab has two other anandamide-like chemicals waiting
in the wings. And in the US, Howlett and Childers both have
chemicals of an entirely different kind that bind to the
receptor: they are water soluble, not fat soluble. the importance
of each remains to be seen. </p>

<p>High hopes </p>

<p>Whatever anandamide turns out to be, it provides
pharmacologists with a fresh plan of attack in their hunt for
drugs that act like cannabinoids. Such drugs could be valuable to
help keep at bay the nausea of cancer chemotherapy; to stimulate
appetite in AIDS patients; to dampen tremors in neurological
disorders; to reduce eye pressure inpatients with glaucoma; and
to dull pain in those for whom other painkillers do not work. </p>

<p>Cannabinoids can do at least some of these things, with one
small drawback: they also make the recipient high. The holy grail
of cannabinoid therapeutics has been to separate what causes the
high from the source of the desired effects, by chemical
tinkering with THC or its relations-- shortening a side group on
one part of the molecule, lengthening a carbon chain in
another-in hope that the &quot;undesirable&quot; effects will be
lost in the shuffle. Despite the drug's obvious reputation,
several US pharmaceuticals spent several years trying to make
this work, but without success. Nor did they reach another
equally sought after goal: an antagonist that will block the
effects of THC and similar substances when taken. </p>

<p>Until marijuana researchers succeed in doing something along
these lines, it is unlikely that drugs companies will pay much
attention. &quot;There is a real stigma working with drugs of
abuse,&quot; says Billy Martin, a pharmacologist at the Medical
College of Virginia. &quot;If drugs companies had three choices
of drugs to work on and one was a drug of abuse, they're just not
going to work on the drug of abuse.&quot; This view is shared by
Larry Melvin, who worked on the Pfizer pharmaceuticals company's
now defunct cannabinoid therapeutics programme. &quot;What will
ultimately legitimise the field in a big way is if researchers
can come up with a really good therapeutic ability. then you'll
see the companies turn around.&quot; </p>

<p>But Gabriel Nahas, an anaesthetist from Columbia University in
New York, who has spoken out against marijuana use for many
years, maintains that THC's effects on the brain are too general
and too toxic for this route ever to work. The discovery of
anandamide and its receptor have not changed his mind. &quot;The
brain is a computer,&quot; he says. &quot;To put THC in the brain
is akin to putting a bug in the computer. I'm sticking to my guns
about its harmful effects--not only to man but to society.&quot; </p>

<p>Only time will reveal the value of anandamide and its receptor
to drug therapy. But the importance of these discoveries to brain
research is not in doubt. &quot;We're no longer just dealing with
the pharmacology of a recreational drug,&quot; says Pertwee.
&quot;We're dealing with the physiology of a newly discovered
system in the brain. And that's an enormously bigger field. </p>

<hr>

<p>Sidebar </p>

<p>Just what the doctor ordered </p>

<p>EVERY month Robert Randall receives a gift from the US
government: a tin box stuffed with 300 marijuana cigarettes. He
gets them because he has glaucoma, a condition which damages the
retina. Marijuana helps to reduce the pressure in his eyes. </p>

<p>Randall and eight others are participants in the Compassionate
Investigative New Drug programme, under which people with
glaucoma, cancer, chronic pain, multiple sclerosis and AIDS are
given the drug for its supposed effectiveness in relieving pain,
suppressing nausea from AZT or chemotherapy, and stimulating
appetite. </p>

<p>If the programme seems like an anomaly, given marijuana's
official status as a drug with no medical use, it is no longer.
Only those patients originally on the programme now receive
marijuana from the government. Others must now buy it illegally
off the street. </p>

<p>That is a hardship, says Randall, president of the Alliance
for Cannabis therapeutics (ACT), which lobbies for the medical
use of marijuana. &quot;We get calls from AIDS patients who say
'I can either buy food that I can't eat because I'm so nauseous,
or I can buy marijuana and get hungry because I can't afford to
buy food',&quot; he says. </p>

<p>In 1975, those steep street prices had driven Randall to grow
cannabis plants to treat his glaucoma. This led to his arrest,
followed by an acquittal and ultimately--after he filed a lawsuit
to a legal supply from the government. Later, a handful of
patients with cancer or suffering chronic pain won access, and in
1990 a man known as Steve L became the first person with AIDS to
get the drug, just ten days before he died. Later that year,
Kenny Jenks and his wife Barbara won the same right, after a
fierce fight following their arrest for possessing two marijuana
plants. </p>

<p>Until 1991, anyone wanting to get on the programme had to fill
in forms so complex that it took about 50 hours. then the
government reduced the red tape, cutting the time down to about
one hour--and found itself inundated with applications for
therapeutic marijuana. The US Public Health Service responded by
scrapping the programme. <br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38171" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>