
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-42</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B038-125</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/General/goodboy.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122071136 text/html 12135
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:11:26 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:29:39 GMT
Content-length: 11917
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Story of the Good Little Boy by Mark Twain</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<p>The Story Of The Good Little Boy </p>

<p><b>By Mark Twain, 1875</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>Once there was a good little boy by the name of Jacob Blivens.
He always obeyed his parents, no matter how absurd and
unreasonable their demands were; and he always learned his book,
and never was late at Sabbath-school. He would not play hookey,
even when his sober judgment told him it was the most profitable
thing he could do. None of the other boys could ever make that
boy out, he acted so strangely. He wouldn't lie, no matter how
convenient it was. He just said it was wrong to lie, and that was
sufficient for him. And he was so honest that he was simply
ridiculous. The curious ways that that Jacob had, surpassed
everything. He wouldn't play marbles on Sunday, he wouldn't rob
birds' nests, he wouldn't give hot pennies to organ-grinders'
monkeys; he didn't seem to take any interest in any kind of
rational amusement. So the other boys used to try to reason it
out and come to an understanding of him, but they couldn't arrive
at any satisfactory conclusion. As I said before, they could only
figure out a sort of vague idea that he was
&quot;afflicted,&quot; and so they took him under their
protection, and never allowed any harm to come to him. </p>

<p>This good little boy read all the Sunday-school books; they
were his greatest delight. This was the whole secret of it. He
believed in the good little boys they put in the Sunday-school
books; he had every confidence in them. He longed to come across
one of them alive, once; but he never did. They all died before
his time, maybe. Whenever he read about a particularly good one
he turned over quickly to the end to see what became of him,
because he wanted to travel thousands of miles and gaze on him;
but it wasn't any use; that good little boy always died in the
last chapter, and there was a picture of the funeral, with all
his relatives and the Sunday-school children standing around the
grave in pantaloons that were too short, and bonnets that were
too large, and everybody crying into handkerchiefs that had as
much as a yard and a half of stuff in them. He was always headed
off in this way. He never could see one of those good little boys
on account of his always dying in the last chapter. </p>

<p>Jacob had a noble ambition to be put in a Sunday-school book.
He wanted to be put in, with pictures representing him gloriously
declining to lie to his mother, and her weeping for joy about it;
and pictures representing him standing on the doorstep giving a
penny to a poor beggar-woman with six children, and telling her
to spend it freely, but not to be extravagant, because
extravagance is a sin; and pictures of him magnanimously refusing
to tell on the bad boy who always lay in wait for him around the
corner as he came from school, and welted him over the head with
a lath, and then chased him home, saying, &quot;Hi! hi!&quot; as
he proceeded. This was the ambition of young Jacob Blivens. He
wished to be put in a Sunday-school book. It made him feel a
little uncomfortable sometimes when he reflected that the good
little boys always died. He loved to live, you know, and this was
the most unpleasant feature about being a Sunday-school-book boy.
He knew it was not healthy to be good. He knew it was more fatal
than consumption to be so supernaturally good as the boys in the
books were; he knew that none of them had been able to stand it
long, and it pained him to think that if they put him in a book
he wouldn't ever see it, or even if they did get the book out
before he died it wouldn't be popular without any picture of his
funeral in the back part of it. It couldn't be much of a
Sunday-school book that couldn't tell about the advice he gave to
the community when he was dying. So at last, of course, he had to
make up his mind to do the best he could under the circumstances
- to live right, and hang on as long as he could, and have his
dying speech all ready when his time came. </p>

<p>But somehow nothing ever went right with this good little boy;
nothing ever turned out with him the way it turned out with the
good little boys in the books. They always had a good time, and
the bad boys had the broken legs; but in his case there was a
screw loose somewhere; and it all happened just the other way.
When he found Jim Blake stealing apples, and went under the tree
to read to him about the bad little boy who fell out of a
neighbor's apple-tree and broke his arm, Jim fell out of the tree
too, but he fell on him, and broke his arm, and Jim wasn't hurt
at all. Jacob couldn't understand that. There wasn't anything in
the books like it. </p>

<p>And once, when some bad boys pushed a blind man over in the
mud, and Jacob ran to help him up and receive his blessing, the
blind man did not give him any blessing at all, but whacked him
over the head with his stick and said he would like to catch him
shoving him again, and then pretending to help him up. This was
not in accordance with any of the books. Jacob looked them all
over to see. </p>

<p>One thing that Jacob wanted to do was to find a lame dog that
hadn't any place to stay, and was hungry and persecuted, and
bring him home and pet him and have that dog's imperishable
gratitude. And at last he found one and was happy; and he brought
him home and fed him, but when he was going to pet him the dog
flew at him and tore all the clothes off him except those that
were in front, and made a spectacle of him that was astonishing.
He examined authorities, but he could not understand the matter.
It was of the same breed of dogs that was in the books, but it
acted very differently. Whatever this boy did he got into
trouble. The very things the boys in the books got rewarded for
turned out to be about the most unprofitable things he could
invest in. </p>

<p>Once, when he was on his way to Sunday-school, he saw some bad
boys starting off pleasuring in a sailboat. He was filled with
consternation, because he knew from his reading that boys who
went sailing on Sunday invariably got drowned. So he ran out on a
raft to warn them, but a log turned with him and slid him into
the river. A man got him out pretty soon, and the doctor pumped
the water out of him, and gave him a fresh start with his
bellows, but he caught cold and lay sick a-bed nine weeks. But
the most unaccountable thing about it was that the bad boys in
the boat had a good time all day, and then reached home alive and
well in the most surprising manner. Jacob Blivens said there was
nothing like these things in the books. He was perfectly
dumb-founded. </p>

<p>When he got well he was a little discouraged, but he resolved
to keep on trying anyhow. He knew that so far his experience
wouldn't do to go in a book, but he hadn't yet reached the
allotted term of life for good little boys, and he hoped to be
able to make a record yet if he could hold on till his time was
fully up. If everything else failed he had his dying speech to
fall back on. </p>

<p>He examined his authorities, and found that it was now time
for him to go to sea as a cabin-boy. He called on a ship captain
and made his application, and when the captain asked for his
recommendations he proudly drew out a tract and pointed to the
words. &quot;To Jacob Blivens, from his affectionate
teacher.&quot; But the captain was a coarse, vulgar man, and he
said, &quot;Oh, that be blowed! that wasn't any proof that he
know how to wash dishes or handle a slush-bucket, and he guessed
he didn't want him.&quot; This was altogether the most
extraordinary thing that ever happened to Jacob in all his life.
A compliment from a teacher, on a tract, had never failed to move
the tenderest emotions of ship captains, and open the way to all
offices of honor and profit in their gift - it never had in any
book that ever he had read. He could hardly believe his senses. </p>

<p>This boy always had a hard time of it. Nothing over came out
according to the authorities with him. At last, one day, when he
was around hunting up bad little boys to admonish, he found a lot
of them in the old iron foundry fixing up a little joke on
fourteen or fifteen dogs, which they had tied together in long
procession, and were going to ornament with empty nitro-glycerine
cans made fast to their tails. Jacob's heart was touched. He sat
down on one of those cans (for he never minded grease when duty
was before him), and he took hold of the foremost dog by the
collar, and turned his reproving eye upon wicked Tom Jones. But
just at that moment Alderman McWelter full of wrath, stepped in.
All the bad boys ran away, but Jacob Blivens rose in conscious
innocence and began one of those stately little
Sunday-school-book speeches which always commence with &quot;Oh,
sir!&quot; in dead opposition to the fact that no boy, good or
bad, ever starts a remark with &quot;Oh, sir.&quot; But the
alderman never waited to hear the rest. He took Jacob Blivens by
the ear and turned him around, and hit him a whack in the rear
with the flat of his hand; and in an instant that good little boy
shot out through the roof and soared away towards the sun, with
the fragments of those fifteen dogs stringing after him like the
tail of a kite. And there wasn't a sign of that alderman or that
old iron foundry left on the face of the earth; and, as for young
Jacob Blivens, he never got a chance to make his last dying
speech after all his trouble fixing it up, unless he made it to
the birds; because, although the bulk of him came down all right
in a tree-top in an adjoining county, the rest of him was
apportioned around among four townships, and so they had to hold
five inquests on him to find out whether he was dead or not, and
how it occurred. You never saw a boy scattered so. ^* </p>

<p>[Footnote *: This glycerine catastrophe is borrowed from a
floating newspaper item, whose author's name I would give if I
knew it. - [M.T.]] </p>

<p>Thus perished the good little boy who did the best he could,
but didn't come out according to the books. Every boy who ever
did as he did prospered except him. His case is truly remarkable.
It will probably never be accounted for.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>