
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-71</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-304</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/1856hemp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044116 text/html 16723
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:41:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:24 GMT
Content-length: 16505
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp Article from the Encyclopedia Brittanica, 1856</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<h1>Hemp Article </h1>

<p><b>from the Encyclopedia Brittanica, 1856</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>THE </p>

<p>ENCYCLOPAEDIA BRITANNICA, </p>

<p>OR </p>

<p>DICTIONARY </p>

<p>OF </p>

<p>ARTS, SCIENCES, AND GENERAL LITERATURE. </p>

<p>EIGHTH EDITION. </p>

<p>WITH EXTENSIVE IMPROVEMENTS AND ADDITIONS; </p>

<p>AND NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS. </p>

<p>VOLUME XI </p>

<p>LITTLE, BROWN, AND CO., BOSTON, U.S. </p>

<p>MDCCLVI. </p>

<p>[The Proprietors of this Work give notice that they reserve
the right of Translating it.] </p>

<p>(skip to page 311, bottom right to find:) </p>

<p>HEMP, a tough fibre yielded by the large annual plant
_Cannabis sativa_, of the natural order Cannabinaceae. There are,
however, several other fibres known in commerce to which the term
is more or less commonly applied. for example - Jute hemp is
obtained from _Corchorus capsularis_ and _C. olitorius; Manilla
hemp from _Musa textilis_; Brown hemp from _Hibiscus canabinus;
Pite or Pita hemp from several species of agave and aloe; Sunn
hemp, Madras hemp, brown Bombay hemp and Malabar hemp, from
_Crotalaria juncea_; Jubbulpore hemp, from _Crotalaria
tenuifolia_, and several others. </p>

<p>The true hemp (_Cannabis sativa_) has been recognised as a
useful plant from a very early period, although probably not of
the same antiquity as flax. Herodotus is the first writer who
mentions it (iv. 74), but he speaks of it in a manner which shows
it must have been then well-known, for he describes the hempen
garments made by the Thracians as being equal to linen (flax
cloth) in fineness. Its use for making cordage is noted as early
as 200 years B.C. by Moschion, who mentions that a large ship,
the &quot;syracusia,&quot; built by Hiero II, was rigged with
ropes made from hemp brought from the Rhone. The original country
of the hemp-plant is not positively known, but it is generally
believed to have been the mountainous districts in the extreme
north of India, whence it spread westward through Europe, and
southward through the peninsula of India. Its cultivation in each
direction had in all probability a different object; for it is
found to produce under tropical culture an inferior fibre, and a
powerfully intoxicating drug, but in cold and temperate climates
it yields an abundance of strong fibres in great perfection for
textile purposes, and loses its narcotic qualities. The
similarity of its name in various languages is a strong
indication that it has taken the course here indicated; thus, in
the Sanscrit it is called goni_, _sana_, or _shanapu_; Persic,
_canna_; Arabic, _kanneh_ or _kinnub; Greek, kannabis_; Latin,
_cannabis_; Italian, _canapa_; French, _chanvre_ or _chanbre_;
Danish, _kamp_ or _kennep_; Lettish and Lithuanian, _kannapes_;
Slavonic, _konopi_; Erse, _canaib_; Scaninavian, _hampr_;
Swedish, _hampa_; German, _hauf_; Anglo-Saxon, _haenep_; and
English, _hemp_. In India other names are applied, indicative of
its intoxicating or narcotic powers; thus, according to Dr Royle,
it is called the &quot;increaser of pleasure,&quot; the
&quot;exciter of desire,&quot; the &quot;cementer of
friendship,&quot; the &quot;causer of the reeling gait,&quot; the
&quot;laughter mover,&quot; &amp;c.; and he also suggests that it
may have been the _nepenthes_ (&quot;assuager of grief&quot;) of
Homer, given by Helen to Telemachus. </p>

<p>The intoxicating properties of hemp reside in a peculiar
resinous extract naturally secreted by the plant when growing in
a hot climate. So remarkable is this peculiarity, that botanists
until lately insisted upon the hemp of India being a distinct
species (_C. indica_). It is now, however, decided that there is
really no specific difference, the change being simply climatal.
The secretion is deposited by exudation upon the surface of the
leaves, the slender branches, and the flowers. According to Dr
O'Shaughnessy, it is collected during the hot season by men clad
in leathern dresses, who rush with violence through the hemp
fields; the resin adheres to their dresses, from which it is
scraped off and kneaded into lumps which have the appearance of
pieces of linseed oil cake in colour and texture, and a peculiar
and by no means agreeable smell. In this state it is called
&quot;churrus;&quot; and there are evidently several varieties of
the substance, as Dr Pereira describes it as being &quot;in
masses of the shape and size of a hen's egg, or of a small lemon,
and formed by the adhesion of superimposed elongated pieces. It
has dull grayish-brown colour, and not much odour;&quot; whereas
one specimen in the writer's collection differs in being in large
shapeless fragments of the colour of amber, with the loose
friable texture of linseed cake, and a heavy unpleasant odour.
Another specimen has a resinous lustre, a dark brown colour, and
is formed into an elongated oval shape, but not larger than half
a hen's egg. </p>

<p>This is almost odourless, and is probably the _momeea_ or
_waxen churrus_, said to be collected with great care by the
hand, and to be highly prized. The dried plant after it has
flowered, and from which the churrus has not been removed, is
compressed into bundles of twenty-four plants each, and is sold
in the bazaars of India under the name of gunjah. The larger
leaves and capsules, without the stalks, are also compressed into
irregular sized masses, which receive the names of bang, subjee,
or sidhee, in India. The hashish of the Arabians consists of the
tops of the small branchlets after inflorescence, carefully
gathered and dried. Both this and the two previously mentioned
preparations are extensively used for smoking and chewing - the
gunjah and bang in India and Persis, and the hashish in Africa.
When the bushmen of Southern Africa were brought to England, they
passed much of their time in smoking this narcotic in pipes made
of the long teeth of alligators, hollowed out for the purpose.
Its use as a means of intoxication is said to have given rise to
our word assassin, from the fact that the low Saracen soldiery,
called _hashashins_, when intoxicated with hashish, were sent
into the camps of the crusaders for the purpose of killing
whomsoever they met, the drug rendering them quite regardless of
the consequences. The physiological effects of the various
preparations above mentioned are most remarkable, and are unlike
every other narcotic at present known. It produces inebriation
and delirium of decidedly hilarious character, inducing violent
laughter, jumping and dancing. The writer several times witnessed
its effects upon the bushmen. After inhaling the smoke for some
time they rose and began a very slow dance, which was gradually
quickened until they became perfectly frenzied, and finally fell
down in a state of complete insensiblity, from which they were a
considerable time in recovering. Dr O'Shaughnessy relates some
most remarkable effects of the churrus, particularly its power in
producing a state of true catalepsy. The same effects do not
appear to take place upon Europeans, but this point has not yet
been fairly tried, as the drug evidently suffers some change in
its transmission by sea. </p>

<p>But it is not as a narcotic and excitant that the hemp plant
is most useful to mankind; it is as an advancer rather than a
retarder of civilization, that its utility is made most manifest.
Its great value as a textile material, particularly for cordage
and canvas, has made it eminently useful; and if we were to copy
the figurative style of the Sanscrit writers, we might with
justice call it the &quot;accelerator of commerce,&quot; and the
&quot;spreader of wealth and intellect.&quot; for ages man has
been dependent upon hempen cordage and hempen sails for enabling
his ships to cross the seas; and in this respect it still
occupies a most important place in our commercial affairs. </p>

<p>For its valuable fibre hemp is very largely cultivated in
Europe, but chiefly in Russia and Russian Poland. It undergoes
the same process for decomposing the parts of the stem as that
described in the article on FLAX, called _water-retting_, by
which the cellular tissue of the bark and medulla is destroyed,
and the long fibres of the woody part are set free. This is not
done by simply soaking in the waters of ponds and streams, for it
requires to be dried both previously and subsequently to the
retting process; after which it is beaten with wooden beetles or
mallets, or by an apparatus called a _break_ or _brake_ worked by
a treddle. Sometimes, however, this laborious operation is
effected by water or steam-power. Some of the finer kinds of hemp
are more carefully prepared; the seed is sown broad-cast instead
of in drills, by which the stems are grown more slender and the
fibres finer; and after the water-retting each stem is taken in
the hand, and the epidermis is stripped or _peeled_ off, and the
reed or boon is then submitted as before mentioned to the
_breaking_ process. In both cases after _breaking_ the stalks are
conveyed to the _scutching-mills_, where the separation of the
fibres is still further effected by rubbing and striking, after
which it is heckled or hackled - the heckler taking as much as he
can conveniently hold and drawing it through a number of iron
spikes fixed in a board forming a kind of comb. </p>

<p>The process called dew-retting, described in the article on
FLAX, is also adopted for very fine varieties of hemp, such as
the white crown Marienburg, and the Italian garden hemp; and in
Russia and Sweden another method called snow-retting is used.
After the first fall of snow the hemp which has been put up in
stacks is spread out over the snow, and left to be buried by
successive falls. It thus remains covered until the snow
disappears, and is then sufficiently retted. </p>

<p>We have hitherto received the largest quantity of hemp from
Russia - St Petersburg, Memel, and Riga being the chief ports of
shipment; but the late war, which put a stop to the supply from
this source, is likely to produce a beneficial result to our
colonies. The indefatigable exertions of Dr Royle on behalf of
the Indian government have led to the knowledge of various
fibrous substances which are produced in the greatest abundance
in our Indian empire, in the manufacture of cordage and canvas;
so that having been forced into a knowledge of our own resources,
it is not probable we shall ever be so dependent upon Russia in
future for this necessary article. </p>

<p>The best substitute appears to be the Caloee or Rheea fibre
produced by a plant of the nettle tribe (Urticaccae), _Boehmeria
nivea_. The Rheea fibre can, it is expected, be produced very
much cheaper than Russian hemp, and it is nearly twice as strong.
Hitherto hemp has had one great advantage over all other fibres
in the manufacture of cordage, and it remains to be seen whether
the Rheea fibre has this qualification. When a hempen rope is
worn out, if it has not been tarred, it is valuable for making
paper; and if it has been tarred, it is even more useful for
oakum. This is not the case certainly with the fine ropes of
Manilla hemp (_Musa textilis_), which, though stronger than the
best Russian hemp, are almost useless when worn out. The same may
be said of the admirable coir ropes now so extensively used for
ship's hawsers and other corage exposed to water. These ropes are
made of the fibres from the husk of the common cocoa-nut. </p>

<p>The fibre called New Zealand flax, which is procured from the
long sword-shaped leaves of _Phormium tenax_, a liliaceous plant,
has been much recommended of late; but whether from the
difficulty of preparing it, or from the inadequacy of the supply,
it has not yet become a regular article of commerce. The
epidermis of its leaves is more compact and harder than that of
the stalks of the plants previously mentioned, and this may cause
great difficulty both in retting and scutching. We import hemp
from Russia, Italy, Holland, Turkey, the East Indies, and
latterly from the United States. That from America, however, is
of inferior quality and blackish colour. The East Indian hemp is
coarse, and is in small hanks plaited about the thickness of a
man's arm. The Italian hemp is very fine, that variety called
garden-hemp being the longest of any kind; its superiority is
supposed to be the result of spade culture in very suitable soil.
It is also as white and soft as the finest white Russian. </p>

<p>Of the Russian kinds the St Petersburg clean and the Riga rein
(or clean) are the best for general purposes. The variety called
white crown Marienburg is remarkably short, white and soft; it is
only fit for fine canvas. </p>

<p>The quantity of hemp imported into the United Kingdom was- </p>

<p>From Russia | From other countries. </p>

<p>In 1851.........33,229 tons | In 1851..........31,441 tons </p>

<p>.. 1852.........26,857 .... | .. 1852..........26,551 .... </p>

<p>.. 1853.........40,320 .... | .. 1853..........20,619 .... </p>

<p>.. 1854......... 1,044 .... | .. 1854..........35,927 .... </p>

<p>.. 1855......... nil. .... | .. 1855..........28,010 .... </p>

<p>The price of Russian hemp has ranged from L38 to L90 (L=pound)
per ton during the last five years, the maximum price being
caused by the war. Considerable quantities are also raised in
England and Ireland. </p>

<p>Of the figures just given those relating to Russia may be
depended upon, but those referring to the imports from other
countries are by no means satisfactory; for owing to the slovenly
manner in which our commercial statistics are collected by the
government, all articles which bear the trade name of hemp are
included, such as Manilla hemp, and very often even jute. </p>

<p>There is one other useful quality in the hemp plant; it
produces an abundance of seed, which not only yields a valuable
oil, but the seed is extensively used in feeding singing birds.
As the hemp is _diaecious_, only about one half the plants
produce seeds; but these yield it in such abundance that an acre
will yield from three to four quarters at about 40s. per quarter.
As this is independent of the fibre produced it is a profitable
crop in countries like Russia where the land is not too valuable.
</p>

<p>For fuller information upon the subject consult Dr Royle's
_Illustrations of the Botany of the Himalayan Mountains_, and his
_Fibrous Plants of India_; Dr. O'Shaughnessy on the Preparation
of the Indian Hemp or Gunjah_; and the erudite work _Textrinum
Antiquorum_, by James Yates, Esq., M.A. (T.C.A.) </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>