
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-41</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B037-69</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/mrsin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125144 text/html 10634
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:51:24 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:53 GMT
Content-length: 10416
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>From Mr Sin to Mr Big </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>From Mr Sin to Mr Big </h1>

<p> Auth: Desmond Manderson </p>

<p> Published: 1993 </p>

<p> Publisher: Oxford University Press Australia </p>

<p> ISBN: 0 19 553531 6 </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>Background to the Book. </h2>

<p> (From back cover) </p>

<p> From Mr Sin to Mr Big is a compelling legal and social
history of the origins and development of drug laws in Australia.
It argues that the selective enactment of 'drug' laws has been
driven by fear, racism, powerful international pressures, and the
vested interests of the medical profession, bureaucrats and
politicians, rather than by genuine concerns about the welfare of
users. </p>

<p> Behind the emotion and contoversy that surround the use of
illegal drugs lie previously unexamined assumptions about how and
why certain substances - such as opium, herion and cannabis -
have been prohibited, while others - such as alcolhol and tobacco
- have not. This book challenges these assumptions, while also
examining the power and efficacy of law as a means of achieving
social change. </p>

<p> Desmond Manderson traces the legislative developments, from
the anti-opium laws directed against the Chinese in the
nineteenth century, to the complex web of our present drug laws,
and illustrates the gradual politicisation of the drugs debate.
From Mr Sin to Mr Big argues that Australia's current drug laws
are a product of the past, and it is only by understanding this
past that we can begin a rational debate about reform in the
future. </p>

<p> [note] </p>

<p> Desmond Manderson is a lawyer and historian who has written
extensively on drug history and policy. After studying and
teaching at the Australian National University in Canberra for
several years, he is currently engaged in research at the Centre
for Medicine, Ethics, and Law at McGill University in </p>

<p> Montreal, Canada. [accurate at 1993 : PH] </p>

<p> [summary of the research programs] </p>

<p> As part of his Honours thesis in History, Manderson
researched for a small publication funded by the Research into
Drug Abuse Program (RIDAP) of the National Campaign Against Drug
Abuse (NCADA). </p>

<p> Following his Honours thesis, it was suggested that he work
on a larger project into the history of drug laws in Australia,
again supported by RIDAP, under the Commonwealth (Federal, for
our world audience) Department of Community Services and Health. </p>

<h2>Interesting quotes from the book. </h2>

<p> (page 7) </p>

<p> In nineteenth-century Australia, opium was the preserve of
neither the creative few nor the urban poor. It was freely
available and freely used. Furthermore, perhaps partly as a
consequence of the weakness of the medical profession, the line
which is now seen to divide medical 'use' form non-medical
'abuse' was not yet apparent. Many people who consumed opium
undoubtedly did so out of habit. Indeed, temperance activists who
would rather forfiet their lives than drink a nip of whiskey, but
who were addicted to opium, were the butt of many jokes. 'I
believe the teetotalers have too little pleasure in this world,
whatever they may hope for in the next,' said Godfrey Carter, a
member of the Victorian Legislative Assembly well known for his
opposition to the temperance movement, in 1898, &quot;and when I
think what little joy they have here at present is derived, to a
great extent, from the use of morphine, chlorodyne, painkiller,
and a variety of other preparations of opium, why should we
prevent them from going to their chemists and getting these
things?&quot; </p>

<p> (page 19) </p>

<p> As the &quot;Bulletin&quot;, whose masthead proudly
proclaimed 'Australia for the White Man', stated in 1889: </p>

<p> &quot;The badness of the Chinaman, socially and morally, is
the outcome of his low wages ... If Chinamen will tomorrow refuse
to work for less wages, man for man, than Britons, and will
refuse to work longer hours, the head and front of the objections
to their presence will disappear.&quot; </p>

<p> For the &quot;Bulletin&quot;, the Chinese were
'jaundice-coloured apostles of unlimited competition'. </p>

<p> The proponents of a 'White Australia', however, slid with
ease from arguments of economic protectionism to visceral racism.
The Chinese were painted as living squalidly and in filth, their
habits depraved and their lives degraded. The absence of Chinese
women was seen as a threat to the honor and chastity of innocent
European women and girls (and prostitution certainly flourished
in the Chinatowns of large communities). That the Chinese men
worked on Sundays was portrayed as an indication of the
infiltration of paganism and devil-worshipping into god-fearing
Australian society. In the slandering of the Chinese, almost
anything went, as this extract from a tract written by someone
who went by the ironic pseudonym 'Humanity' shows: </p>

<p> &quot;The Chinese amidst their evil surroundings, and their
filthy and sinful abodes of sin and swinish devilry [will be]
entered into by the servants of the Most High God! May the
wayside scattering of the seed of holiness and truth take root in
the hotbed of all unholy and unclean vices! ... It would never be
believed that our Saxon and Norman girls could have sunk so low
in crime as to consort with such a herd of Gorilla
Devils...&quot; </p>

<p> (page 23-24) </p>

<p> Opium was seen as a pollutant, moral as well as physical; it
was tainted by the environment of its consumption and by its
connections with the Chinese themselves. The potency of these
separate aesthetic revulsions-against dirtiness, the Chinese, and
the smell of opium-was compounded by their mutual association, as
can be seen from the description of an opium den contained in the
'Bulletin's&quot; 1886 feature on 'The Chinese in Australia': </p>

<p> &quot;Down from the fan-tan den are stairs leading to lower
and dirtier abodes: rooms darker than and more greasy than
anything on the ground floor: rooms where the legions of
aggressive stinks peculiar to Chinamen seems to linger ... Yet
the rooms are not naturally repulsive, nor would they be so when
occupied by other tenants; but the Chinaman has defiled their
walls with his filthy touch; he has vitiated what was once a
reasonably pure atmosphere with his presence, and he has polluted
the premises with his disgusting habits; and so it is that nought
save suggestions of evil, incentives of disgust and associations
of vice, now seems to move in the fetid atmosphere ... The very
air of the alley is impregnated with the heavy odour of the
drug.&quot; </p>

<p> From being seen as a dirty habit in dirty people, opium
smoking came to be seen as an immoral habit in hated people. It
was a small step readily taken: from a symbol of depravity, opium
became a cause of it; from a sign of evil, it became an active
agent of it. </p>

<p> (page 32) </p>

<p> Sub-title: 'They all go to the Chinaman': Aboriginal Opium
Laws and the Chinese In fact, the first laws specifically to
prohibit opium did not seem to deal with the Chinese use of it at
all. The Queensland &quot;Sale and Use of Poison Act 1891&quot;
penalised &quot;any person who supplies, or permits to be
supplied, any opium to any aboriginal native of Australia or
half-caste of that race ... except for medicinal purposes
...&quot; </p>

<p> (page 36) </p>

<p> A man named Corbett, 'speaking for all other farmers',
complained that 'they could not get the blacks to work when they
wanted them, while the Chinese', who farmed half of the
surrounding land, could always get them, a fact which he
accounted for by saying that the Celestial paid their Aboriginal
employees in opium'. The solution seemed simple. As the local
carpenter argued, 'the blacks should be taken from the Chinese
and compelled to work for any European who might require their
services'. Opium was, as ever, a scapegoat. The local White
farmers, wanting cheap Black labour, could not understand why
they would rather work for the Chinese. The use of opium was
fastened upon as the only possible explanation for such a
perverse choice. </p>

<p> The more likely truth was that the Chinese treated the
Aboriginal with a modicum of respect. Roth reported the local
police as saying that is the White population ceased starving and
mistreating its Black employees, it could get as many workers as
it wanted. But even the crudest kind of decency appears to have
been beyond some of the locals. A man named Putt expressed his
grievance with incredulity: </p>

<p> &quot;I have shot thirteen or fourteen niggers in this
District and this is all the Government has done for me:-I can't
get a _____ nigger when I want one. They all go to the
Chinaman.&quot; </p>

<p> (page 204-205) </p>

<p> Senator Peter Baume, amongst others, has spoken with more and
more conviction as the years have passed. In one of his last
parliamentary speeches on the subject, before retiring to take up
an appointment as Professor of Community Medicine at the
University of New South Wales, he said: &quot;Our strategies seek
to prevent the production of certain designated illegal
substances, and fail to do so; they seek to prevent the
importation of substances, and fail to do so; they seek to
prevent the distribution of substances, and fail to do so; they
seek to prevent the sale and use of substances, and fail to do
so.&quot; </p>

<p> (page 207) </p>

<p> One thing is apparent. 'Drugs' is a subject which people
approach with many erroneous preconceptions, and a little
knowledge can change people's opinions profoundly. Both Peter
Baume and Peter Cleeland, chairmen of influential parliamentary
committees on the subject, have stressed to me how much their
thinking began to change when they first started to read and to
listen. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>