
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-84</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B007-232</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/jgray1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035815 text/html 19601
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:58:07 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:44 GMT
Content-length: 19383
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Keep Doin' What We're Doin'? No, We Must Reassess Our Drug
Policy</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<h2><a name="DDE_LINK7">KEEP DOIN' WHAT WERE DOIN'?</a> </h2>

<p>No, We Must Reassess Our Drug Policy </p>

<p>By Judge James P. Gray </p>

<hr>

<p>James P. Gray is a former federal prosecutor in Los Angeles
and criminal defense attorney in the United States Navy, and is
now a trial judge In the Orange County Superior Court. </p>

<hr>

<p>On April 8,1992, 1 did something unusual for a trial judge: I
held a news conference in the plaza behind the Santa Ana
Courthouse. At that time, I publicly set forth my conclusions
that what we are doing through the Criminal Justice System with
regard to our attempts to combat drug use and abuse in our
society, and all of the crime and misery that accompany them, is
not working. </p>

<p>Since that time, I have discussed this subject with many
different groups of people, and when I do, I always ask for a
show of hands as to how many people feel that our country Is In a
better condition today with regard to this critical problem then
we were five years ago. Almost never do any people raise their
hands. Then I remind them that if this is true, and if we
continue to pursue the same approach. no one can reasonably
expect that we will be in a better condition next year than we
are in today. </p>

<p>Fortunately, however, we have options. So now we must simply
investigate our options and <i>come up </i>with a more workable
and effective approach. </p>

<p>Before I begin my general discussion of this matter, however,
I would like to address nine threshold points so that we can
better understand each other </p>

<p>1. All of us are on the same side on this issue, we all are
trying to reduce drug use and abuse, and all of the crime and
misery that accompany them. We may simply disagree upon the best
option to accomplish that goal. </p>

<p>2. We must have more responsibility and accountability in our
society, not less; and the courts, the police and-the prison
system have an important part to play in bringing these back to
our society. </p>

<p>3. Without a doubt, heroin and cocaine are dangerous and
sometimes addicting drugs. But so also are alcohol and tobacco
dangerous and sometimes addicting drugs, and virtually everyone
agrees that we would only compound their haffn by making them
illegal. </p>

<p>4. Just because people discuss various options about how best
to combat drug use and abuse, or even because they believe that
we should employ a different option, does not mean that these
people condone drug use or abuse. </p>

<p>5. Education in this area is critically important and has
definitely had some positive results; however, it will continue
to be used effectively no matter which option we employ, </p>

<p>6. Law Enforcement has been doing a magnificent job in
attempting to enforce our current approach. However, the problem
is with the approach - not the police, the courts and the rest of
the Criminal Justice System. </p>

<p>7. We have never had a drug-free society, and we never will.
Recognizing this fact, we should try to employ an approach which
will reduce the overall harm that flows from drug use and abuse. </p>

<p>8. No matter which option we employ, there will always be an
important role to be played in it by the Criminal Justice System.
</p>

<p>9. This is a complex and multifaceted problem area, and does
not beneficially lend itself to little sound bites and slogans.
However, If we adopt a slogan, we should use something like:
&quot;if you want to keep gettin'what you're gettin', keep doin'
what you're doin'. </p>

<p>Well, what have we been doin' in our country with regard to
drug use and abuse? For the past decades, we have been attempting
to combat this critical problem with a program of massive
incarceration of our people. However, it is becoming increasingly
clear to everyone that this program has been and is a massive
failure. And we have gone broke in the process. We have built 12
new state prisons in the State of California in the past 10
years, at the cost of hundreds of millions of dollars. Yet even
so, today our jails and prisons are well beyond being
overcrowded. Now, an additional 12 new state prisons are on the
drawing board, with many of them scheduled to be completed by the
turn of the century. This has already been shown not to work.
Some people say that we can just as effectively address crime by
building new prisons as we can effectively address a fatal
disease by building new graveyards. In so many ways they are
right. </p>

<p>Today, almost one in every five people who work for the State
of California works for the Department of Corrections. We are
cutting back upon our education, closing many of our libraries,
and denying medical treatment for drug addiction to large numbers
of our people who desire and need it. At the same time we are
using our scarce resources to incarcerate people who use and sell
drugs at the cost of about $25,000 per year per person. One
accountant recently calculated that if we continue on the same
course in the future as we have for the last twenty years, by the
year 2020, literally everyone in the State of California will
either be in prison, or running one. </p>

<p>In addition, by pursuing this approach, we have made cocaine
the most lucrative product in the history of the world. We have
also made marijuana the most lucrative crop in the State of
California, easily outdistancing the number two crop, which is
corn. Make no mistake, any people who traffic In human misery by
selling these drugs for their own profit should be sent to
prison. However, would it not be better to have a system that did
not so strongly encourage this activfty? </p>

<p>On February 26, 1993, 1 was one of a group of nineteen
concerned cftlzens that met at the Hoover Institution on the
campus of Stanford University and unanimously passed a resolution
which recommends that our country investigate the possibility of
change In the way we choose to combat our drug problems. The
Resolution, which recommends that these medical and social
problems be treated with medical and social solutions, is printed
separately herein. It further recommends that one final blue
ribbon commission be immediately empowered by the President and
Congress to conduct this investigation as publicly and fully as
possible, and then to recommend revisions of the drug laws of
these United States in order to reduce the harm being caused by
out current policies. </p>

<p>The original signers of the Resolution include Dr. Milton
Friedman, the Nobel laureate professor of economics; Dr. Joseph
K. McNamara, author and former Chief of Police of San Jose;
George Shultz, former Secretary of State; Kurt L. Schmoke, Mayor
of the City of Baltimore; Reverends Leonard B. Jackson and J. D.
Moore of the First A.M.E. Church of South Central Los Angeles; a
former high school principal from the Oakland area, and several
medical doctors. </p>

<p>Since that meeting, the Resolution has been signed by numbers
of judges and justices in California as well as other state and
federal judges around the country; the Mayors of San Francisco,
Oakland, Upland and San Jose; the Chiefs of Police of San
Francisco, Oakland and San Jose; State Senators Marion Berguson
and Robert Presley; Orange County Supervisors Harriet Wieder and
Thomas Riley; the Sheriff of San Francisco; the Board of
Supervisors of Mendocino County; the Central Conference of
American Rabbis; Stanley Marcus, co-founder of Neiman-Marcus
Stores; the Board of Directors of the California Academy of
Family Physicians; Abigail Van Buren (&quot;Dear AW; all 23
chaplains at RlkeFs Island Prison in Now York City; and thousands
of other members of the legal, medical, law enforcement,
entertainment, business and education communities and concerned
citizens and taxpayers. </p>

<p>The credibility of this neutral Commission is a matter of
considerable importance. Its members should include
representatives from law enforcement, medical and drug treatment
professionals, former addicts, members of the clergy, university
scholars, etc. Hopefully the Commission would be chaired by
someone like General Colin Powell, former Surgeon General C.
Everett Koop, or someone of similar stature. </p>

<p>This is obviously a large area of inquiry, and many of the
issues are interrelated. However, the Commission should address
historically how our country chose to employ our present
approach. Professors Charles H. Whitebread and Richard J. Bonnie
published an extensive Inquiry into the legal history of American
marijuana prohibition in the October 1970 Issue of the Virginia
Law Review. As a judge, I am embarrassed to read of citations to
the Congressional Record that show that issues of public health
and public safety were not even considered by Congress in making
this substance illegal. Instead, the motivation appears to have
been racism and fear of economic competition. The Commission
should consider and publish these facts. </p>

<p>The Commission should also investigate what we have done in
our country that has been successful and not successful - and
what other countries around the world have done as well. It
should inquire into what has caused the upsurge in drug usage,
crime, and court and prison overcrowding in our country that has
not been present to such a degree in other countries. It should
Investigate the fact that between 1980 and 1993, the number of
women imprisoned in California increased 450%, from 1316 to 7232,
with a large majority being non-violent drug offenders, and 80%
of whom have children under the age of six years old. Then it
should consider the effect this incarceration has had upon the
upbringing of these children. </p>

<p>There are so many other areas in which our present approach
has impacted upon all of our people which we have not focused
upon. By following our present policies, we have funneled about
70 billion dollars per year of untaxed revenue Into organized
crime. We have undermined the work ethic in our society by making
the trafficking of these drugs the most lucrative activity in
which most of our people can engage. This has directly resulted
in our youths, both in our inner cities and everywhere else,
having drug sellers as their role models instead of people who
work hard and pursue an education. Our approach has also directly
resulted in the continual deterioration of the relationship
between the police and the communities they are attempting to
serve. </p>

<p>The 'War on Drugs' in our country in many ways has become a
war upon our own people, especially our minorities, who have been
incarcerated in vastly disproportionate numbers. Our present
approach has directly resulted in the exportation of mom money
from our shores than any other single cause, except for oil.
Indeed, as a result of this drug money, we have actually exported
narco-terrorism to the rest of the world. Our approach has also
resulted in a crime being committed upon our people by depriving
clean needles to those who are drug addicted - thus exacerbating
the AIDS epidemic. And our approach has materially and
demonstrably resulted In the erosion of our civil liberties set
forth in the Bill of Rights. </p>

<p>By our history over the last several decades, we have proved
that there is a sheer impossibility of preventing consenting
adults in a free society from selling small amounts of drugs for
large amounts of money. The Criminal Justice System simply cannot
prevail against this reality. Even though these street drugs are
today as illegal as we can make them under our statutes and our
Constitution, they are fully available in any quantity, governed
only by price. It truly Is time for us to investigate the
possibility of changing away from this failed approach. </p>

<p>Some people raise a legitimate concern that if we were to go
to a different system then large numbers of additional people <i>would
become </i>addicted to them drugs. This very Issue has been
researched before by numerous neutral Investigative groups, such
as New York Mayor La Guardia Committee in 1944; President Nixon's
National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse in 1973;
California Attorney General Van de Kamp's Research Advisory Panel
in 1989; as well as an in-depth book entitled <u>Licit and
Illicit Drugs</u> which was published by the editors of Consumer
Reports Magazine in 1972. None of these neutral bodies felt that
there would be a material increase In usage, and they further
went on to say that even if there might be, we still should go
away from the Criminal Justice System approach because of the
enormous benefits that our society would receive. </p>

<p>In addition, on June 13, 1994. the RAND Corporation released a
study about the most effective way to reduce cocaine use in the
nation. According to this highly-regarded think tank, drug
treatment programs are seven times more cost effective in
reducing cocaine use than law enforcement efforts. It also stated
that drug treatment is 11 times more effective than attempting to
interdict the drug at our borders, and 23 times more effective
than attempting to control the drug supply overseas. The evidence
is all around us. The only real question remaining is, is anybody
reading it? </p>

<p>So where do we go from here? Today the political reality still
is that our &quot;leaders&quot; do not believe there are enough
votes for the investigation of possible change. However, this
political reality is changing. Several years ago, the San
Francisco Chronicle aptly editorialized that with regard to our
nation's drug problem, &quot;the cure is worse than the
disease&quot;. On April 26, 1993, U.S. News and World Report
published an editorial by Its editor-in-chief, entitled
&quot;Fighting the Right Drug War. It concludes with the
following statement: </p>

<p>&quot;If President Clinton lacks the political courage to
change the old failed program and needs protective cover, let him
at least appoint an independent commission charged with
investigating prevention and treatment and instituting a sweeping
new program. Dr. Kildare, rather than Eliot Ness, is the role
model for banishing our deepest sickness.&quot; </p>

<p>On May 11, 1993, the Los Angeles Times editorialized that
&quot;Perhaps the political climate is becoming more receptive to
a now approach. Certainly the new Administration in <i>Washington
should </i>seize the moment for a fresh and comprehensive look at
the drug laws.&quot; Similarly, in the July/August 1993 issue of <u>American
Jails</u>. which is the magazine of the American Jail
Association, San Francisco Sheriff Michael Hennessey wrote a
feature article which decries the fact that our nation has, for
no beneficial purpose, become &quot;hopelessly addicted&quot; to
the ever-increasing incarceration of drug offenders. He made
comparisons to alcohol prohibition and to the war in Vietnam, and
then said that &quot;We have once again committed ourselves to a
costly, unwinnable war which is tearing the fabric of society to
shreds.&quot; </p>

<p>Even Dear Abby has stated publicly in her column on May 3,
1994 that &quot;Just as bootleggers were forced out of business
In 1933 when Prohibition was repealed, making the sale of liquor
legal (thus eliminating racketeering), the legalization of drugs
would put drug dealers out of business. It also would guarantee
government approved quality, and the tax on drugs would provide
an ongoing source of revenue for drug-education programs. An
added plus, There would be far less crowding in our prisons due
to drug-related crimes. It's something to consider.&quot; </p>

<p>Attomey General Janet Reno was quoted awhile ago as
acknowledging that the Government would have to seize 70% of the
illegal drugs in this country before a program of drug
interdiction would be successful. However, no one seriously
suggests that we actually interdict more than 10% of these drugs,
and a more realistic assessment tells us that the number is
closer to about 5%. Accordingly, for every ton on cocaine we
seize, we easily fail to seize somewhere between 9 and 19 other
tons - and the seizure rate for drug monies is even lower. As a
result. all of our efforts merely represent an acceptable
&quot;cost of doing business for organized crime. Food markets
accept higher rates of spoilage for fruits and vegetables. </p>

<p>What we are doing is not working. As judges, we are at the
helm of a sinking ship, and out citizens are really still not
aware of the hopelessness of the situation. Our group requests
our leaders and citizens who are aware of the magnitude of the
problem to sign the Resolution and go on record as recommending
the investigation of viable altematives to the failed &quot;W<i>ar
</i>on Drugs&quot;. There must be and is a better way. This fact
is so clear, that I make two promises without hesitation. The
first is that our country will adopt a materially different
approach in order to combat this critical problem, because what
we are doing now is so clearly not working. It is only a question
of when this important change will be made. The second promise is
that five years after we have adopted this different approach, we
will<i> </i>all look back with shock and dismay that we could
have stayed with our present failed system for so long. It is
time we get started. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>