
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B023-258</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/marij.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122104545 text/html 29145
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:45:25 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:29 GMT
Content-length: 28927
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Pharmacology of Marijuana: Just Another Sedative</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->

<h1>Pharmacology of Marijuana: Just Another Sedative </h1>

<p><b>FREDERICK H. MEYERS, M.D.</b> </p>

<p>Professor of Pharmacology, University of California, San
Francisco, Ca. </p>

<p>The Drug Policy Foundation's CME Seminar </p>

<p>Washington, D.C. November 13, 1992 </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h2>Introduction </h2>

<p>Change in the laws regulating the use of marijuana-certainly a
primary goal of this group-has been effectively blocked by the
successful efforts of the enforcement industry to convince the
citizenry that the use of marijuana presents a terrible danger to
the user and to society. Efforts to rebut the claims of the
prohibitionists have been enfeebled by the confusion that some of
us feel. Proselytizers insist not on an absence of significant
danger but on some positive, mystic and generally ineffable
benefit from the use of marijuana. Observers with less subjective
overlay also appear at a loss in formulating the pharmacology of
Cannabis, and both groups thus play into the hand of those who
encoded marijuana as an hallucinogen or who plead for delaying
action pending further research. </p>

<p>Even the technical or scientific reviews of the drug by
nominal experts are little more than catalogues suffused with
uncertainty, timidity and even error generated by the confusion
imposed by law and street lore. The defects in the literature are
not due to a lack of data from research but to a failure or
inability to apply any unifying or organizing concept to the
fragments of information. It will not be difficult to supply you
with that key: cannabis in its several forms and essences is just
another member of a large group of drugs, call them for the
moment general <i>anesthetic-sedative-hypnotics, </i>all of which
are used (and abused) at some time and in some form by some
technique by some individuals to relieve anxiety, to provide
surcease from memory and to cross the borders of consciousness
and sometimes even of life. </p>

<p>Members of this group of drugs, exemplified by alcohol,
Valium, and the other agents in the incomplete list in Figure 1,
all have characteristic, identifying effects in common, They
differ one from another largely in their duration of action and
speed of onset of effect. Some of them, especially alcohol, have
important organic toxicity not seen in others. It will also be
necessary to discuss the differences in the slope of the
dose-response relationship, that is the margin of safety.
However, the most important preliminary matter is the effect of
the route of administration on the manifest actions of a drug. </p>

<h2>SMOKE AS A DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEM </h2>

<p>Many people, including those smokers of marijuana who use wine
or beer to reinforce and prolong the effect, will resist the
conclusion, established below, that marijuana and alcohol are
comparable pharmacologically. Their intuitive feeling that there
can be no relation between the instantaneous, transient euphoria
from a joint and the more slowly developing and persistent good
feeling after a drink is understandable but mistaken. Before the
similarity of effects can be convincingly presented, however, the
influence of the route of administration on the temporal
relations of the response must be clarified by as brief as
possible a discussion of the distribution and transformation of
THC, the active ingredient of cannabis, after it enters the body
whether swallowed or inhaled. </p>

<p>The differences claimed to exist between marijuana and alcohol
(or Valium or whatever) virtually disappear if the reference drug
is given by mouth and is compared with THC also orally
administered. (Careful metabolic studies of crude drug using
special chocolate cookies are also available.) THC, it turns out,
is actually much more slowly metabolized and excreted than
alcohol (Figure 3 and 6). THC, like phenobarbital or
chlordiazepoxide (Librium), is best given as a cumulative drug,
and the amount in the body at equilibration is enormous compared
to the amount provided by one cigarette. Why then does the
cigarette provide such an immediate and intense effect? </p>

<p>First of all, realize that the particles in the smoke that
carry the drug are colloidal in size; so small that they are
carried by the inspired air to the depths of the lung where the
drug can be instantaneously absorbed across the alveolar
membrane. The efficiency of this process is already apparent to
you by analogy with the two common methods of cocaine delivery.
Smoked free-based (crack) is absorbed with a velocity resulting
in levels comparable to those seen after intravenous injection.
In contrast, the particles of inhaled cocaine salt are relatively
large, are deposited on the mucosa of the upper respiratory tract
and absorption is not much more rapid than after swallowing the
drug. </p>

<p>The THC in smoke is rapidly transferred to the essentially
aqueous blood and carried immediately to the left heart and into
the arteries, that is, the liver is not included in this first
pass and the absorbed THC is diluted by a relatively small volume
of arterial blood that is pumped to the tissues. Difference
vascular beds have differing blood flows. The cerebral blood flow
is relatively large and the brain is a fatty organ in the
chemical sense. THC is partitioned from the blood into the lipids
of the brain tissue. Immediately after inhalation, then, a high
concentration of THC is built up in the brain and the subjective
experience begins. </p>

<p>The THC remaining in the blood undergoes two additional
processes. Some reaches the liver and a fraction is altered
chemically- some accumulates in other fatty organs especially
ordinary adipose tissue. This accumulation slowly removes THC
from the blood. :The accumulation is slow because blood flow to
these depots is low. However, as THC is removed from the blood,
the concentration in the blood falls below that in the brain and
the THC passes from the brain back into the blood and the
behavioral effects at least rapidly diminish (Figure 5). </p>

<p>It is this rapid accumulation of agent in the brain and its
subsequent redistribution rather than its chemical transformation
that explains the brevity and intensity of the effect. The effect
begins before the subject exhales. As an illustration of the
efficiency of smoking consider that in one trial 10-15 mg of
Smoked THC resulted in a peak concentration about eight times as
great as followed 20 mg by mouth (Figure 3). </p>

<p>There are some correlates of THC metabolism unrelated to our
immediate discussion but worth mentioning in passing. THC
accumulates in fat to a concentration at least twenty fold that
in any other organ, and the slow release of the stored substance
explains the persistent appearance of THC and its metabolite in
the urine for weeks. (Figures 4 and 6.) Unlike the blood levels
of the very water soluble alcohol, THC levels do not correlate
with its biological effects. </p>

<p>Now that we are able to adjust to the different routes of the
administration, we can examine the effects of marijuana and
compare them with the effects of other sedatives. </p>

<h2>THE SEDATIVE -HYPNOTIC -GENERAL ANESTHETIC GROUP </h2>

<p>Physicians are conditioned at great expense by the drug
industry to think of available therapeutic agents as thousands of
individual cases properly identified only by a euphonious
tradename. However, the vast amount of information available can
be managed only if drugs are put into classes or categories. The
same properties that make for a useful therapeutic agent may make
for an enticing social drug, and it is not surprising then that
most social drugs fit into known categories. </p>

<p>There are a very large number of drugs that have similar
effects and are fairly included in the category
sedative-hypnotics or anxiolytics although <i>sedative-hypnotic-general
</i>anesthetics would be more accurate. Gases and volatile
liquids are often selected for use as general anesthetics because
their use can be by inhalation and allow minute to minute control
of dosage and rapid recovery. Solids are more easily dispensed
and administered as tablets or capsules and are chosen for use in
treating anxiety or inducing sleep, but pharmacologicaly all are
similar. Figure 1 lists some common drugs from this group. </p>

<p>This exercise will now examine the pharmacology of marijuana
and establish that all of the properties of sedatives are
present. Remember, please, throughout the discussion that effects
are described to establish the drug type. It does not follow that
these effects are induced regularly or even at all as marijuana
is used in our culture, but they are established by quantitative
experiments in the animal laboratory and by controlled clinical
observations. </p>

<h2>EFFECTS OF GRADED DOSE: </h2>

<p>The simplest way to characterize marijuana and equate the
effects with those of all other sedatives and general anesthetics
is to study the effects of doses of increasing size. It is
important to study the drug over a range of doses because the
effects manifested at a single dose level may mislead. Alcohol
even today is regarded as a stimulant by many people because they
see only the excitement and acting out; with larger or smaller
doses it becomes apparent that alcohol is a depressant and that
the excitement is actually disinhibition. The sequence of changes
are those still conveniently described as the stages of
anesthesia. These changes reflect a diffuse depression of the
neuraxis that begins at the highest level of the cortex and at
the caudal segments of the cord. The depression descends and
ascends until it meets at the medulla and even vegetative
function stops. </p>

<p>Stage 1 was long called the stage of analgesia. With small
doses, the subject experiences relief of anxiety or euphoria (a
positively good feeling) and possibly a slight drowsiness.
Psychomotor performance, concentration, short term memory are
progressively impaired in the laboratory situation. Actual
performance (driving on a test course) deteriorates if the dose
is adequate and the timing consonant. The flight simulator is a
useful tool and shows the same prolonged (24 hours) decrement in
performance seen after the acute effects of the barbiturates.
Judgment is obviously difficult to test, but most observers
consider as evidence the inappropriate high humor and confidence
in a fumbling, discursive subject. The one generalization that is
hard </p>

<p>for users of marijuana or of other sedatives to accept is that
users, whose function and ability to judge their function are
both impaired, are the persons least competent to analyze the
effects of a downer. </p>

<p>Stage 2 begins with the appearance of excitement. The degree
of excitement depends not alone on the dose but also on the
expectation of the subject and the setting, that is, on the
amount and nature of stimuli from the surroundings. In a calm
environment the subject may show only an intensification of the
changes listed for Stage 1. In another situation, the patient may
respond to stimuli in an uncontrolled, exaggerated way. This
excitement must not be confused with stimulation. These
&quot;drunks&quot; from whatever drug are disinhibited, that is,
the highest cortical centers are depressed and lower centers and
more primitive behaviors are released from the inhibition from
above that ordinarily controls them. The stage ends with the loss
of consciousness. </p>

<p>The flat dose response curve mentioned above now becomes of
crucial importance in understanding why marijuana does not cause,
as a direct drug effect, the same disinhibited criminal and
antisocial activity as does alcohol. Marijuana is in part benign
in this regard because the brief effect after smoking is achieved
with a small absolute dose. However, even if the subject is
swallowing hashish or THC (which is now marketed), the dangerous
(to self or others) dose is many multiples of the threshold dose
and, so far as I can establish, never achieved in humans in this
country. (There never was any basis for the picture of the
hash-crazed assassin. The assassins were a sect in Islam active
at the time of the crusades who were given to religio-political
murder but not under the influence of hashish. Their
assassinations were carefully planned and sometimes required
years of preparation while, for <u>example</u>, the designated
hit man learned a language and a trade and insinuated himself
into the court of the victim.) </p>

<p>Stage 3, the stage of surgical anesthesia, is easily reached
with cannabis in the animal laboratory, but the dose-effect curve
is so flat that is, so much is required, that it is doubtful if
anyone in the U.S. has ever been anesthetized by cannabis resin
in any form. For our purpose, classification, however, the animal
data are enough. </p>

<p>Stage 4, the stage of medullary paralysis, is demonstrable
with difficulty even in animals. The oral LD50 of THC in rats is
in excess of 600 mg/kg. </p>

<h2>ANOTHER ACUTE EFFECT </h2>

<h3>Dreamy, Fantasizing State </h3>

<p>The law thinks that marijuana is an hallucinogen, and any
number of groups and individuals refer to marijuana as a
&quot;mild hallucinogen&quot; and thus terribly confuse the
perception of the drug by many citizens. </p>

<p>What marijuana does is induce the same state that has been
described in association with every sedative-hypnotic that has
had wide use. The effect is most easily and commonly defined in
hospitals or offices where sedated patients can make known to
doctors and nurses their difficulty in distinguishing dreams and
waking fantasies from reality. The patient may complain bitterly
of the frightening nightmares or may accuse a staff member of
molesting her. At home the nightmares may be equally frightening,
but the erotic dreams cannot be projected onto an attendant and
the dreamy float may actually be pleasurable. The absence of an
exact statement about the associated level of consciousness is
not accidental. The process appears separate from the developing
concept of lucid dreaming. </p>

<p>This effect is also totally different than that of the nominal
hallucinogens such as acid. I say &quot;nominal&quot; because the
dreams of the sedated patient are by definition closer to
hallucinations than the distortions of perception experienced
with what, it appears, we will soon have to call rave drugs.
These magic agents all have the properties of the sympathomimetic
stimulants to a greater (MDA, MDMA) or lesser (LSD) degree. </p>

<p>Where the misconceived labeling of marijuana as hallucinatory
originated, and how it is maintained is a question of interest to
those of us who hope to see the laws regulating marijuana
rationalized. The 1937 enactment, designed to criminalize
marijuana use and thus provide continued federal employment for
redundant prohibition agents and a fiefdom for Anslinger,
classified marijuana as a narcotic. This irrationality, together
with the ruling by the Supreme Court that applying for a tax
stamp to handle an illegal substance constituted self
incrimination and would not fly, forced some revisions at just
about the time the early proselytizers for LSD were active. When
the hallucinogens were added to the index, marijuana was
transferred to that category. The enforcement industry is, of
course, still happy to have it separated from anything familiar.
Unfortunately several groups of professionals and marijuana
advocates are as responsible for maintaining the fallacy as those
from the criminal justice system. </p>

<h2>EFFECTS DURING CONTINUOUS USE </h2>

<h3>Tolerance and Withdrawal </h3>

<p>The tolerance and withdrawal expected of a sedative does
develop with the use of cannabis in concentrated forms. Tolerance
strictly defined has been demonstrated only with the use of
concentrated forms of cannabis or of THC and an analogue.
However, a learning process that is fairly called behavioral
tolerance explains some otherwise puzzling observations that are
made on people who smoke grass. </p>

<p><i>Behavioral Tolerance</i> - The manifest expression of
sedative effect depends not alone on the pharmacological effect
in the strict sense but also on the expectation of the user and
on his reaction to the physiological and behavioral changes
perceived. Taken at bedtime, a downer will shorten sleep latency;
the same dose at five in the afternoon in a situation that
provides stimulation and the need to continue to function may
lead to excitement. An inexperienced user, notably a first time
user or someone unexpectedly experiencing a larger than usual
dose or someone using in an anxiety laden situation, may be
seized by panic. We have no time for case histories, but the
hypomania and paranoia that accompanies the disinhibition and
anxiety can be alarming to all. If the episode is followed by
feelings of guilt or fear of consequences, the anxiety or panic
can be prolonged or recurrent. Possibly these incidents and the
withdrawal state to be described were the origin of the now
discredited claim of a marijuana psychosis. </p>

<p>The experienced drinker or marijuana user will not show these
exaggerated reactions, indeed, he will be able to hide some minor
effects consistently. The effects on psychomotor function and
cognition will not, however, be lessened, that is the tolerance
is more apparent than real. </p>

<p><i>Metabolic Tolerance.- </i>Behavioral tolerance is usually
contrasted with &quot;real&quot; or metabolic tolerance. However,
it seems to me that, in this day of disproportionate interest in
biotransformation and P450, &quot;real&quot; tolerance should be
divided into the metabolic and physiologic. </p>

<p>As we shall see, some kind of tolerance to marijuana clearly
must develop since its correlate, withdrawal, is easily
demonstrable. Tolerance, however, is quantitatively minor, and it
is not necessary to use larger and larger doses to maintain the
same effect, nor do fixed doses lose their effect with continued
administration. The point at this moment is that enzyme induction
cannot be important in this situation since frequent users of
marijuana achieve higher plasma levels after a test dose and
excrete the dose over a longer period than do infrequent users
(Figure 6). </p>

<p><i>Physiologic Tolerance</i> - Small but statistically
significant degrees of tolerance to </p>

<p>the effects on cardiovascular function, amount of REM sleep,
psychomotor performance, intraocular pressure, subjective
judgment of intensity of effect and others developed rapidly
when, to cite one specific paper, 210 mg per day of THC or the
equivalent in the form of crude extract was given for 11-21 days.
</p>

<p>During the above period of drug administration, physical
dependence developed, for, to anticipate the next paragraph, the
abrupt replacement of the drug with a placebo led to signs of
hyperexcitability or stimulation, that is, to withdrawal. The
constant presence in the body of a depressant had led to the
activation of antagonizing, stimulant or excitatory physiologic
systems. </p>

<p><i>Withdrawal</i> - The signs of withdrawal or physical
dependence appear when the stimulant or excitatory adaptations
persist beyond the e effect of the depressant. In the above
trial, weight loss, irritability and an increase in time spent in
REM sleep were prominent and persisted for 96 hours. Another
apparently well executed trial gave large doses of a synthetic
analogue of THC for a month. The withdrawal state described upon
discontinuing the drug was more in the expected pattern in that
it developed on the third day and was characterized by
restlessness and disturbed sleep although one subject did develop
hypomania. Under the same experimental conditions, subjects were
allowed free access to the drug as cigarettes; the average
patient smoked seventeen cigarettes per day, but no withdrawal
state could be demonstrated. </p>

<p>Insofar as our needs for classifying cannabis are concerned,
there remains the question of whether withdrawal from strong
cannabis could be as intense as the delirium tremens of alcohol
withdrawal and explain some of the &quot;psychotic&quot; episodes
alleged to occur. Controlled trials, of course, are not going to
become available. The clinical reports, notably those from
British physicians serving colonial troops, seem convincing to
me. </p>

<h2>Potential for Abuse </h2>

<p>There is no drug of this category that has not been misused
either episodically or compulsively. Relief of anxiety is a
seductive pharmacological reward, and countless patients and
non-patients are unable to resist using a little more than is
prescribed, a little oftener than is necessary. If one looks
outside of our culture to the Muslim world, it appears that a
compulsive pattern of use is possible, but in this country the
mode is the &quot;responsible use&quot; that the consensus
applauds in the case of alcohol. The responsible use of the less
dangerous cannabis is not countenanced because some agency or
forcehas convinced our legislators. that marijuana is somehow
different from all of its congeners. </p>

<h2>Other Effects </h2>

<p>There are a few other minor drug effects common to cannabis
and all other sedatives. In the animal laboratory the
tetrahydrocannabinols are anticonvulsant and comparable to
Phenobarbital. Presumably THC could be used in the human as an
antiepileptic, but also presumably the rapid down and up of
smoked marijuana could destabilize a seizure prone patient. </p>

<p>As is necessary to validate our thesis, marijuana depresses
polysynaptic spinal cord reflexes. In the laboratory this effect
can be demonstrated independent of the behavioral sedation, but
clinically the voluntary muscle relaxant effect of the sedatives
cannot be shown to be useful beyond or independent of the
anxiolytic effect. </p>

<p>A discussion of the therapeutic applications of marijuana or
of THC, which is available on prescription, would contribute to
our argument to the extent that the drug can be shown to act as a
sedative or anxiety relieving agent. The use of synhexyl as an
antidepressant is often mention. Review of the paper by Stockings
usually cited in this regard will establish that he actually used
the drug for the relief of anxiety. He clearly characterizes his
ambulant patients as neurotic and describes the development after
the administration of the analogue of THC of mild intoxication,
euphoria, and dreamy apathy. Given a patient whose vision and
ocular structure has been destroyed by glaucoma no one would
withhold whatever subjective relief a joint would provide, but it
would be misleading to say that marijuana is acting on the
glaucomatous process. Whether marijuana has important therapeutic
applications is an emotional issue that can be settled only by
controlled clinical trials of each proposed application as is
required for any other new drug or new application. In any case,
the questions associated with the use of marijuana as a social
drug are unrelated. </p>

<h2>MECHANISM OF ACTION </h2>

<p>The mechanism of action of this large group of drugs is, as
has been mentioned, a diffuse depression of the entire central
nervous system. However, one action is more specific and is
useful in developing our analogy. The ability of a sedative or
anesthetic to cause loss of consciousness is due to the
sensitivity of the reticular activating system to their
depressant effects. When electrodes are implanted into the
reticular formation and several functionally related areas in the
brain,, the effect of synhexyl cannot be distinguished from that
of thiopental (Pentothal), that is, the barbiturate and the
cannabinoid have a similar mechanism of action. (Synhexyl is a
close analogue of THC that was available in pure form before THC.
Careful, controlled double blind studies have shown that human
subjects are unable to distinguish between the two.) </p>

<p>In summary then marijuana is a drug which is pharmacologicly
similar to all other sedatives. There are differences between the
various sedatives, but these are largely matters of onset and
duration of action. The exception is alcohol which must be
ingested in grams rather than milligrams and which provides empty
calories that replace food that contains protein and vitamins.
and in some people the thiamin deficiency can lead to atrophy of
the brain. Alcohol also has direct toxic effects on the liver,
upper GI and respiratory tracts and brain As a direct effect of
its persistent action and the ease with which a grossly
disinhibiting action can be reached, it is responsible for
massive social and criminal problems. </p>

<p>Having provided you with an outline or framework upon which
you can hang your further studies and experience with marijuana,
I have reached the boundary of my province as a Pharmacologist.
In considering the social problems presented by our societal
reaction to the use of marijuana, I am a citizen with one vote.
However, I believe that the objective pharmacology that I have
presented suggests a well advised direction for change. </p>

<p>People who prefer marijuana to alcohol as a social drug can
fairly point out that the disinhibitory effect is brief, a
dangerously intense effect difficult to achieve and the organic
toxicity infinitely less than is the case with alcohol. From what
I regard as an objective pharmacologic point of view, I do not
see how we can with any hope of useful outcome acknowledge that
prohibition failed in the case of alcohol and at the same time
apply the discredited remedy to marijuana. It would also be
useful to eliminate the market that bleeds dollars into other
economies, and undeniably the criminal justice system would
become more useful if relieved of the burden posed by the huge
number of people who do not feel guilty. </p>

<p>Yet I do not wish to encourage the use of marijuana; we
certainly must not reduce regulation to the point that another
cigarette or liquor industry develops. My suggestion is to
legalize cultivation for personal use. </p>

<h2>References For Figures </h2>

<p>1. Huestis, et. al., Characterization of the absorption phase
of marijuana smoking Clin Pharmacol Therap 1992;52:31 </p>

<p>2. Kreuz and Axelrod, Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol:
Localization in body fat Science 1973;179:391 </p>

<p>3. Ohlsson et. al. Plasma delta-9- tetrahydrocannabinol
concentrations and clinical effects after oral and intravenous
administration and smoking Clin Pharmacol Therap 1980; 28:409 </p>

<p>4. Peat, Jones, et. al., The disposition of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol... in frequent </p>

<p>and infrequent marijuana users J Pharmacol Exp Therap 1987
(Preprint) <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>