
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-33</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B034-78</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/suprmct.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122063903 text/html 6448
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:38:53 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:22:35 GMT
Content-length: 6230
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Supreme Court Decision</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
</head>

<body>

<hr>

<h2 align="center">U.S. Supreme Court Report </h2>

<h5 align="center">Employment Division </h5>

<h5 align="center">Department of Human Resources of Oregon, et
al., Petitioners </h5>

<h5 align="center">v.</h5>

<h5 align="center">Alfred L. Smith et al.</h5>

<h5 align="center">[No.88-1213] 494 US 872,108 L Ed 2nd 876,110 S
Ct 1595 </h5>

<h5 align="center">Argued November 6, 1989. Decided April 17,
1990.</h5>

<p> <b>Decision:</b> Oregon's prohibition of use of peyote in
religious ceremony held not to violate free exercise of religion
clause of Federal Constitution's First Amendment.</p>

<hr>

<h5>SUMMARY</h5>

<p> Two drug rehabilitation counselors, both of whom were members
of the Native American Church, were fired from their jobs with a
private corporation in Oregon because they had ingested peyote, a
hallucinogenic drug, for sacramental purposes at a ceremony of
the Church. The counselors applied to the Employment Division of
Oregon's Department of Human Resources for unemployment
compensation, but the department's Employment Appeals Board
ultimately denied their applications on the ground that the
counselors had been discharged for misconduct connected with
work. The Oregon Court of Appeals, reversing the board's
decisions, (1) held that the denial of benefits to persons who
were discharged for engaging in a religious act constituted an
unjustified burden on the right of free exercise of religion, and
(2) remanded the cases to the board for further findings as to
the religious nature of the counselors' acts (75 Or App 764, 707
P2d 1274, 709 P2d 246). The Supreme Court of Oregon, holding that
such further findings were unnecessary and that the counselors
were entitled to payment of unemployment benefits, affirmed both
judgments as modified (301 Or 209, 221, 721 P2d 445, 451). On
certiorari, the United States Supreme Court (1) noted that the
Oregon Supreme Court had not decided whether the counselors'
sacramental use of peyote was in fact proscribed by Oregon's
controlled substance law, and that this issue was a matter of
dispute between the parties, (2) determined that it would not be
appropriate, given this uncertainty, for the United States
Supreme Court to decide whether the practice was protected by the
Federal Constitution, and accordingly (3) vacated the Oregon
Supreme Court's judgment and remanded the case for further
proceedings (485 US 660, 99 L Ed 2nd 753, 108 S Ct 1444). On
remand, the Oregon Supreme Court held that (1) the Oregon statute
made no exception for the sacramental use of peyote, (2) the
counselors' use of peyote thus fell within the prohibition of the
statute, (3) the prohibition of the practice at issue was not
valid under the free exercise clause of the Federal
Constitution's First Amendment, and (4) the counselors could not
be denied unemployment benefits for having engaged in that
practice (307 Or 68, 763 P2d 146). </p>

<p> On certiorari, the United States Supreme Court reversed. In
an opinion by Scalia, J., joined by Rehnquist, Ch. J., and White,
Stevens and Kennedy, JJ., it was held that (1) the free exercise
of religion clause permits a state to include religiously
inspired use of peyote within the reach of the state's general
criminal prohibition on use of that drug, where there is no
contention that the state's drug law represents an attempt to
regulate religious beliefs, the communication of religious
beliefs, or the raising of one's children in those beliefs; (2)
the free exercise of religion clause thus permitted Oregon to
deny unemployment benefits to persons dismissed from their jobs
because of such religiously inspired use; and (3) generally
applicable, religion-neutral criminal laws that have the effect
of burdening a particular religious practice need not be
justified, under the free exercise of religion clause, by a
compelling governmental interest. </p>

<p> O'Connor, J., concurred in the judgment and, in an opinion
joined in part (as to points 1-3 below) by Brennan, Marshall, and
Blackmun, JJ., expressed the view that (1 ) the question under
the free exercise of religion clause was properly presented in
the United States Supreme Court, (2) an individual's free
exercise of religion is burdened by neutral laws of general
applicability that make criminal the individual's religiously
motivated conduct, (3) the First Amendment requires at least a
case-by-case determination whether such a burden on specific
individuals is constitutionally significant and whether the
particular criminal interest asserted by the government is
compelling, and (4) under such a test, (a) Oregon had a
compelling interest in regulating peyote use by its citizens, (b)
a selective exemption from the prohibition would unduly interfere
with this interest, and therefore (c) the free exercise of
religion clause did not require Oregon to accommodate the
counselors conduct. </p>

<p> Blackmun, J., joined by Brennan and Marshall, JJ.,
dissenting, expressed the view that (1 ) a state statute that
burdens the free exercise of religion may stand only if the law
in general, and the state's refusal to allow a religious
exemption in particular, are justified by a compelling interest
that cannot be served by less restrictive means, (2) Oregon's
interest in refusing to make an exception for the religious use
of peyote was not sufficiently compelling to outweigh the
counselors' right to the free exercise of their religion, and
therefore (3) Oregon could not, consistent with the free exercise
of religion clause, deny the counselors unemployment benefits. </p>

<hr>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/peyotmnu.htm">Peyote
Wisdom Menu Page</a> </p>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm">LSD
and Psychedelics Menu Page</a> </p>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>