
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-66</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B033-366</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GENERAL/family2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110913 text/html 20331
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:09:04 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:30:38 GMT
Content-length: 20113
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Richardson-Taylor Reunion News March 10, 1990</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<h1>RICHARDSON-TAYLOR REUNION NEWS</h1>

<hr>

<p><b><i>March 10, 1990</i></b> </p>

<p>The response to the last edition of the Reunion News was most
gratifying and, in some cases, frightening. I heard from quite a
few known and suspected members of the family, and picked up
quite a few addresses of people who probably did not want to be
found. Thanks to all of those who did reply, but it is still
apparent that we haven't tracked down all of the nefarious family
members so let's keep up the effort to track down, and thoroughly
embarrass all those family members who are trying to hide. </p>

<p>Bud called me one day to say that Laurence had called him to
suggest that we include with the Reunion News a brief update on
where everybody is and what they are doing. He staunchly
maintains that both he and Laurence were sober at the time. </p>

<p>He suggested that everyone should send in a short note on
their current doings and significant events and a dollar or so to
defray the expenses of producing and mailing the newsletter.
Monetary contributions to support this effort would be nice (all
blank checks eagerly accepted) but no one will be denied the
benefit(?) of this newsletter just because they failed to ante
up. </p>

<p>If you will drop me a line (as many have already) and let me
know of significant events in your life in the last year or so, I
will include them with the periodic reunion information so
everyone can know how your life is going to Hell in a handbasket.
</p>

<p>I have attached a form at the end of this letter which you can
fill out and return, if you wish, to help me keep all of the
information accurate. </p>

<p>All information on the forms is voluntary and I will not print
or give out anyone's address or any other information without
their permission. </p>

<p>Anyone who fails to report will, of course, have only the most
slanderous rumors printed about them. </p>

<p>Sincerely, </p>

<p>Clifford A. Schaffer </p>

<p><b>REUNION DETAILS</b> </p>

<p><b>DATE:</b> <b>June 23 and 24, 1990</b> </p>

<p><b>PLACE: Howarth Park - Summerfield Rd., Santa Rosa, CA</b>. </p>

<p>The park is located on the east side of town, and a map is
enclosed. There is hiking, fishing, swimming, a small park, and
an amusement park close by. There are also paddle boats at both
lakes. </p>

<p>On the back of one of the sheets she sent me, in an almost
illegible scrawl, Ruthie wrote, &quot;It is also close to a lot
of wineries.&quot; I'll bet it is. </p>

<p><b>FOOD </b></p>

<p>There will be snacks, dips, lots of other food, and plenty of
raw meat, roots, and berries for the Morrises. Dinner will be
early, at 3:30 or 4:00 on Saturday because of the previous bad
experiences when we tried to feed the Leards and Morrises after
dark. Whatever food is left after the first attack of the Leards
and Morrises will be placed on the edge of the camp all day
Sunday to draw them away from the rest of us. </p>

<p>People who live in the area should bring salad, beans, and
other such items. People who live farther away should bring
chips, dips, and dessert. Dinnerware will be provided, but bring
drinks and charcoal for your family. </p>

<p><b>CAMPGROUNDS</b> </p>

<p>There are campgrounds in Spring Lake Park. A copy of a
campsite reservation form is enclosed. Please make arrangements
early before the authorities get wind of what is going on. </p>

<p>There is also a KOA campground nearby with all of the usual
KOA stuff. The address is: </p>

<p>San Francisco North/Petaluma KOA </p>

<p>20 Rainsville Road </p>

<p>Petaluma, CA 94952 </p>

<p>(707) 763-1492 </p>

<p>(800) 992-CAMP (Calif. Reservations Only) </p>

<p><b>MOTELS</b> </p>

<p>For those who are used to sleeping indoors, there are several
motels located within about three miles of the park. Three of
them are listed below. Ruthie recommends that everyone make their
own motel reservations as the best method of coping with the
chaos of the reunion. </p>

<p>All motels can be reached by taking the Hearn Ave. exit from
the 101 freeway. All motels have swimming pools. </p>

<p><b><u>RATING</u></b><b> </b><b><u>NAME</u></b><b> </b><b><u>COSTS</u></b><b>
</b><b><u>PHONE</u></b> </p>

<p>Best El Rancho Tropicana $56.00 and up (707) 542-3655 </p>

<p>2200 Santa Rosa Ave. </p>

<p><i>Ask for the &quot;Golden State Discount&quot;</i> </p>

<p>Good Best Western Single - $45.00 (707) 546-4031 </p>

<p>1500 Santa Rosa Double - $54.00 </p>

<p>Fair TownHouse Single - $32.00 (707) 545-4711 </p>

<p>2363 Santa Rosa Double - $36.00 </p>

<p><b>FINANCES</b> </p>

<p>The contribution for this year's reunion is $8.00 for each
family - a family being defined as the members of a single
household. </p>

<p>The cost to attend this reunion is fairly small but Ruthie
wanted me to mention that we want everyone to attend and money
should not be a consideration. If anyone would like to attend,
but has a problem with funds, please contact Ruth or Laurence and
money will be provided (probably out of the leftovers of the
Taylor family bail fund). Any requests for assistance will be
kept entirely confidential. You may stay home because you are
scared or embarrassed, but don't stay home just because you're
broke. </p>

<p><b>FAMILY DOINGS </b></p>

<p>WHO THE HELL ARE THESE PEOPLE? </p>

<p>ARE THEY FAR, FAR AWAY FROM ME? </p>

<p>WHEN WILL THEY BE PAROLED? </p>

<p><b>INTRODUCTION</b> </p>

<p>I am pleased to report that the vast majority of people in the
family are apparently healthy, active, and doing well. We do not
yet have any relatives who are rich enough that we can all go
mooch off of them, but nobody seems to be starving either. </p>

<p><b>PASSINGS</b> </p>

<p>For all of those who were not aware, Mary Taylor died last
year. She and my grandmother, Laura Richardson, are the reasons
that we gather every year. She will be missed by all of us, but
we should all feel very lucky that we have had these women in our
lives. </p>

<p><b>THE FAMILY</b> </p>

<p>ALLSMAN, DOROTHY </p>

<p>(nee Richardson) - Currently selling real estate in Phoenix,
Arizona. The last time I spoke with her she made a point of
mentioning how much she enjoys meeting all of the nice people in
this family every year at the reunion. Her doctor tells me that
radical personality changes are common in persons of extreme age.
Ed has had some health problems which may limit their ability to
travel. </p>

<p>ALLSMAN, PAT </p>

<p>Pat is living in Phoenix, doing well, and he has developed
into a good judge of appropriate Christmas gifts. </p>

<p>ATKINSON, CHRISTINE </p>

<p>(nee Sweet), eldest of Margaret and Vic, is in Chicago,
working for First Boston Corp. doing something with computers.
She didn't mention anything specific about the opportunities for
embezzlement at her current position, but we know she will be
alert. She tells a fairly wild, and almost believable, story
about how her husband Scott travels a lot because of his
highfalutin position with something called Terra Museum. She
swears that it is not a front for drug smuggling. </p>

<p>BECK, META </p>

<p>Bud says she is doing well but he did not provide a lot of
details. He is probably covering up. </p>

<p>BERZ, RONNI </p>

<p>Meta's second. Currently living in Bakersfield and prospering
nicely with her husband, George, who works with computers. </p>

<p>HARTER, BARRI </p>

<p>No information. May be the same Barri Harter rumored to be
involved with Donald Trump. </p>

<p>JOHNSON, GLENDA </p>

<p>No current address. No information. May have been lost in
Borneo while filming the headhunters. </p>

<p>KRAMER, JOANNE </p>

<p>(nee Morris) - Joanne is living in Fresno and sends obscene
horoscopes to all those who write to her. She still labors under
the delusion that I am really Satan. </p>

<p>KRAMER, LARRY </p>

<p>son of Joanne, no relationship to the Japanese monster film
&quot;Son of Joanne.&quot; According to Joanne, he is living
with, and mooching off his mother in the finest Morris tradition.
</p>

<p>KRAMER, LESLIE MAUREEN </p>

<p>Daughter of Joanne, living in Cleveland and working as an
exotic dancer. (Yes, that's right.) She is the proud mother of
Crystal Ladd who, according to the sworn testimony of Joanne, is
an extraordinarily beautiful and talented child. </p>

<p>LEARD, DAVID </p>

<p>His years in the Navy permanently damaged his ability to tell
when it is too wet outside. He is currently living in the rain
forests of Seattle and doing something with computer systems. It
didn't surprise anyone that one of the Leards would eventually
return to the Bigfoot territory from whence they came. His wife
is pretty, intelligent, and very nice. He must have lied
tremendously to get her. </p>

<p>LEARD, DOUGLAS </p>

<p>Somehow the Richardson-Taylor arson gene went wrong in
Douglas. He puts out fires for a living, instead of starting
them, and apparently enjoys it. He and Barbara, and kids, live in
Rancho and, last time I checked, they were all doing well and
enjoying life. </p>

<p>LEARD, LOUISE </p>

<p>Louise is still living in the same old place in Sacramento
that she bought when houses were still $1.49. She is in good
health, reasonably good humor, and still unreasonably
conservative. She still says &quot;Well, now Michael . . .&quot;,
all the time, even when Michael is not around. </p>

<p>LEARD, MICHAEL </p>

<p>Michael just keeps on trucking. He is an air conditioning
expert at McClellan in Sacramento. He recently visited us in Los
Angeles and found that he actually could cope with the freeways
down here (but he still split as soon as he could anyway). He is
in good health but needs more practice with his .22 pistol. </p>

<p>LINK, BARBARA </p>

<p>(nee Sweet) - Barbara is married to Dan Link, a pastor with a
devotion to hopeless causes such as truth and morality. They
moved to Ruidoso, New Mexico, presumably to escape the shame and
guilt which follows excessively moral people in this family. The
name Ruidoso is Spanish for &quot;noisy&quot; which, Barbara
claims, has only a coincidental relationship to Dan's sermons. </p>

<p>MORRIS, ELEANOR </p>

<p>and Don - No current word from them, although I thought I
recognized Don playing Digit in &quot;Gorillas in the Mist.&quot;
Way to go with that second career, Fellah. </p>

<p>MORRIS, RICHARD </p>

<p>No current word on his activities. What can you say about a
Morris that hasn't already been grunted by someone else? I heard
that he was running a dress shop for transvestites and all I can
say is that Richard never denied it. </p>

<p>MORRIS, STEVEN </p>

<p>He is single (relatively speaking), working at DMV, and still
trying to impregnate every female in the city of Sacramento now
that the State has given up its effort to restrict his breeding.
Remember the family motto, Steve - <i>Never give your right name</i>.
</p>

<p>NEWCOMB, RUTH </p>

<p>(nee Taylor) - She is doing well and sends her love to
everyone. She mentioned that she is getting married very soon
(says she doesn't have to) and recommends bear traps and doe
scent as the perfect combination for nailing a man. She didn't
give his name but sent a nice picture of him bound and gagged in
the trunk of her car. Congrats, Ruthie. </p>

<p>PEREIRA, CARRIE </p>

<p>She recently had a baby, prompting Bud to lie far more than he
usually does. </p>

<p>PORTER, MICHAEL ANDREW </p>

<p>(Andy) son of Joanne Kramer - Currently living in Fullerton,
CA and doing well in sales. </p>

<p>PRUITT, BOB </p>

<p>No information. Could be the same Bob Pruitt responsible for
the Exxon Valdez disaster. </p>

<p>QUIGLEY, DONNA </p>

<p>(nee Morris) - Donna reportedly lives next door to Margie and
they are known as the Unholy Two in their neighborhood. A recent
effort by the City Council to evict them failed when the
authorities were unable to prove a connection to the rest of the
Morris family. </p>

<p>RICHARDSON, BILL </p>

<p>Bill and Dawn currently live in Ohio for no apparent reason,
and Bill is now working as a cost analyst after many, many years
with the U.S. Air Force. (You know - the people who brought us
the Stealth Bomber.) He gets Air Force retirement money and
probably makes a pretty good bundle at his current job, so he is
probably a good person to borrow money from. Dawn has, by all
accounts, consistently sullied the family reputation with a long
string of church work, good deeds, and other socially acceptable
do-gooder behavior which is totally alien to this family's
character. Mark, their eldest, is either on the high school
football team, or he is the high school football team, - it
wasn't clear from their letter. I saw a picture of Craig. He has
to be healthy. </p>

<p>RICHARDSON, BUD </p>

<p>He is in better health than he has a right to be, and claims
he is going to live forever. He called me just days after the
birth of his latest great grandkid and he had already concocted
the most astonishing stories about this child. </p>

<p>RICHARDSON, BECKY </p>

<p>Eldest of James and Edna. No information. She may be living
with a motorcycle gang responsible for several holdups in the
Central Valley. </p>

<p>RICHARDSON, JAMIE </p>

<p>Youngest of James and Edna. No information. Carried away by
Gypsies many years ago to the remotest reaches of Fresno County. </p>

<p>RICHARDSON, JAMES </p>

<p>Currently retired and residing in Fresno with Edna who, for
some strange reason, is a perfect match for James. His &quot;Old
Fart&quot; hat wore out so he is getting one that says
&quot;Older Fart.&quot; Unlike fine wines, the aroma of farts is
not greatly improved by aging. </p>

<p>RICHARDSON, JERRY </p>

<p>No information direct from Jerry but Bud tells me that he is
doing well. </p>

<p>RICHARDSON, LARRY </p>

<p>Bud tells the same story about Larry, further straining his
credibility. </p>

<p>RICHARDSON, PETE </p>

<p>Pete has not yet learned that exercise is bad for the health
so he continues to run every day. Despite all this running, to
the best of my knowledge, he has never caught anything more
significant than the common cold. He continues to compete and win
races in the Old and Decrepit category. </p>

<p>SCHAFFER, CLIFFORD </p>

<p>I am currently working as a computer systems consultant, write
a few articles now and then and, lately, am doing some public
speaking for the ACLU. Bonnie is a computer systems manager with
Pinkerton Detectives. </p>

<p>Serena and Alyssa are 15 and in high school. Serena is in
Flags with the marching band and Alyssa earned a letter last year
on the swim team. Melissa, 12, and Courtney, 10 are both doing
well. </p>

<p>SCHULKINS, JOYCE </p>

<p>No information. Rumored to be on an expedition to find
dinosaurs in Africa. </p>

<p>SCHULKINS, LARRY </p>

<p>No information. May be the same Larry Schulkins who is
currently a hostage in Beirut. </p>

<p>SWEET, JULIE </p>

<p>Julie is currently working at the Los Angeles Zoo, as an
animal keeper and trainer and thus would probably be the best
skilled person to manage the reunion. </p>

<p>SWEET, MARGARET </p>

<p>(nee Richardson) - Margaret sent out a letter with some
outrageous tale about how she and Vic are supposedly not old
enough to qualify for Social Security or something like that so
she is continuing to work. Margaret's letter starts out
&quot;Dear Friends and Relatives&quot;, which shows that she
draws a clear distinction between the two. Vic is working in a
funeral parlor so he should have a lot of creepy stories to tell
around the campfire. </p>

<p>TAYLOR, DAVID </p>

<p>No information or parole date. </p>

<p>TAYLOR, EDITH </p>

<p>No information. Probably on the run from the law. </p>

<p>TAYLOR, LAURENCE and WILMA </p>

<p>Laurence was caught telling the truth last year and had to
spend several weeks in therapy before he was well again. When you
talk to him you will see that he is much better now. </p>

<p>TAYLOR, LOUISE </p>

<p>No information. Possible KGB double agent. </p>

<p><b>FAMILY INFORMATION WORKSHEET</b> </p>

<p>First Name:__________________________ Last
Name:______________________ </p>

<p>Address:
______________________________________________________ </p>

<p>City, State, Zip: _______________________________________ </p>

<p>Telephone: _______________________________________ </p>

<p>Spouse/Significant Other: __________________________________ </p>

<p>Current Occupation: ________________________________________ </p>

<p>Can the rest of us borrow money from you? _____ </p>

<p><u>KNOWN AND SUSPECTED CHILDREN</u> </p>

<p>Date of </p>

<p><u>Name Sex Birth</u> </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>(use additional pages if necessary) </p>

<p><u>ACHIEVEMENTS</u> </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p><u>OTHER SIGNIFICANT NEWS</u> </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>

<p>_________________________________________________________ </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>