
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B23-50</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B012-274</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/chap1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050325 text/html 27195
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:03:18 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:57:36 GMT
Content-length: 26977
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>California Drug and Marijuana Arrests, 1960-67</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49632" -->

<p><b>A Fiscal Analysis of Marijuana Decriminalization</b></p>

<p><b>CHAPTER 1. </b></p>

<h1>REASONS FOR ESCALATING ENFORCEMENT COSTS: </h1>

<p><b>CALIFORNIA DRUG AND MARIJUANA ARRESTS, 1960-67</b> </p>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<h2>LEGISLATIVE HISTORY</h2>

<p>Marijuana has been illegal in California since 1915, when the
State Legislature made it unlawful to possess or sell the
flowertops, leaves, extracts, tinctures or any narcotic
preparations of hemp, Indian hemp or &quot;loco weed&quot; except
when prescribed by a physician. Originally these were misdemeanor
offenses punishable by a $100- $400 fine or 50-1830 days in jail,
but subsequent legislation gradually increased penalties to the
felony level (Source 1). </p>

<p>A felony is defined in California law as an offense for which
confinement in state prison is either an alternative or the sole
penalty. By 1939, possession or sale of any amount (or any part)
of the plant Cannabis sativa L. drew up to a year in county jail
or up to six years in prison. </p>

<p>In 1953-54 minimum mandatory sentences were established for
cannabis crimes, with &quot;escalator clauses&quot; punishing
repeat offenders more severely. Most marijuana offenses were
felonies with minimums of one to ten years in prison for
possession,) or five to life for sale. Practically the only
marijuana misdemeanors were &quot;use of marijuana&quot; (a crime
since 1949), and &quot;maintaining premises where narcotics are
used.&quot; These were punished by a mandatory 90 days to one
year in jail. </p>

<p>A U.S. Supreme Court decision in the Robinson case in 1962,
however, held that addiction or use of drugs per se was not a
crime, leaving &quot;use of marijuana&quot; exclusively a
juvenile offense thereafter. California's delinquent tendency
laws allow juveniles to be punished for offenses such as using
marijuana, or being a runaways which would not be crimes if they
were committed by adults (Source 2). </p>

<p>The marijuana laws covering most of the first eight-year
(1960-67) period of this study were established in 1961. Simple
possession of any amount of marijuana drew a minimum 1-10 years
in prison, with no parole until a year had been served. An
offender with any prior felony conviction got 2-20 years, and
with two priors five years to life in prison. </p>

<p>Possession of marijuana for sales a new offense in 1961, drew
two to ten years in prison (5-15 with any prior; 10-life with two
priors). Sale of marijuana was punished by a mandatory five or
ten years to life, with no possibility of parole until three
years had been served (Source I). </p>

<p>By putting virtually all marijuana offenses in the same felony
class as heroin% murder, rapes and arson, legislators placed
marijuana offenders in the most expensive law enforcement
judicial, and correctional categories. Malting any crime a felony
sends a message to the police and Courts that this offense has
top priority in terms of time and money spent pursuing and
prosecuting the offender. This was feasible as long as there were
only a few thousand marijuana arrests per year.., but when
arrests started doubling and tripling it soon became evident that
treating marijuana like heroin was going to be a very expensive
proposition indeed. </p>

<h2>THE BCS INDIVIDUAL REPORTING SYSTEM, 1959-67</h2>

<p>California has one of the best statistical databases on drug
offenders in the world today because the 1959 State Legislature
appropriated funds to establish a unit within the Justice
Department's Bureau of Criminal Statistics to keep track of every
known drug law violator from the point of arrest through the
final disposition. </p>

<p>Information such as the age, sex, race, drug usage, prior
criminal record, and probation or parole status of each new
offender was recorded on a 5x8 card at the time of his or her
drug arrest. Subsequent events (disposition and sentence) in
processing the offender through the criminal justice system were
recorded on this same card., along with any later criminal
involvements (Source 3). </p>

<p>This was the first attempt in any state to gather information
about individual drug offenders from all available sources.
Federal agencies as well as city, county and state agencies
contributed data from police arrest reports, rap sheets, court
records, jail and prison files, juvenile hall and California
Youth Authority records, and probation and parole reports. A
total of 120,248 persons were included in these files between
1960 and 1967 (Source 3i, p.7). These persons accumulated a total
of 214,809 drug arrests during this time, of which 91,529 were
marijuana arrests (Table 1). </p>

<p>The wealth of detail on drug offenders preserved by the
Individual Reporting System allows us to determine why
enforcement costs skyrocketed. The eight-year period 1960-67 has
been chosen because thereafter the method of recording arrests no
longer included detailed offender characteristics. </p>

<h2>CHANGES IN DRUG OFFENDER CHARACTERISTICS 1960-67</h2>

<p>Changes in drug arrest patterns and drug offender
characteristics in the early 1960s were the primary reasons for
the sudden escalation of drug law enforcement costs in California
during the ensuring years. A brief survey of these changes
between 1960 and 1967 will help us understand why enforcement
costs rose so drastically. Fuller detail can be found in Sources
3 and 4i, and in the RACE67 appendix to this report. </p>

<p>1960 was the first full calendar year of the Individual
Reporting System, and in many ways reflects the narcotics scene
of the late 1950s. Drug arrests were split about evenly between
heroin offenders and a quite different group of marijuana or
dangerous drug offenders (see Table 1). The replacement of the
first group by the second is essentially what caused the costs of
law enforcement to rise. </p>

<p>The chief concern of law enforcement was heroin arrests, which
were nearly half (48 percent) of all drug arrests. There were
twice as many heroin arrests as marijuana arrests among adults,
with dangerous drug arrests taking third place (Table 1). Police
priority was given to heroin and marijuana offenses because most
were felonies while dangerous drug offenses were practically all
amphetamine and barbiturate misdemeanors. </p>

<p>Nearly three-fourths (74.1 percent) of heroin arrests were for
simple use of the drug-- a felony. Forty percent of heroin
offenders were Hispanic; about a third were white, and a fourth
were black (Race67). </p>

<p><b>TABLE 1. CALIFORNIA DRUG ARRESTS 1960-67</b> </p>

<p>By Offense Category and Percentage of All Drug Arrests </p>

<hr>

<pre>
YEAR ALLDRUG    MJ   MJ%      HEROIN H%      D.DRS. DD%     OTHER 0%
1960	19265	5155	27	9295	48	4048	21	767	4
1961	15185	3794	21	8307	46	5239	29	848	5
1962	17613	3743	21	6022	34	6771	38	1077	6
1963	19226	5518	30	6064	33	5443	30	1201	7
1964	21729	7560	35	7701	35	5216	24	1252	6
1965	24374	10002	41	6164	25	6881	28	1327	5
1966	33622	18243	54	6482	19	7071	21	1826	5
1967	61792	37514	61	8469	14	12367	20	3442	6
</pre>

<hr>

<pre>
TOTAL    214809    91529 43% 58504 27%           53036   25% 11740      5.5%
</pre>

<hr>

<p>Note: Percentages may not total 100% due to rounding. </p>

<p>Source: Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California 1969, p.l.
</p>

<p>The typical adult heroin offender in 1960 was a male heroin
addict of Mexican descent from Los Angeles. He was 25 years of
age or older, and had a lengthy criminal record for drugs and
crimes against property. Seven out of ten heroin offenders had
already served prison or jail sentences at the time of their 1960
arrest (Source 4). </p>

<p>Juveniles in the early 1960s, however, had many more marijuana
and dangerous drug arrests than heroin arrests. In 1961 juvenile
drug offenders were 39 percent Mexican descent, 37 percent white,
22 percent black, and 1.6 percent &quot;other&quot; races (RACE67
Appendix). </p>

<p>The main reason for these ethnic distributions in the early
Sixties was that Los Angeles County, with its large Hispanic and
black populations was responsible for about 70 percent of all
drug arrests in the state. There was considerable variation
between Los Angeles and the rest of the state in ethnicity of
arrests. &quot;A much higher percentage of whites was arrested
outside Los Angeles County. The percentage of Negroes arrested in
Los Angeles County was substantially higher than in the rest of
the state&quot; (Source 3c, p.20). </p>

<p>The establishment of the California Rehabilitation Center
(CRC) for narcotics addicts in 1961, and the U. S. Supreme Court
decision in the Robinson case in 1962, had the cumulative effect
of greatly reducing the number of arrests for heroin addiction or
use in the next few years. Since these were about three-fourths
of all heroin arrests, the percentage of drug arrests which were
for heroin steadily declined (Sources 3b-3i). </p>

<p>Meanwhile, arrests for marijuana and dangerous drugs started
to climb. A surge of dangerous drug arrests in 1961-62 was the
first sign that drug arrest patterns were about to change
radically. Dangerous drug arrests exceeded heroin arrests for the
first time in 1962 (Table 1). </p>

<p>In 1960, felony marijuana arrests were only 3.72 percent of
all the felony arrests in California (MJSPRD line 43), and
marijuana arrests were about one-fourth (27 percent) of all drug
arrests in the state (Table 1). Seventy percent of marijuana
arrests were made in Los Angeles. Whites accounted for nearly
half (48.5 percent) of adult marijuana arrests, blacks for 28
percent, and Hispanics for 22 percent (RACE67). </p>

<p>The typical adult marijuana or dangerous offender in 1960 was
a white male under 25 years of age from Los Angeles. He had never
been arrested before on a drug charge, but was likely to have
been arrested for some crime against property. One out of seven
adult marijuana offenders in 1960 progressed to heroin
involvement within five years (Source 4). </p>

<p>In 1963 the number of marijuana arrests began to rise rapidly.
In 1964 marijuana and heroin arrests were each about 35 percent
of all drug arrests, and in 1965 marijuana arrests surpassed
heroin arrests both in number and as a percentage of drug arrests
(Table 1). </p>

<p>For the first time in California history, whites were involved
in more than half of all drug and all marijuana arrests in 1965.
The Los Angeles component of statewide drug arrests steadily
declined, from 70 per-cent in 1960 to 64 percent in 1965 and only
50 percent in 1967 (RACE67). </p>

<p>The Bureau of Criminal Statistics noted in 1966 that &quot;a
new segment of California's population is entering the drug
picture. Here there is an indication that an important component
of the new segment is made up of persons of Caucasian descent ...
The proportion of white (adult) arrestees has risen to 56 percent
from 44 percent in 1960... This development appears to stem in
part from the influx of large numbers of novice users into the
drug arrest population&quot; (Source 3h, p.14). </p>

<p>This trend was even more pronounced in 1967, when whites
became 64.5 percent of adult drug arrests, 70.9 percent of
juvenile drug arrests, and 66 percent of all drug arrests. The
surge in white arrests occurred in all categories. Many
amphetamine-barbiturate offenses were raised to felony level in
1965, and LSD and similar hallucinogens were made illegal in
1966, which caused dangerous drug arrests to double between 1965
and 1967 (Table 19 and Sources 3h, pp.1-49 and 3i, pp.1-39 12). </p>

<p>The most significant increase however, was in marijuana
arrests, where the proportion of white offenders in 1967 rose to
68 percent for adults, 72.9 percent for juveniles) and 64 percent
of all marijuana arrests, with concomitant decreases of about 5
percent each in black and Hispanic marijuana arrests (Source 3i,
p.12). </p>

<p>Marijuana arrests doubled between 1966-1967 and became 61
percent of all drug arrests in the state, compared with 27
percent in 1960. Despite the explosion of dangerous drug arrests
in 1967, they constituted only about 20 percent of all drug
arrests-- down slightly from 21 percent in 1960. And heroin
arrests, which had been 48 percent of drug arrests in 1960, were
now only 14 percent of all drug arrests in California (Table 1). </p>

<p>Accompanying the increase in white offenders was a continuing
rise in the proportion of offenders who had never been arrested
on drug or criminal charges before. In 1965, 53 percent of adult
drug arrestees were first offenders; in 1967 they were 61
percent. The highest proportion of these were new marijuana
offenders-- 67 percent of adult marijuana arrests in 1965 were
initial arrests, rising to 71 percent in 1967 (Sources 3g, P.8;
3h, p.9; 3i, p.7). </p>

<p>The median (average) age of marijuana offenders fell from 24
years old in 1961 to 22 in 1965 and 19 in 1967. This drove down
the median age of all drug offenders from 26 in 1961 to 20 in
1967. About 85 percent of drug offenders were male (Sources 3g,
p.11; 3h, p.14; 3i, pp.12-13). </p>

<p>Thus by 1967 the typical person arrested for drugs in
California was no longer an aging Hispanic heroin addict with a
lengthy criminal record, but a young white pot smoker who had
usually not been involved with drugs or crime before. This change
was permanent, at least through 1985, and had great impact on the
costs of drug law enforcement in California. </p>

<p>Generally an ethnic-minority heroin addict does not have the
financial resources available to a first-time white marijuana
offender, with which to fight a felony case through the criminal
justice system. It was not the change in skin color, but the
changes in drug of choice, place of arrest, and financial
circumstances of the average drug offender that caused the costs
of law enforcement to skyrocket. The single most important
influence on these costs was the rising number of white felony
marijuana arrests, which by 1967 were 42 percent of all drug
arrests in California (RACE67). </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA ARREST ANALYSIS, 1960-67</h2>

<p>The following analysis of marijuana arrest patterns will be
helpful in understanding the predominant role of these arrests in
increasing the costs of law enforcement in California. The
frequency counts (Tables 1, 2, and 3) and the MJSPRD table on
which this analysis is based may be found in the reference table
section at the back of this report. </p>

<p>Marijuana arrests increased tenfold between 1962 (3743) and
1967 (37514). As can be seen in graph DRMJ6067 above, it was.
this rise in marijuana arrests which fueled the statewide surge
in drug arrests, so the drug arrest curve generally matches the
marijuana arrest curve. </p>

<p>Graph %AMJAD67 shows that marijuana arrests rose from 27
percent of all drug arrests in 1960 to 61 percent in 1967. This
important change in the typical offender's drug of choice
occurred in 1965, when marijuana arrests surpassed heroin
arrests, and was solidified when marijuana arrests surpassed
non-marijuana arrests in 1966 (graph DAD672 below). </p>

<p>95 to 99 percent of California marijuana arrests were felonies
at this time. Most misdemeanor marijuana arrests were of
juveniles, for use of marijuana. A few adults each year were
arrested for maintaining premises. </p>

<p>Adults were arrested for marijuana far more frequently than
juveniles, contrary to the public impression that most marijuana
arrests are of juveniles (Table 3, graph MJ6067) However, the
rate of increase for juvenile arrests was much greater than for
adult arrests.., and the average marijuana offender was only 19
years old by 1967 (Source 3i, p.13). </p>

<p>Adult marijuana arrests increased vastly in number, but
declined as a percentage of all marijuana arrests, from 92
percent in 1962 to 71 percent in 1967 (graph %AJMJ67). Juvenile
arrests rose from 8 to 29 percent. </p>

<p>Possession of any amount of marijuana was a felony, and was
the most frequent marijuana offense, ranging from 77 percent in
1962 to 84 percent in 1967. When possession for sale is included
possession arrests were nearly 90 percent of all marijuana
arrests by 1967 (Table 3, graphs above). </p>

<p>Non-possession offenses were 19.5 percent (1962) to 11 percent
(1967) of marijuana arrests. The most common non-possession
felony was sale of marijuana; the least common -felonies were
cultivation of marijuana and sale of some other substance in lieu
of marijuana. </p>

<h2>SUMMARY: REASONS FOR RISING ENFORCEMENT COSTS</h2>

<p>The following are the most important reasons for -the
escalation of marijuana law enforcement costs in California.
Unless otherwise stated, the data given are for 1967. </p>

<p>1. ARREST VOLUME: There were ten times as many marijuana
arrests in 1967 (37,514) as there were in 1962 (3,743), and still
rising. </p>

<p>2. FELONY STATUS: Virtually all marijuana offenses (99
percent) were classified as felonies, which put them into the
costliest &quot;top priority&quot; law enforcement judicial and
correctional classes. </p>

<p>3. MOSTLY POSSESSION: Eighty-four percent of felony marijuana
arrests were for simple possession (Table 3). The minimum
mandatory penalty for simple possession was 1-10 years in state
prison. </p>

<p>4. PERCENTAGE OF STATEWIDE FELONY ARRESTS: Felony marijuana
arrests were 18.23 percent of all felony arrests, compared with
only 3.72 percent in 1960 (MJSPRD line 43). It was the easiest
felony bust in the state for police to make, and this too
contributed to the sharp rise in arrests. </p>

<p>5. %AMJAD: Marijuana arrests were 61 percent of all drug
arrests, compared with 27 percent in 1960 (Table 1, and MJSPRD
line 53). </p>

<p>6. PLACE OF ARREST: Drug arrests, particularly marijuana
arrests., spread statewide instead of being concentrated in Los
Angeles. Los Angeles County made 70 percent of drug arrests and
66 percent of marijuana arrests in 1960, declining to 50 and 48
percent in 1967. &quot;Areas which previously had little illegal
drug activity... now found it necessary to add highly specialized
narcotic officers to their law enforcement staffs&quot; (Source
3h, p.12). </p>

<p>7. DRUG OF CHOICE: The typical drug offender in California was
no longer a heroin addict, scrambling to support an expensive
habits but a marijuana smoker with better financial resources
available. </p>

<p>B. RACE AND FINANCIAL CONDITION: White people, who received
fewer than half of all drug arrests in 1960, now accounted for
twothirds (66 percent) of all drug arrests and for 70 percent of
all marijuana arrests. Whites in general have better financial
resources than ethnic minorities with which to fight a felony
case. </p>

<p>9. CRIMINAL RECORD: the typical drug offender no longer had a
criminal record. This meant that he or she was harder to convict,
and often that he or she would fight a first offense with all
available resources. With more defendants fighting their cases,,
costs rose across the board, especially in Superior Court. </p>

<p>10. AGE: The typical drug offender was now 19 years old, and
prosecutors and judges found it increasingly difficult to send
19-year-old first offenders to state prison for simple
possession. In 1960, 93 percent of all drug offenders were
convicted as charged; by 1967 this had fallen to 70 percent
overall, with only 48 percent of marijuana offenders convicted as
charged (Source 3i, p.29). </p>

<p>In sums the underlying reason for the rise in enforcement
costs was a radical change in offender characteristics. The
typical Californian arrested for drugs was no longer an
ethnic-minority heroin addicts but a young white marijuana user.
The arrest statistics themselves thus reveal a major
sociocultural change in California, directly connected to the
rise of white marijuana and dangerous drug (psychedelic) arrests.
This was the rise of the youthful counterculture. </p>

<p>Social commentary on the predominantly white counterculture is
beyond the scope of this papers but it should be pointed out that
black and Hispanic marijuana and dangerous drug arrests show
increases parallel to the white increases but more modest (RACE67
annual tables). Whether this was due to countercultural influence
and assimilations to increased availability of these drugs, or to
other factors, cannot be ascertained from the statistics. </p>

<p>Likewise, it is difficult to be more specific about the costs
of arresting and prosecuting heroin addicts (usually repeat
of-fenders) versus marijuana smokers (usually first offenders).
The key question here would be whether the cost of repeated
incarceration of those financially unable to defend themselves is
more or less than the cost of fruitless prosecution of those who
can. The former calculation would have to include the capital
costs of correctional facilities for addicts (including prisons,
jails, and the CRC)-- and capital expenditures are not included
in the enforcement cost statistics collected by BCS. Other
variables such as how many white and nonwhite offenders were able
to hire lawyers, are also not available. </p>

<p>Nevertheless, it is generally true that a white marijuana
offender has better financial resources with which to fight a
felony charge than an ethnic-minority heroin addict does, and
this is reflected in the declining conviction rates for drug
offenders (see item 10 on page 8). </p>

<p>This fact, coupled with the extraordinary increase in arrest
volume (marijuana arrests leaping beyond 37,000 a year and still
rising), led to increased costs at every stage of the criminal
justice system, including expanded police forces, the need for
more public defenders, huge caseloads in probation and parole
departments and a major logjam in the courts. </p>

<p>Because the law continued to treat marijuana like heroin (as a
felony)$ enforcement costs started exploding the moment this
change occurred in 1965. The resulting rise in enforcement costs
will be examined in the next chapter. </p>

<h2>SOURCES</h2>

<p>1. Letter to Senator Arlen Gregorio (titled &quot;Marijuana -
#17361&quot;), from Peter Melnicoe, Deputy Legislative Counsel,
Office of the Legislative Counsel of California (George H.
Murphy)* Sacramento, January 18, 1974. Printed as an appendix to
the Moscone Report (&quot;Marijuana: Beyond
Misunderstanding%&quot; Final Report of the California
Legislature Senate Select Committee on Control of Marijuana),
Sacramento, May 1974. </p>

<p>2. &quot;While all (juvenile) narcotic arrests have been
grouped Linder the heading, major offenses (felonies), it is very
difficult to identify in detail the exact nature of these
offenses. The Bureau of Criminal Statistics publishes a separate
series of reports on narcotic arrests each year which indicates
that about one-half of the juvenile arrests fall into a felony
category and the other half either in a misdemeanor category or
in an area of delinquency not defined by the Penal Code. The fact
that an adult has admitted the use of marijuana or dangerous
drugs is not a criminal offense defined by the Penal Code;
however% a ,juvenile who has admitted to the use of such
substances can be filed on in the juvenile court as a
delinquent.&quot; -- Crime and Delinquency in California 1965
(Sacramento: BCS, 1966), p.143. </p>

<p>3. A detailed history of the Individual Reporting System drug
offender study and its methodology may be found in its first
report (#3a below), and as appendices to the BCS reports for 1960
through 1963 (#3b-#3e). Retroactive revisions of data are
discussed in the reports for 1965 (#3g) through 1967 (#3i). See
also Michael R. Aldrich, &quot;Legislative and Reporting-System
Changes Relevant to Statistics on Cost of Enforcing California
Marijuana Laws,&quot; in the Moscone Report, Sacramento, 1974. </p>

<p>3a. Narcotic Arrests in California July 1, 1959- June 30,
1960. Sacramento: Bureau of Criminal Statistics, 1960. </p>

<p>3b. Narcotic Arrests and Their Dispositions in California,
1960. </p>

<p>3c. Narcotic Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1961. </p>

<p>3d. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1962. </p>

<p>3e. Drug AT-rests and Dispositions in California, 1963. </p>

<p>3f. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1964. </p>

<p>3g. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1965. </p>

<p>3h. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1966. </p>

<p>3i. Drug Arrests and Dispositions in California, 1967. </p>

<p>4. &quot;Follow-Up Study of 1960 Adult Drug Offenders,&quot;
Sacramento: Bureau of Criminal Statistics, 1968. See also RACE67
file appended to this Study and, for an interesting comparison,
the &quot;Five Year Follow-Up of 1966 Juvenile Drug
Arrestees,&quot; Sacramento: BCS, 1973. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49632" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>