
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-37</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B002-387</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133614 text/html 78391
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:36:03 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:44 GMT
Content-length: 78173
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Federal Drug Strategy</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<p><b>Note from Cliff Schaffer:</b> </p>

<p>This chapter is a summary of some of the major events in
American drug prohibition. What is most interesting about this
chapter is what it leaves out. For example, elsewhere in these
pages you will find numerous historical references to the racial
motives behind these laws. In this chapter, there is only a
passing reference to an opium law restricting trade by the
Chinese. </p>

<p>In addition, the chapter spends a good deal of time talking
about President Nixon's administration and the reorganization
which took place, but fails to mention that Nixon commissioned
the largest study of drug policy in American history, which
disagreed with his policy. </p>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </p>

<h2>Chapter IV Part 1: Federal Drug Strategy... </h2>

<p>Federal Drug Strategy: Origins, Evolution, and Current Status </p>

<p>Introduction </p>

<p>The Federal response to the national problems of drug abuse
and drug trafficking over the years has been both dynamic and
characterized by frustration. Drug use and its concomitant
organized crime effects continue to challenge the Nation to
develop a more effective and sophisticated response. Typically, a
particular Federal enforcement reaction to drug abuse and drug
trafficking has prompted drug traffickers and drug abusers to
take defensive actions, which in turn have required new or
different governmental responses. This reactive process has been
particularly characteristic of the Federal effort over the last
two decades. </p>

<p>The history of Federal drug policy that follows demonstrates
that approaches to reduce supply have been the preferred and
dominant Federal response over the last 75 years. It is only
relatively recently that the nature of the drug supply-demand
dynamic has become widely understood, leading to an increased
appreciation for and emphasis on programs to reduce demand, and
that there is still no consensus on what the role of the Federal
government in the national campaign against drug trafficking and
drug abuse should be. </p>

<p>The Early Years </p>

<p>Although use of drugs has been viewed by many Americans as a
medical problem or a personal moral shortcoming throughout this
country's history, laws regulating or proscribing such use are of
relatively recent vintage. The first significant piece of
prohibitory legislation relating to drugs in the United States
was an ordinance enacted in 1875 by the city of San Francisco
prohibiting the operation of opium dens, commercial
establishments in which the smoking of opium occurred. One
western state after another followed San Francisco's lead and
enacted legislation prohibiting opium smoking. Within eight years
of the passage of the San Francisco ordinance, Congress raised
the tariff on smoking opium, which was a relatively mild form of
opium, from $6 to $10 a pound; the tariff on opium had first been
imposed in 1842. In 1887, apparently in response to obligations
imposed upon the United States by a Chinese-American commercial
treaty negotiated in 1880, Congress prohibited the importation of
smoking opium by Chinese subjects. Despite these first
legislative efforts, the incidence of drug use and addiction
increased, as did societal concern and illegal drug smuggling. </p>

<p>Although estimates concerning the number of drug addicts
during the 50 years prior to the passage of drug legislation in
1914 are inherently suspect, the available information suggests
that drug abuse during that period was a &quot;major
medico-social problem.&quot; In fact, by 1909, the United States
was confronted with a significant and growing drug problem. The
increased opiate use and addiction in the United States
subsequent to the Civil War has been attributed to several
factors, including the indiscriminate use of morphine to treat
battlefield casualties during the Civil War. The increase in
morphine addiction was such that the phrase &quot;army
disease&quot; was used to describe the drug use among
ex-soldiers. The widespread administration of morphine by
hypodermic syringe also contributed to the increase in opiate
abuse. Other circumstances, which exacerbated the situation
during the period of 1865-1914, included the spread of opium
smoking from Chinese immigrants to American citizens, the use of
opium and its derivatives by the American patent medicine
industry, and the marketing of heroin beginning in 1898 as a
safe, powerful, and non-addictive substitute for the opium
derivatives morphine and codeine. </p>

<p>The American Opium Commission, established by an Act of
Congress in early 1908, investigated domestic opium use during
that year. In response to the results of this investigation,
Congress passed &quot;An Act to Prohibit the Importation and Use
of Opium for Other Than Medicinal Purposes&quot; in 1909, which
among other things, permitted the importation of opium for
medicinal purposes but only to 12 ports of entry. However, it did
not regulate domestic opium production and manufacture or the
interstate shipment of opium products: </p>

<p>Opium products were still available without a physician's
prescription and were being marketed throughout the country
through retail outlets and a growing mail order trade. </p>

<p>Another motivation for the passage of the 1909 Act was the
realization that the United States could not continue to advocate
measures to ameliorate the opium problem in the Far East without
taking serious steps to deal with its own &quot;home
problem.&quot; Although considered a necessary first step, the
1909 Act was subsequently adjudged to be seriously defective in
that it &quot;contain[ed] no provision against the possible
intrastate manufacture of smoking opium. It [did] no more than
exclude this form of the drug from the United States.&quot;
Because few States had effective laws against the manufacture of
smoking opium in addition to the proscriptions on its sale and
use, that gap could frustrate the objectives of Federal and State
laws. </p>

<p>Shortly before the enactment of the Act of 1909 an
International Opium Commission, consisting of the representatives
of 13 nations was convened in Shanghai at the initiative of the
United States. The Shanghai Commission has been described as the
&quot;first international effort at the solution of the opium
problem.&quot; Although originally conceived of as an
organization for investigating Far East opium use and
trafficking, the Shanghai Commission was transformed into a body
for examining worldwide opium use and trafficking because opium
addiction had spread to other parts of the world, especially to
the United States, and because producer countries were not
restricted to the Far East. The Shanghai Convention unanimously
adopted several resolutions for consideration by the governments
of the participating nations, including the following three: </p>

<p>(1) Consider the desirability of reviewing each country's
system of regulation of the use of opium in light of the
discrepancies among countries' regulatory systems; </p>

<p>(2) Adopt measures to prevent the exporting of opium and its
derivatives to countries which prohibit the importation of such
items; and </p>

<p>(3) Take measures for the gradual suppression of opium smoking
in each country's own territories and possessions. </p>

<p>Because of the unanimity achieved by the Shanghai Commission,
the United States on September 1, 1909, proposed to the other
participating countries that an international conference be held
to &quot;conventionalize the resolutions adopted at Shanghai and
their necessary consequences.&quot; The conference, which was
held at The Hague, began on December 1, 1911, and resulted in the
signing of the International Opium Convention on January 23,
1912. The Convention was ratified by the United States Senate on
October 18, 1913. The International Opium Convention committed
its signatories to the enactment of laws designed to suppress the
&quot;abuse of opium, morphine, cocaine as well as drugs prepared
or derived from these substances . . . In response to this
international obligation and to domestic considerations, the
United States passed the Harrison Act on December 17, 1914 (Ch.
1, 38 Stat. 785) , which &quot;became the cornerstone of domestic
narcotics policy&quot; for nearly 65 years. </p>

<p>The Harrison Act: 1914-1936, Early Years of Enforcement </p>

<p>Section 1 of the Harrison Act provided that any person who was
in the business of dealing in the covered drugs was required to
register annually and to pay a special annual tax of one dollar.
Section 2 made it illegal for any person to sell or in any way to
give away any of the covered drugs, except pursuant to the
written order of the person to whom the drug was being sold or
given; the written order was required to be on a form issued by
the Commissioner of Internal Revenue. Section 4 made it unlawful
for anyone who had not previously registered and paid the special
tax, required by Section 1 of the Act, to engage in interstate
trafficking in the drugs listed. With the exception of employees
of registrants and patients of physicians and dentists, Section 8
prohibited the possession of any of the drugs covered by the Act
by any person who had not registered and paid the special tax
imposed by Section I. Section 9 provided that the punishment for
any violation of the Act was to be not more than $2,000 or not
more than 5 years in prison or both. Finally, Section 10 gave the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue, subject to the approval of the
Secretary of the Treasury, the responsibility for enforcing the
Act. </p>

<p>The history of enforcement under the Harrison Act was
tremendously affected by Congress' chosen source of authority for
the legislation, its constitutional power to lay and collect
taxes. The principle of Federalism and the related concept of the
States' police power were effective constraints on the scope of
the Federal government's powers at the time of the Harrison Act,
hence the use of the constitutional authority to tax to regulate
drug-related activity. </p>

<p>Because the Harrison Act was superficially a measure designed
to raise revenue, its stated purpose dictated that the
enforcement of the Statute be the responsibility of the Treasury
Department and, by the statute's own terms, of the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue. Despite its revenue-raising veneer, its
regulatory purpose was acknowledged from the beginning: </p>

<p>Certain individuals viewed the Harrison Act as a rational way
to limit addiction and drug abuse through taxation and
regulation. It was a regulatory device which, according to the
American opium Commission, &quot;would bring the whole traffic
and use of these drugs into the light of day and, therefore,
create a public opinion against the use of them that would be
more important, perhaps, than the Act itself&quot; (Dr. Hamilton
Wright, American Opium Commission). The Act was heralded as a
method of drug abuse control and as a public awareness tool. </p>

<p>The history of early enforcement efforts under the Harrison
Act, and of the nation's drug abuse problem and policy generally,
was affected in no small degree by a series of Supreme Court
decisions that were handed down during the decade immediately
following passage of the Act. </p>

<p>The Supreme Court sustained the constitutionality of the
Harrison Act in United States v. Doremus. In deciding the issues
raised by the Government's appeal of the dismissal of the
indictment against a physician who had been registered under the
Act, the Supreme Court set forth general principles that governed
its resolution of the issues: </p>

<p>If the legislation enacted has some reasonable relation to the
exercise of the taxing authority conferred by the Constitution,
it cannot be invalidated because of the supposed motives which
induced it. </p>

<p>* * * </p>

<p>The Act may not be declared unconstitutional because its
effect may be to accomplish another purpose as well as the
raising of revenue. If the legislation is within the taxing
authority of Congress - that is sufficient to sustain it. </p>

<p>The Supreme Court sustained the constitutionality of Section 2
of the Act on the ground that it did relate to the raising of
revenue. </p>

<p>On the same day that the Supreme Court decided Doremus, it
also answered in Webb v. United States the following question in
the negative: whether an order for morphine, which is issued by a
physician to a habitual user who is not under his professional
care and which is issued not for the purpose of curing the habit
but for maintenance, is a &quot;prescription.&quot; It did so
because it concluded that &quot;to call such an order . . . a
physician's prescription would be so plain a perversion of
meaning that no discussion of the subject is required.&quot; </p>

<p>The Court extended its Webb Ruling in United States v. Behrman
by holding that an order issued by a physician for large doses of
proscribed drugs, which were not prescribed for the purpose of
treating a condition other than the addiction itself and which
were to be self-administered by the addict, to a person, who was
addicted and who was under the physician's personal care,
constituted a violation of the Harrison Act. In doing so, the
Court implicitly agreed with the district judge that
&quot;prescriptions in the regular course of practice did not
include the indiscriminate doling out of narcotics in such
quantity to addicts as charged in the indictments.&quot; </p>

<p>The Harrison Act, as construed by the Supreme Court, was the
statutory framework within which Federal drug strategies were
devised and implemented over the next half-century. However,
early enforcement efforts and priorities under the Harrison Act
did have somewhat unintended and undesirable consequences. </p>

<p>As noted previously, the responsibility for enforcement of the
Harrison Act was given initially to the Commissioner of Revenue,
subject to review by the Secretary of the Treasury. In 1915, 162
collectors and agents in the Miscellaneous Division of the
Internal Revenue Service were given the responsibility under the
Harrison Act for restricting the sale of proscribed drugs.
Meanwhile, the administration and enforcement of the National
Prohibition or the Volstead Act, which was adopted to enforce the
Eighteenth Amendment, was committed to the Commissioner of
Internal Revenue who created a prohibition unit. Because it
seemed logical to place responsibility for enforcement of the
Harrison Act within this Prohibition Unit, a Narcotics Division
was created in that unit in 1919 with a staff of 170 agents and
an appropriation of $270,000. This organizational unit for the
enforcement of the Harrison Act existed until April 1, 1927, when
legislation creating a Bureau of Prohibition and a Bureau of
Customs, to be headed by Commissioners, within the Department of
Treasury, was enacted. The 1927 legislation also transferred to
the Secretary of the Treasury all powers and duties that had been
conferred by the revenue and prohibition laws upon the
Commissioner of Revenue relating to intoxicating liquors and
narcotics. In addition, the Secretary was authorized to delegate
such powers and duties to the Commissioners of Prohibition and
Internal Revenue. The enforcement of the narcotics laws
subsequently was delegated to a narcotics unit under the
direction of the Deputy Commissioner of Prohibition. </p>

<p>Enforcement efforts under the Harrison Act from 1914 through
1929 were controversial. Following the expansive constructions of
the Harrison Act by the Supreme Court in Doremus, Webb, and
Behrman, thousands of additional prosecutions were undertaken as
a result of investigations conducted by agents of the Narcotics
Division of the Prohibition Unit. It has been estimated that over
50,000 individuals, including many physicians and others who were
required to register under the Act, were charged with violating
the Act during the period of 1914-1922. After this initial burst
of arrest activity directed against registrants, the Narcotics
Division turned its attention to closing clinics that had been
established to conduct research and treat large numbers of
addicts who could not afford private care. Because of pressure by
the American Medical Association, which had initially welcomed
the Harrison Act but which later came to view the actions of the
Narcotics Division as harassment and an improper Federal
intrusion into the practice of medicine, the Department of the
Treasury encouraged its agents to focus on the &quot;blatantly
illegal importation and sale of narcotics.&quot; </p>

<p>Despite this change in enforcement direction, the earlier
enforcement focus had a damaging, long-term impact. Because of
the mere threat of prosecution under the Act, the &quot;interest
of physicians in these cases [of narcotic addiction]&quot;
declined and &quot;they even began to refuse to prescribe.&quot;
In closing the clinics, which had been established to treat those
who were unable to afford private care, the Federal government
may have impeded - albeit unintentionally - research into
narcotic effects, use and addiction and as a result interfered
with the development of efficacious medical treatment. Finally,
the Federal government's early success in decreasing the supply
of narcotic drugs from licit sources, i.e., registrants, to drug
users forced those users to seek out illicit sources of supply. </p>

<p>The history of enforcement of the Harrison Act during the
fifteen years following its enactment illustrates the operation
of a principle that has been validated repeatedly since that
tine: drug demand will result in the creation of supply channels
to satisfy the demand. An effective drug abuse policy requires a
systematic and long-term demand reduction component;
unfortunately, there was no such component of the Federal policy
in the more than 50 years following the enactment of the Harrison
Act. </p>

<p>Enforcement efforts were burdened, however, by public
dissatisfaction with the activities of the Narcotics Division,
which was tainted by its association with the country's
anti-liquor laws. The public dissatisfaction intensified because
of a scandal involving falsification of arrest records and
charges relating to payoffs by, and collusion with, drug dealers.
In response, Congress removed the responsibility for enforcing
the Federal drug laws from the Bureau of Prohibition, which was
itself incorporated into the Department of Justice. Drug
enforcement was transferred in 1930 to a newly created Federal
Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) within the Department of the Treasury,
which was headed by a Commissioner of Narcotics. Although the FBN
was primarily responsible for the enforcement of the Harrison Act
and related drug laws, the task of preventing and interdicting
the illegal importation and smuggling of drugs remained with the
Bureau of Customs. With one major exception to be discussed at
the beginning of the next section, the Federal statutory and
organizational structure relating to narcotics that existed on
July 1, 1930, remained in place for the next 35 years. </p>

<p>1937-1969: Intensification of Pressure for Change in Federal
Drug Policy </p>

<p>Marijuana was not made subject to the Harrison Act or to the
Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act (the Jones-Miller Act)
because it was not viewed as a particularly dangerous drug. In
addition, because of its use in the making of rope, twine,
veterinary medicines, and other products, marijuana's commercial
value was thought to outweigh any deleterious effects from its
abuse. However, as marijuana use became widespread in America,
concern about its use also spread. Due to the efforts of a
&quot;small but vocal group of crusaders,&quot; the States began
to pass legislation to prohibit all marijuana-related activity.
By 1931, &quot;all but two states West of the Mississippi and
several more in the East had enacted prohibitory legislation
making it a criminal offense to possess or use the drug.&quot;
The FBN initially minimized the dangers of marijuana use, and in
its 1932 annual report, it instead urged the States to adopt a
Uniform State Narcotics Law. Such a law was drafted in 1932, and
it included an optional marijuana provision. </p>

<p>By 1937 every state had prohibited marijuana use. However,
faced with continuing intensive lobbying efforts, the FBN did
become an &quot;ardent supporter&quot; of marijuana legislation,
which finally was embodied in the Marihuana Tax Act 1937. </p>

<p>The Marihuana Tax Act was nominally a revenue measure
patterned after the Harrison Narcotic Act. It required that any
person whose business related to marijuana to register and pay a
special tax. In addition, the transference of marijuana had to be
pursuant to a written order on a form issued by the Secretary of
the Treasury and the transferee was required to pay a tax of
$1.00/ounce if he had registered and $100.00/ounce if he had not.
Finally, the Act made the transferor liable for the transfer tax
if a transfer were made without an order form and without payment
of the tax by the transferee. </p>

<p>From the late 1930's through the 1950's, the FBN's enforcement
efforts were directed almost exclusively at disrupting the
illegal importation of drugs into this country and to making
cases against distributors and dealers. Indeed, in 1942 the FBN
recognized that it was necessary to eradicate crops in Mexico if
its interdiction efforts were to achieve greater success. In that
same year Congress enacted the Opium Poppy Control Act of 1942,
which, among other things, prohibited the domestic production of
the poppy without FBN permission. </p>

<p>During a great part of this period the FBN was handicapped to
some degree by a shortage of agents and inadequate budgets. In
the Spring of 1956, a Congressional Committee found that: </p>

<p>[FBN] is one of the few Federal agencies whose personnel and
funds have not been increased to reflect population growth and
greater responsibility. Over a period of 25 years, the Federal
narcotic laws have been enforced with a force of approximately
227 agents and an average budget of less than $2 million. This
restriction on manpower and operating funds has seriously
curtailed investigations of the illicit traffic in the United
States and of sources of supply in foreign countries. </p>

<p>Because of budget limitations, the present force of 250
Federal narcotic agents is 25 short of the number authorized by
the Congress. By way of comparison, New York City has
approximately 200 police officers assigned specifically to
narcotic enforcement. </p>

<p>These statistics suggest that, during this time, drug abuse
and trafficking were not the Federal priorities that they are
today. </p>

<p>Despite the handicaps that the FBN operated under during this
period, it nevertheless enjoyed a degree of success. According to
LCN informer Joseph Valachi, the tactics used by the FBN to
infiltrate and disrupt trafficking organizations caused some LCN
chieftains to rethink the advisability of their continued
participation in the drug trade. According to Valachi, Frank
Costello, then acting boss of the Luciano Family, ordered its
members to stop trafficking in drugs in 1948. One of the
principal reasons for the edict was explained as follows: </p>

<p>Much more important . . . was the dogged harassment of the
Bureau of Narcotics. The Cosa Nostra despised - and feared - [the
FBN] . . . . </p>

<p>The Narcotics Bureau, unlike the FBI, which tends to look down
its nose at it, does not depend on the informant system for much
of its intelligence but regularly engages its agents in dangerous
undercover work; they are, as a result, . . . highly motivated,
less disciplined, generally more daring and innovational,
occasionally corruptible. Above all else, the [FBN] was the first
to recognize the existence of an organization like the Cosa
Nostra, and no other arm of the law has put more of a crimp in
its operation. </p>

<p>Although continuing to warn of the dangers of drug use, the
FBN, especially during the earlier part of the period,
&quot;adopted a more moderate approach in its dealings with
Congress as well as the American people.&quot; The Bureau's
approach reflected the attitude of the American public, which
appeared to consider the drug problem to be restricted to small
groups at the periphery of society, with no great societal
impact. </p>

<p>In the 1950's the rather complacent attitude toward the drug
problem began to change. The first indication of greater concern
was reflected in the enactment of the Boggs Act on November 2,
1951, which generally increased the penalties for violations of
the narcotic and marijuana laws. The primary motivations for the
passage of the Boggs Act were the inadequacy of penalties under
the existing law as deterrents and an increase in drug addiction.
With respect to the former, Congress relied on statistics showing
that the rate of recidivism among drug violators had increased
substantially over a 15- year period of time; in 1935, 40 percent
of those convicted of narcotics violations had prior drug
convictions, while 63.6 percent of those convicted and sentenced
during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1950 were recidivists.
Congress concluded that drug addiction was increasing on the
basis of statistics showing that between 1946 and 1950 there had
been a 100 percent increase in the number of narcotic
laws-related arrests and that the average age of persons
committed to a Public Health Service Hospital had declined from
37.5 to 26.7 years, over a five year period. </p>

<p>Encouraged by the purported success of the Boggs Act, Congress
passed the Narcotic Control Act of 1956, which further increased
the penalties for drug violations. Among other things, this 1956
Act raised the permissive maximum sentences for violations of the
narcotic possession statutes; imposed new mandatory minimum
sentences and increased the permissive maximums for trafficking
violations; eliminated probation, suspension of service, or
parole for all cases except those involving a first offender
possessor; authorized FBN and Customs agents to carry firearms
and to execute and serve search and arrest warrants; made the
sale of heroin to individuals under 18 years of age a capital
offense, although the death penalty was not made mandatory but
could be imposed only if the jury specifically so directed; and
made the smuggling of marijuana a violation of the Narcotic Drugs
Import and Export Act. </p>

<p>The severe penalties imposed by the Narcotic Control Act of
1956 were adopted even though Congress found that, as a result of
the Boggs Act, &quot;narcotic addiction and the illicit narcotic
traffic [were] generally on the decline in the United
States.&quot; Because the stringent penalties imposed by the
Boggs Act were thought to be successful in decreasing drug
addiction, the 84th Congress concluded that the imposition of
even more severe penalties would &quot;be the strongest and most
effective deterrent to narcotic addiction and illicit drug
traffic.&quot; Finally, Congress was of the view in enacting the
Narcotic Control Act of 1956 that &quot;suppression of the
illicit drug traffic&quot; would be the most important
contribution that the Federal Government could make to the
successful and permanent rehabilitation of drug addicts. Congress
thus sought to reduce the demand for drugs through reducing their
supply. </p>

<p>Public concern over the problem of drug abuse, which had been
relatively dormant during the 1940's and 1950's, flared during
the 1960's. The intensification of the national concern resulted
in increasing pressure for Federal initiatives in the area. In
response to this development, a White House Conference on
Narcotics and Drug Abuse was convened in 1962, which resulted in
the establishment of the President's Advisory Commission on
Narcotics and Drug Abuse (Prettyman Commission) on January 15,
1963. </p>

<p>The Prettyman Commission's final report, submitted to
President Kennedy in November 1963, included 25 recommendations,
the substance of several of which were: </p>

<p>(1) Transfer the enforcement and investigative functions of
the FBN relating to illicit transactions in narcotic drugs and
marijuana from the Department of Treasury to the Department of
Justice; </p>

<p>(2) Transfer the responsibilities of the FBN relating to the
regulation of the legitimate traffic in narcotic drugs and
marijuana from the Department of the Treasury to the Department
of Health, Education and Welfare; </p>

<p>(3) Substantially increase the number of Federal agents
assigned to the investigation of the illicit importation of and
trafficking in narcotic drugs, marijuana, and dangerous drugs; </p>

<p>(4) Transfer the responsibility for investigating the illicit
traffic in dangerous drugs from the Department of Health,
Education and Welfare to the Department of Justice; and </p>

<p>(5) Strictly control, by Federal statute, all non-narcotic
drugs capable of producing serious psychotoxic effects when
abused. </p>

<p>Within 18 months of the issuance of the Commission's final
report, Congress adopted the recommendation regarding the
diversion of &quot;dangerous drugs&quot; from legal channels. The
resulting Drug Abuse Control Amendments of 1965 mandated, among
other things, record-keeping and inspection requirements for
depressant and stimulant drugs, and specifically for barbiturates
and amphetamines, &quot;throughout the chain of distribution,
from the basic manufacturer to (but not including) the ultimate
consumer.&quot; The Drug Abuse Control Amendments of 1965 were
passed because of perceived serious problems associated with the
diversion of depressant and stimulant drugs from licit channels: </p>

<p>[T]estimony showed that over 9 billion barbiturate and
amphetamine tablets are produced annually in the United States.
It is estimated that over 50 percent, or 4 1/2 billion tablets,
are distributed through illicit channels. The human toll of drug
abuse cannot be measured for it affects not only the abuser but
his family and the community around him. Drug abuse is closely
bound up with juvenile delinquency. It also contributes to the
rising crime rate in the United States. </p>

<p>To carry out the new enforcement obligations imposed by the
Drug Abuse Control Amendments of 1965 another agency was created;
a Bureau of Drug Abuse Control (BDAC) was established within the
Department's Food and Drug Administration. The Bureau of Customs,
however, retained responsibility for the enforcement of laws
relating to the importing and exporting of depressant and
stimulants drugs. With the establishment of the BDAC on February
1, 1966, the Department of the Treasury's virtual monopoly of the
enforcement of Federal drug laws ended. </p>

<p>Within 16 months of the enactment of the Drug Abuse Control
Amendments of 1965 Congress passed an enlightened piece of
legislation: The Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966. This
Act did many things, including: authorizing a district court to
order the civil commitment of an individual, who was an addict,
who had been charged with certain offenses against the United
States, and who elected to do so, to the Surgeon General for
treatment of his addiction and rehabilitation, in lieu of
prosecution; requiring a district court to commit an individual
who had been convicted of certain offenses against the United
States and who was an addict to the custody of the Attorney
General for treatment and rehabilitation; permitting any narcotic
addict to file a petition with a United States Attorney
requesting that he be admitted to a Public Health Service
hospital for treatment and rehabilitation; and authorizing the
Surgeon General to establish rehabilitation and
post-hospitalization care programs for narcotic addicts and to
provide financial assistance to the States to establish similar
programs. </p>

<p>As the House Committee on Judiciary, one of the Congressional
committees which reported on the proposed bill, observed, the
Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966: </p>

<p>. . . mark[e]d a fundamental reorientation toward the problem
of narcotics addiction. The Attorney General in his testimony
before the Committee stated that for too long the law had
stressed punitive solutions and neglected medical and
rehabilitative measures. </p>

<p>The 1966 Act embodied a proposition that had tended to be
overlooked in the past: successful treatment and permanent
rehabilitation of drug users, i.e., reduction of demand for
drugs, must be an essential component of Federal law enforcement
efforts. </p>

<p>A detailed evaluation of the Federal drug strategy that was
released in 1979 accurately summarized what the Federal approach
had been prior to the late 1960's: </p>

<p>Early efforts to deal with the problem primarily focused on
reducing the supply of drugs, first through taxation, then by
prohibition and strict legal control. The basic assumption . . .
was that reducing supply and availability of drugs would lead to
reduction in their use by encouraging drug-dependent individuals
to detoxify, and by keeping drugs out of the hands of users. </p>

<p>By the end of the 1950's there was a general agreement on the
part of both the public and legislators that the Federal policy
of strict supply reduction by itself was not enough. During the
1960's and early 1970's, as drug abuse increased and spread to
new markets, the almost exclusive emphasis on supply reduction
and stiff penalties was challenged with growing frequency,
leading to increased research and experimentation with treatment
for drug abusers. </p>

<p>Beginning in 1968, in response to rising . . . concern . . .,
a variety of changes occurred in an attempt to curtail drug
abuse. </p>

<p>Despite the work of the Prettyman Commission and the enactment
of the Drug Abuse Control Amendments of 1965, public agitation
concerning crime in general, and drug abuse in particular,
intensified. In response, President Lyndon B. Johnson established
the President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration
of Justice (Katzenbach Commission) in 1966 to undertake a
&quot;comprehensive study of the nation's crime problem and to
provid[e] recommendations to coordinate its eradication on all
fronts.&quot; The Katzenbach Commission issued a report in 1967,
which included a chapter on drug abuse. The substance of several
of the Katzenbach Commission's recommendations addressed both the
demand and supply of drugs: </p>

<p>(1) Substantially increase the enforcement staffs of FBN and
the Bureau of Customs; </p>

<p>(2) Permit courts and correctional authorities to deal
flexibly with violators of the drug laws; </p>

<p>(3) Undertake research to develop a sound and effective
framework of regulatory and criminal laws relating to dangerous
drugs; and </p>

<p>(4) The National Institute of Mental Health should develop a
core of educational and informational materials relating to
drugs. </p>

<p>Drawing on the recommendations of the Prettyman Commission,
President Johnson sent a reorganization plan restructuring the
Federal drug law enforcement effort to Congress for its
consideration on February 7, 1968. In terms that have been
repeated often since that time, President Johnson explained the
reason for the proposed consolidation of drug enforcement
responsibilities: </p>

<p>Today, Federal investigation and enforcement of our narcotics
laws are fragmented. </p>

<p>* * * </p>

<p>Neither [the FBN nor the BADC] is in the agency which is
primarily concerned with Federal law enforcement - the Department
of Justice. </p>

<p>This separation of responsibilities . . . has complicated and
hindered our response to a national menace. </p>

<p>Among the most significant provisions of the plan, which
became effective on April 7, 1968, were the following: the
Department of Justice was given a major responsibility for the
enforcement of the Federal drug laws for the first time in
history by the creation within it of a Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs (BNDD); the FBN was abolished, and its drug
enforcement duties and responsibilities were shifted to BNDD; and
BDAC was also abolished, and its drug enforcement duties and
responsibilities were transferred to the Department of Justice. </p>

<p>The 1968 reorganization did not significantly affect the
revenue collection functions exercised by IRS under the Harrison
and Marijuana Tax Acts or the responsibility of the Bureau of
Customs for interdicting the smuggling of narcotics and
marijuana. The Plan that was intended to eliminate fragmentation
in Federal drug law enforcement thus did not eliminate it
entirely. </p>

<p>Although neither House of Congress blocked the 1968
reorganization plan, criticism of it did develop. While in
agreement that merger of the FBN and BDAC would eliminate
friction and duplication of effort, Congressional opponents
expressed skepticism that law enforcement relating to drugs and
organized crime would be in any way improved by transferring the
merged entity to the Department of Justice. Because
Administration spokesmen had acknowledged that BDAC and the FBN
had been effective law enforcement agencies, the opponents of the
plan recommended that the merged entity should instead be located
within the Department of the Treasury, where coordination with
IRS and Customs, both of which had drug law enforcement
responsibilities, could be better assured. That the BNDD was
apparently not to be placed within the FBI was one factor leading
the dissenters to conclude that &quot;greater overall efficiency
in crime enforcement&quot; would not be achieved by the placement
of the merged entity into Justice. </p>

<p>Federal Drug Law Enforcement: From Implementation of the 1968
Reorganization Plan to October 27, 1970. </p>

<p>Two major issues during the 1968 Presidential campaign were
crime and drugs. Shortly after his inauguration, President
Richard M. Nixon declared war on both and formed Task Force One
in the spring of 1969 to &quot;design programs that would have an
immediate effect on the importation of heroin and other illegal
drugs.&quot; Task Force One developed and implemented Operation
Intercept, the &quot;first major interagency attempt at border
interdiction,&quot; which involved more than 2,000 Customs, INS
Border Patrol, and BNDD agents. Because the amount of illegal
drugs seized as a result of Operation Intercept was
disappointingly small and because the venture seriously strained
relations between Mexico and the United States, Justice
Department officials concluded that successful interdiction
programs required the cooperation of source countries. As a
result, in the fall of 1969, Operation Intercept was transformed
into Operation Cooperation, which in part provided U.S. financial
aid to the Mexican Government to purchase aircraft and to train
agents to interdict the flow of drugs before they reached the
United States borders. </p>

<p>The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of
1970 </p>

<p>The year 1970 was an important one in the history of this
Nation's war against drug trafficking and drug abuse. In February
of that year, President Nixon clarified the responsibilities of
the various Federal agencies involved in the effort against drug
trafficking by issuing a directive announcing that BNDD
&quot;controls all investigations involving violations of the
laws of the United States relating to narcotics, marijuana and
dangerous drugs, both within the United States and beyond its
borders. Several months later, the President approved guidelines,
developed by the Attorney General and the Secretary of the
Treasury, which increased the investigatory responsibility of
Customs at ports and borders. However, the most significant event
in 1970 was the enactment of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (1970 Comprehensive Act). </p>

<p>As of 1970, numerous Federal statutes dealt with various
facets of the Nation's drug trafficking and abuse problems. These
laws overlapped, were sometimes inconsistent, and required more
than a dozen Federal agencies to enforce them. In response, the
1970 Comprehensive Act was passed to collect and conform
&quot;diverse laws in one piece of legislation based upon new
scientific information, the restructured Federal law enforcement
efforts under Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1968, and greater
information concerning the scope of the problem.&quot; </p>

<p>The 1970 Act comprised four titles: Title I authorized the
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare to increase its
efforts in drug rehabilitation, drug treatment and the prevention
of drug abuse. Specifically, Title I authorized the appropriation
of funds for drug abuse prevention and education programs and for
special project grants to programs designed to treat and
rehabilitate narcotic addicts or drug dependent persons. As a
result of these steps, Congress provided for a &quot;greatly
increased Federal effort in the fields of prevention and
rehabilitation&quot; and made the National Institute of Mental
Health the agency primarily responsible for drug education and
prevention activities in the Federal government. </p>

<p>Title II of the 1970 Act, the &quot;Controlled Substances
Act,&quot; along with Title III, comprehensively addressed the
law enforcement aspects of the attack on drug abuse. Among other
things, Title II established five schedules into which controlled
substances were and could be placed, required the registration
of, and record-keeping by, manufacturers, distributors and
dispensers of controlled substances, imposed penalties for
violations of the Act, established a Commission on Marihuana and
Drug Abuse, and authorized BNDD to add 300 agents to its staff
during FY 1971. </p>

<p>Finally, Title III, the Controlled Substances Import and
Export Act, governed the importation and exportation of
controlled substances. The Attorney General was given the
responsibility for maintaining the integrity of the import/export
registration system that the Act created. </p>

<p>Although primarily an effort to consolidate the myriad of laws
dealing with drug trafficking and abuse that had been adopted
over the years, Congress's authority for enacting the 1970 Act
was predicated upon its interstate commerce power and not, as
with previous narcotics laws, on the constitutional power to tax.
This shift had enormous implications for the way that the Federal
government would and did approach drug enforcement in the future:
</p>

<p>[The Controlled Substances Act] set the stage for an
innovation in Federal drug enforcement techniques. That
innovation was assigning large numbers of Federal narcotics
agents to work in local communities. No longer was it necessary
to demonstrate interstate traffic to justify Federal
participation in combating illegal drug use. </p>

<p>Constitutional challenges to the 1970 Act that were predicated
upon the intrastate nature of the conduct prosecuted were
rejected. </p>

<p>Federal Drug Abuse Policy: 1970-1980 </p>

<p>The decade of the 1970's was an extremely significant one for
the development of Federal drug abuse policy in terms of new
laws, organizational and operational reforms, and a growing
recognition that the reduction of the demand for drugs must be
given a greater emphasis. On the debit side the extent of the
Nation's drug abuse problem at the end of 1980 was as great as,
if not greater than, the problem in 1970. To some extent, the
situation in 1980 was attributable to the continuing and
unresolved debate concerning the appropriate Federal role in the
national struggle against drug abuse and trafficking. </p>

<p>New legislative initiatives, organizations, and operational
reforms relating to the Nation's drug abuse problem were adopted
and implemented within a relatively short period after the
enactment of the 1970 Comprehensive Act. One of the most
important and innovative of these reforms was the establishment,
by executive order, of the Special Action Office for Drug Abuse
Prevention (SAODAP) within the Executive Office of the President
on June 17, 1971. The President made the Director of SAODAP his
special representative with respect to all Federal drug abuse
training, education, rehabilitation, research, treatment, and
prevention programs and activities (exclusive of law enforcement
activities and legal proceedings). In this capacity, the SAODAP
Director's duties included prescribing &quot;policies,
guidelines, standards, and criteria for the maximum achievement
of the goals and objectives&quot; of Federal demand reduction
programs and coordinating and evaluating all Federal drug abuse
programs. </p>

<p>President Nixon did not neglect the supply reduction component
of the Federal drug policy. Presidential initiatives in this area
in 1971 included the establishment of the Cabinet Committee on
International Narcotics Control (CCINC) and of the Narcotics
Traffickers Program (NTP) within IRS. The CCINC, chaired by the
Secretary of State, was given the responsibility for
&quot;developing a strategy to check the illegal flow of
narcotics to the United States and coordinating the efforts
undertaken abroad by involved Federal departments and agencies to
implement that strategy.&quot; </p>

<p>The NTP was designed to function as a mechanism for disrupting
drug trafficking by having the IRS intensively investigate
top-echelon drug dealers. The IRS effectively ended the NTP
sometime in 1975, both because it had a relatively low revenue
yield and because IRS officials felt uncomfortable in operating a
program whose primary objective was not tax-related. </p>

<p>On January 28, 1972, President Nixon took another step,
designed to improve the Federal government's drug law enforcement
efforts by establishing an Office for Drug Abuse Law Enforcement
(ODALE) within the Department of Justice. This office was to be
headed by a Director who would be a Special Assistant Attorney
General and who would serve as a Special Consultant to the
President concerning drug law enforcement. In this role the ODALE
Director was responsible for advising the President on improving
the effectiveness of Federal drug enforcement and on assisting
the States and local governments in strengthening their own drug
law enforcement. The Director was also required to develop and
implement a &quot;concentrated program&quot; for enforcing
Federal laws concerning drug abuse prevention and for cooperating
with State and local governments in the enforcement of their drug
abuse laws. Finally, to ensure that all steps permitted by law
were taken by Federal, State and local governments and by the
private sector to prevent drug abuse, the Director of ODALE was
instructed to consult regularly with the SAODAP Director. With
the establishment of ODALE and SAODAP, and the presidential
instruction that their Directors consult, cooperate, and
coordinate, a mechanism was created within the Federal Government
that, at least theoretically, could have integrated Federal
strategies to reduce drug supply and demand to achieve maximum
results. </p>

<p>That ODALE was created in early 1972, so relatively soon after
the implementation of the 1968 reorganization plan, bespoke a
lack of confidence in the structure and operation of the drug law
enforcement system created by that plan. Indeed, ODALE was
established because of the &quot;Administration's concern that
BNDD and Customs could not act with the swiftness and precision
that a single agency vested with authority and power could.&quot;
In performing its duties and responsibilities ODALE &quot;was
empowered to take the lead in the Administration's 'war on
heroin,' with a particular emphasis on street-level
trafficking.&quot; </p>

<p>Several months after the creation of ODALE, another unit, the
Office of National Narcotic Intelligence (ONNI), was established
within the Department of Justice to function as a Clearinghouse
Of information that would be useful in the Administration's
campaign against drug trafficking. The Director of ONNI was
instructed to collect and provide narcotics intelligence to any
Federal, State, or local official determined to have a
&quot;legitimate official need&quot; for the intelligence. The
ONNI Director was also instructed to cooperate with the Director
of ODALE to assist the latter in insuring that all feasible steps
were taken to prevent drug abuse in the Nation. Although its
mandate did not include the independent development of narcotics
intelligence, the establishment of ONNI was the first concrete
recognition by officials at the highest levels of the Federal
government of the crucial role that intelligence had to play in
supply reduction strategies. </p>

<p>Congress eventually responded positively to President Nixon's
request that it enact legislation confirming his creation of
SAODAP by passing the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act of 1972
(1972 Drug Abuse Office Act). This legislation was an important
event in the history of Federal drug abuse policy: </p>

<p>With the enactment of the [Act] Federal policy clearly called
for a balanced response to the problem of drug abuse by adding a
vigorous prevention and treatment component to the existing law
enforcement effort. </p>

<p>Although commitments to the &quot;balanced response&quot;
enshrined in the 1972 Drug Abuse office Act have been proclaimed
repeatedly ever since, they have not generally been translated
into action, as measured by budget authorizations and
expenditures. </p>

<p>Congress was persuaded to enact the 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act
because the witnesses who testified before its committees were
&quot;unanimously agreed that drug abuse in America had reached
epidemic proportions.&quot; Most of the witnesses were
&quot;generally agreed that greater emphasis on the so-called
demand side of the problem is required, that is, on treatment,
rehabilitation, research, education and training.&quot; Congress
also found that the Federal government's activities with respect
to the &quot;demand side of the drug abuse field have been
carried on by at least nine different agencies and
departments&quot; and that the legislation under consideration
was needed to &quot;provide for and insure a central
comprehensive coordination of the federal effort.&quot; In
passing the Act, Congress concluded that the &quot;emphasis must,
indeed, be changed [to strategies to reduce demand] if there is
to be meaningful progress in the effort against drug abuse.&quot;
</p>

<p>The 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act did many things, including
establishing SAODAP in the Executive Office of the President;
making the Director of SAODAP responsible for, among other
things, providing overall planning and policy, and establishing
objectives and priorities, for all federal drug abuse prevention
functions, making recommendations to the President concerning any
Federal drug traffic prevention function, making findings and
recommendations to the President concerning the resolution of
conflicts involving drug abuse prevention or drug traffic
prevention functions, and coordinating Federal drug abuse
prevention functions with those of the State and local
governments; directing the President to require development of a
comprehensive, coordinated long-term Federal strategy for all
drug abuse and drug traffic prevention functions; directing the
Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare to make grants to
States submitting plans for establishing, conducting and
coordinating projects for the development of more effective drug
abuse prevention functions and to make special project grants to,
and contracts with, public and private entities and individuals
to develop drug abuse prevention programs; and establishing a
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) to administer the
programs of the Secretary of HEW relating to drug abuse
prevention functions. </p>

<p>The 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act was necessary and useful
legislation, but it was based on the mistaken premise that the
nation's drug abuse problem could be dealt with in a relatively
short period of time: </p>

<p>[I]t is the policy of the United States and the purpose of
this Act to focus the comprehensive resources of the Federal
Government and bring them to bear on drug abuse with the
immediate objective of significantly reducing the incidence of
drug abuse in the United States within the shortest possible
period of time . . . . </p>

<p>Consistent with this premise, Congress provided that SAODAP
was to be abolished on June 30, 1975. </p>

<p>There appears to have been an expectation at the time that the
1972 Drug Abuse office Act became effective that NIDA would
assume many of the programmatic functions of SAODAP on or before
June 30, 1975, after the war against drug abuse had been won and
only &quot;mopping-up&quot; operations remained. This expectation
no doubt was encouraged by statements made subsequent to the
passage of the 1972 Act, such as that of President Nixon in
September of 1973 that &quot;[w]e have turned the corner on drug
addiction in the United States.&quot; As the historical record
demonstrates, the expectation of quick success was unrealistic
because of the nature of the drug problem. </p>

<p>The 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act reflected the realization that
an exclusive reliance on strategies to reduce supply will fail to
achieve the ultimate objective. Such an approach disregards the
fundamental economic principle, that where a demand for a service
or commodity exists, some entrepreneur, for the right price, will
attempt to supply it. There is an optimal mix of approaches to
reduce demand and supply that will obtain maximum results and
thus achieve the goal of that policy, i.e., the elimination of
drug abuse. The Federal government necessarily has a paramount
and continuing role in that policy, in terms of providing
leadership, resources, and support to the other participants.
Experience immediately following the enactment of the 1972 Drug
Abuse Office Act demonstrates that although the Nation's drug
abuse problem may never be eliminated, it can be reduced
substantially if a long-term commitment of sufficient resources
is made and unreasonable impatience for results is checked. </p>

<p>Despite the comprehensive restructuring of the Federal
narcotics laws that had occurred in 1970, related legislative
initiatives, and the innovations in Federal drug law enforcement
represented by ODALE and ONNI, the Nixon Administration concluded
that Federal drug law enforcement continued to be hampered by
interagency rivalries and jurisdictional overlaps and disputes.
In response, another major restructuring of the Federal drug law
enforcement machinery was announced on March 28, 1973. The Nixon
Administration trumpeted the 1973 reorganization plan, which was
implemented on July 1, 1973, as doing for the supply side of the
drug abuse problem what the 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act had done
for the demand side: create an organization with the necessary
resources, breadth, and leadership capacity to act decisively. </p>

<p>The Federal drug law enforcement structure in March of 1973
was complex, as reflected in Appendix C, with no single
individual or agency responsible for supervision of the overall
effort. The 1973 reorganization plan was designed to overcome
perceived deficiencies in existing law enforcement. </p>

<p>The 1973 reorganization plan was motivated primarily by the
beliefs of Administration officials that the aggregation of
Federal drug law enforcement activities had &quot;serious
operational and organizational shortcomings&quot; and that
&quot;enforcement work could benefit significantly . . . from
consolidation of our anti-drug forces under a single unified
command.&quot; The most important innovation adopted by the plan
was the creation of the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
within the Department of Justice as the &quot;single,
comprehensive Federal agency within the Department of Justice to
lead the war against illicit drug traffic.&quot; The DEA, to be
headed by an Administrator who would report directly to the
Attorney General, was to be responsible for the anti-drug
functions, and would absorb the associated manpower and budgets
of BNDD, ODALE, and ONNI and those of the Bureau of Customs with
respect to drug investigations and intelligence. The plan also
provided that drug law enforcement research that had been
hitherto funded by the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration
would be transferred to DEA. </p>

<p>While the 1973 reorganization plan reaffirmed the jurisdiction
of the Bureau of Customs to conduct investigative, intelligence,
and law enforcement functions relating to the suppression of drug
trafficking at ports of entry and borders, it prohibited Customs
from exercising those functions, as it had been previously
authorized to do, at locations away from ports of entry or
borders. In addition, drugs, evidence, and persons seized by
customs agents at ports of entry or borders were to be turned
over to representatives of the Attorney General. The plan
explicitly provided that the Department of Justice, in addition
to Customs, could perform law enforcement functions, including
those relating to illicit drug trafficking, at the Nation's ports
of entry and borders. Finally, the plan required the Attorney
General to assure the maximum cooperation between and among DEA,
the FBI, and other units of the Justice Department to achieve
coordination of all of his drug law enforcement functions. </p>

<p>Once established, DEA played an &quot;increasingly crucial
role in the coordination of Federal drug law enforcement; and
during the 1970's a number of interagency efforts were
launched.&quot; Among the coordination efforts undertaken by DEA
was the development of mechanisms to provide timely and accurate
narcotics intelligence to drug law enforcement personnel at the
Federal, State and local levels. Steps taken by DEA in this area
included the establishment of: </p>

<p>(1) An Office of Intelligence at DEA headquarters which,
organizationally, was at the same level as its Office of
Enforcement; </p>

<p>(2) Regional Intelligence Units (RIUs) in each of the DEA
regions; </p>

<p>(3) The El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC) in 1974 as a border
intelligence unit, which soon grew into a
&quot;twenty-four-hour-a-day intelligence center, with worldwide
capabilities to collect, process, and disseminate information
concerning illicit drug trafficking as the smuggling of aliens
and weapons; EPIC is staffed by personnel from DFA, INS, Customs,
the Coast Guard, BATF, FAA, the U.S. Marshals Service, FBI and
IRS; </p>

<p>(4) The Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Information System
(NADDIS) and the System to Retrieve Information from Drug
Evidence (STRIDE) to provide access to numerous investigative
records of PEA and other Federal, State and local drug
enforcement records; </p>

<p>(5) In April of 1978, the National Narcotics Intelligence
Consumers Committee (NNICC), chaired by the DEA Deputy Assistant
Administrator for Intelligence and including representatives from
the Departments of Defense, Treasury and State, and their
component agencies in the field, including Customs, the Coast
Guard, FBI, INS, IRS, and NIDA to coordinate the collection,
analysis, dissemination and evaluation of drug-related
intelligence, both foreign and domestic, and to publish annually
a &quot;National Intelligence Estimate on the Supply of Drugs to
the U.S. Illicit Market from Foreign and Domestic Sources.&quot; </p>

<p>In addition to trying to improve the intelligence gathering
and dissemination functions of Federal drug law enforcement, PEA
attempted to improve the task force concept in drug law
enforcement which it had inherited from ODALE. In 1974 DEA
adopted the Central Tactical Units (CENTAC) program to focus
enforcement resources on conspiracy investigations of high-level
drug trafficking targets. Unfettered by normal DEA regional
operations, centrally administered, specially funded, staffed by
personnel from DEA, IRS, Customs, and State and local agencies,
and charged with pursuing conspiracy cases under the Continuing
Criminal Enterprise (CCE) and RICO statutes, the CENTAC program
did produce relatively high arrest and conviction rates of high
level traffickers, and accounted for 12 percent of DEA arrests
from 1976 to 1979 while using less than three percent of DEA
personnel. Although criticizing the CENTAC Program for not
exploiting the Federal forfeiture statutes to seize the assets of
convicted traffickers, the General Accounting office (GAO)
nevertheless concluded that: </p>

<p>Given the success of the Central Tactical units and the need
for more multi-regional conspiracy investigations, the expansion
of the [CENTAC] program is warranted. </p>

<p>GAO recommended expansion of the CENTAC program despite an
earlier conclusion that the CENTAC efforts had not
&quot;achieve[d] the overall objective - complete immobilization
of the targeted trafficking organizations.&quot; The 1980 GAO
report also conflicted with: </p>

<p>DEA officials who said the current size of the CENTAC program
is optimum given existing enforcement resources, required
commitments, and their preference for regionally controlled
investigations . . . . </p>

<p>Another effort at interagency operational cooperation during
the decade of the 1970's was the creation of three FBI-DEA forces
in Chicago, New York, and Los Angeles to &quot;test the
feasibility of joint operations.&quot; These task forces were
designed to combine the FBI's organized crime and conspiracy
cases expertise with DEA's experience in narcotics
investigations. This effort was probably doomed from the start
because, although each agency was supposed to coordinate with the
other, each used its own investigative techniques, personnel, and
information sources and each maintained jurisdictional autonomy.
After two years, the program was in effect disbanded, and
evaluations by GAO and others attributed the failure to
disagreements over investigative techniques and to restrictions
on case selection. </p>

<p>The creation of DEA by the 1973 reorganization plan and DEA's
subsequent development of new supply reduction approaches were
not the only steps undertaken and designed during the 1970's to
respond to what many had come to view as the almost intractable
national drug problem. For example, Congress passed the Narcotic
Addict Treatment Act of 1974, which amended the 1970 Controlled
Substances Act to require annual registration by practitioners
dispensing narcotic drugs, including methadone, for maintenance
or detoxification purposes. This legislation, which imposed
standards for the legal dispensing of drugs, was deemed necessary
because of the increased diversion of methadone for illegal sale
and use. </p>

<p>That year also saw the passage of the Alcohol and Drug Abuse
Education Act Amendments of 1974, which extended the grant and
contract authorities of the Drug Abuse Education Act of 1970 for
three years and authorized the expenditure of $90 million over
those three years. The Act placed greater emphasis on the need
for prevention and early intervention programs, recognizing the
crucial role of family, peer group, school, church and other
community institutions in influencing young people's behavior. </p>

<p>In enacting the 1974 Alcohol and Drug Abuse Education Act
Amendments, Congress noted that most of the previously adopted
Federal programs to reduce demand had &quot;inevitably been
directed primarily toward the person who is already in serious
trouble with alcohol and/or drugs,&quot; but that the focus of
the Drug Abuse Education Act of 1970 had been different in that
it was directed to those who had not yet experimented with drugs
or to those who had just begun to do so. In passing the 1974
amendments Congress applauded the focus on prevention,
reaffirming the philosophy that had suffused the 1970 Education
Act: </p>

<p>[R]eal progress in the struggle against alcohol and drug abuse
will require an intensified effort to reach that far more
numerous group, those millions of young people who may be tempted
to experiment with dangerous drugs or who may have already done
so. </p>

<p>Although committed to the continuation of Federal support for
local drug education programs, Congress was nevertheless critical
of those educational programs that were based upon information
that was incomplete, erroneous, or designed to frighten, and
those based on accurate information that had the tendency to
arouse interest in drugs and to lead to experimentation, Before
passing the 1974 Amendments Congress received assurances from the
Office of Education within the Department of HEW that it would
make every effort to support only those programs which would
&quot;incorporate factual material about drugs into programs
which focus on the causes of drug use and emphasize the
development of appropriate attitudes and values,&quot; rather
than merely inform and arouse interest. </p>

<p>The Nixon Administration opposed passage of the bill that
eventually became the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Education Act
Amendments of 1974 because it believed that &quot;alcohol and
drug abuse education [should] be included among the special
projects to be funded under other education legislation and that
alcoholism and drug abuse formula grant funds to the states
[should] be considered the major source of funds for local
alcohol and drug abuse education programs.&quot; Congress
disagreed with the Administration's position concerning
categorical legislation relating to prevention and early
intervention educational programs, stating that: </p>

<p>Failure to renew a clear legislative mandate to the Office of
Education would destroy the identity of the program at both the
Federal and the State level and would cast the alcohol and drug
education programs in the role of supplicants to those agencies
whose primary concern is not education and who are already
besieged by the demands of treatment programs. </p>

<p>The ultimate result would be either the disappearance of
community drug and alcohol education programs or a reversion to
some of the futile and dangerous efforts of the past. . . </p>

<p>As noted earlier, the 1972 Drug Abuse Office Act provided that
SAODAP would be abolished on June 30, 1975, with no assignment of
its policy-making and coordinative functions to any other Federal
agency. On March 19, 1976, however, legislation was approved that
in effect continued SAODAP, but under the slightly different name
of &quot;Office of Drug Abuse Policy&quot; (ODAP). Congress
created ODAP because: </p>

<p>[T]here is current evidence that whatever improvement in the
problem occurred in 1973 was temporary and that the present
problem is at least as great as at the time the original act was
passed. </p>

<p>In approving the continuation of an executive level drug
advisor, Congress found that &quot;drug abuse was not a crisis
which could be rapidly solved but rather a continuing problem
calling for a continued Federal responsibility.&quot; Congress
also concluded that Federal expenditures for drug abuse
prevention efforts had peaked in 1974 and then declined, despite
continuing serious problems, due to, among other things, the
anticipated end of SAODAP: </p>

<p>It would also appear that the existence of a high-level office
in the executive branch is to some extent correlated with the
fiscal emphasis provided to drug abuse prevention efforts. </p>

<p>Congress was also somewhat concerned that &quot;unless some
active direction is taken at some high level it is probable that
in the very near future funding for drug law enforcement will
again overbalance funding for drug abuse prevention.&quot; </p>

<p>In creating ODAP Congress required its Director to make
recommendations to the President regarding the policies and
priorities for, and objectives of, all Federal &quot;drug abuse
functions,&quot; a term which was defined to encompass both drug
abuse prevention and drug traffic prevention functions, and to
coordinate the performance of such functions by Federal
departments and agencies. This was a significant expansion of the
authority of ODAP's predecessor, SAODAP. </p>

<p>Despite the Ford Administration's opposition to the
continuation of an executive-level office relating to drug abuse
prevention, President Ford did not veto the 1976 amendment
creating ODAP. However, President Ford did not staff ODAP, even
though a specific line-item authorization had been made for it.
DAP did not come into being until President Carter issued a
memorandum initiating the Office on March 14, 1977. Less than two
months after the Senate confirmation of the ODAP Director,
President Carter submitted a reorganization plan restructuring
the Executive Office of the President to Congress on July 15,
1977. </p>

<p>The 1977 reorganization plan altered the structure of the
Executive Office of the President, which at the time consisted of
the immediate White House Office, the Vice President's Office,
OMB, and 14 other agencies, including ODAP and the Domestic
Council. As proposed, the plan, among other things, abolished the
Domestic Council and ODAP and redesignated the Domestic Council
Staff as the Domestic Policy Staff. The functions of ODAP and its
Director would be transferred to the President who could then
delegate such functions. </p>

<p>Several members of Congress, recalling that it was the need
for a high-level policy and coordinating office to oversee the
activities of more than 20 Federal agencies with significant drug
abuse responsibilities that had given birth to the SAODAP/ODAP
program, expressed grave concern about the abolishment of ODAP.
President Carter assured them that the ODAP's functions would be
carried on within the Executive office of the President and that
the Domestic Policy Staff, with several of its staff members
assigned exclusively to drug abuse issues, would handle ODAP's
policy-making and coordinative functions. With Congressional
acquiescence, the 1977 Reorganization became effective on March
26, 1978, at which time a core group of ODAP staff was
transferred to the Domestic Policy Staff. </p>

<p>Although Congress did not block the provisions of the 1977
reorganization plan, members of Congress nevertheless remained
unsure whether drug abuse policy-making and coordinative
functions could be or would be adequately performed by the
Domestic Policy Staff. This uncertainty was reflected in the Drug
Abuse Prevention and Treatment Amendments of 1978, which extended
the authorization for NIDA programs for only one year, instead of
the previous multi-year reauthorizations, so that it could
evaluate the system created by the 1977 reorganization plan after
a relatively brief but adequate period of time. </p>

<p>The Congressional evaluation of the operations of the drug
abuse policy and coordinating system in the Executive Office of
the President was embodied the next year in the Drug Abuse
Prevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Amendments of 1979.
During the consideration of this legislation, President Carter
assigned the Associate Director for Drug Policy of the Domestic
Policy Staff the responsibility for assisting the President in
performing the functions of ODAP, which had been transferred to
the President by the 1977 reorganization plan. President Carter
took this step because of Congressional concern that: </p>

<p>[T]he continued coordination of drug abuse policy, required by
the 1972 Act and its subsequent amendments, became dependent upon
the continued interest . . . of the President and other
individuals within the Executive Branch, rather than being
clearly structured by statute as had been the case prior to the
implementation of the Reorganization Plan. </p>

<p>Because of the steps taken by the Carter Administration
including the revitalization of the Strategy Council, Congress
responded by legislating what the 1977 reorganization plan had
done. </p>

<p>In addition to giving its imprimatur to the 1977
reorganization plan, the 1979 legislation made authorizations for
NIDA's state formula grants and special grant and contract
programs for drug education and prevention through September 30,
1981. It did so because it found that the &quot;growing extent of
drug abuse indicates an urgent need for prevention and
intervention programs designed to reach the general
population.&quot; In providing for a two-year reauthorization for
NIDA programs and activities, Congress rejected the Carter
Administration's proposal that state formula grants for drug
abuse be consolidated with those for alcoholism and mental health
because: </p>

<p>There is considerable history to suggest that earmarked
funding for categorical programs should remain separate at the
State level as well as at the national level. Within the
traditional health care delivery system, the drug and alcohol
client has not fared well. To force these systems to compete
again is to seriously jeopardize the major strides which have
been made . . . . The Committee insists that a categorical
emphasis on drug abuse must be maintained at all levels of
government. A loss of direct program emphasis would severely harm
the state focus on combatting drug abuse, and could seriously
endanger the Nation's battle against drug abuse. </p>

<p>The decade of the 1970's was an important one in the evolution
of the Federal drug abuse effort. It began with a comprehensive
restructuring of Federal laws relating to drugs and included a
major reorganization of Federal drug law enforcement agencies in
a effort to reduce interagency rivalries and to promote
efficiency and leadership in the fight against drug trafficking.
Equally important was the recognition that strategies to reduce
demand must be an essential component of the overall drug abuse
policy and that the nation's drug abuse problem could not be
regarded as a crisis susceptible to quick resolution. In
addition, new laws were passed to respond to particular aspects
of the drug problem, and new enforcement approaches were tried in
an effort to disrupt drug trafficking more effectively. </p>

<p>On a less positive note, disagreements over certain
fundamental issues remained unresolved at the end of the 1970's.
Among these were the role of the Federal Government in drug
policy and the appropriate balance between strategies to reduce
demand and supply. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, despite
legislation, massive reorganizations, new enforcement techniques,
and necessary attitudinal changes, the problems of drug abuse and
trafficking continued at high levels at the end of the decade. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>