
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-42</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B003-85</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133725 text/html 33305
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:37:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:42 GMT
Content-length: 33087
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Reducing the Demand for Drugs</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter VII Reducing the Demand for Drugs </h2>

<p>The Limitations of Tactics Affecting Supply </p>

<p>Traditionally, efforts to reduce the trafficking and abuse of
illicit drugs in this country have been based on the theory that
significant reductions of drug supplies would lead to equal
reductions in drug-related problems. While this seems plausible,
a review of the 75-year history of these efforts reveals that
they have not reduced social, economic or crime problems related
to drugs. Despite continuing expressions of determination,
America's war on drugs seems nowhere close to success. Now more
than ever, drugs present problems of vast proportions. </p>

<p>This does not suggest that efforts to reduce supply, such as
crop eradication, border interdiction, and prosecution, have
failed. To the contrary, they have achieved a measure of success.
In 1983, for example, authorities estimated that approximately 10
percent of the drugs destined for illicit markets were
interdicted. Crop eradication programs were significantly
expanded in Colombia, where most of the world's cocaine is
processed and nearly one-half of the marijuana consumed in the
United States is grown. In addition, indictments and convictions
of some of the world's most notorious traffickers have been
obtained in recent years. </p>

<p>Despite these efforts, American consumption of cocaine
increased an estimated 12 percent and dangerous drug use
increased an estimated 15 percent between 1983 and 1984. Cocaine,
heroin, amphetamine, and methamphetamine-related deaths
increased, as did cocaine, PCP, and methamphetamine-related
emergency room visits. </p>

<p>In short, strategies to reduce supply are &quot;working&quot;
by some standards, but only to a limited degree. </p>

<p>Although some inherent factors limit the effectiveness of
these tactics, the overwhelming and continuing demand for illicit
drugs among Americans is the primary cause of their limited
success. Millions want illicit drugs and are willing to violate
the law, spend billions of dollars, and in many cases risk their
lives to obtain them. </p>

<p>Supply Versus Demand </p>

<p>Although the supply of and demand for drugs have often been
considered separate issues, by both the public and private
sectors, they are in fact inseparable parts of a single problem.
The success of supply efforts are related to commitments made to
reduce the demand for drugs through drug abuse education,
treatment, research, vigorous enforcement of drug abuse laws, and
effective sentencing. Drug supply and demand operate in an
interrelated and dynamic manner. The strategies employed to limit
each should be similarly connected. </p>

<p>The national fight against illicit drugs relies on two
fundamental strategies: organized crime policy and drug abuse
policy. Organized crime policy targets specific criminal groups
and seeks to destroy those already in existence and prevent the
emergence of new ones. In contrast, drug abuse policy attempts to
reduce drug use and its associated adverse effects.
Theoretically, organized crime policy and drug abuse policy can
conflict. Reducing the demand for drugs advances the goals of
both organized crime policy and drug abuse policy. A
significantly smaller drug market, which would likely result from
a substantially reduced demand for drugs, would attack organized
crime groups by limiting the huge profits currently available in
drug trafficking, while simultaneously reducing the number of
drug users, the goal of drug abuse policy. </p>

<p>A clear example of the relationship of supply and demand is
provided by the case of heroin trafficker Cecily Lermusiaux, who
with several associates, moved heroin into an area of Las Vegas
where its use among &quot;middle to high-class whites&quot; was
previously unknown. In a scheme which began with the distribution
of free samples of heroin, Lermusiaux's independent heroin
business generated a profit of several million dollars in
approximately six years. </p>

<p>The demand for drugs is also widely recognized as the fuel
that the illicit drug industry needs to operate. According to
Colombian President Belisario Bentancur: </p>

<p>In the world war against narcotics, we need the commitment of
the consumer nations to attack the traffic with the same vigor we
have shown. We can make all the sacrifices possible, but if there
is enormous demand, production will never be completely
eradicated. </p>

<p>This sentiment has been echoed by the other side of the law.
Carlos Lehder, who heads one of Colombia's most notorious cocaine
cartels, sees the American demand for drugs as the driving force
behind the &quot;bonanza&quot; of drug trafficking: </p>

<p>The demand for drugs in the United States is so great that the
producer countries like Colombia play a really tiny role compared
to the total consumption of the United States. </p>

<p>Tactics to Reduce Demand </p>

<p>Efforts to reduce demand are not hampered by international
political complications, or other factors that limit the
effectiveness of tactics to reduce supply. This Commission is of
the opinion that since reducing demand is the single policy
option pursuable entirely within our own borders, it deserves
greater attention. </p>

<p>More successful tactics to reduce demand may in the long-run
decrease the need for current high levels of funding for
approaches to reduce supply. A significant reduction in the
demand for drugs as a complement to aggressive enforcement
efforts is likely to make drug trafficking less lucrative for
organized crime and thus prompt many organized crime groups to
drop out of the drug business. According to analyst Mark Kleiman:
</p>

<p>Demand reduction is clearly the strategy of choice with
respect to its effects on organized crime . . . anything that
tends to depress demand will reduce both trafficking-related
ancillary crime and the level of drug enforcement resources
needed to attain any given level of reduction in drug
consumption. </p>

<p>Skeptics have argued that past tactics to reduce demand have
not been successful. However, the history of drug abuse
prevention and treatment programs has been relatively short. It
was not until the upsurge of drug use in the 1960's that these
programs developed. Some early prevention approaches were
ill-conceived. For example, they often presented information
about drugs without persuasive arguments to deter their use, and
other programs used exaggerated information. Such programs have
been criticized for unintentionally encouraging experimentation
with drugs or squandering the credibility of anti-drug
information. The most recent and effective drug abuse education
and prevention programs focus on the psychological and
sociological factors that contribute to the onset of drug use.
Drug education programs must be continually evaluated and
improved to keep pace with changing drug abuse patterns. </p>

<p>In a model program, the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA) used the strategy of the anti-smoking campaigns of the
late 1970's, which many feel were effective, to develop its
&quot;Just Say No&quot; campaign against drug use which
recognizes the impact of social pressure. NIDA seeks to show
adolescents through a music video, television commercials, and
other media that they can turn down drugs by simply saying
&quot;no&quot; to them. </p>

<p>While it is difficult to measure precisely the effectiveness
of such anti-drug advertising, it is clear that the media can
help shape attitudes. Just as beliefs about cigarette smoking
have changed in recent years, so too can attitudes about drugs.
Anti-drug advertising has an advantage over the anti-smoking
campaigns: drug dealers cannot openly advertise their product.
According to the New York advertising firm of Trout and Ries, </p>

<p>Unlike cigarette manufacturers, drug producers and sellers
cannot use advertising to promote a fashionable image for their
drugs. Quite the opposite, the government can use advertising to
make drugs less and less fashionable to use. This, if America
runs true to form, will dramatically reduce demand. When it's
'out' in America, it doesn't sell. </p>

<p>Reducing the demand for drugs requires a long-term commitment
because it takes time to change attitudes. This commitment must
be made by Federal, State, and local governments and the private
sector. Each must unequivocally reassert that any and all illicit
drug use is unacceptable in light of the effects of drugs on
individuals, families, communities, and governments. It is only
in this context that a war against drugs that seeks to limit both
the supply of and demand for drugs can be effective. </p>

<p>Federal Government </p>

<p>Federal Priorities </p>

<p>Three of the five elements of the current National Strategy
for Prevention of Drug Abuse and Drug Trafficking are directed to
reduction of demand: drug abuse prevention, medical
detoxification and treatment, and research. </p>

<p>The importance of reducing demand has, in addition, been,
publicly acknowledged by leading law enforcement officials.
According to Attorney General Edwin Meese III, for example: </p>

<p>All the enforcement efforts that we can try in this country,
all the police agencies in this nation and worldwide will never
be able to stem the supply of drugs in this nation until we have
first decreased the number of users and have decreased the demand
for these drugs. </p>

<p>John Lawn, administrator of the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA), concurs: </p>

<p>Were we [DEAl to increase dramatically in size, the drug
problem would continue to exist until we could do something about
demand reduction. </p>

<p>While the importance of strategies to reduce demand has been
acknowledged, it is reduction of supply that has consumed the
bulk of the Federal drug abuse budget. This may be due, in part,
to the fact that certain enforcement operations are inherently
more expensive, and they are exclusively a Federal function. In
addition, primary responsibility for developing and maintaining
programs to reduce demand has been shifted to the States and the
private sector. </p>

<p>The concept of our current National Strategy, assigning
complementary roles to the Federal government, on the one hand,
and State and local governments and the private sector, on the
other, is commendable for its recognition of the unique roles of
each component. However, the adoption of this coordinated
approach carries with it the responsibility for ensuring that the
components perform in a truly coordinated and complementary
fashion. There is insufficient evidence today that this
responsibility is being met. Moreover, in precisely the same way
that approaches to reduce supply recognize a unique Federal
capability, there are certain functions in the area of demand
that, by their nature, can only be performed by the Federal
government. The Federal government's exclusive role in reducing
the demand for drugs includes providing national coordination in
the conduct of research, gathering nationwide data, and
developing and disseminating standards for drug prevention and
treatment programs across the country. </p>

<p>Current budgetary figures reflect the emphasis on drug law
enforcement. while programs to reduce demand at one time received
the larger share of the Federal budget, the focus on enforcement
has increased dramatically during the last decade. For example,
between fiscal year 82 and 86, Federal funding for drug abuse
prevention has decreased by 5 percent, while Federal funding for
drug law enforcement has increase by 70 percent. For fiscal year
1986 Federal expenditures on drug law enforcement constitute 84
percent of the total Federal drug abuse budget outlay of $1.7
billion. Interdiction alone consumes 38 percent of this budget.
In the same year Federal funding for drug abuse prevention
constitutes one percent, treatment and rehabilitation 6 percent,
and research 4 percent of the total Federal drug abuse budget. </p>

<p>In addition to this funding the Federal government provides
funding to the States for drug abuse prevention and treatment
through the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Block Grants.
For fiscal year 1986 between $65 and $244 million is made
available to the States for drug programs. However, prior to 1981
under the formula grant program, 40 percent more funds were
available to the States for these purposes. A thorough review of
the current budgetary allotments for anti-drug efforts, now
contemplated by the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board,
should be placed at the top of the agenda of the Board
immediately. This Commission concludes that such a review will
indicate that greater Federal resources should be devoted to
programs to reduce demand, and that the Board should pursue
appropriate action without hesitation. </p>

<p>Asset Forfeiture </p>

<p>Expanded efforts to reduce demand would, of course, require
additional funding at all levels. A particularly promising source
of such funding is the considerable amount of money and property
obtained annually through forfeiture and seized by law
enforcement officials. In 1984 Federal agencies obtained an
estimated $400 to 450 million through the forfeiture and seizure
of drug traffickers assets. Rudolph Guiliani, U.S. Attorney for
the Southern District of New York, observes: </p>

<p>The drug dealers are just about paying for the drug law
enforcement, and hopefully we can get them to pay for drug
education. </p>

<p>Under current policy, the Federal government channels all
seized and forfeited assets into Federal, State, and local law
enforcement agencies and the Department of Justice Assets
Forfeiture Fund. Presently, no portion of these funds is used for
Federal drug demand reduction programs, such as prevention,
treatment, and research. However, pending legislation is being
considered that would direct use of portions of the Assets
Forfeiture Fund for drug abuse prevention and treatment programs.
A portion of the Federal government's asset forfeiture fund
derived from drug cases should be devoted to programs to reduce
demand in whatever proportion is indicated by the Policy Board's
budgetary review. Funding to reduce demand should include a
responsible contribution to the States for their own programs in
this area. However, any funding directed to the States should be
made contingent upon their vigorous pursuit of such programs, and
after a reasonable grace period, funding should be denied to any
State failing this requirement. Failure to enact State electronic
surveillance measures and asset forfeiture provisions, with the
proceeds thereof directed to anti-drug programs, should
constitute per se failure. </p>

<p>Research </p>

<p>Because data concerning drug abuse are in many instances
relatively incomplete, and in all cases, subject to change based
on new discoveries, continuing research is a fundamental
component of any drug strategy. Recent discoveries concerning
cocaine provide an example. The 1967 President's Commission on
Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice reported that
cocaine did not &quot;create tolerance or physical
dependence;&quot; however, research during the 1980's showed that
cocaine does, in fact, create tolerance and some argue, physical
dependence. Despite this increased understanding about cocaine,
many experts, such as Dr. Arnold Washton, argue that research
about the effects of cocaine is still in its &quot;infancy.&quot;
</p>

<p>Continuing research is required not only by the complex nature
of drugs and their effects on the human mind and body, but also
by the constantly shifting patterns of drug abuse. While heroin
has traditionally been the most frequently encountered drug of
abuse among individuals in treatment programs, cocaine now
follows closely behind and has, in fact, overtaken heroin as the
primary drug of abuse by those in treatment in 18 States. While
requests for treatment by cocaine users are estimated to have
increased by as much as 600 percent in the last three years,
research about cocaine and its effects has not kept pace with
this growing problem. The development of new drugs, such as
controlled substance analogs, presents another compelling need
for continuing research. </p>

<p>Data Collection and Dissemination </p>

<p>As part of its research responsibilities, NIDA supports two
continuing epidemiological surveys, the National Household Survey
on Drug Abuse and the High School Senior Survey. While these two
surveys provide valuable information about the extent of drug
use, neither NIDA nor any other agency systematically collects or
disseminates information about the thousands of drug abuse
programs. </p>

<p>State governments, which disbursed 46 percent ($642.5 million)
of the funding for alcohol and drug abuse prevention and
treatment services in fiscal year 1984, do not systematically
report to the Federal government about these programs. This lack
of data is due primarily to the absence of any statutory
requirement for such reporting, and is a major obstacle to
effective drug policy planning. The States should be required to
report to the National Institute on Drug Abuse information about
their prevention and treatment programs. With this information,
and reports obtained from private programs, NIDA will be better
able to identify the best prevention and treatment programs and
to develop and disseminate standards and guidelines for such
programs to the States. The States should, in turn, provide this
information to all groups engaged in prevention, treatment, and
related research. </p>

<p>Guidelines </p>

<p>Because the Federal government does not systematically collect
and evaluate information about drug abuse prevention and
treatment programs, it cannot develop substantive guidelines for
such efforts. The history of drug abuse prevention has
demonstrated that certain approaches are considerably more
effective than others. Some have even unwittingly encouraged
experimentation with drugs. As an increasing number of school and
community-based prevention programs are created, the need for
guidelines for drug abuse programs is particularly acute.
Officials at NIDA acknowledge that many programs use outdated
factual information and philosophies; however, the Federal
government is in a unique position to establish and disseminate
such guidelines to improve both State and private sector drug
abuse programs. Its current failure to do so is a major
deficiency in the campaign against drug abuse. </p>

<p>In addition to contributions to reducing the demand for drugs
through research, data collection and dissemination, and the
formation of guidelines, the Federal government should provide an
example of the unacceptability of drug use. The President should
direct the heads of all federal agencies to formulate immediately
clear policy statements, with implementing guidelines, including
suitable drug testing, expressing the utter unacceptability of
drug use by Federal employees. Government contracts should not be
awarded to companies which fail to implement drug programs,
including suitable drug testing. </p>

<p>State and Local Governments </p>

<p>State and local governments are key components in the national
campaign against drug abuse. Their unique capabilities in the
area of reducing demand include State-sponsored media campaigns
against drug use, prevention and education programs in the
schools, drug treatment programs, more vigorous enforcement of
State drug laws, and the inclusion of mandatory treatment or jail
sentences, as appropriate, for those individuals convicted of
possession of drugs. Because the nature of drug use tends to vary
among different geographical areas, State and local governments
are best positioned to tailor techniques to reduce demand to suit
their particular drug problem. </p>

<p>Drug Education </p>

<p>The public school systems of State and local governments
provide an appropriate forum for drug abuse prevention programs.
Consistent with identified measures of success, State governments
should establish credentialing standards for prevention and
treatment programs. They should further require that all
elementary, junior high, and high schools within the State
include drug abuse prevention programs in their curricula,
designed in a manner consistent with such credentialing
standards. State funding should be made available to assure the
proper training of educators assigned to such programs. </p>

<p>Combining prevention programs, clear school policies about the
consequences of drug use, increased discipline, and higher
academic standards has been demonstrated to be effective. For
example, Northside High School in Atlanta, Georgia implemented
such a program in the late 1970's in the face of &quot;poor
academic performance . . . student apathy . . . discipline
problems . . . class cutting and open drug use on campus.&quot;
By the early 1980's, performance on standardized tests improved
significantly and &quot;the use and possession of drugs on campus
[had] all but disappeared.&quot; Every employer, public and
private, and public education institutions at all levels should
have clearly-stated policies prohibiting drug use, possession of
drugs, or being under the influence of drugs on their premises.
The consequences of violating these prohibitions should be
clearly explained. </p>

<p>Law Enforcement </p>

<p>A critical part of a national campaign to reduce demand is
vigorous enforcement by State and local governments of their laws
regarding the possession of controlled substances. The Department
of Justice Uniform Crime Report for 1984 states that 552,552
arrests were made in 1984 by State and local police agencies for
possession of drugs. Given that in 1984 there were estimated to
be 20 million monthly marijuana users, over four million monthly
cocaine users, and approximately 520,000 heroin addicts, it is
clear that the statistical probability of arrest for possession
was and is quite low. This low probability of arrest vitiates in
large part whatever deterrent value laws against drug possession
and use may have. </p>

<p>In addition to increasing the likelihood of arrest for drug
possession, punishment for those convicted of such offenses can
be more effective. Drug users are not &quot;victims&quot; who
bear no responsibility for their actions. Imprisonment for
recidivists provides both deterrent value and an opportunity to
break the cycle of drug use. Uniform and rational sentencing for
drug offenses is essential. Such a system should provide a
sentence of probation and a fine for a first offense involving
possession of drugs. The terms of probation should include a
requirement to remain drug-free, to be verified through periodic
drug testing. A second offense for possession of drugs should
result in a jail sentence or mandatory treatment, if appropriate,
or fines or all three. The results of random drug screening
should be used in considering parole in cases of both drug
possession and trafficking. </p>

<p>Society's commitment to the unacceptability of illicit drug
use is properly expressed in vigorous enforcement of the laws
regarding possession of drugs and sentencing of recidivist users
to jail terms and mandatory treatment. Such a national commitment
is in conflict with various States' relaxation of criminal
penalties for the possession of marijuana. Because such measures
were based on limited information and popular misinformation
about the effects of marijuana, it is appropriate for those
States that reduced these penalties during the 1970's to
reconsider these laws. This reconsideration is warranted,
especially in light of a Federal campaign against marijuana
smuggling and the considerable evidence that a substantial share
of marijuana trafficking is dominated by organized crime groups,
which are both ruthless and involved in smuggling other drugs. In
addition, the sale of drug paraphernalia undermines this Nation's
anti-drug efforts. States that have not already done so should
enact and enforce laws prohibiting the sale of drug
paraphernalia. </p>

<p>Reducing demand and increased enforcement of drug possession
laws will undoubtedly place a greater burden on our courts and
will generate the need for more jail cells and treatment
facilities. The accompanying increase in expenditures, however,
could be met in part with funding extracted from the illicit drug
industry itself. All 50 States currently authorize forfeiture of
assets in connection with drug trafficking and manufacturing,
making available millions of dollars in cash and property each
year to State governments. </p>

<p>The Private Sector: Attitudes and Actions </p>

<p>The hostess who is certain enough of her own unwillingness to
tolerate pot smoking in her home doesn't need to call the cops to
keep her guests from lighting up. </p>

<p>&quot;Great scent. Lousy name.&quot; - Advertising Age, a
trade journal commenting on &quot;Opium,&quot; a popular perfume
marketed by Charles of the Ritz, a subsidiary of Squibb
Pharmaceuticals. </p>

<p>Drug abuse is fundamentally a social problem, which cannot be
solved by the government alone. Federal and State governments can
support drug abuse prevention and treatment programs, conduct
research, enforce drug laws and provide leadership in the fight
against drug abuse and drug trafficking. However, not until
public and individual attitudes change will illicit drugs and the
organized criminal groups that traffic in them be eliminated.
Individuals need not accept drug use in their midst. There is no
&quot;right&quot; to use drugs. Government efforts to combat drug
trafficking and drug abuse are a vital effort, but they are
ultimately only a holding action, while consensus continues to
build among individuals concerning the utter unacceptability of
drug use. </p>

<p>Despite this growing consensus, a profound disparity exists
between principle and practice. Popular entertainment arid
advertising, sometimes subtle, sometimes not, regularly reflects
and even promotes the view that the use of illicit drugs is
glamorous, exciting, and sophisticated, or at least harmless and
amusing. </p>

<p>The illusion that drug use is glamorous is regularly, if
somewhat indirectly, reinforced by revelations that drug use is
commonplace among celebrities in the sports and entertainment
worlds. In August 1985, for example, the New York Times reported
cocaine's alleged use by players on virtually every team in the
major leagues, prompting the Commissioner of Baseball to declare
drug use the &quot;number one&quot; problem facing the game. </p>

<p>It is even possible to find purportedly responsible groups
urging not only recognition but acceptance of drug use as a
feature of daily life. An article in the January/February 1984
issue of Social Work, the journal of the National Association of
Social Workers, prescribes the following for adolescent marijuana
use: </p>

<p>Use should be moderate . . no more than four to five joints
per week seem advisable. </p>

<p>Such acceptance of drug use may be shared by many who resign
themselves to the fact that drug abuse is inevitable. Such a view
reflects a failure of will on the part of the American public.
American society may view drug use in the abstract as wrong, and
many People agree that heroin addicts who commit additional
crimes to support their drug habits should be jailed. However,
many people react with ambivalence to the drug use in their
midst. Even while the United States government spends almost a
billion and one-half dollars on drug law enforcement, threatens
to cut off foreign aid to drug producing countries, and
extradites and imprisons foreign nationals on trafficking
charges, we appear to lack the same degree of resolve to hold
this country's drug users, as well as those who directly or
indirectly promote drug use, accountable for their actions and
the consequences thereof. </p>

<p>While attitudes are ultimately an individual matter, actions
need not be. It is in combination with others that private
citizens have been most effective in combatting drug abuse. As
discussed earlier, athletes, entertainers, manufactures,
advertisers and media can promote drug use by their individual
examples or by favorable portrayals of drug use. However, these
elements of society also have the power to shape different public
attitudes about drug use by presenting the truth about drugs. The
media and entertainment industries should carefully review their
portrayals of drug use and its consequences and ensure their
accuracy. </p>

<p>Efforts to combat drug abuse can also be successful in the
workplace. Many businesses across the country have Employee
Assistance Programs (EAPs), which seek to prevent drug abuse at
the worksite and which offer treatment and referrals. In
addition, many businesses now test employees or prospective
employees for drug use. According to a survey of 100 Fortune 500
companies, two-thirds refuse to hire job applicants who fail such
tests, 25 percent fire employees and 41 percent require treatment
for employees who fail. Drug testing protects businesses, which
lose billions of dollars each year in reduced productivity as a
result of drug use, employees, and the public. Drug testing in
certain &quot;critical positions,&quot; such as in the
transportation industry, law enforcement, and education is
particularly important. </p>

<p>In addition to efforts in the workplace to combat drug abuse,
health professionals, such as physicians, nurses, psychologists,
and social workers can help identify and treat drug users.
However, currently formal training in the diagnosis and treatment
of drug abuse is limited. Health professionals should be
thoroughly trained to identify and counsel drug abusers. </p>

<p>Decisions to use or not to use drugs are ultimately derived
from values that are best inculcated and reinforced in families,
churches, civic organizations, schools and local communities. The
efforts of organizations, which seek to help families prevent
drug use, such as the National Federation of Parents for
Drug-Free Youth, are essential to the fight against drug use and
drug trafficking. First Lady Nancy Reagan has made an important
contribution to this effort to reduce the demand for drugs.
Relying on the task force approach which law enforcement
officials have used successfully, parents, churches, schools,
civic organizations, and business associations should form
community task forces in every community across the country to
provide a unified front against drugs.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>