
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B001-21</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/amhab/amhabc4a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122031643 text/html 37600
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:16:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:28 GMT
Content-length: 37382
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Federal Drug Abuse Policy: 1981-Present</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter IV </h2>

<h2>Part 2: Federal Drug Abuse Policy: 1981-Present </h2>

<p>Early in his administration President Ronald Reagan
acknowledged that drug abuse was &quot;one of the gravest
problems facing us&quot; as a Nation. The Reagan Administration
has taken many steps designed to improve the effectiveness of the
U.S. overall drug abuse policy. </p>

<p>Reorganization/Coordination </p>

<p>On January 21, 1982, in a major policy shift, the FBI was
given concurrent jurisdiction with DEA for drug law enforcement
and investigation. In addition, the Administrator of DEA was
required to report to the Director of the FBI who was given the
responsibility for supervising generally drug law enforcement
efforts and policies. </p>

<p>In giving the FBI concurrent jurisdiction for enforcement of
U.S. drug laws, the Attorney General followed the recommendation
of a committee that he had established to study the need for
increased coordination of DEA and the FBI in the drug field. This
committee was headed by then Associate Attorney General Rudolph
W. Giuliani. According to Giuliani, the Attorney General's
committee recommended concurrent jurisdiction because: </p>

<p>[W]e believe we can more effectively deal with the large-scale
trafficking groups by coordinating DEA's street-level, undercover
expertise with the FBI's ability to combat large criminal
enterprises. The FBI's 20-year experience in combatting organized
crime will also prove critical to drug enforcement. </p>

<p>Although FBI expertise in organized crime and financial
investigations would be available in drug enforcement work as a
result of concurrent jurisdiction, DEA would continue to function
as a &quot;single-mission narcotics enforcement agency&quot; that
would &quot;give the drug problem the kind of focus it
needs.&quot; </p>

<p>In another action relating to the coordination of Federal drug
abuse efforts, President Reagan issued an executive order on June
24, 1982, directing the office of Policy Development to assist
the President in performing his duties under the Drug Abuse
Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation Act; designating the
Director of the Drug Abuse Policy Office within the Office of
Policy Development as primarily responsible for coordinating,
overseeing, and policy-making for all Executive international and
domestic drug abuse functions; and making the Director directly
responsible for the activities of a drug policy staff within the
office of Policy Development. </p>

<p>Despite President Reagan's stated commitment to the
performance of the functions imposed upon him by the Drug Abuse
Prevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Act, Congress became
increasingly dissatisfied with a perceived lack of coordination
of such functions. This dissatisfaction became embodied in an
Omnibus Crime Bill (H.R. 3963) which included a provision to
establish an Office of Director of National and International
Drug Operations and Policy, which was described as follows: </p>

<p>Similar in concept to SAODAP, the proposed agency would have
been charged with the overall planning and coordination of
Federal efforts to control the supply of dangerous drugs. </p>

<p>Unlike SAODAP, which had been directed by Congress to
coordinate Federal drug abuse prevention efforts, and unlike
ODAP, which was enjoined to oversee all Federal drug abuse
programs, the proposed Office of Director of National and
International Drug Operations and Policy was envisioned as a
mechanism for coordinating and directing Federal law enforcement
operations. </p>

<p>While the President was considering the merits of H.R. 3963,
an Administration spokesman criticized that portion of the bill
creating the Office of Director of National and International
Drug Operations and Policy: </p>

<p>If the czar . . . is to have the power to direct the drug
enforcement operations of other Cabinet officers, the very nature
of our Cabinet system of government would be drastically altered.
If he is not to have such power, he could do little more than
interfere with the existing mechanisms, which have been working
well. </p>

<p>Two days after this statement appeared, President Reagan
pocket-vetoed H.R. 3963 and issued a memorandum of disapproval
explaining his action: </p>

<p>The creation of another layer of bureaucracy within the
Executive Branch would produce friction, disrupt effective law
enforcement, and could threaten the integrity of criminal
investigations and prosecutions . . . . </p>

<p>The seriousness of this threat is underscored by the
overwhelming opposition to this provision by the Federal law
enforcement community as well as by such groups as the
International Association of Chiefs of Police and the National
Association of Attorney's General. </p>

<p>* * * </p>

<p>The war on crime and drugs does not need more bureaucracy in
Washington. It does need more action in the field, and that is
where my Administration will focus its efforts. </p>

<p>Members of Congress were not easily dissuaded from their
efforts to achieve a greater degree of coordination of the
Federal drug abuse efforts. On February 7, 1984, the Senate
passed a proposed National Narcotics Act of 1984 (S. 1787),
which, among other things, would have established a cabinet-level
office of National and International Drug Operation and Policy.
Under the bill the Director of the Office was authorized to:
develop, review, implement, and enforce U.S. policy concerning
illegal drugs; coordinate all U.S. efforts to halt drug
trafficking into and within the United States; develop, in
concert with the Federal entities concerned with drug control,
budgetary priorities and allocations; and coordinate the
collection and disseminate of narcotics intelligence. </p>

<p>In recommending that S. 1787 be passed, the Senate Judiciary
Committee acknowledged that the Reagan Administration had
undertaken a number of &quot;promising initiatives&quot; in drug
law enforcement. However, the Committee concluded that an Office
of National and International Drug Operations and Policy was
necessary because: </p>

<p>[T]he Committee believes the Administration's anti-drug effort
falls short in one crucial respect: the lack of central
direction. </p>

<p>At least 15 Federal agencies play a role in the regulation of
commerce in dangerous drugs or in the enforcement of other
restrictions . . . . These agencies are located in six different
departments. Under such circumstances, it is inevitable that
divergences as to priorities will arise and that there will be
conflicting interpretations of national policy. Indeed, national
policy in such an area as drug law enforcement must be
continually reevaluated and reformulated; a one-time annual
review and the publication of a broadly-worded strategy does not
suffice. </p>

<p>The Committee also described in some detail the role it
envisioned for the proposed Office: </p>

<p>SOADAP was the same kind of &quot;overlord&quot; agency as the
one contemplated by S. 1787. However, it was flawed from the
beginning in that its effective jurisdiction was limited to
activities aimed at the control of drug demand; it was not given
authority of any substance in the law enforcement field. </p>

<p>* * * </p>

<p>The Committee bill draws from the SAODAP concept, but focuses
on the aspects of drug control that were excluded from the former
agency's purview, i.e., the government's efforts to control the
supply of abused drugs. It is in the area of supply control, be
it in foreign or domestic programs, that the Committee perceives
the greatest current need for central direction. </p>

<p>In recommending the establishment of an office to which the
Reagan Administration appeared to be implacably opposed, the
Senate Judiciary Committee took pains to observe that the
Director of the Drug Abuse Policy office was not capable of
performing the necessary coordinative functions concerning
Federal drug law enforcement efforts: </p>

<p>[U]nder questioning by several Congressmen [of the House
Subcommittee on Crime at a February 17, 1983, hearing on the
coordination of drug enforcement efforts] it became clear that
the director does not have the authority or stature to oversee
the implementation of the Federal strategy. </p>

<p>Anxious to reassure the Administration about the proposed
cabinet-level Office, the Committee made it clear that, in
implementing the legislation, the President would have a great
deal of flexibility; for example, the Office would not have to be
established in the Executive office of the President, and the
Attorney General could be appointed the Director of the central
drug agency. However, the Committee was insistent that the
Director have something like a cabinet-level status because such
status was deemed &quot;necessary if the office is to have the
influence needed to impose a truce on interagency feuding, to
insure maximum participation, and to allocate budgetary resources
for top efficiency and economy.&quot; </p>

<p>Despite the Administration's opposition, the Senate passed S.
1787. However, Congressional conferees compromised and
substituted a National Drug Enforcement Policy Board for the
Office of National and International Drug Operations and Policy
as the means for achieving greater coordination of Federal drug
law enforcement efforts. Both the House and Senate agreed to the
Conference Report, and Public Law No. 98-473 was thereafter
approved on October 12, 1984. Title II of this law was entitled
the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, and Chapter XIII of
that title was designated the National Narcotics Act of 1984. </p>

<p>Congress established the National Drug Enforcement Policy
Board (Policy Board) because it found that drug trafficking was
estimated to be an $80 billion a year industry; only 5 to 15
percent of the drugs imported into the country were interdicted;
and controlling the supply of drugs was thought to be a key to
reducing the drug-related crime epidemic. The Policy Board,
chaired by the Attorney General, was and is charged with
facilitating coordination of U.S. operations and policy
concerning illegal law enforcement. As Chairman of the Policy
Board, the Attorney General was given many duties, including
advising the Policy Board concerning drug law enforcement and
acting as primary advisor to the President and Congress on
Board-developed programs. The Act, however, declares that nothing
therein authorizes the Board or its Chairman to interfere with
routine law enforcement or intelligence decisions of any agency.
Finally, the National Narcotics Act of 1984 amended the Drug
Abuse Prevention, Treatment and Rehabilitation Act to declare
that one of the duties of the White House Office of Drug Abuse
Policy Board was to insure coordination between the Policy Board
and health issues associated with drug abuse. </p>

<p>The creation of the Policy Board in January 1985 represents
only the latest compromise between the President and Congress in
the ongoing search for more effective coordination of all facets
of the Federal drug abuse effort. It remains to be seen whether
an entity like the Policy Board can effectively oversee, police,
and coordinate all Federal law enforcement efforts and whether
some other mechanism is needed to impose coordination of Federal
demand reduction and supply reduction strategies. </p>

<p>Legislative Responses to the Drug Problem </p>

<p>In addition to the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984,
other important legislative initiatives have been adopted in
recent years. For example, the Department of Defense
Authorization Act of 1982 contained a provision, &quot;Military
Cooperation With Civilian Law Enforcement Officials,&quot; which
was intended to codify the practices of cooperation that had
developed between military and civilian law enforcement
authorities. The Act was also designed to improve the level of
cooperation by delineating precisely that assistance which
military commanders could provide and by permitting military
personnel to operate military equipment that had been lent to
civilian drug enforcement agencies. This legislation was deemed
necessary for the following reasons: </p>

<p>The rising tide of drugs being smuggled into the United States
by land, sea, and air presents a grave threat to all Americans. </p>

<p>* * * </p>

<p>Only through the dedicated work of all of Federal, State, and
local law enforcement agencies can we begin to stem this tide. In
fighting this battle, it is important to maximize the degree of
cooperation between the military and civilian law enforcement. At
the same time, we must recognize the need to maintain the
traditional balance of authority between civilians and the
military. </p>

<p>The most important and innovative part of the legislation was
Section 374, which permits the Secretary of Defense to assign
Department personnel to operate and maintain military equipment
that had been made available to an agency with jurisdiction to
enforce the Controlled Substances Act. This relatively simple
change increased geometrically the potential interdiction
capability of Federal drug law enforcement agencies. </p>

<p>The year 1984 was a prolific one for legislation dealing with
discrete areas in drug law enforcement. The Controlled Substance
Registrant Protection Act of 1984 made it illegal, among other
things, to steal any quantity of a controlled substance from a
registrant. Congress also directed the Attorney General,
notwithstanding the scheduling provisions of the Controlled
Substances Act, to transfer methaqualone, commonly known by the
brand name Quaalude, from Schedule II to Schedule I, with the
effect of making the prescription of methaqualone unlawful
because it no longer had an approved medical use. While remaining
committed to the proposition that scheduling of controlled
substances ordinarily should be handled in accordance with the
administrative procedures mandated by the Controlled Substances
Act, Congress took this legislative action after determining that
circumstances required it to do so and that the adverse effects
of the diversion of methaqualone outweighed its therapeutic
usefulness. </p>

<p>Congress also passed the Aviation Drug-Trafficking Control
Act, which amended the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, to, among
other things, require the Administrator of the FAA to revoke
airman certificates and aircraft registrations of those convicted
of violating any Federal or State law relating to controlled
substances, except where the violations involved possession
offenses. The Act also made it illegal for any person to serve as
an airman without an airman's certificate in connection with a
transportation that constitutes a Federal or State drug felony
offense. </p>

<p>Although the Controlled Substance Registrant Protection Act of
1984, the Aviation Drug-Trafficking Control Act, and the
Congressional rescheduling of methaqualone were necessary laws,
by far the most important drug law enforcement measures passed in
1984 were contained in several provisions of the Comprehensive
Crime Control Act of 1984. The Act included: </p>

<p>(i) Bail Reform Act of 1984: This Act comprises many sections,
but the most important and most controversial was that codified
in 18 U.S.C. Section 3142. Section 3142 provides that when a
person charged with an offense appears before a judicial officer,
the judicial officer must order that, pending trial, the accused
be released on personal recognizance or upon execution of an
unsecured appearance bond; released upon certain listed
conditions; temporarily detained to permit exclusion or
deportation if not a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident;
temporarily detained to permit revocation of a prior conditional
release; or detained. The preventive detention provision states
that the judicial officer must hold a hearing in any case
involving a narcotics offense for which imprisonment for ten or
more years is prescribed to determine whether any conditions will
assure the accused's appearance and the safety of any other
person and of the community. In any such hearing the accused must
prove that there are conditions that will assure his appearance
or the community's safety, if the judicial officer finds that
there is probable cause to believe that the person committed the
offense. </p>

<p>(ii) Comprehensive Forfeiture Act of 1984: This legislation
made extensive revisions to Federal civil and criminal forfeiture
laws and procedures, which had targeted the assets of
racketeering and drug trafficking organizations: </p>

<p>Today few in the Congress or the law enforcement community
fail to recognize that the traditional criminal sanctions of fine
and imprisonment are inadequate to deter or punish the enormously
profitable trade in dangerous drugs . . . . Clearly, if law
enforcement efforts to combat racketeering and drug trafficking
are to be successful, they must include an attack on the economic
aspects of these crimes. Forfeiture is the mechanism through
which such an attack may be made. </p>

<p>This 1984 legislation was designed to eliminate limitations
and ambiguities that had &quot;significantly impeded the full
realization of forfeiture's potential as a powerful law
enforcement weapon.&quot; </p>

<p>With respect to the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act, the 1984 Comprehensive Forfeiture Act did
several things, including confirming the Supreme Court's decision
in Russello v. United States, 464 U.S. 16(1983) that a
defendant's ill-gotten profits from racketeering were
forfeitable; defining the property subject to forfeiture to
include real property; making the relation back doctrine, i.e.,
U.S. interest in forfeitable property arises at the time of the
commission of the act that gives rise to the forfeiture,
applicable in criminal forfeiture proceedings; and expanding
post-indictment prior restraining order authority to preserve the
availability of forfeiture assets by making an indictment
sufficient to establish conclusively probable cause that the
property will be forfeited. </p>

<p>The Comprehensive Forfeiture Act also amended the 1970
Comprehensive Act. With respect to criminal forfeiture, the 1984
Act added a new provision to the 1970 act that is applicable to
all felony drug offenses, including the Continuing Criminal
Enterprise offense. In virtually all respects, the drug criminal
forfeiture provisions are now identical to those of the amended
RICO statute. The new drug criminal forfeiture provision also
creates a rebuttable presumption that any property of a person
convicted of a drug felony is subject to forfeiture if the
government establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that
the defendant acquired the property during the period of
violation, or within a reasonably short period thereafter, and
there was no likely source for the property other than the
violation. </p>

<p>(iii) Controlled Substances Penalties Amendments Act of 1984.
This legislation generally enhanced the penalties for violations
of the Controlled Substances Act. Specifically, it provided a
20-year prison term and a $250,000 fine for violations involving
specified large amounts of Schedule I and II narcotic drugs, PCP
and LSD; raised the fine for violations involving all Schedule I
or II substances and enhanced the fines for violations involving
Schedule III, IV, and V substances. With respect to all doubling
provisions for recidivists in the Controlled Substances Act, the
1984 legislation removed an ambiguity in the existing law by
providing that a State drug felony conviction would trigger the
provisions; it went further by providing that a Foreign drug
felony conviction would have the same effect. Finally, the 1984
legislation provided that anyone who distributed controlled
substances on or within 1,000 feet of school property could be
subjected to a prison term or fine or both up to twice what is
otherwise provided. </p>

<p>(iv) Dangerous Drug Diversion Control Act of 1984. This
legislation &quot;represent[ed] the first major updating of the
regulatory provisions of the Controlled Substances Act and the
Controlled Substances Import and Export Act since their enactment
in 1970.&quot; In doing so, the 1984 amendments focused
principally on diversion of drugs of legitimate origin into the
illicit market and the manufacture and abuse of new drugs, such
as controlled substance analogs. With respect to the problem of
diversion, which Congress had attempted to address in the 1970
Comprehensive Act by creating a closed system, the legislative
history states: </p>

<p>Diversion of legally produced drugs into illicit channels is a
major part of the drug abuse problem in the United States. It is
estimated that between 60 and 70 percent of all drug-related
deaths and injuries involve drugs that were originally part of
the legitimate drug production and distribution chain. Also,
diversion of legally produced drugs often evidences the same sort
of large-scale trafficking more commonly associated with the
trade in wholly illicit drugs. </p>

<p>* * * </p>

<p>Unfortunately, experience under the [CSA] over the past decade
has demonstrated that the strong regulatory authority to maintain
a &quot;closed&quot; distribution chain does not exist at the
practitioner level. Yet, it is estimated that 80 to 90 percent of
all current diversion occurs at this level. </p>

<p>In response to this diversion problem, Congress amended the
Controlled Substances Act to, among other things, permit the
Attorney General to deny registration to practitioners if such
registration would be inconsistent with the public interest,
authorize the Attorney General to suspend or revoke a
registration upon the recommendation of a competent state
authority or if the public interest requires it; and authorize
the Attorney General to make grants to State and local
governments in connection with those governments' anti-diversion
programs. </p>

<p>With respect to the problem of the manufacture and abuse of
new drugs, Congress found that: </p>

<p>[T]he procedural requirements for controlling a drug under 21
U.S.C. 811 have proven sufficiently time consuming that they
preclude a swift response when an as yet uncontrolled drug
rapidly enters the illicit market and creates a significant
health problem. </p>

<p>As a result of the Dangerous Drug Diversion Control Act of
1984, Congress gave the Attorney General emergency scheduling
authority. Under that authority, the Attorney General is
permitted to schedule a drug in Schedule I on a temporary basis,
for up to one year, if he determines that such action is
&quot;necessary to avoid an imminent hazard to the public
safety.&quot; In making this determination, the Attorney General
need only consider the history and current pattern of abuse, the
scope, duration, and significance of abuse, and the nature of the
risk, if any, to the public health. The temporary scheduling may
be extended for up to six months while a rule-making proceeding
is conducted for the purpose of permanently scheduling the drug.
Such a temporary scheduling order is not subject to judicial
review. </p>

<p>(v) Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act
Amendments: &quot;Without the means to launder money, thereby
making cash generated by a criminal enterprise appear to come
from a legitimate source, organized crime could not flourish as
it now does.&quot; The 1984 amendments of the Currency and
Foreign Transactions Reporting Act were designed to &quot;fine
tune the [then] current currency reporting law.&quot; One of the
changes adopted increased the civil penalty for violating the
records and reporting requirements of the Act from $1,000 to
$10,000 for each violation and the criminal penalty from $1,000
and 1 year in prison to $250,000 and 5 years imprisonment. These
changes were deemed necessary because: </p>

<p>[I]t is important to recognize that [the requirements] are
primarily directed at persons who make a lucrative career in the
illicit drug trade and organized crime. As such, the penalties
are far too low to deter and punish such activity. Indeed, the
modest penalties now applicable may simply be written off as a
cost of doing business. </p>

<p>The Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984 was intended to,
and did in fact, provide Federal law enforcement agents with
better tools for combatting drug traffickers. However, it is
still too early to evaluate how these tools have been used. </p>

<p>Important legislation in the field of drug abuse since 1981
has not been restricted only to matters relating to improving
drug law enforcement. As noted previously, Congress in 1979
rejected President Carter's proposal that NIDA's State formula
grants for drug abuse programs be consolidated with those for
alcoholism and mental health. Instead it reauthorized the drug
formula grants through September 30, 1981. In passing the Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, Congress reversed itself and
fundamentally changed the role that the Federal Government plays
in overseeing and funding of drug abuse prevention, treatment and
rehabilitation programs by creating an Alcohol and Drug Abuse and
Mental Health Service Block Grant (ADMS Block Grant). The new
program was designed to distribute the Federal money that had
previously been provided to the States through formula and
project grants and contracts. </p>

<p>One of the principal motivations for adopting the block grant
approach was the belief that the States were in the best position
to determine the most efficacious use of Federal funds: </p>

<p>The ADMS Block . . . [was] established in 1981 to provide
State and local governments greater flexibility and
decision-making authority in focusing Federal, State, and local
resources on needs and priorities they know best and in ways they
believe are best suited to local conditions. Block grants were
also intended to eliminate duplication and overlapping of
services and allow States to better integrate and coordinate
services funded by several levels of government. </p>

<p>In addition to establishing the ADMS Block Grant, the Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act specified how the States were to spend
their allotment. Although requiring the States to file reports
with information permitting the Secretary of Health and Human
Services to determine whether the Federal funds provided were
expended in conformity with the objectives of the block grant,
the Act also directed the Secretary not to impose burdensome
reporting requirements. The reporting requirements concerning the
block grant imposed by the Secretary were much less extensive
than those existing under the categorical programs that existed
prior to the adoption of the block grant approach. </p>

<p>The impact of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act has been
estimated: Since the establishment of the ADMS Block Grant, the
amount of Federal money going to State drug abuse prevention and
treatment programs has declined by approximately 40 percent. It
is not possible, however, to determine what the impact of this
reduction has been because a portion, perhaps significant, of the
reduction represents savings due to the elimination of overhead
administrative costs. </p>

<p>Law Enforcement and Executive Responses to the Drug Problem. </p>

<p>Recognizing that drug abuse and drug trafficking are serious
national problems, which also pose a threat to national security,
the Reagan Administration has taken steps since 1981 that have
been designed to improve Federal law enforcement efforts against
drug traffickers. </p>

<p>Narcotics intelligence is essential to any drug law
enforcement program. In that regard, on December 4, 1981,
President Reagan issued an executive order, entitled &quot;United
States Intelligence Activities,&quot; which was intended to
&quot;control and provide direction and guidance to the
Intelligence Community.&quot; Among the executive order's
provisions relating to drugs, one authorizes agencies within the
U.S. Intelligence Community to participate in law enforcement
activities to investigate or prevent international narcotics
activities and to render assistance and cooperation to law
enforcement authorities not otherwise precluded by law. In
addition, agencies within the Intelligence Community are
authorized to collect, retain, or disseminate information
concerning U.S. persons obtained during the course of a lawful
international narcotics investigation or incidentally obtained
information indicating involvement in activities that may violate
federal, state, local or foreign laws. Finally, the Executive
Order directs that all departments and agencies involved in the
U.S. intelligence effort shall cooperate to provide the President
and the National Security Council with information on which to
base decisions concerning the conduct and development of foreign,
defense, and economic policy and the protection of U.S. national
interests. </p>

<p>Whether the U.S. Intelligence Community has played or will
play the important role in the Nation's anti-drug effort
envisioned for it by Executive Order 12333 depends upon the
commitment of its constituent departments and agencies to
eliminating this threat to national security. The Executive Order
was an important event because it represented recognition at the
highest level of the Executive Branch that, without accurate and
adequate strategic, operational, and tactical narcotics
intelligence, the Federal drug trafficking prevention effort
would be seriously crippled. </p>

<p>During 1981 the deleterious effect of drug trafficking on the
quality of life in Florida, and especially in South Florida, had
become so great that the State's citizens demanded prompt and
effective responses by government at all levels. At the Federal
level, President Reagan established on January 28, 1982, a
cabinet-level South Florida Task Force, also known as Operation
Florida, which was chaired by Vice President Bush, to
&quot;assist and coordinate Federal efforts with those of State
and local authorities in order to reduce crime&quot; and which
was patterned after previous multi-agency efforts, such as the
CENTAC program. The South Florida Task Force was intended to be a
&quot;broad, multifaceted anti-crime program,&quot; but its focus
was on interdiction and the arrest and prosecution of drug
smugglers. Assistance to the South Florida Task Force, which
became operational on March 15, 1982, was provided by DEA,
Customs, FBI, BATF, the Marshals Service, the Coast Guard, and
the Department of Defense. </p>

<p>One of the more significant features of the South Florida Task
Force was the creation of the South Florida Joint Task Group,
which consisted of DEA and Customs personnel and which was
charged with conducting follow-up investigations of drug
interdictions. In authorizing Customs agents to conduct such
investigations under the supervision of DEA on March 20, 1982,
the Attorney General modified, albeit slightly, the structure of
Federal drug enforcement that had been established by President
Nixon's 1973 reorganization plan. That plan had prohibited
Customs agents from exercising investigative, intelligence, and
law enforcement functions at locations away from ports of entry
or borders. This action was in effect a recognition, long
overdue, that it was necessary, if law enforcement efforts
against drug trafficking were to be improved, for Customs'
intelligence and investigative functions to be expanded. </p>

<p>Operations Greenback and Florida were successful in that they
forced traffickers to reduce their activities in Florida.
However, the increased law enforcement pressure, as had happened
so many times in the past, resulted in the traffickers diverting
drug smuggling to Gulf and Eastern ports of entry and their money
laundering activities to New York and the California-Mexico area.
The successes achieved by the Florida multiagency operations thus
exacerbated an already serious nationwide drug problem, but they
also provided a model for responding to that problem. In 1982 the
Attorney General appointed a committee to develop new approaches
to the drug trafficking problem. The Committee concluded that
&quot;no single agency could cope with the problem&quot; and that
&quot;many previous cooperative ventures, although limited in
scope by comparison, provided the promise that agencies can
cooperate and . . . only full-scale teamwork could meet the
crisis . . . .&quot; The Committee's conclusions led to President
Reagan's announcement on October 14, 1982, of the formation of 12
regional Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces, which were
authorized in January 1983 and became operational during the
spring of that year. </p>

<p>The Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program
(OCDETF Program) is modeled after the South Florida Task Force,
but its objectives are quite different. While the primary
objective of the South Florida Task Force is the interdiction of
drugs, the focus of the OCDETF Program is the leaders of large
organizations, which control drug importation and distribution
networks, and the disruption of those networks. The participating
Federal agencies are the U.S. Attorney's offices, DEA, FBI,
Customs, BATF, IRS, the Coast Guard, and the U.S. Marshals
Service. The OCDETF Program differs from previous multi-agency
law enforcement efforts in several respects: the task forces are
directly controlled by the Attorney General; the initial funding
was under the control of the Attorney General; and the task
forces are to focus on only one major segment of organized
criminal activity, drug trafficking. Because the OCDE Task Forces
are not intended to replace existing Federal enforcement efforts
against drugs and organized crime, the work of the organized
Crime Strike Forces and the South Florida Task Force continue, as
do the efforts of the FBI, DEA, Customs, and U.S. Attorneys
directed against organized crime groups involved in drug
trafficking. </p>

<p>Shortly after the establishment of the OCDETF Program, the
Reagan Administration adopted another multi-agency approach to
one facet of the Nation's supply reduction efforts, interdiction,
by creating the National Narcotics Border Interdiction System
(NNBIS) which was to be headed by Vice President Bush. NNBIS was
given the responsibility for informally coordinating the
interdiction efforts of other organizations; it could recommend,
but not require, that the organizations take certain actions, and
it itself was not authorized to interdict drugs. When it became
operational, NNBIS took over the interdiction coordination
responsibilities of the South Florida Task Force. Despite the
establishment of the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board in
1984, NNBIS continues to operate as an interdiction coordinating
body.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>