
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B020-165</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncchap2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123012 text/html 104889
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:30:03 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:53:45 GMT
Content-length: 104670
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marihuana Use and Its Effects</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse</b> </p>

<p><b>Marihuana - A Signal of Misunderstanding.</b> </p>

<p><b>Chapter II</b> </p>

<h1>marihuana use and its effects<br>
</h1>

<hr>

<p>&quot;Facts are stubborn things; and whatever may be our
wishes, our inclinations, or the dictates of our passions, they
cannot alter the state of facts and evidence.&quot; John Adams
(1770) <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>The ultimate objective of the Commission is to evaluate the
total impact of actual and potential marihuana use on
contemporary American society. This endeavor involves three
phases: first, an evaluation of the nature and scope of
contemporary American marihuana use; second, a careful
reevaluation of the pharmacological effects of the drug on the
human body with special emphasis on the drug's capacity to alter
or modify behavior; and third, an evaluation of the impact of
marihuana use on society. This chapter deals with the first and
second phases, and Chapter Three deals with the third.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><b>The Marihuana User <br>
</b></p>

<p>Cannabis has been used widely for many centuries in
nonindustrialized countries of Asia and Africa. Today, as in
earlier years, use of drug is concentrated primarily among lower
socioeconomic groups. in these countries, the practice is
estimated to be confined to a tenth of the lower socioeconomic,
male population. Although such use of the drug is
well-established, it offers little direct comparison with the
American experience. </p>

<p>Although the commercial, industrial and therapeutic value of
the hemp plant was widely recognized and exploited in the United
States from the earliest days of its history, knowledge and use
of its intoxicating and psychoactive properties remained largely
unknown until about 1900. </p>

<p>At that time, the custom of smoking marihuana was generally
limited to groups of Mexican itinerant workers in the border
states of the Southwest. By 1910, marihuana use began to emerge
in other southern states and cities, particularly New Orleans,
and in the port cities along the Mississippi River. In time,
these cities became distribution centers for enterprising
sailors. From there, marihuana use spread cross-country to other
urban centers, mining camps, railroad construction sites, farm
labor camps, &quot;bohemian&quot; communities of artists and jazz
musicians, and various other groups outside the mainstream of
American society.<br>
</p>

<p>Recently, of course, use of the drug has spread to young,
white, middle class groups and especially to high school and
college populations.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>On the basis of the Commission-sponsored National Survey, we
have concluded that contemporary marihuana use is pervasive,
involving all segments of the U.S. population. The Survey
estimated that about 24 million Americans over the age of 11
years (15% of the adults 18 and over, and 14% of the 12-17 year
olds) have used marihuana at least once, referred to in this
Report as ever-users. Until recently twice as many males as
females had used it; the most up-to-date studies of high school
students, college-age individuals, and young adults carried out
by the Commission indicate that this sex differential appears to
be diminishing. In many youthful populations use is almost
equally distributed between males and females. </p>

<p>Marihuana use does not appear to vary significantly by race.
With respect to the religious affiliation of the users, Jews and
Catholics appear to be slightly overrepresented as compared to
Protestants. </p>

<p>Usage is highest in cities, towns, and suburbs but not
uncommon in rural areas. States in the Northeast and West have
considerably higher rates of use than have the North Central
states, which in turn have significantly higher rates than those
in the South. </p>

<p>Use is found in all socioeconomic groups and occupations,
though slightly more predominant among persons with above-average
incomes. A New York survey of the state's general population
indicated that ever-use as well as regular use is almost equally
prevalent among <font size="2">sales workers, clerical workers,
skilled, semiskilled and unskilled workers, managers, owners,
professionals and technical workers.</font> </p>

<p>At the same time, the incidence of use seems to vary according
to educational attainment. Among all adults not now in school, 5%
of those with an eighth grade education or less have used the
drug, contrasted with 11% of those who completed some high
school, 14% of those who graduated from high school, 25% of those
who completed some college and 21 % of those who graduated from
college. </p>

<p>Age is presently one of the most significant correlates of
marihuana use. Among the total population, those who have tried
or used marihuana at least once, termed ever-users, are heavily
concentrated in the 16-25 age bracket. Of all the ever-users,
about half are in this group. At the same time, however, we
should emphasize that use is by no means confined to teenagers
and young adults. <br>
</p>

<p>The proportion of individuals in different age groups who have
used marihuana is indicated in Figure 1.<br>
<br>
<img src="img00001.gif" align="bottom" width="1343" height="973"><br>
</p>

<p>The incidence of use is greatest among young people: 27% of
the 16-17 year olds, 40% of the 18-21 year olds, and 38% of the
22-25 year olds have tried marihuana; at the low extremes, 6% of
the 12-13 year olds and 6% of the over-50 generation have used
the drug. </p>

<p>Among those now in school, incidence also seems to rise with
increasing school level: Ever-users represent 44% of those
persons now in college or graduate school; 30% of high school
juniors and seniors; 17% of freshmen and sophomores; and 8% of
students in junior high school.<br>
</p>

<p>At the same time, the use of the drug among adults is by no
means confined to college students. Even among the 18-25 year
olds, 75% of the ever-users are not now in school. </p>

<p>The initial patterns of contemporary marihuana use appear to
be shifting; there is a trend toward increased use among college
students as well as non-college students. Non-student users now
span social class, income level and occupational classification.
In addition, the proportion -of users increases during the teens,
peaks during the young adult years and then falls off rapidly
(Figure 1). </p>

<p>Having described the incidence of any use of marihuana ever,
and demographic characteristics of the 24 million Americans who
have tried the drug, we recognize the need to place this
information into perspective. The policymaker must also be
concerned with the patterns of use: frequency, amount consumed at
each smoking, and duration of use. </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>PATTERNS OF USE<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The most striking of the use patterns revealed in the National
Survey is that 41 % of the adults and 45 % of the youth who have
ever used marihuana reported that they no longer use the drug.
Twenty-nine percent of the adults and 43% of the youth reported
that they are still using marihuana (see Table 1). When asked why
they bad terminated use, the overwhelming majority of adults
(61%) specified, among other reasons, that they had simply lost
interest in the drug.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Table I.-EXPERIENCE WITH MARIHUANA<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Percent of ever-users<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Frequency</b> <b>Adults</b> <b>Youth</b> <b>Designation</b></font>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>(18 and</b> <b>(12-17)</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>over)<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Have used marihuana but no longer</b> <b>41</b>
<b>45</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2">u <b>se.</b> <b>lExperimenters.</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Once a month or less</b> <b>9</b> <b>15<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>2-3 times pet month</b> <b>8</b> <b>10</b> <b>Intermittent
users.</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Once per week</b> <b>4</b> <b>9 @<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Several times per week</b> <b>5</b> <b>4
Moderate users.</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Once daily</b> <b>1</b> <b>1 1<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>More than once daily</b> <b>2</b> <b>4 Heavy
users.</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>No answer</b> <b>30</b> <b>12 <br>
<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>These data indicate that at least 41% of the adults and 45% of
the youth have used marihuana but have -discontinued use; 9% of
the adults and 15% of the youth use the drug sporadically, once
a, month or less. These persons can be characterized as
experimental marihuana users.* </p>

<p>To ensure an understanding of this section of the Report, some
definitions are required at this juncture. In this report, the
Commission employs the following designations:<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>Frequency of Use <br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="2">Experimental-At least one trial to once a month
or less.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Intermittent-Two to 10 times monthly.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Moderate-11 times monthly to once, daily.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Heavy-Several times daily.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Very Heavy-Almost constant intoxication with
potent preparations; brain rarely drug free. <br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>Duration of Use</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Short Term-Less than two years.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Long Term-Two to 10 years.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Very Long Term-Over 10 years. <br>
</font></p>

<p>Twelve percent of the adults and 19% of the youth who have
ever used marihuana can be designated intermittent users; they
continue to use the drug more than once a month, but less than
several times a week, probably on weekends. Six percent of the
adults and five percent of the youth are moderate users who
continue to use marihuana several times a week to once daily. </p>

<p>Finally, 2% of the adults and 4% of the youth who have ever
used marihuana are heavy users: they use the drug several times
daily. A very small fraction of these heavy users may be very
heavy users, who are intoxicated most of their waking hours and
probably use very potent preparations of the drug. </p>

<p>In addition to frequency, duration of use is an important
variable in discussing use patterns and especially when
considering drug effects. Most users in this country have smoked
the drug over a short term, that is, less than two years. Others
have used the drug over a long term, two to 10 years. Very few
Americans can be considered very long term users, that is, over
10 years. </p>

<p>Another important element of use is the amount of marihuana
used on each occasion. Most intermittent and moderate users
average about one-half to one cigarette per occasion, usually at
night. Most heavy users smoke at least one to two cigarettes an
occasion, with a few using as many as five consecutively. </p>

<p>As this brief description of use patterns suggests, marihuana
use and the marihuana user do not fall into simple, distinct
classifications. Although it is possible to sketch profiles of
various marihuana-using populations, no valid stereotype of a
marihuana user or non-user can be drawn. The spectrum of
individuals who use or have used marihuana varies according to
frequency, intensity and duration of use. It is meaningless to
talk of &quot;the marihuana user&quot; or &quot;marihuana
use&quot; without first clarifying descriptive data.<br>
</p>

<p>*All respondents for the National Survey were asked to
complete a self administered questionnaire. This instrument
covered many sensitive areas, including a series of items on
personal experience with marihuana and other drugs. Given the
nature of the questions, the contractor took every precaution to
insure that the interviewee responded honestly and that his
responses were kept strictly confidential. Even the interviewer
who orally administered the rest of the Survey was not permitted
to view the written instrument. </p>

<p>One of the inevitable costs of such confidentiality is the
risk that a certain percentage of respondents would not complete
one or more of the questions. Where a significant number of
questions remained unanswered, the questionnaire was not
tabulated at all. However, in 30%, of the otherwise complete
questionnaires, the adult respondents who had ever used the drug
did not answer the question, &quot;On the average, about how
often do you use marihuana at the present time?&quot; </p>

<p>Concerned about the meaning of this non-response rate, the,
Commission directed the contractor to conduct a detailed analysis
comparing the non-respondents with all respondents and with those
individuals who had never used marihuana at all. On the basis of
this analysis, we are confident that the overwhelming majority,
if not all, of the non-respondents are experimenters. </p>

<p>In the flrst place, the demographic characteristics of the
non-respondents coincide closely with those of the non-users and
less frequent users. Very few of the young adults, where more
frequent use is concentrated, failed to respond. </p>

<p>Secondly, the non-respondents are disproportionately located
in the geographic regions where use was least prevalent and least
frequent. For example, 50% of the ever-users in the North Central
region failed to respond, compared to 71% in the West. Yet only
5% of the ever-users in the North Central region continue to use
the drug more than once a week, compared to 21% in the West; and
less than .5% of the ever-users in the North Central region use
the drug more than once a day, as compared to 4% in the West. <br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>PROFILES OF USERS <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Several studies by the Commission and many other recent
college and high school surveys have elucidated a variety of
personality types or categories of marihuana users. These
profiles relate primarily to the patterns depicted above and to
the meaning of marihuana use for various individuals. Essentially
we will describe a continuum with much overlapping among the
categories. The reader should understand that group
identification is at best a hazardous occupation; the traits
described are not exclusive to marihuana users. A much larger
number of individuals who have not used the drug can be similarly
described. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Experimental Users<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The first and by far the largest group has been designated as
&quot;experimenters&quot; because of their extremely infrequent
or non-persistent marihuana usage. Experimentation with the drug
is motivated primarily by curiosity and a desire to share a
social experience. These experimenters are characteristically
quite conventional and practically indistinguishable from the
non-user in terms of life style, activities, social integration,
and vocational or academic performance. </p>

<p>Disciplined, optimistic, and self-confident, experimenters
appear to be as conventional, responsible, goal-oriented and
orderly as non-users.<br>
</p>

<p>Intermittent Users<br>
</p>

<p>The intermittent users are motivated to use marihuana for
reasons similar to those of the experimenters. They use the drug
irregularly and infrequently but generally continue to do so
because of its socializing and recreational aspects. For the
intermittent user, marihuana often contributes to the
establishment and solidification of close social relations among
users similarly inclined. The individual has a sense of belonging
to an intimate group. </p>

<p>Investigations of behavioral aspects of marihuana smoking
clearly demonstrate that marihuana smoking is a social activity,
believed by intermittent users to enhance the enjoyment of shared
activities, especially music, art, films and food. </p>

<p>In a Commission-sponsored study to determine the effects of
repeat doses of marihuana, under free access conditions, the
subjects smoked almost exclusively in groups. A certain number of
these individuals tended to share much of their leisure time in
common activities, and marihuana, smoking was the focal activity
around which other types of social interactions revolved, such as
conversation, watching TV, listening to music and playing games.
The intermittent users studied exhibited an increased sense of
well-being, relaxation, and friendliness during these activities.
They were more inclined to seek and emphasize the social rather
than personal effects of the drug. </p>

<p>Intermittent marihuana users, like the experimenters, are
generally conventional in most respects. They are more liberal
politically and socially and they tend to stress education for
personal improvement rather than for recognition or high grades.
Like many non-users, these individuals are likely to be
self-expressive, intellectually and culturally oriented,
creative, and flexible. Placing a high value on experimentation
and responsible, independent decision-making, they often manifest
a desire to search for new experiences, resulting in some
behaviors which depart from the norms of the larger society.
Often accompanying their search is a sense of uncertainty about
the future.<br>
</p>

<p>Moderate and Heavy Users </p>

<p>The final groups of marihuana users are the moderate and heavy
users. This range is wide and includes individuals who use
marihuana more than 10 times a month to several times a day.
Practically all of the American research effort to date has
focused on the large majority of individuals who use less often,
that is, the experimental and intermittent users. Consequently,
not enough is known about characteristics and behavior of the
moderate and the heavy users, so it is difficult to distinguish
accurately between the two groups. We suspect however that the
moderate users share traits with both the intermittent and the
heavy users. Having already discussed the intermittent group, we
will now turn to the characteristics of the heavy group. </p>

<p>Heavy users seem to need the drug experience more often. Their
initial and continued marihuana use is motivated not only by
curiosity and an urge to share a social experience but also by a
desire for &quot;kicks,&quot; &quot;expansion of awareness and
understanding,&quot; and relief of anxiety or boredom. </p>

<p>Generally, the heavy marihuana user's life style, activities,
values and attitudes are unconventional and at variance with
those of the, larger society. These individuals are more
pessimistic, insecure, irresponsible, and nonconforming. They
find routine especially distasteful. Their behavior and mood are
restless and uneven. </p>

<p>Heavy users place particularly strong emphasis on impulsive
response in the interest of pleasure-seeking, immediate
gratification, and individual expression. They tend to evidence
social and emotional immaturity, are especially indifferent to
rules and conventions, and are often resistant to authority.
However, several surveys have also revealed that they tend to be
curious, socially perceptive, skillful and sensitive to the needs
of others, and possess broadly based, although unconventional,
interests. </p>

<p>The Boston free-access study permitted the Commission to
observe a group of individuals whose life styles, activities,
values and attitudes are representative of a segment of the
unconventional youthful subculture. The month-long period of
controlled study during the fall prevented the participation of
individuals who were married, steadily employed, or enrolled in
school. </p>

<p>Individuals who smoked marihuana once a week or less were
sought by the researchers but were exceedingly unusual among the
population available for the study. Consequently, the group
studies contrasted with the student and full-time working
populations in which weekly marihuana use is more common. For
this reason, the intermittent users studied appeared to be
similar to, rather than different from, the moderate and heavy
users studied. Both groups had used marihuana for an average of
five years. </p>

<p>Under the study's confined conditions, participants tended to
smoke more marihuana than they did &quot;on the outside.&quot;
The intermittent users, who by our definition averaged eight
times a month under outside conditions, averaged three cigarettes
a day during the study. The range was from one-half to six
cigarettes daily. </p>

<p>The moderate and heavy users, who &quot;on the outside&quot;
averaged 33 times a month, now averaged six-and-a-half cigarettes
a day. The range was three-and-a-half to eight cigarettes. In
discussing the Boston study, we will call this group
&quot;daily&quot; users. </p>

<p>Smoking usually occurred at night, sometimes during the
afternoon and only occasionally upon awakening. The intermittent
and heavy users usually smoked one cigarette a session. The daily
users were more likely to smoke more than one a session. A few
individuals in the daily group could have been considered
constantly intoxicated on a few occasions during the 21 -day
period. </p>

<p>The mean age of the subjects studied was 23. Based on IQ
testing, they were superior intellectually, although they had
completed, on the average, only two-and-a-half years of college.
Their job histories were rather erratic, characteristic of a
pattern of itinerant living. The intermittent users -were from a
middle or upper class background, while the daily users generally
shared a lower socioeconomic status. Broken homes and instances
of alcohol or drug abuse were more common in the family
backgrounds of the daily users. </p>

<p>Alcohol was rarely used by the subjects. Use of hallucinogens
and amphetamines was significantly more widespread and had begun
earlier in the daily user group. In contrast to the intermittent
group, the daily users almost uniformly reported that marihuana
smoking produced relaxation, noting <b>also </b>increased
alteration <b>in </b>perception or psychedelic-like effects.
Similarly, they reported an increased sense of well-being,
friendliness, carefreeness and decreased hostility. Additionally,
the daily users appeared to demonstrate a moderate psychological
dependence <b>on </b>the marihuana experience while the
intermittent users demonstrated little or no psychological
dependence. </p>

<p>Analysis of social-behavioral aspects of daily users'
marihuana smoking clearly demonstrated that it is a pivotal
social activity around which conversation, other personal
interactions, and much of the users' lives revolve. Smoking
almost exclusively occurred in groups and was the focal activity
around which these groups formed. The daily users exhibited a
readiness to take part in but not to initiate a smoking session. </p>

<p>In contrast to the intermittent users, all the daily users in
a group smoked when marihuana was made available. Marihuana
smoking appeared to be a primary means of reinforcing group
solidarity. Yet these users were more inclined to seek the
personal effects of the drug rather than the socializing effects
sought by the intermittent users. </p>

<p>The social adjustment of the daily users, when judged from a
traditional psychiatric standpoint, was impaired. Individuals
tended to be more withdrawn and to interact less with each other
than the intermittent users, regardless of the type of activity
or state of intoxication. However, the daily users did appear to
accommodate themselves better than the intermittent users to the
effects of the intoxication on social interaction.<br>
</p>

<p>Despite a relatively high level of scholastic attainment and
superior intelligence, many of the subjects were performing well
below their intellectual capability, usually working at menial,
mechanical or artisan tasks. They were not oriented toward
achieving the traditional goals of the larger society. </p>

<p>Nonetheless, during the period of the Boston study, the
subjects could not be characterized as displaying a general
lassitude and indifference, carelessness in personal hygiene or
lack of productive activity, all supposed to be characteristic of
very heavy use. Even during the periods of heaviest marihuana
smoking, they maintained a high level of interest and
participation in a variety of personal activities, such as
writing, reading, keeping up on current world events, and
participating in athletic and aesthetic endeavors. </p>

<p>Additionally, all of the subjects maintained a desire to
complete all aspects of the research study. Although they could
be labeled 'underachievers&quot; in terms of the traditional
standards of the larger society, these individuals were motivated
to pursue actively the interests and activities of their <b>own </b>subculture.
</p>

<p>Generally, most studies which have been undertaken indicate
that individuals who are heavy marihuana users cannot find a
place for themselves in conventional society. Their heavy
marihuana use may reflect and perhaps perpetuate their
unconventionality while providing social acceptance in one of the
non-conventional subcultures.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Very Heavy Users<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The Commission's analysis of frequency, quantity and duration
of marihuana use suggest that the United States is at the present
time in a fortunate position. All of the studies available to the
Commission have indicated that only a minute number of Americans
can be designated as very heavy marihuana users. These studies
uniformly indicate that chronic, constant intoxication with very
potent cannabis preparations is exceedingly rare in this country.
</p>

<p>The Commission believes that important distinctions must be
made between the daily (moderate and heavy) American marihuana
user and the very heavy hashish or charas user in other parts of
the world where cannabis is widely cultivated and its use deeply
ingrained. Many of the North African and Asian users do not
employ the drug only as an intoxicant in the western sense.
Instead, it is frequently used in &quot;folk medical
practice,&quot; in religious rites and as a work adjunct
particularly in those occupations which are physically demanding,
monotonous, unintellectual, and offer little possibility of
advancement. </p>

<p>In these countries, very heavy use is typically associated
with young males from a lower socioeconomic background.
Nonetheless, use is more widespread among all ages and elderly
chronic users are not uncommon. </p>

<p>Generally, these very heavy users consume high amounts of very
potent preparations continually throughout the day so that they
are rarely drug-free. These individuals evidence strong
psychological dependence on the drug, requiring compulsive
drug-taking. Clear-cut behavioral changes occur in these extreme
cases. The very heavy User tends to lose interest in all
activities other than drug use. A common element of the
behavioral pattern is lethargy and social deterioration. Not
surprisingly, these users have been held in low esteem and very
heavy use has been subject to societal disapproval in almost all
countries.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>BECOMING A MARIHUANA USER<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Our attempt to classify marihuana users is primarily for
descriptive purposes. It does not imply that all individuals who
resemble any of the categories are necessarily marihuana users.
Nor is it implied that all marihuana users fit neatly or
precisely into these slots. There is no &quot;typical&quot;
marihuana user, just as their is no typical American. The most
notable statement that can be made about the vast majority of
marihuana users-experimenters and intermittent users-is that they
are essentially indistinguishable from their non-marihuana using
peers by any fundamental criterion other than their marihuana
use. </p>

<p>But if most users and non-users of marihuana essentially are
indistinguishable, why have some people chosen to use the drug
and others not, and why have some people continued to use it and
others not? An important part of the explanation is that use of
marihuana, like all human behavior, occurs within specific social
and cultural settings. The individual's biological
characteristics and personality probably play an important role
in determining the pattern his use will take. However, the
cultural and social setting play a larger role in determining
whether be will use it at all. </p>

<p>Numerous studies have demonstrated that the young person who
chooses to use marihuana differs in some important sociological
respects from his peer who does not choose to do so. These
differences relate to his willingness to experiment with a drug,
especially a forbidden one. in short, the process of becoming a
marihuana user is not a &quot; seduction of the, innocent&quot;
as is often portrayed. Based on interrelated familial, social and
cultural factors, persons, especially young persons, who may
choose to use marihuana can be predicted statistically.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Parental Influence<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The decision to use marihuana is related to parental life
style. </p>

<p>Parents provide the most important example of acceptable
drug-taking behavior for their children. That marihuana users
frequently have medicine-taking, cigarette-smoking, or
liquor-drinking parents has been demonstrated. In a series of
Canadian studies, grade and high school students who said their
mothers took tranquilizers daily were three times more likely to
try marihuana than the students who did not so report. </p>

<p>Beyond the influence of a drug-taking example, parents have
the primary influence on their childrens' acquisition of skills,
values and attitudes necessary to be mature and responsible
adults. Many parents have oriented their children toward becoming
independent, competent, educated, and adaptive adults. </p>

<p>Simultaneously, many young people observe in their parents'
lives the trend toward shorter work periods, earlier retirement
and increased emphasis on leisure time activities. It appears
that the incidence of adolescent marihuana use is strongly
correlated with this trend toward increased leisure time.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Situational Factors and Behavioral
Correlates </b></font></p>

<p>All studies of the ever user, including the
Commission-sponsored National Survey, have established that
marihuana smoking is significantly correlated with a number of
demographic variables. Males, college students, and residents of
metropolitan areas, especially in the Northeast and West, are
generally overrepresented in proportion to their percentage of
the total population. </p>

<p>Among the behaviors statistically correlated with marihuana,
use are radical politics, visits to psychiatrists, sexual
freedom, and separate residences from parents. The most
significant behavior seems to be use of legal drugs, especially
alcohol and tobacco. Young people who choose to experiment with
marihuana are fundamentally the same people, socially and
psychologically, as those who use alcohol and tobacco. For
example, in a study of high school youngsters, only 3% of all the
nonsmokers in the sample had ever tried marihuana, compared with
50% of all the current cigarette smokers. Similarly, for alcohol
drinking outside the family setting, only 2% of all the
nondrinkers had tried marihuana, as compared to 27% of the
drinkers. The National Survey tends to confirm the close
association between marihuana use and cigarette smoking and
alcohol use. Among all the adults sampled in the Survey, 71% had
smoked cigarettes and 39% are current smokers. Similarly, of
adult non-marihuana users, 70% have smoked cigarettes and 38% are
current smokers. These percentages increase somewhat for
marihuana users: 87 have smoked cigarettes and 54% are current
cigarette smokers. </p>

<p>In regard to alcohol consumption, 40% of all the adults
sampled indicated that they had not consumed beer or bard liquor
in the 30 days prior to the survey. Marihuana users tended to
have consumed alcohol more often than non-marihuana users (Table,
2).<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Table 2.-LIQUOR CONSUMPTION DURING 30-DAY
PERIOD <br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>1-4</b> <b>5-10</b> <b>11 or</b> <b>No</b></font>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>0 days</b> <b>days</b> <b>days</b> <b>more</b>
<b>answer</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>days<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Percent of nonmarihuana users. .</b> <b>45</b>
<b>19</b> <b>6</b> <b>7</b> <b>21</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Percent of marihuana users</b>...... <b>26</b>
<b>30</b> <b>12</b> <b>8</b> <b>24<br>
<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Social Group Factors<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>One of the most influential factors in determining behavior in
contemporary America among adolescents and young adults is peer
group influence. Knowing other people who use marihuana
predisposes the individual to use marihuana, and having
marihuana-using friends provides the social opportunity for the
curious. Ile individual who is already part of a, social group
which uses marihuana indicates by this choice that his attitudes
and values are already to some degree compatible with illicit
drug use. </p>

<p>Social peer groups are especially influential upon individuals
who have not yet become &quot;successful&quot; adults, such as
adolescents, college students and young adults, who spend a great
deal of time and effort competing for status in situations where
status opportunities are minimal. The social peer group provides
an opportunity for achieving status among equals by demonstrating
competence and autonomy. Outstanding performance in athletics,
organizations or academics demonstrates competence but not
autonomy because these activities are adult-oriented and
controlled. Additionally, only a relative few are able to excel. </p>

<p>Opportunity to prove oneself is more readily available in the
peer group. Often, adolescents participate in forms of delinquent
behavior, termed symbolic infractions, in order to demonstrate
autonomy and competence to their peers. These include joy-riding,
vandalism, sexual promiscuity, underage drinking, violation of
rules of decorum and dress, and purposeless confrontation with
authority. </p>

<p>Marihuana use has recently been added to the list of
infractions and offers several advantages for adolescents and
young adults. Most important, it provides a shared group
experience which offers the, shy, lonely, socially awkward
neophyte a means of entrance to the group, complete with its own
ceremonial initiation. Repetition of the behavior serves to
increase closeness and commitment to the group. Usually the
experience is pleasurable and the individual is able to control
his level of intoxication. This delinquency is viewed as
relatively harmless to oneself and others, although its symbolic
impact on parents and authority is often greater than that of
other common infractions. </p>

<p>Therefore, a, subtle process of acquiring attitudes favorable
to drug use, of having friends and acquaintances who define the
marihuana experience in acceptable and pleasurable terms, and of
having a social belief system which prepares one to accept the
conversion process to begin with, are all powerful complementary
factors which direct a young person toward marihuana use. At this
point, the use of marihuana provides further opportunities for
acquiring new marihuana using friends and entering the social
milieu of marihuana, users.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>The Dynamics of Persistent Use<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The cultural and social factors sketched above, in combination
with the individual's somatic and psychic characteristics,
determine the pattern of his drug behavior once he has chosen to
experiment with it. The majority of individuals who reach this
point progress no further and often discontinue marihuana use.
The most common explanation for discontinuing use is loss of
interest; the effect lost its novelty and became boring. Other
less common reasons are fear of legal hazards, social pressure,
and concerns over physical and mental drug effects. Among the
infrequently noted reasons are: interference with other
activities; replacement by alcohol; unavailability; cost;
unpleasant experiences; fear of moral transgression; or
progression to other forms of non-drug interests such as yoga,
transcendental meditation, agrarian communes, esoteric religion
and restrictive diets. </p>

<p>For those who continue use, psychosocial factors are important
determinants of the use patterns. Many marihuana users are
strongly committed to traditional society in which they desire to
rise socially. They have chosen to participate fully in the
traditional adult-oriented activities and the formal
achievement-reward system. Their peer groups consist primarily of
similarly oriented individuals. The infrequent use of marihuana
by these persons is a social activity for fun and satisfies
curiosity. </p>

<p>Those individuals who continue to use marihuana more
frequently appear to be different types of people and oriented
toward a different part of the social system. Most of them
maintain stable career orientations and continue to function
within the broader society. But they feel more burdened by the
traditional system of social controls and more removed from
contemporary society's institutions. These individuals tend to
turn away from more traditional adult-oriented reward systems and
intensify their peer-group orientation. Their interests and
activities emphasize an informal &quot;in-crowd,&quot;
out-of-school or work orientation. The meaning of marihuana use
by this peer group emphasizes the ideological character of usage.
In contrast to the infrequent type of user, these individuals
seem to build their self-identity around the marihuana-using peer
group.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>BECOMING A MULTIDRUG USER<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The more one smokes marihuana, the more involved his
interpersonal relationships are likely to become with his peers
who share the experience with him. As he spends more time with
this group, he begins to sever his contacts with conventional
individuals and conventional routines. He may eventually view
himself as a drug user and be willing to experiment with other
drugs which are approved by his peer group. Only ;a small portion
of the marihuana users who reach this stage are likely to become
persistent, frequent users of these other drugs. The majority
appear to experiment only.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Epidemiologic Studies<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The Commission's studies have confirmed the association
between marihuana usage and the consumption of other drugs for
curiosity and pleasure. This association holds for all drugs,
including over-thecounter and prescription pain relievers,
tension relievers, sleeping pills, and stimulants as well as
hashish, methamphetamines, cocaine, LSD and mescaline, and
heroin. The National Survey showed that current marihuana users
are about twice as likely to have used any illicit drugs than are
those who have ceased using marihuana (Table 3).<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">Table 3.-ILLICIT DRUG USE BY
ADULTS<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">Have used Currently</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">but no using</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Substance Never used marihuana longer use
marihuana</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">marihuana (percent)</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">(percent)<br>
<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">Hashish Less than 0.5 percent 28 63<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">LSD or mescaline Less than 0.5 percent 11 28</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">Methamphetamine Less than 0.5 percent 10 23</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">Cocaine Less than 0.5 percent 4 10</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Heroin Less than 0.5 percent 1 4<br>
</font></p>

<p>The Commission additionally has contracted a study of 105
selected, middle class, young, working adults from California,
who are marihuana smokers. Of this sample, 11% were daily
marihuana users and 47% used it several times a week; 33% used it
several times a month; 6% used it once to several times a year;
and 3% had used it but were not currently using marihuana. The
study indicates that while most of the subjects were frequent
marihuana users, the incidence of other drug use was relatively
low (Table 4).<br>
</p>

<p><font size="1"><b>Table 4.-FREQUENCY OF OTHER DRUG USE BY
MARIHUANA USERS<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="1"><b>Percent who use marihuana</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><b>Percent</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><b>Substance</b> <b>who</b> <b>Once to</b> <b>Several</b>
<b>Several</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><b>never</b> <b>several</b> <b>times</b> <b>times</b>
<b>Daily</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><b>used</b> <b>times</b> <b>a month</b> <b>a
week</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><b>marihuana</b> <b>a year <br>
</b></font></p>

<table>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"></td>
        <td width="84"></td>
        <td width="84"></td>
        <td width="84"></td>
        <td width="84"></td>
        <td width="84"></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>Hashish</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>42</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>31</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>21</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>5</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>LSD</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>96</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>4</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>Mescaline</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>79</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>19</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>2</b></font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>Psilocybin</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>96</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>4</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>STP, DMT</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>100</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>Heroin</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>98</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>2</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>Codeine</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>87</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>11</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>2</b></font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>Amphetamines</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>89</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>7</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>4</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>Barbiturates</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>86</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>10</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>4</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>Cocaine</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>75</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>19</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>2</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>4</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>Glue</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>100</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font></td>
        <td width="84"><font size="1"><b>0</b></font> </td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>With the exception of marihuana and hashish, no drug was used
by more than 25% of this population and this use was almost
exclusively experimental. Interestingly, the more exotic drugs,
mescaline and cocaine were more frequently used (21% and 25% of
this sample respectively) than the common dangerous drugs: LSD
(4%), heroin (2%), codeine (11%), barbiturates (14%), and
amphetamines (11%). </p>

<p>Among high school students, marihuana, is normally the, first
illicit drug used, although several recent studies have suggested
that a significant number of students initiate illicit use, with
other drugs. Of the marihuana users, a majority have used no
other illicit drug, and they tend to be experimental or
intermittent users of marihuana. </p>

<p>The more frequently the adolescent uses marihuana, the more
likely he is to experiment with other drugs. For example, in one
recent study of San Diego high school students of predominantly
white middle socioeconomic background, 80% of the students who
used marihuana weekly or more often had used other drugs, and 50%
of this group had used LSD. In contrast, 33% of the less than
weekly users bad used other drugs. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="1"><b>Profiles and Dynamics<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The personality profile of the heavy marihuana user discussed
earlier includes elements propelling him toward heavy involvement
in the multiple-drug-using-subculture. Heavy drug use by these
individuals may reflect and aggravate a total alienation and
disaffiliation from American society and its institutions. This
group hopes to find in drug use more than simple, fun or relief
from boredom. The heavy use of drugs represents a shift into the
drug subculture and an adoption of a totally new life style. Some
observers feel that this shift provides a new identity which
allows the individual to counteract his apathy and search for
meaning in a society he views as unloving, lonely, and
meaningless. He seeks to become involved with what he describes
as the exciting, relevant, &quot;real&quot; experience of life.
Additionally, he believes drug use provides new feelings and
awareness needed to overcome barriers between himself, others,
and the natural world. </p>

<p>The drug culture as a community also helps to meet the needs
of the individual. It provides a ready supply of drugs, unites
common experiences and secrets that enhance the drug experience,
and protects the individual against undesired experiences and
against &quot;the outside world.&quot; Most important, the
culture instills self-confidence by reassuring the individual
that he has been wise in choosing this new identity. </p>

<p>Frequently, these are individuals who express feelings of
loneliness, isolation and over-protection from their home and
family. One frequent pattern involves an intimate, dominating
mother and a distant, unemotional father. In some cases, the
drug-use ritual and the, sense of community closeness offered by
the drug subculture appear to satisfy certain personal needs.
Additionally, joining the subculture provides a release from
sheltered life, a test of competence, an opportunity to
participate, and a chance to express anger. When the anger is
turned inward instead of directed at society and family, drug use
becomes a form of passive, self-destructiveness. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Sociocultural Factors<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>After the individual views himself as a drug user and has
become immersed in the drug-using subculture, the drugs he
chooses to experiment with and his pattern of use are determined
primarily by non-drug factors well beyond the simple properties
of the psychoactive chemical. These factors are predominantly
socioeconomic and sociocultural, although psychic and somatic
factors also play a role in determining who will continue and how
intensively. </p>

<p>The availability of a distribution system which stocks the
other drugs is essential. Most often, contact with this
distribution system is increased by having friends or
acquaintances who use or sell other drugs. However, much of the
marihuana selling takes place, at the customer level between
friends, and involves little profit and relatively small
quantities of the drug. The marihuana user who only buys has
little contact with the professional multidrug dealing system.
However, the user-buyer-seller of marihuana is more involved with
the multidrug system, uses more himself and has more friends who
use and sell other drugs. This factor of being a seller rather
than only a buyer-user is influential in determining the degree
of an individual's involvement with and commitment to the use of
other drugs. </p>

<p>Marihuana use does not itself determine which drugs the
heavily involved user will choose to use. Generally, the
selection of other drugs is influenced by the social group. For
example, blacks and whites have roughly equal rates of trying and
using marihuana, but their choice of other drugs and the styles
of drug use are quite different and distinctive, due to their
frequently different sociocultural backgrounds. Additionally, one
recent study of white high school and college students revealed
different patterns of further drug use among males and females.
Men and women used marihuana in equal numbers, but the men who
used other drugs tended to use hallucinogens while the women
tended to use amphetamines. </p>

<p>An extensive survey of drug use among 3,500 liberal arts
undergraduates attending 14 campuses in the New York area
demonstrated the racial character of drug use among this
population (Table 5).<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Table 5.-RACIAL CHARACTER OF DRUG USE<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Meth-</b> <b>Amphet-</b> <b>Hallu-</b></font>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Percentage tried drugs</b> <b>Heroin</b> <b>Cocaine</b>
<b>amphet-</b> <b>amine</b> <b>cinogens</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>mine<br>
<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Blacks................ 9</b> <b>16</b> <b>5</b>
<b>9</b> <b>13</b></font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Whites................ 4</b> <b>7</b> <b>11</b>
<b>19</b> <b>21<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>According to recent studies, heroin usage is not common among
white marihuana users. Heroin is most strongly linked to
marihuana use in black and Spanish-speaking ghettos where many
feel they have little chance of personal advancement and
self-fulfillment. In such communities, a segment of the
population constructs new illegitimate but accessible avenues for
social coping. For some this involves the hustle (non-violent
stealing) and the excitement of obtaining and using heroin and
cocaine. They regard marihuana as a &quot;cool&quot; drug and use
it for its social and calming effects. </p>

<p>In contrast, studies have demonstrated that the psychedelics
are more often used by the white, middle to upper middle class,
collegeeducated populations. The typical use of these drugs in
high school college and working populations is episodic and
experimental, and is usually discontinued rather rapidly in
contrast with marihuana use, which for many persons is of long
duration. In many instances, psychedelic drug use begins almost
simultaneously with marihuana. </p>

<p>For a few, drug use becomes an ideologic focus, reflecting
disillusionment with society and rejection of the
&quot;establishment.&quot; These and other motives, including
mere pleasure-seeking, lead to continued use of LSD and other
hallucinogens. Marihuana is viewed as a dilute LSD and is often
used to enhance or prolong the effects of that drug. Sometimes it
is encountered after first LSD use. </p>

<p>Methamphetamine, or &quot;speed,&quot; use is more
characteristic of those lower socioeconomic white, youth who are
not school or work oriented. Living for the moment is the
characteristic attitude of the speed scene. The speed user views
marihuana as he does alcohol and uses it for fun or for its
calming effects. </p>

<p>For these three groups of illicit drug users, marihuana use
has different meanings and is secondary in importance to the use
of the other drugs. Whether or not marihuana leads to other drug
use depends on the individual, on the social and cultural setting
in which the drug use takes places, and on the nature of the drug
market. Its use, however, is neither inevitable nor necessary. <br>
</p>

<p align="center">The Effects of Marihuana on the User<br>
</p>

<p>The previous section has attempted to paint a broad picture of
the marihuana user. This section will deal with the, drug and its
effects on these individuals. </p>

<p>The meaning of drug often varies with the context in which it
is used. The physician would define a drug as any substance used
as a medicine in the treatment of physical or mental disease.
Today, due to the influence of many factors, the layman may focus
on the negative connotations of drugs, such as the stupefying,
poisoning, habit-forming misuse of the opiate drugs. The
considerably wider and more scientific definition of a drug which
will be used in this section is: any chemical substance which has
an action on living tissues.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><i>A psychoactive drug </i></font><font
size="1"><i>is </i></font><font size="2"><i>any substance capable
of modifying mental performance and individual behavior by
inducing functional or pathological changes in the central
nervous system. <br>
</i></font></p>

<p>As defined, psychoactive drugs exert their major effect on the
state of the mind including emotions, feelings, sensibility,
consciousness and thinking. The definition implies neither
positive nor negative meanings. Chemical substances are not
inherently good or bad. All substances, including medicines and
foods, which man has chosen to consume have certain desired
effects (whether therapeutically beneficial or pleasurable) and
undesired effects (whether detrimental or unpleasant). For
example, eating food is certainly a necessary and pleasurable
activity. However, obesity plays an important role in many
diseases, including diabetes, high blood pressure and heart
attacks, and tends to limit physical activities. </p>

<p>The classification of any drug effect as either beneficial or
harmful often greatly depends on the values the classifier places
on the expected effects. This is especially relevant with respect
to the psychoactive drugs such as tranquilizers, stimulants,
coffee, cigarettes, alcohol, marihuana and other licit or illicit
drugs. For all of these drugs, the weights of benefit and harm
are difficult to determine when viewed merely in terms of their
stated effects. <br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>BOTANY AND CHEMISTRY <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Marihuana refers to a preparation derived from a plant,
cannabis sativa L. The preparation contains varying quantities of
the flowers and their resinous secretions, leaves, small stems
and seeds. These plant parts contain many chemical substances.
The chemical substance which produces the major drug effects is
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). According to current information, the
amount of THC present determines the potency of the preparation.
Hereinafter, any reference to drug content or drug effect of
marihuana will, for all practical purposes, mean that of
tetrahydrocannabinol. </p>

<p>The drug content of the plant parts is variable, generally
decreasing in the following sequence: resin, flowers, leaves.
Practically no drug is found in the stems, roots or seeds. The
potency and resulting drug effect of marihuana fluctuates,
depending on the relative proportions of these plant parts in the
marihuana mixture. </p>

<p>Most marihuana available in this country comes from Mexico and
has a THC content of less than 1%. Marihuana of American origin
often contains less than two-tenths of 1% THC. Marihuana
originating in Jamaica and Southeast Asia often has a 2% to 4%
THC content. </p>

<p>Marihuana is the least potent preparation of the plant.
Jamaican ganja, containing primarily the flower tops and the
small leaves or bracts, has a THC content of about 4% to 8%
depending on the mixture. Indian ganja is less potent. The most
potent preparation is hashish (charas) which is composed of only
the drug-rich resinous secretions of the flowers. Generally, the
THC content of hashish is 5 % to 12 %.<br>
</p>

<p>FACTORS INFLUENCING DRUG EFFECT<br>
</p>

<p>A number of variable factors exert an important influence on
the psychopharmacologic effects of marihuana in man, as is true
for all drugs. Failure to take these factors into consideration
probably accounts for a large part of the inconsistency and
controversy surrounding the description of the drug effect.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Dosage</b></font> </p>

<p>The dosage or quantity of the drug (tetrahydrocannabinol)
consumed is the most important variable. As with most drugs, the
larger the dose taken, the greater the physical and mental effect
will be and the longer the effect will last. The effect of a high
dose of marihuana on an individual would be quite different from
the effect of a low, usual &quot;social&quot; dose.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Method of Use<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The method of use has a bearing upon the drug effect. The
method is directly related to both dosage and time lapse before
the drug effect is felt. Injection directly into a vein delivers
the total dose immediately, producing a rapid, maximal response
of minimal duration. Smoking and inhalation cause rapid but less
efficient delivery of the dose; variable quantity of the drug is
destroyed during burning or escapes into the air and does not
reach the lungs. Oral ingestion produces different effects,
according to the system in which the drug is dispersed.
Generally, oral ingestion diminishes the drug effect, but
prolongs it.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Metabolism<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Another factor which influences the effect of the drug is
metabolism. During the metabolic process, the body cells,
principally in the liver and lungs, chemically alter drug
substances, changing their activity and providing for their
elimination from the body. Increasing evidence indicates that
marihuana is first changed by the body in a way that activates or
enhances the drug effect and is subsequently altered in a way
that inactivates the drug prior to its removal from the body. </p>

<p>The rate and direction of these metabolic steps can
significantly influence the effect of marihuana. For instance,
individuals with extensive exposure to marihuana or other drugs
metabolize more rapidly, and perhaps differently, from those
individuals with no drug exposure.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Set and Setting<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>An important variable in discussing the effect of marihuana on
the user is the social and emotional environment; that is, the
individual's &quot;set&quot; and &quot;setting.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Set&quot; refers to a combination of factors that create
the &quot;internal environment&quot; of the individual, including
personality, life style, and philosophy, past drug experiences,
personal expectations of drug effect, and mood at the time of the
drug experience. </p>

<p>&quot;Setting&quot; refers to the external environment and
social context in which the individual takes the drug. These
factors are most influential when drugs are taken at low dosages
and, like marihuana, produce minimal physical and subtle
subjective mental effects. The effect of marihuana generally will
be quite different for an intermittent social adult smoker from
that of a youth deeply involved in the youthful drug subculture.
These factors partially account for the belief of a marihuana
user that he is experiencing a &quot;high&quot; in certain
experiments even when he is given a non-marihuana substance
(placebo) but is told it is marihuana. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Tolerance<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Another important factor that determines the immediate effect
of any drug is tolerance. Tolerance has two different
connotations. The first, initial tolerance, is a measure of the
amount of a drug which a subject must receive on first exposure
to produce a designated degree of effect. A variety of innate and
environmental factors contributes to initial tolerance among
individuals. Different individuals require varying amounts of the
drug to attain the same physical and mental effect. </p>

<p>The second connotation, which shall be referred to when we use
the word tolerance, is that of an acquired change in tolerance.
That is, within the same individual, as a result of repeated
exposure to the drug, the same dose of the drug may produce a
diminishing effect so that an increased amount of the drug is
required to produce the same specified degree of effect. </p>

<p>Tolerance develops at differential rates to given effects of
the same drug. If tolerance has developed to one specific effect,
it has not necessarily developed to other specific effects. </p>

<p>By definition, the development of tolerance is neither
beneficial nor detrimental. If tolerance develops rapidly to the
desired mental effect of a &quot;high&quot; but slowly to the
behavioral or physical effects, rapid increase in dose would be
necessary in order to have the desired effect, and progressive
behavioral and physical disruption would be seen. This is the
pattern for amphetamines. </p>

<p>However, if tolerance develops slowly or not at all to the
desired mental effects but more rapidly to the behaviorally or
physically disruptive effects, no dosage increase or only a
slight one would be necessary and the unpleasant and undesired
effects would progressively diminish. </p>

<p>With regard to marihuana, present indications are that
tolerance does develop to the behaviorally and physically
disruptive effects, in both animals and man, especially at high
frequent doses for prolonged time periods. Studies in foreign
countries indicate that very heavy prolonged use of very large
quantities of hashish leads to the development of tolerance to
the mental effects, requiring an increase in intake to reach the
original level of satisfaction. However, for the intermittent use
pattern and even the moderate use pattern, little evidence exists
to indicate the development of tolerance to the desired
&quot;high,&quot; although the high may persist for a shorter
time period. During the Boston free-access study, no change was
apparent in the level of the high produced by a relatively large
dose of the drug over a 21-day period of moderate to heavy
smoking. <br>
</p>

<p>The fact that some individuals smoke more of the drug than
others may merely reflect a desire for a different level of
&quot;high.&quot; There is a tendency to develop a tolerance to
the physical effects and behaviorally disruptive effects,
especially the depressant effects, in heavy daily users. The
development of such behavioral tolerance of this nature may
explain the fact that experienced marihuana smokers describe a
lower occurrence rate of undesirable drug effects. The
development of tolerance may also explain why these smokers
exhibit normal behavior and competent performance of ordinary
tasks, while not appearing intoxicated to others even though they
are at their usual level of intoxication.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Reverse Tolerance<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Repeated exposure to marihuana has been said to cause an
individual to need lesser amounts of the drug to achieve the same
degree of intoxication. This &quot;reverse tolerance&quot; may be
related to one's learning to get high or to the recognition of
the subtle intoxication at low doses. Or perhaps, such tolerance
reflects an increase in the body's ability to change the drug to
an active chemical. To date, the existence of &quot;reverse
tolerance&quot; has not been substantiated in an experimental
setting.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Duration of Use<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Tolerance development is only one of a variety of occurrences
which possibly are related to repetitive use of marihuana. Any
discussion of drug effect must also take into account the time
period over which the drug use occurs. Immediate effects of a
single drug experience must be contrasted with effects of
short-term use and the effects of longterm use in order to detect
any cumulative effects or more subtle, gradually occurring
changes. </p>

<p>This issue of an individual's change over a period of years is
quite complex; a multitude of factors other than marihuana use
may affect his life. As previously defined, short-term refers to
periods of less than two years, long-term to periods of two to 10
years, and very long-term to periods greater than 10 years. Most
of the American experience involves short-term and long-term use,
with low doses of weak preparations of the drug.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Patterns of Use<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The drug effect of marihuana can be realistically discussed
only within the context of who the user is, how long he has used
marihuana, how much and how frequently he uses it, and the,
social setting of his use. <br>
</p>

<p>In general, for virtually any drug, the heavier the pattern of
use, the greater the risk of either direct or indirect damage.
For purposes of this discussion, the patterns of use developed in
the first section of this chapter will be utilized. Because
frequency of use is presently the, primary determinant of use
patterns in this country, we employ similar designations: </p>

<p><font size="2">(1) The <i>experimenter </i>who uses marihuana,
at most a few times over a short term and then generally ceases
to use it, or uses once a month or less;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">(2) The <i>intermittent user </i>who uses
marihuana, infrequently, that is more than once monthly but less
than several times a week;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">(3) <i>The moderate user </i>who uses it from
several times a week to once daily, generally over a long term;</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">(4) The <i>heavy user </i>who uses it several
times a day over a long term and;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">(5) The <i>very heavy user </i>who is
constantly intoxicated with high tetrahydrocannabinol content
preparations, usually hashish, over a very long term.</font> </p>

<p>Again, these classifications are not intended to be rigid but
are designed to facilitate a discussion of the many usage
patterns. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Definition of Dependence <br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2">Before describing the effect of marihuana, on
the user, two additional definitions are required. They concern
the concept of <i>dependence </i>which has so clouded public and
professional consideration of psychoactive drugs. Throughout the
remainder of this report, we refer Separately to psychological
and physical dependence, defined as follows:</font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><i>Psychological dependence </i>is the repeated
use of psychoactive drugs leading to a conditioned pattern of
drug-seeking behavior. The intensity of dependence varies with
the nature of the drug, the method, frequency, and duration of
administration, the mental and physical attributes of the
individual, and the characteristics of the physical and social
environment. Its intensity is at its peak when drug-seeking
becomes a compulsive and undeviating pattern of behavior.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><i>Physical dependence </i>is the state of
latent hyper-excitability which develops in the central nervous
system of higher mammals following frequent and prolonged
administration of the morphine-like analgesics, alcohol,
barbiturates, and other depressants. Such dependence is not
manifest subjectively or objectively during drug administration.
Specific symptoms and signs, the abstinence syndrome, occur upon
abrupt termination of drug administration; or with morphinelike
agonists by administering the specific antagonists.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>EFFECTS RELATED TO PATTERN
USE<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Set out below is a brief summary of effects of marihuana,
related to frequency and duration of use. The remainder of the
Chapter discusses the effects of immediate, short-term, long-term
and very long-term use of the drug.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Experimenters and</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">intermittent users ------ Little or no
psychological dependence.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Influence on behavior related largely to</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">conditioning to drug use and its social</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">value to the user.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">No organ injury demonstrable.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Moderate users ------------ Moderate
psychological dependence in-</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">creasing with duration of use.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Behavioral effects minimal in stable per-</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">sonalities, greater in those with emo-</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">tional instability.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Probably little if any organ injury.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Duration of use increases probability of</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">escalation of all effects including shift</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">from moderate to heavy use.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Heavy users -------------- American &quot;pot
head.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Strong psychological dependence.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Detectable behavior changes.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Possible organ injury (chronic diminution of
pulmonary function).</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Effects more easily demonstrable with long-term
use. <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Very heavy users ---------- Users in countries
where the use of cannabis has been indigenous for centuries.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Very strong psychological dependence to point
of compulsive drug seeking and use.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Clear-cut behavioral changes.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Greater incidence of associated organ injury.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>IMMEDIATE DRUG EFFECTS<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The immediate effects are those which occur during the drug
intoxication or shortly following it. The user is aware of some
of these effects, for they often cause him to use the drug. At
the same time, many changes may occur in his body which can be
measured by others but are not obvious to him.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Subjective Effects<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>A description of an individual's feelings and state of
consciousness as affected by low doses of marihuana is difficult;
the condition is not similar to usual waking states and is the
result of a highly individual experience. Perhaps the closest
analogies are the experience of day dreaming or the moments just
prior to falling asleep. The effect is not constant and a
cyclical waxing and waning of the intensity of the intoxication
occurs periodically. </p>

<p>At low, usual &quot;social&quot; doses, the intoxicated
individual may experience an increased sense of well-being;
initial restlessness and hilarity followed by a dreamy, carefree
state of relaxation; alteration of sensory perceptions including
expansion of space and time; and a more vivid sense of touch,
sight, smell, taste, and sound; a feeling of hunger, especially a
craving for sweets; and subtle changes in thought formation and
expression. To an unknowing observer, an individual in this state
of consciousness would not appear noticeably different from his
normal state. </p>

<p>At higher, moderate doses, these same reactions are
intensified but the changes in the individual would still be
scarcely noticeable to an observer. The individual may experience
rapidly changing emotions, changing sensory imagery, dulling of
attention, more altered thought formation and expression such as
fragmented thought, flight of ideas, impaired immediate memory,
disturbed associations, altered sense of self-identity and, to
some, a perceived feeling of enhanced insight. </p>

<p>At very high doses, psychotomimetic phenomena may be
experienced. These, include distortions of body image, loss of
personal identity, sensory and mental illusions, fantasies and
hallucinations. </p>

<p>Nearly all persons who continue to use marihuana describe
these usual effects in largely pleasurable terms. However, others
might call some of these same effects unpleasant or undesirable. </p>

<p>As discussed earlier, a wide range of extra-drug factors also
influences marihuana's effects. The more the individual uses
marihuana and the longer he has been using it, the more likely
the experiences will be predominantly pleasurable, and the less
likely the effects will be unpleasant. An increasing
sensitization to those effects viewed as pleasant occurs as the
user has more experience with the drug. </p>

<p>Persons subject to unpleasant reactions may eliminate
themselves from the using group although the occasional
experience of an unpleasant effect does not always discourage
use.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Body Function<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>A large amount of research has been performed in man and
animals regarding the immediate effect of marihuana on bodily
processes. No conclusive evidence exists of any physical damage,
disturbances of bodily processes or proven human fatalities
attributable solely to even very high doses of marihuana.
Recently, animal studies demonstrated a relatively large margin
of safety between the psychoactive dose and the physical and
behavioral toxic and lethal dose. Such studies seemed to indicate
that safe human study could be undertaken over a wide dose range.
</p>

<p>Low to moderate doses of the drug produce minimal measurable
transient changes in body functions. Generally, pulse rate
increases, recumbent blood pressure increases slightly, and
upright blood pressure decreases. The eyes redden, tear secretion
is decreased, the pupils become slightly smaller, the fluid
pressure within the eye lessens and one study reports that the
eyeball rapidly oscillates (nystagmus). </p>

<p>A minimal decrement in maximum muscle strength, the presence
of a fine hand tremor, and a decrease in hand and body steadiness
have also been noted. Decreased sensitivity to pain and
overestimation of elapsed time may occur. </p>

<p>The effects of marihuana on brain waves are still unclear and
inconsistent. Generally, the intoxication produces minimal,
transient changes of rapid onset and short duration. Sleep time
appears to increase, as does dreaming. </p>

<p>Investigation of the effects of marihuana on a wide variety of
other bodily function indices has revealed few consistently
observed changes. </p>

<p>These few consistently observed transient effects on bodily
function seem to suggest that marihuana is a rather unexciting
compound of negligible immediate toxicity at the doses usually
consumed in this country. The substance is predominantly a
psychoactive drug. The feelings and state of consciousness
described by the intoxicated seem to be far more interesting than
the objective state noted by an observer.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Mental Function<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Marihuana, like other psychoactive substances, predominantly
affects mental processes and responses (cognitive tasks) and thus
the motor responses directed by mental processes (psychomotor
tasks). Generally, the degree of impairment of cognitive and
psychomotor performance is dose-related, with minimal effect at
low doses. The impairment varies during the period of
intoxication, with the maximal effect at the peak intoxication.
Performance of simple or familiar tasks is at most minimally
impaired, while poor performance is demonstrated on complex,
unfamiliar tasks. Experienced marihuana users commonly
demonstrate significantly less decrement in performance than
drug-naive, individuals. </p>

<p>The greater his past marihuana experience, the better the
intoxicated individual is able to compensate for drug effect on
ordinary performance at usual doses. Furthermore, marked
individual variation in performance is noted when all else is
held constant. The effect of marihuana on cognitive and
psychomotor performance is therefore highly individualized and
not easily predictable. Effects on emotional reactions and on
volition are equally variable and are difficult to measure under
laboratory conditions, but can be significant.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>The Intoxicated State<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Studies of intoxicated persons have suggested possible
explanations for the subtle effects on mental processes produced
by marihuana, Generally, a temporary episodic impairment of
short-term memory occurs. These memory voids may be filled with
thoughts and perceptions extraneous to organized -mental
processes. Past and future may become obscured -as the individual
focuses on filling the present momentary memory lapse. His sense
of self -identity may seem altered if he cannot place himself in
his usual time frame. </p>

<p>This altered state of mind may be regarded by the individual
as pleasant or unpleasant. The important factors of dosage and
set and setting play a most important role in this determination.
When the nature of the drug-taking situation and the
characteristics of the individual are optimal. the user is apt to
describe his experience as one of relaxation, sensitivity,
friendliness, carefreeness, thoughtfulness, happiness,
peacefulness, and fun. For most marihuana users who continue to
use the drug, the experience is overwhelmingly pleasurable. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Unpleasant Reactions<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>However, when these circumstances are not optimal, the
experience may be unpleasant and an undesirable reaction to the
marihuana intoxication occurs. In these instances, anxiety,
depression, fatigue or cognitive loss are experienced as a
generalized feeling of ill-being and discomfort. A heavy sluggish
feeling, mentally and physically, is common in inexperienced
marihuana smokers who overshoot the desired high or in persons
who might orally ingest too large a dose. Dizziness, nausea,
incoordination, and palpitations often accompany the &quot;too
stoned&quot; feeling.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Anxiety States<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>&quot;Novice anxiety reactions&quot; or feelings of panic
account for a majority of unpleasant reactions to marihuana. When
the distortion of self image and time is recognized by the
individual as drug-induced and temporary, the experience is
viewed as pleasurable. Anxiety -and panic result when these
changes cause the individual to fear that the loss of his
identity and self-control may not end, and that he is dying or
&quot;losing his mind.&quot; These anxiety and panic reactions
are transient and usually disappear over a few hours as the
drug's effects wear off, or more quickly with gentle friendly
reassurance. </p>

<p>The large majority of these, anxiety reactions occur in
individuals who are experimenting with marihuana. Most often
these individuals have an intense underlying anxiety surrounding
marihuana use, such as fears of arrest, disruption of family and
occupational relations, and possible bodily or mental harm. Often
they are older and have relatively rigid personalities with less
desire for new and different experiences. </p>

<p>The incidence of these anxiety reactions may have decreased as
marihuana use has become acceptable to wider populations, as the
fears of its effects have lessened and as users have developed
experience in management of these reactions.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Psychosis<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Rare cases of full-blown psychotic episodes have been
precipitated by marihuana. Generally, the individuals had
previous mental disorders or had poorly developed personalities
and were marginally adjusted to their life situation. Often the
episode occurred at times of excessive stress. These episodes are
characteristically temporary. Psychotherapy and sometimes
medications are useful in prompt control and treatment of this
psychological reaction. In addition, rare nonspecific toxic
psychoses have occurred after extremely high doses. This state of
nonspecific drug intoxication or acute brain syndrome is
self-limited and clears spontaneously as the drug is eliminated
from the body.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Conclusions<br>
</b></p>

<p>In summary, the immediate effect of marihuana on normal mental
processes is a subtle alteration in state of consciousness
probably related to a change in short-term memory, mood, emotion
and volition. This effect on the mind produces a varying
influence on cognitive and psychomotor task performance which is
highly individualized, as well as related to dosage, time,
complexity of the task and experience of the user. The effect on
personal, social and vocational functions is difficult to
predict. In most instances, the marihuana intoxication is
pleasurable. In rare cases, the experience may lead to unpleasant
anxiety and panic, and in a predisposed few, to psychosis.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>SHORT-TERM EFFECTS <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The effect of an enormous daily oral dose of the drug (up to
about one hundred thousand times the minimal behaviorally
effective human dose) was recently studied in rats and monkeys
for three months. A severe, generalized nervous system depression
was evident the first few days. Evidence of cumulative toxicity
was observed at these doses. Severe central -nervous system
depression produced fatalities in some rats in the first few days
until tolerance developed. Later, extreme hyperactivity
developed. </p>

<p>The monkeys experienced severe central nervous system
depression and one group showed mild hyperactivity, but all
rapidly returned to normal behavior after the development of
tolerance to these effects. Minimal dose-related toxic effects on
bodily organs were noted at autopsy at the conclusion of the
experiment. These non-specific findings of unknown meaning
included bypocellularity of the bone marrow and spleen and
hypertrophy of the adrenal cortex. </p>

<p>A 28-day study employing intravenous administration of from
one to ten thousand times the minimal effective human dose to
monkeys produced -similar findings clinically. In the high dose
groups delayed deaths from acute hemorrhagic pneumonia were
possibly caused by accumulation of clumps of THC in the lung
producing irritation similar to that seen at the injection sites.
No other organ pathology was noted. These animal studies
illustrated that the margin of safety between active dose and
toxic dose was enormous. </p>

<p>A few studies have recently been carried out to observe the
effect of a few weeks of daily marihuana smoking in man. The
amount smoked was a relatively large American dose. Frequency of
use was once to several times daily. </p>

<p>During the 21-day Boston free-access study, no harmful effects
were observed on general bodily functions, motor functions,
mental functions, personal or social behavior or work
performance. Total sleep time and periods of sleep were
increased. Weight gain was uniformly noted. </p>

<p>No evidence of physical dependence or signs of withdrawal were
noted. In the heaviest smokers, -moderate psychological
dependence was suggested by an increased negative mood after
cessation of smoking. </p>

<p>Tolerance appeared to develop to the immediate effects of the
drug on general bodily functions (pulse rate) and
psychomotor-cognitive performance (time estimation, short-term
memory, and shootinggallery skill) but not to the
&quot;high.&quot; Marihuana intoxication did not significantly
inhibit the ability of the subjects to improve with practice
through time on these psychological-motor tasks. </p>

<p>Neither immediate nor short-term (21 day) high-dose marihuana
intoxication decreased motivation to engage in a variety of
social and goal-directed behaviors. No consistent alteration that
could be related to marihuana smoking over this period of time
was observed in work performance of a simple task, participation
in aspects of the research study, or interest and participation
in a variety of personal activities, such as writing, reading,
interest and knowledge of current world events, or participation
in athletic or aesthetic activities. </p>

<p>Marihuana smoking appeared to affect patterns of social
interactions. Although use of the drug was found to be a group
social activity around which conversation and other types of
social behavior were centered, it was not uncommon for some or
all of the smokers to withdraw from the social interaction and
concentrate on the subjective drug experience. </p>

<p>During the first part of the smoking period, both intermittent
and daily users demonstrated a marked decrement in total
interaction. Total interaction continued to diminish among
intermittent users but increased above presmoking levels among
the daily users during the later parts of the smoking period. The
quality of the interaction was more convivial and less
task-oriented when marihuana was available to the group. </p>

<p>Additionally, an assessment of the effect of marihuana on
risktaking behavior revealed that daily users tended to become
more conservative when engaging in decision-making under
conditions of risk. </p>

<p><font size="2"><b>LONG-TERM EFFECTS<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Our knowledge about marihuana is incomplete, but certain
behavior characteristics appear to be emerging in regard to long
term American marihuana use which, for the most part, is
significantly less than 10 years. These impressions were
confirmed in the Boston free-access study. The group of American
young adults studied averaged five years (range 2-17 years) of
intermittent or daily use, of marihuana. </p>

<p>No significant physical, biochemical, or mental abnormalities
could be attributed solely to their marihuana smoking. Some
abnormality of pulmonary function was demonstrated in many of the
subjects which could not be correlated-with quantity, frequency
or duration of smoking marihuana and/or tobacco cigarettes. (One
other investigation recently completed uncovered no abnormalities
in lung or heart functioning of a group of non-cigarette smoking
heavy marihuana users). Many of the subjects were in fair to poor
physical condition, as judged by exercise tolerance. </p>

<p>The performance of one-fifth of the subjects on a battery of
tests sensitive to brain function was poorer on at least one,
index than would have been predicted on the basis of their IQ
scores and education. But a definite relationship between the
poor test scores and prior marihuana or hallucinogen use could
not be proven. </p>

<p>In the past few years, observers have noted various social,
psychological and behavioral changes among young high school and
college age Americans including many who have used marihuana
heavily for a number of years. These changes are reflected by a
loss of volitional goal direction. These individuals drop out and
relinquish traditional adult roles and values. They become
present rather than future oriented, appear alienated from
broadly accepted social and occupational activity, and experience
reduced concern for personal hygiene and nutrition. </p>

<p>Several psychiatrists believe they have detected clinically
that some heavy marihuana-using individuals appear to undergo
subtle changes in personality and modes of thinking, with a
resulting change in life style. In adopting this new life style,
a troubled youth may turn toward a subculture where drug use and
untraditional behavior are acceptable. </p>

<p>This youthful population resembles in many respects the
marihuana smoker described in the Boston study. No evidence
exists to date to demonstrate that marihuana use alone caused
these behavioral changes either directly or indirectly. Many
individuals reach the same point without prior marihuana use or
only intermittent or moderate use; and many more individuals use
marihuana as heavily but do not evidence these changes. For some
of these young people, the drop out state is only a temporary
phase, preceding a personal reorganization and return to a more
conventional life style. </p>

<p>If heavy, long-term marihuana use is linked to the formation
of this complex of social, psychological and behavioral changes
in young people, then it is only one of many contributing
factors. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2">VERY LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF HEAVY AND VERY HEAVY
USE <br>
</font></p>

<p>Knowledge of the effects of very heavy, very long-term use of
marihuana by man is still incomplete. The Commission has
extensively reviewed the world literature as well as ongoing
studies in Jamaica and Greece, and carefully observed very heavy,
very long-term using populations in countries in other parts of
the world, such as Afghanistan and India. These populations smoke
and often drink much stronger drug preparations, hashish and
ganja, than are commonly used in America. From these
investigations, some observable consequences are becoming much
clearer.<br>
</p>

<p>Tolerance and Dependence<br>
</p>

<p>Some tolerance does occur with prolonged heavy usage; large
drug doses are necessary for the desired effects. Abrupt
withdrawal does not lead to a specific or reproducible abstinence
syndrome and physical dependence has not been demonstrated in man
or in animals. The very heavy users studied did evidence strong
psychological dependence, but were able to cease use for short
periods of time. In these users, <br>
</p>

<p>withdrawal does induce, symptoms characteristic of
psychological dependence. The anxiety, restlessness, insomnia,
and other non-specific symptoms of withdrawal are very similar in
kind and intensity to those experienced by compulsive cigarette
smokers. </p>

<p>Although the distress of withdrawal exerts a very strong
psychogenic drive to continue use, fear of withdrawal is, in most
cases, not adequate to inspire immediate criminal acts to obtain
the drug. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>General Body Function<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>In the Jamaican study, no significant physical or mental
abnormalities could be attributed to marihuana use, according to
an evaluation of medical history, complete physical examination,
chest x-ray, electrocardiogram, blood cell and chemistry tests,
lung, liver or kidney function tests, selected hormone
evaluation, brain waves, psychiatric evaluation, and
psychological testing. There was no evidence to indicate that the
drug as commonly used was responsible for producing birth defects
in offspring of users. This aspect is also being studied further.
</p>

<p>Heavy smoking, no matter if the substance was tobacco or
ganja, was shown to contribute to pulmonary functions lower than
those found among persons who smoked neither substance. All the
ganja smokers studied also smoked tobacco. In Jamaica, ganja is
always smoked in a mixture with tobacco; and many of the subjects
were heavy cigarette smokers, as well. </p>

<p>In a study of a Greek hashish-using population preliminary
findings revealed poor dentition, enlarged livers, and chronic
bronchitis. Further study is required to clarify the relationship
of these to hashish use, alcohol or tobacco use, or general life
style of this user population.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Social Functioning<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Similarly, the Jamaican and Greek subjects did not evidence
any deterioration of mental or social functioning which could be
attributed solely to heavy very long-term cannabis use. </p>

<p>These individuals appear to have used the drug without
noticeable behavioral or mental deviation from their lower
socioeconomic group norms, as detected by observation in their
communities and by extensive sociological interviews,
psychological tests and psychiatric examination. </p>

<p>Overall life style was not different from non-users in their
lower socioeconomic community. They were alert and realistic,
with average intelligence based on their education. Most
functioned normally in their communities with stable families,
homes, jobs, and friends. These individuals seem to have survived
heavy long-term cannabis use without major physical or behavioral
defects.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Mental Functioning<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The incidence of psychiatric hospitalizations for acute
psychoses and of use of drugs other than alcohol is not
significantly higher than among the non-using population. The
existence of a specific longlasting, cannabis-related psychosis
is poorly defined. If heavy cannabis use produces a, specific
psychosis, it must be quite rare or else exceedingly difficult to
distinguish from other acute or chronic psychoses. </p>

<p>Recent studies suggest that the occurrence of any form of
psychosis in heavy cannabis users is no higher than in the
general population. Although such use is often quite, prevalent
in hospitalized mental patients, the drug could only be
considered a. causal factor in a, few cases. Most of these were,
short-term reactions or toxic overdoses. In addition, a
concurrent use of alcohol often played a role in the, episode
causing hospitalization. </p>

<p>These findings are somewhat surprising in view of the
widespread belief that cannabis attracts the mentally unstable,
vulnerable individual. Experience in the United States has not
involved a level of heavy marihuana, use comparable to these
foreign countries. Consequently, such long-lasting psychic
disturbances possibly caused by heavy cannabis use have not been
observed in this country. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Motivation and Behavioral Change<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Another controversial form of social-mental deterioration
allegedly related to very long-term very heavy cannabis use is
the &quot;amotivational syndrome.&quot; It supposedly affects the
very heavy using population and is described world-wide as a,
loss of interest in virtually all activities other than cannabis
use, with resultant lethargy, amorality, instability and social
and personal deterioration. The reasons for the occurrence of
this syndrome are varied and hypothetical; drug use is only one
of many components in the socioeconomic and psychocultural
backgrounds of the individuals. </p>

<p>Intensive studies of the Greek and Jamaican populations of
heavy long-term cannabis users appear to dispute the sole
causality of cannabis in this syndrome. The heavy ganja and
hashish using individuals were from lower socioeconomic groups,
and possessed average intelligence but had little education and
small chance of vocational advancement. Most were married and
maintained families and households. They were all employed, most
often as laborers or small businessmen, at a level which
corresponded with their education and opportunity. </p>

<p>In general, their life styles were dictated by socioeconomic
factors and did not appear to deteriorate as a result of cannabis
use. The Jamaicans were working strenuously and regularly at
generally uninteresting jobs. In their culture, cannabis serves
as a work adjunct. The users believe the drug provides energy for
laborious work and helps them to endure their routine tasks.<br>
</p>

<p>In contrast, others have described Asian and African
populations where heavy to very heavy hashish or charas smoking
for a very long time is associated with clear-cut behavioral
changes. In these societies, the smokers are mostly jobless,
illiterate persons of the lowest socioeconomic backgrounds. They
generally begin to use the drug in their early teens and continue
its use up to their 60's. </p>

<p>The users prefer to smoke in groups of two to 20, generally in
a quiet place out of the reach of non-smokers. Weakness,
malnutrition and sexual difficulties, usually impotence, a-re
common. Some of them report sleep disturbances. </p>

<p>Most users who have used the drug for 20 to 30 years are lazy
and less practical in most of their daily acts and reluctant to
make decisions. However, their ability to perform non-complicated
tasks is as good as non-smokers. </p>

<p>Although the smokers think they become faster in their daily
work, a general slowness in all their activities is noticed by
others. This user population is typically uncreative. They make
little if any significant contribution to the social, medical or
economic improvement of their community. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>SUMMARY<br>
</b></p>

<p>Once existing marihuana, policy was cast into the realm of
public debate, partisans on both sides of the issue
over-simplified the question of the effects of use of the, drug
on the individual. Proponents of the prohibitory legal system
contended that marihuana, was a, dangerous drug, while opponents
insisted that it was a harmless drug or was less harmful than
alcohol or tobacco. </p>

<p>Any psychoactive drug is potentially harmful to the
individual, depending on the intensity, frequency and duration of
use. Marihuana is no exception. Because the particular hazards of
use differ for different drugs, it makes no sense, to compare the
harmfulness of different drugs. One may compare, insofar as the
individual is concerned, only the harmfulness of specific
effects. Is heroin less harmful than alcohol because, unlike
alcohol, it directly causes no physical in-jury? Or is heroin
more harmful than alcohol because at normal doses its use is more
incapacitating in a behavioral sense? </p>

<p>Assessment of the relative dangers of particular drugs is
meaningful only in a wider context which weighs the possible
benefits of the drugs, the comparative scope of their use, and
their relative impact on society at large. We consider these
questions in the next Chapter, particularly in connection with
the impact on public health. </p>

<p>Looking only at the effects on the individual, there, is
little proven danger of physical or psychological harm from the
experimental or intermittent use of the natural preparations of
cannabis, including the resinous mixtures commonly used in this
country. The risk of harm lies instead in the heavy, long-term
use of the drug, particularly of the most potent preparations. </p>

<p>The experimenter and the intermittent users develop little or
no psychological dependence on the drug. No organ injury is
demonstrable. </p>

<p>Some moderate users evidence a degree of psychological
dependence which increases in intensity with prolonged duration
of use. Behavioral effects are lesser in stable personalities but
greater in those with emotional instability. Prolonged duration
of use does increase the probability of some behavioral and
organic consequences including the possible shift to a heavy use
pattern. </p>

<p>The heavy user shows strong psychological dependence on
marihuana and often hashish. Organ injury, especially diminuation
of pulmonary function, is possible. Specific behavioral changes
are detectable. All of these effects are more apparent with
long-term and very long-term heavy use than with short-term heavy
use. </p>

<p>The very heavy users, found in countries where the use of
cannabis has been indigenous for centuries, have a compulsive
psychological dependence on the drug, most commonly used in the
form of hashish. Clear-cut behavioral changes and a greater
incidence of associated biological injury occur as duration of
use increases. At present, the Commission is unaware of any
similar pattern in this country. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>