
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B23-52</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B012-335</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/moscone/chap3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050356 text/html 14362
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:03:45 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:57:21 GMT
Content-length: 14144
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Legislative Changes in California Marijuana Laws in the
1970S </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49632" -->

<p><font size="5">A Fiscal Analysis of Marijuana
Decriminalization</font></p>

<p><b>CHAPTER III</b> </p>

<h1><a name="OLE_LINK2">LEGISLATIVE CHANGES IN CALIFORNIA
MARIJUANA LAWS IN 1970S</a></h1>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<h2>I. 1972: Prelude to Decriminalization </h2>

<p>Following the enactment of The Wobbler and the revisions in
Section 17 of the Penal Code, California's marijuana laws were to
remain unchanged until 1972, when certain events occurring
outside of the Legislature heralded the beginning of a
noncriminal approach to marijuana possession and use in the
state. </p>

<p>The first external force to impact upon the Legislature was
the Final Report of the National Commission on Marijuana and
Health, appointed by President Nixon to study all aspects of
marijuana in American society and to recommend public policy
approaches and guidelines. The Commission was A conservative body
of thirteen members, nine of whom were appointed by the President
and two each by the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives, and
it was widely assumed that the Commission would reinforce and
rubber-stamp the harsh &quot;War on Drugs&quot; approach toward
marijuana and drug use which the White House had been advocating.
Thus, the Commission's Final Report made headlines across the
country when it recommended decriminalizing marijuana possession
and use. </p>

<p>Decriminalization was a term essentially coined and
popularized by the National Commission. Decriminalization
entailed a public policy of discouragement of marijuana use,. by
keeping cultivation, sale and other non-possessory offenses
illegal, while removing criminal penalties for simple use and
possession of the substance. In essence, it aimed at eliminating
the harsh social consequences brought about by labeling marijuana
users &quot;criminal&quot; while concentrating the resources and
sanctions of the criminal law on commercial traffickers. The
report of the National Commission was to become the Bible of the
marijuana law reform movement for the remainder of the '70s. </p>

<p>The second major event to force a re-examination by the
Legislature of the state's marijuana laws was the 1972 California
Marijuana Initiative, which appeared on the November ballot that
year as Proposition 19. Founded by Foster City attorney Leo
Paoli, Proposition 19 was a measure which proposed totally
removing criminal penalties for the adult possession and
cultivation of marijuana for personal use. Though defeated, the
measure garnered 34% of the vote and provided new impetus for
legislative efforts to repeal felony penalties for marijuana
possession. </p>

<p>Significantly, the California Legislature passed two major
bills in 1972 affecting marijuana penalties, both of which were
clearly influenced by the statewide demonstration for marijuana
law reform symbolized by Proposition 19. </p>

<p>The first, Penal Code 1000, commonly known as the &quot;drug
diversion program,&quot; was sponsored by, among others,
then-State Senator George Deukmejian, in order to provide a
mechanism for diverting first-offenders from the criminal justice
system. Under P.C. 1000, individuals charged with various drug
possession offenses could have all criminal charges against them
dismissed, provided they agreed to participate in a drug
education and/or treatment program. Supported by liberals and
conservatives alike, the drug diversion bill was signed into law
by Governor Ronald Reagan. </p>

<p>Also passing the Legislature in late 1972, following the vote
on Proposition 19, was a bill sponsored by Beverly Hills
Assemblyman Alan Sieroty which would have repealed the wobbler
and made possession of marijuana for personal use a straight
misdemeanor. The Sieroty bill was vetoed by Governor Reagan.
Another Sieroty misdemeanor bill passed both houses of the
Legislature in 1974, but was also vetoed by Governor Reagan. </p>

<p>The impact of Proposition 19 was also noticed by Senate
Democratic leader George R. Moscone, who represented San
Francisco, which was the only county to pass Proposition 19.
Recognizing that a penalty reduction bill had no chance of
enactment as long as Ronald Reagan was governor, Senator Moscone
instead proposed the appointment of a state commission, analogous
to the National Commission on Marijuana and Health, to study
California's marijuana laws and recommend appropriate public
policy changes. Originally proposed as a state commission,
Moscone realized that Governor Reagan would be able to block the
formation of such a commission. Thus came into being,
alternatively, the California Senate Select Committee on the
Control of Marijuana. </p>

<p>The Select Committee, commonly referred to as the Moscone
Committee after its chairman, conducted the first major study
into marijuana law enforcement in the state, with particular
emphasis on the social and fiscal costs of the laws. Among its
findings were the facts that in the early 1970s, statewide
marijuana arrests were approaching almost 100,000 annually, with
enforcement costs averaging well over $100,000 million per year. </p>

<p>Finding that the overwhelming majority of marijuana offenses
(approximately 90%) were for simple possession, the Moscone
Committee recommended in its Final Report a serious re-ordering
of law enforcement priorities by the Legislature. The Final
Report of the Select Committee noted that: </p>

<p>&quot;The marijuana laws as they pertain to simple possession
for private adult use should be amended to abolish the felony
offense. The Legislature should adopt a program of
decriminalization, making simple possession of marijuana for
private adult use an infraction, if anything.&quot; </p>

<h2>1975: Enactment of Senate Bill 95</h2>

<p>Following an unsuccessful attempt in 1974 to implement the
decriminalization recommendations of the Select Committee, which
was essentially a &quot;trial run&quot; with no expectation of
actual success, Senator Moscone introduced Senate Bill 95 which
was heard and enacted by the Legislature in 1975. This bill was
signed into law on July 9, 1975 by Governor Edmund G. Brown, Jr.,
making California the fifth state (out of an eventual total of
eleven) to end the arrest and jailing of persons charged with
possession of small amounts of marijuana for personal use. </p>

<p>As originally introduced, S.B. 95 would have made possession
of not more than three ounces of marijuana an infraction,
punishable by a maximum fine of $100.00. There was political
resistance, however, to both the three-ounce standard and also to
labeling the offense an infraction, which opponents of S.B. 95
contended sent too &quot;permissive&quot; a message to the
public. The bill was therefore amended by the author in the
Senate Judiciary Committee to make possession of one ounce or
less a citable misdemeanor, rather than an infraction, in order
to split law enforcement opposition to the bill and pick up the
necessary votes to pass the measure out of committee. </p>

<p>The amendment changing the offense from an infraction to a
misdemeanor resulted in a change of label more than anything
else, in that an infraction was also a crime in California, and
S.B. 95 created essentially a new category of low misdemeanor
which was sui generis and was treated like an infraction in all
critical respects. Possession of an ounce or less became a
mandatory citable misdemeanor offense, punishable by fine only,
not to exceed $100.00, -with no arrest, booking or jail. </p>

<p>Under S.B. 95, possession of more than one ounce of marijuana
also became a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than six months, by a fine of not more
than $500.00, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In such
instances, the arresting officer has the discretion of either
issuing a citation or taking the defendant into custody. </p>

<p>S.B. 95 also revised the penalties for both furnishing without
consideration and transporting not more than one ounce of
marijuana, treating such offenses as simple possession, rather
than as felonies. Giving away or transporting more than one ounce
of marijuana, as well as cultivation, sale and possession of-any
amount with intention to sell remained as felonies under S.B. 95.
</p>

<p>Prior California law did not distinguish among various forms
of marijuana based on form or potency, treating the natural
cannabis plant, synthetic THC and hashish as the same substance.
S. B. 95 distinguished between &quot;marijuana&quot; and
&quot;concentrated cannabis&quot;, the latter referring to the
separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from
marijuana. As to concentrated cannabis, essentially hashish or
hash oil, the prior wobbler penalties remain in effect. This
legislative distinction was brought about by law enforcement
opposition to eliminating felony penalties for possession of
hashish or hash oil. </p>

<p>One of the critical reforms embodied in S.B. 95, which
resulted directly from the legislative &quot;trade-off&quot;
which came about when the bill was amended to make possession of
small amounts of marijuana a citable misdemeanor rather than an
infraction, was a new record.-purging provision unlike anything
in existing California law. This provision ended the prospect of
life-long criminal records for individuals arrested and/or
convicted of marijuana possession and other marijuana misdemeanor
offenses and contained retroactive provisions for offenses
occurring prior to January 1, 1976, when S.B. 95 took effect. </p>

<p>Under these provisions as later amended S.B. 95 required the
destruction of records of any court or public agency pertaining
to an arrest or conviction for possessing marijuana, other than
concentrated cannabis, or for giving away or transporting not
more than one ounce of ordinary marijuana where the arrest and/or
conviction occurred after January 1, 1976, in which case such
records could not be kept beyond two years from the date of
conviction, or from the date of arrest if there was no
conviction. No civil or collateral disabilities or penalties
could attach to an individual as a result of a prior marijuana
misdemeanor offense, once the records are destroyed or two years
had passed. </p>

<p>The penalty provisions of S.B. 95 are non-recidivist, in that
repeat offenders are not subject to any greater penalties than
first offenders. S.B. 95 provided, however, that individuals
convicted more than three times within a two year period shall be
subject to the provisions of P.C. Section 1000.1 and 1000.2 (the
drug diversion program). No jail penalties or increased fines can
be assessed against repeat offenders. </p>

<p>In summary, in addition to repealing various minor marijuana
offenses, S.B. 95 adopted six major forms affecting California's
marijuana laws, which together have had a major impact on the
fiscal costs of marijuana law enforcement in the state and in
reducing the legal, social and fiscal costs of marijuana law
enforcement: </p>

<ol>
    <li>No arrest or booking for individuals apprehended in
        possession of small amounts of marijuana; </li>
</ol>

<ol>
    <li>No jail or incarceration for persons convicted of
        possession of small amounts of marijuana; </li>
    <li>Furnishing of small amount of marijuana for no
        consideration is treated as simple possession, not sale; </li>
    <li>Transportation of small amounts of marijuana is treated
        as simple possession, not felony transportation; </li>
    <li>Elimination of life-long criminal records for marijuana
        possession arrests and convictions, and placing a
        two-year limit on the retention of such records and the
        use of such records. against individuals arrested and
        convicted of specified offenses; </li>
    <li>Abolition of recidivist penalties for simple possession,
        giving and away and transporting small amounts of
        marijuana. </li>
</ol>

<p>The actual fiscal savings brought about by S.B. 95, and the
impact which this reform legislation has had on California's
criminal justice system, have been dramatic, as evidenced by the
analysis set forth in this study. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49632" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>