
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-51</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B014-241</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/cocaine/crakref1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122042627 text/html 22098
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:26:19 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:31:17 GMT
Content-length: 21880
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Crack References -- Cocaine</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Effects of Crack Smoking on the Lungs </h1>

<p> <b>Abstracts of 17 articles on the effects of smoking crack.</b>
</p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> 1. Khalsa ME; Tashkin DP; Perrochet B. </p>

<p> Smoked cocaine: patterns of use and pulmonary consequences.
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 1992 Jul-Sep, 24(3):265-72. (UI:
93058148) </p>

<p> Abstract: This article offers a perspective on the use of
volatilized alkaloidal cocaine in its freebase and crack forms
and on the pulmonary consequences of such use. The inhalational
route of administration of freebase and crack cocaine exposes the
lung to their combustion products, raising concern about possible
adverse pulmonary effects. A brief historical review of cocaine
and its methods of use precedes the presentation of data
concerning current modes and patterns of use and some pulmonary
complications of crack and freebase use. Results from a
systematic study of a large sample of cocaine users document a
high frequency of occurrence of acute respiratory symptoms in
temporal association with cocaine smoking. No relationship was
detected between the prevalence of acute pulmonary symptoms and
identifiable aspects of techniques of cocaine administration.
These results suggest that the respiratory consequences of
alkaloidal cocaine are most likely attributable to the inhaled
cocaine itself, rather than to variable characteristics of usage.
</p>

<p> 2. Oh PI; Balter MS. </p>

<p> Cocaine induced eosinophilic lung disease. Thorax, 1992 Jun,
47(6):478-9. (UI: 92358464) </p>

<p> Abstract: A patient developed fever, bronchoconstriction,
hypoxaemia, pulmonary infiltrates, and serum and bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid eosinophilia on two occasions after inhaling crack
cocaine. Transbronchial biopsy specimens showed normal lung
parenchyma but a dense eosinophilic infiltrate within the
bronchial wall. Both episodes resolved promptly after treatment
with corticosteroids. Eosinophilic lung disease may be a steroid
responsive complication of crack cocaine abuse. </p>

<p> 3. Perper JA; Van Thiel DH. </p>

<p> Respiratory complications of cocaine abuse. Recent
Developments in Alcoholism, 1992, 10:363-77. (UI: 92270885) </p>

<p> Pub type: Journal Article; Review; Review, Tutorial. </p>

<p> Abstract: Upper respiratory and pulmonary complications of
cocaine addiction have been increasingly reported in recent
years, with most of the patients being intravenous addicts, users
of freebase, or smokers of &quot;crack.&quot; The toxicity of
cocaine is complex and is exerted via multiple central and
peripheral pathways. Recurrent snorting of cocaine may result in
ischemia, necrosis, and infections of the nasal mucosa, sinuses,
and adjacent structures. Pulmonary complications of cocaine
toxicity include pulmonary edema, pulmonary hemorrhages,
pulmonary barotrauma, foreign body granulomas, cocaine related
pulmonary infection, obliterative bronchiolitis, asthma, and
persistent gas-exchange abnormalities. </p>

<p> Respiratory manifestations are nonspecific and include
shortness of breath, cough, wheezing, hemoptysis, and chest
pains. Severe respiratory difficulties have been reported in
neonates of abusing mothers. In the absence of a cocaine-abuse
history, it may be difficult to recognize the etiological role of
cocaine, especially in the absence of needle tracks pointing to
previous intravenous drug abuse and/or negative toxicology. </p>

<p> 5. Tashkin DP; Khalsa ME; Gorelick D; Chang P; Simmons MS;
Coulson AH; Gong H </p>

<p> Jr. Pulmonary status of habitual cocaine smokers. American
Review of Respiratory Disease, 1992 Jan, 145(1):92-100. (UI:
92117426) </p>

<p> Abstract: We determined the prevalence of respiratory
symptoms and lung dysfunction in a large sample of habitual
smokers of freebase cocaine (&quot;crack&quot;) alone and in
combination with tobacco and/or marijuana. In addition, we
compared these findings with those in an age- and race-matched
sample of nonusers of crack who did or did not smoke tobacco
and/or marijuana. A detailed respiratory and drug use
questionnaire and a battery of lung function tests were
administered to (1) a convenience sample of 202 habitual smokers
of cocaine (cases) who denied intravenous drug abuse and (2) a
reference sample of 99 nonusers of cocaine (control subjects).
The cocaine smokers (85% black) included the following: 68
never-smokers of marijuana, of whom 43 currently smoked tobacco
and 25 did not, and 134 ever-smokers of marijuana (42 current and
92 former), of whom 92 currently smoked tobacco and 42 did not.
The control subjects (96% black) included the following: 69
never-smokers of marijuana, of whom 26 currently smoked tobacco
and 43 did not, and 30 ever-smokers of marijuana (18 current and
12 former), of whom 21 currently smoked tobacco and 9 did not.
Cases smoked an average of 6.5 g cocaine per week for a mean of
53 months. The median time of the most recent use of crack prior
to study was 19 days (range less than 1 to 180 days). After
controlling for the use of other smoked substances, frequent
crack use was associated with: (1) a high prevalence of at least
occasional occurrences of acute cardiorespiratory symptoms within
1 to 12 h after smoking cocaine (cough productive of black sputum
[43.7%], hemoptysis [5.7%], chest pain [38.5%], usually worse
with deep breathing, and cardiac palpitations [52.6%]) and (2) a
mild but significant impairment in the diffusing capacity of the
lung.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<p> 6. O'Donnell AE; Mappin FG; Sebo TJ; Tazelaar H. Interstitial
pneumonitis associated with &quot;crack&quot; cocaine abuse.
Chest, 1991 Oct, 100(4):1155-7. (UI: 92006753) </p>

<p> Abstract: A 33-year-old woman developed acute bilateral
pulmonary infiltrates after the intense use of rock cocaine
(crack). She subsequently had progressive deterioration of
pulmonary function to the point of being ventilator-dependent.
Open lung biopsy showed a chronic interstitial pneumonia with
extensive accumulation of free silica within histiocytes
associated with mild pulmonary fibrosis. This pattern of
interstitial pneumonia has not been previously reported in crack
users. 7. Susskind H; Weber DA; Volkow ND; Hitzemann R. Increased
lung permeability following long-term use of free-base cocaine
(crack). Chest, 1991 Oct, 100(4):903-9. (UI: 92006781) </p>

<p> Abstract: The clearance of inhaled 99mTc DTPA aerosol from
the lungs is used as an index of lung epithelial permeability.
Using the radioaerosol method, we investigated the effects of
long-term &quot;crack&quot; (free-base cocaine) inhalation on
lung permeability in 23 subjects. Eighteen control subjects (12
nonsmokers and 6 cigarette smokers) with no history of drug use
were also studied. Subjects inhaled approximately 150 muCi
(approximately 5.6 MBq) of 99mTc DTPA aerosol and quantitative
gamma camera images of the lungs were acquired at 1-min
increments for 25 minutes. Regions of interest (ROIs) were
selected to include the following: (1) both lungs; (2) each
individual lung; and (3) the upper, middle, and lower thirds of
each lung. 99mTc DTPA lung clearance was determined from the
slopes of the respective time-activity plots for the different
RIOs. Radioaerosol clearance half-times (T1/2) for the seven
nonsmoking crack users (61.5 +/- 18.3 minutes) were longer than
for the seven cigarette-smoking crack users (27.9 +/- 16.9
minutes) and nine cigarette-smoking crack plus marijuana users
(33.5 +/- 21.6 minutes). T1/2 for the nonsmoking crack users was
significantly shorter (p less than 0.001) than for the nonsmoking
control group (123.8 +/- 28.7 minutes). T1/2 for the
cigarette-smoking drug users was similar to that of the
cigarette-smoking control group (33.1 +/- 17.8 minutes),
suggesting a similar mechanism of damage from the smoke of crack
and tobacco. From these groups, one nonsmoker and 11 cigarette
smokers displayed biexponential 99mTc DTPA clearances, indicative
of greater lung injury than found in the usual cases of
monoexponential clearance. The upper lungs of all crack users
groups cleared faster than the lower lungs. The faster and
biexponential clearance properties of inhaled 99mTc DTPA aerosol
were the principal functional abnormalities found in all the drug
users. In contrast, 19 of 23 crack users had normal spirometry
and gas exchange. These results indicate that 99mTc DTPA may
provide a sensitive and useful assay to evaluate the physiologic
effects of cocaine inhalation in the lung. </p>

<p> 8. McCarroll KA; Roszler MH. Lung disorders due to drug
abuse. Journal of Thoracic Imaging, 1991 Jan, 6(1):30-5. (UI:
91116637) </p>

<p> Pub type: Journal Article; Review; Review, Academic. </p>

<p> Abstract: Drug-related diseases of the lungs have been noted
with increasing frequency in urban patients. These entities are
also being seen in smaller urban and suburban settings, however.
The spectrum of pathology is also changing coincident with the
marked increase in crack cocaine use. The incidence of abnormal
chest radiographs in cocaine users admitted with pulmonary
complaints has ranged from 12% to 55%. Findings have included
focal air space disease, atelectasis, pneumothorax,
pneumomediastinum, and pulmonary edema. Pulmonary complications
related to injections of illicit drugs have included pulmonary
infection, pulmonary edema, particulate embolism, and talcosis.
The &quot;pocket shot&quot; places the patient at risk for a
unique set of complications. Radiologists should be aware of this
wide spectrum of pulmonary disease that may be related to this
increasingly frequent social problem. </p>

<p> 9. Smart RG. Crack cocaine use: a review of prevalence and
adverse effects. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse,
1991, 17(1):13-26. (UI: 91247446) </p>

<p> Pub type: Journal Article; Review; Review, Tutorial. </p>

<p> Abstract: Crack is a potent form of cocaine which results in
rapid and striking stimulant effects when smoked. This paper
reviews epidemiological research on the extent of use as well as
reports of adverse effects. Crack is used by a small minority of
adult and student populations but by a large proportion of
cocaine users and heavy drug-using groups. Use does not appear to
be increasing in general populations, but there are no trend
studies for high-risk groups. Crack users tend to be young, heavy
polydrug users, many of whom have serious drug abuse problems.
The adverse reactions to crack are similar to those of cocaine
and include effects on offspring, neurological and psychiatric
problems, as well as pulmonary and cardiac abnormalities.
However, two adverse reactions unique to crack have been
reported. One relates to lung infiltrates and bronchospasm. The
other involves neurological symptoms among children living in
crack smoke-filled rooms. There is a need for improved treatment
and preventive programs for crack use. </p>

<p> 10. Forrester JM; Steele AW; Waldron JA; Parsons PE. </p>

<p> Crack lung: an acute pulmonary syndrome with a spectrum of
clinical and histopathologic findings. American Review of
Respiratory Disease, 1990 Aug, 142(2):462-7. (UI: 90343162) </p>

<p> Abstract: In this report, we review the hospital course of
four patients who presented with an acute pulmonary syndrome
after inhaling freebase cocaine and compare them with previously
described case reports. Two patients had prolonged inflammatory
pulmonary injury associated with fever, hypoxemia, hemoptysis,
respiratory failure, and diffuse alveolar infiltrates. Lung
tissue specimens from both patients revealed diffuse alveolar
damage, alveolar hemorrhage, and interstitial and intraalveolar
inflammatory cell infiltration notable for the prominence of
eosinophils. Immunofluorescent staining performed on one of the
biopsy specimens showed a striking deposition of IgE in both
lymphocytes and alveolar macrophages. Both patients were treated
with systemic corticosteroids and rapidly improved. In contrast,
two patients presented acutely with diffuse pulmonary alveolar
infiltrates associated with dyspnea and hypoxemia, but without
fever, and within 36 h of discontinuing cocaine their pulmonary
infiltrates and symptoms had spontaneously resolved. Our report
further supports the finding that an acute pulmonary syndrome can
occur after inhalation of freebase cocaine. Furthermore, the lung
injury may respond to systemic corticosteroid therapy when it is
associated with a prominent inflammatory cell infiltration. </p>

<p> 11. Hannan DJ; Adler AG. </p>

<p> Crack abuse. Do you known enough about it? Postgraduate
Medicine, 1990 Jul, 88(1):141-3, 146-7. (UI: 90310821) </p>

<p> Pub type: Journal Article; Review; Review, Tutorial. </p>

<p> Abstract: Crack use has increased dramatically because the
drug is cheap, highly addictive, and easy to use. As a result, an
increased frequency of cocaine-related medical problems has been
noted. The effects of crack abuse on fetal outcome and
neurobehavioral development are becoming more apparent. In
addition, the role of crack use in furthering transmission of
sexually transmitted diseases has been documented, and the
implications for AIDS transmission have been speculated on. Crack
use enhances social disorganization, particularly in poor urban
areas, where increased child abuse, neglect, and prostitution are
common. Ever present are the financial incentives to increase the
number of crack users. Cocaine was once considered a drug for the
elite, rich, and famous. Crack clearly has changed that notion. </p>

<p> 12. Tashkin DP. Pulmonary complications of smoked substance
abuse. Western Journal of Medicine, 1990 May, 152(5):525-30. (UI:
90273700) </p>

<p> Pub type: Journal Article; Review; Review, Tutorial. </p>

<p> Abstract: After tobacco, marijuana is the most widely smoked
substance in our society. Studies conducted within the past 15
years in animals, isolated tissues, and humans indicate that
marijuana smoke can injure the lungs. Habitual smoking of
marijuana has been shown to be associated with chronic
respiratory tract symptoms, an increased frequency of acute
bronchitic episodes, extensive tracheobronchial epithelial
disease, and abnormalities in the structure and function of
alveolar macrophages, key cells in the lungs' immune defense
system. In addition, the available evidence strongly suggests
that regularly smoking marijuana may predispose to the
development of cancer of the respiratory tract. &quot;Crack&quot;
smoking has become increasingly prevalent in our society,
especially among habitual smokers of marijuana. New evidence is
emerging implicating smoked cocaine as a cause of acute
respiratory tract symptoms, lung dysfunction, and, in some cases,
serious, life-threatening acute lung injury. A strong physician
message to users of marijuana, cocaine, or both concerning the
harmful effects of these smoked substances on the lungs and other
organs may persuade some of them, especially those with
drug-related respiratory complications, to quit smoking. </p>

<p> 13. Brody SL; Slovis CM; Wrenn KD. </p>

<p> Cocaine-related medical problems: consecutive series of 233
patients [see comments]. </p>

<p> American Journal of Medicine, 1990 Apr, 88(4):325-31. (UI:
90224989) </p>

<p> Abstract: PURPOSE: Little information describing common
cocaine-related medical problems is available. This study
examined the nature, frequency, treatment, incidence of
complications, and emergency department deaths of patients
seeking medical care for acute and chronic cocaine-associated
medical problems. PATIENTS AND METHODS: A consecutive series of
233 hospital visits by 216 cocaine-using patients over a 6-month
period during 1986 and 1987 was studied. Medical records were
retrospectively reviewed to determine patient characteristics,
nature of complications, treatment, and outcome. RESULTS:
Patients most commonly used cocaine intravenously (49%), but
freebase or crack use was also common (23.3%). Concomitant abuse
of other intoxicants, especially alcohol, was frequently seen
(48.5%). The vast majority of complaints were cardiopulmonary
(56.2%), neurologic (39.1%), and psychiatric (35.8%); multiple
symptoms were often present (57.5%). The most common complaint
was chest pain though rarely was it believed to represent
ischemia. Altered mental status was common (27.4%) and ranged
from psychosis to coma. Short-term pharmacologic intervention was
necessary in only 24% of patients, and only 9.9% of patients were
admitted. Acute mortality was less than 1%. CONCLUSION: Most
medical complications of cocaine are short-lived and appear to be
related to cocaine's hyperadrenergic effects. Patients usually do
not require short-term therapy or hospital admission. Acute
morbidity and mortality rates from cocaine use in patients
presenting to the hospital are very low, suggesting that a major
focus in the treatment of cocaine-related emergencies should be
referral for drug abuse detoxification and treatment. </p>

<p> 14. Wallach SJ. Medical complications of the use of cocaine.
Hawaii Medical Journal, 1989 Nov, 48(11):461-2. (UI: 90077816) </p>

<p> Abstract: There are many serious medical problems that are
associated with the use of cocaine and &quot;crack&quot; cocaine.
</p>

<p> 15. Eurman DW; Potash HI; Eyler WR; Paganussi PJ; Beute GH. </p>

<p> Chest pain and dyspnea related to &quot;crack&quot; cocaine
smoking: value of chest radiography. </p>

<p> Radiology, 1989 Aug, 172(2):459-62. </p>

<p> (UI: 89316319) </p>

<p> Abstract: The chest radiographs of 71 patients who had chest
pain or shortness of breath following the smoking of highly
potent &quot;crack&quot; cocaine were retrospectively evaluated.
Nine patients had abnormal findings on radiographs as follows:
atelectasis or localized parenchymal opacification in four,
pneumomediastinum in two, pneumothorax in one, hemopneumothorax
in one, and pulmonary edema in one. Radiographic detection of
these abnormalities was important in the clinical management of
these patients. This spectrum of findings is presented with a
discussion of the pathophysiologic mechanisms responsible. </p>

<p> 16. Cherukuri R; Minkoff H; Feldman J; Parekh A; Glass L. A
cohort study of alkaloidal cocaine (&quot;crack&quot;) in
pregnancy. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 1988 Aug, 72(2):147-51. </p>

<p> (UI: 88276400) </p>

<p> Abstract: The recent dramatic increase in the use of
alkaloidal cocaine (&quot;crack&quot;) has led to concern about
possible deleterious fetal effects associated with its use during
pregnancy. Crack, which is not destroyed by heating, can be
smoked, and delivers a large quantity of cocaine to the vascular
bed of the lung, producing an effect similar to that from
intravenous injection. To describe the association of crack use
with pregnancy outcome, we conducted a retrospective matched
cohort study of 55 women who admitted to the use of crack during
pregnancy and 55 non-drug-using women who delivered during the
same period. The groups were matched for age, parity,
socioeconomic status, alcohol use, and presence or absence of
prenatal care. A significantly larger number of women using crack
delivered at 37 weeks or earlier (50.9 versus 16.4%; P = .001). </p>

<p> Crack-exposed infants were 3.6 times more likely to have
intrauterine growth retardation (P less than .006) and 2.8 times
more likely to have a head circumference less than the tenth
percentile for gestational age (P less than .007). Premature
rupture of the membranes was 1.8 times more common in the crack
group (P less than .03). Sixty percent of crack-using mothers
received no prenatal care. Abnormal neurobehavioral symptoms were
present in a minority of infants and were usually mild. </p>

<p> 17. Snyder CA; Wood RW; Graefe JF; Bowers A; Magar K.
&quot;Crack smoke&quot; is a respirable aerosol of cocaine base
[published erratum appears in Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1988
Apr;29(4):835]. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 1988
Jan, 29(1):93-5. </p>

<p> (UI: 88177036) </p>

<p> Abstract: The smoking of cocaine base [corrected]
(&quot;crack&quot;) has emerged as a significant substance abuse
problem. A detailed characterization of cocaine smoke is a
prerequisite for studies of its pharmacokinetics, abuse potential
and toxicity. Model pipes were used to generate cocaine smoke
analogous to that inhaled by human &quot;crack&quot; abusers.
Using procedures to minimize pyrolysis, cocaine base smoke was
determined to be 93.5% cocaine particles with the remainder being
cocaine vapor. The average particle size generated from all model
pipes was 2.3 mu which is small enough to ensure deposition into
the alveolar region of the human lung. Although this particle
size is eminently respirable [corrected] by primates, a much
smaller fraction will reach the alveolar region of rodents.
Special generating procedures would therefore be required to
expose rodents to meaningful doses of airborne cocaine that mimic
the rapid absorption achieved by &quot;crack&quot; smokers. </p>

<hr>

<p> . </p>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>