
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B011-195</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/dare6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122041217 text/html 8435
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:12:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:40:37 GMT
Content-length: 8218
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>STUDIES FIND DARE DRUG PROGRAM NOT EFFECTIVE</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> STUDIES FIND DRUG PROGRAM NOT EFFECTIVE </p>

<p> Yet high-level supporters argue &quot;it's better to have it
than not have it&quot; </p>

<p> by Dennis Cauchon </p>

<p> USA TODAY, 11 October 1993 </p>

<p> In just 10 years, D.A.R.E. has grown into the USA's No. 1
drug education program, reaching 5 million fifth-graders in 60%
of school districts. </p>

<p> The Drug Abuse Resistance Education logo -- &quot;D.A.R.E. To
Keep Kids Off Drugs&quot; -- is on bumper stickers, T-shirts,
even Kentucky Fried Chicken boxes. Police, taxpayers and business
give $700 million a year. It's also a favorite of dozens of
members of Congress. </p>

<p> But a raft of scientific studies says D.A.R.E., the 17-week
course taught by uniformed police, doesn't achieve its main
long-term goal: stopping kids from smoking pot, drinking booze or
using other drugs. </p>

<p> &quot;I've got nothing against D.A.R.E., but we need to get
some white light on this issue so we can wisely decide how to
spend our money and on what programs,&quot; says Tom Colthurst,
who recently organized a national conference on drug education at
the University of California-San Diego. But D.A.R.E. executive
director Glenn Levant calls the studies flawed and not
comprehensive: &quot;Scientists, will tell you bumble bees can't
fly, but we know they can.&quot; </p>

<p> Levant says a proper national study would cost $3 million-$5
million and take seven years to finish. </p>

<p> Studies have focused mostly on specific cities, and cost
several hundred thousand dollars each. </p>

<p> Experts agree recent research on D.A.R.E. is not perfect: It
is difficult and expensive to measure the behavior of large
numbers of children over several years. But they say the research
is better than studies on other drug programs. &quot;Almost every
researcher would agree there's enough information to judge
D.A.R.E.,&quot; says Rand Corp. researcher Phyllis Ellickson. </p>

<p> &quot;It's well-established that D.A.R.E. doesn't work,&quot;
says Gilbert Botvin of the Institute for Prevention at Cornell
University Medical Center. </p>

<p> Created in 1983 under the direction of former Los Angeles
Police chief Daryl Gates, D.A.R.E. exploded after the Bush
administration gave it heavy federal subsidies. </p>

<p> The program uses lectures, role playing and other techniques
to teach children to avoid drugs. And by all accounts, the kids
who take the course and the police who teach it think it's
terrific. D.A.R.E. &quot;does no harm and by far, nothing but
good,&quot; says Scott Mandel, a Los Angeles-area teacher.
&quot;D.A.R.E. really works,&quot; says Mike Miller, Round Rock,
Texas, police officer and D.A.R.E. teacher. &quot;Surveys from
across the nation show kids who take the D.A.R.E. course are much
less likely to use drugs later in life.&quot; </p>

<p> That's not what most studies show. </p>

<p> To investigate D.A.R.E.'s effectiveness, researchers looked
at two similar groups of children: One group takes D.A.R.E.; the
other does not. Then, researchers followed the children's
behavior for several years. Since 1987, studies -- most funded by
law enforcement agencies involved in the program -- have been
conducted at 20 North Carolina schools; 31 Kentucky schools; 11
South Carolina schools; 36 Illinois schools; and 11 Canadian
schools. The results were similar. </p>

<p> The 1991 Kentucky study, the National Institute on Drug Abuse
reported, found &quot;no statistically significant differences
between experimental groups and control groups in the percentage
of new users of ... cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, alcohol,
marijuana.&quot; </p>

<p> A 1990 study funded by the Canadian government found
&quot;D.A.R.E. had no significant effect on the students' use of
any of the substances measured.... They included: tobacco, beer,
pop, marijuana, acid, Valium, wine, aspirin, uppers, downers,
heroin, crack (cocaine), liquor, candy, glue and PCP.&quot; </p>

<p> To make sense of the various studies, the Justice Department
hired the Research Triangle Institute of Durham, N.C., to conduct
a statistical analysis of all D.A.R.E. research. </p>

<p> A preliminary report from the RTI -- analyzing eight studies
involving 9,500 children -- says D.A.R.E. has &quot;a limited to
essentially non-existent effect&quot; on drug use. </p>

<p> D.A.R.E. did have a positive effect on children's knowledge
and attitudes about drugs, the report says. It also added the
social skills needed to say no to drugs. </p>

<p> But even on these measures, D.A.R.E. didn't do as well as
other drug programs, including local classes taught by teachers
and students. </p>

<p> D.A.R.E. America has launched a behind-the-scenes lobbying
campaign against the final RTI report, due in November. </p>

<p> &quot;We're working with D.A.R.E. to ... voice their
concerns,&quot; says Winnie Reed, the National Institute of
Justice official overseeing the study. </p>

<p> The pressure has angered some academic researchers.
&quot;It's repugnant, out of line and very unusual,&quot; says
Dennis Rosenbaum, director of the Center for Research in Law and
Justice at the University of Illinois-Chicago. </p>

<p> Rosenbaum -- a D.A.R.E. supporter -- says the group is its
own worst enemy because it has spent so much effort attacking the
evaluations, rather than learning from research. </p>

<p> Even some state and local D.A.R.E. programs are backing away
from D.A.R.E. America's fight. &quot;If we aren't getting the job
done, we ought to be man enough to try something else,&quot; says
Tim DeRosa of the Illinois state police and long-time D.A.R.E.
activist. </p>

<p> Some government officials are aware of D.A.R.E.'s
shortcomings. </p>

<p> &quot;Research shows that, no, D.A.R.E. hasn't been effective
in reducing drug use,&quot; says William Modzeleski, the top drug
official at the Department of Education. </p>

<p> The department has considered asking Congress to repeal a law
requiring states to give D.A.R.E. a total of $10 million or more
a year from federal Drug Free Schools money. </p>

<p> But D.A.R.E. continues to have high-level government support.
</p>

<p> On Sept. 9 -- National D.A.R.E. Day by congressional decree
-- D.A.R.E. </p>

<p> officials and students lunched with dozens of Congress
members and met Attorney General Janet Reno. Later, they visited
first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton. </p>

<p> Drug czar Lee Brown, who started the program in Houston when
he was police chief, remains a booster. &quot;My experience has
been positive,&quot; Brown says. &quot;The research has pointed
in many different directions, but my conclusion is it's better to
have it than not have it. I know first-hand that young people are
impressed by it and look up to the D.A.R.E. officer as a role
model.&quot; </p>

<p> Yet many drug education experts fear that D.A.R.E.'s
political clout is siphoning drug education money from better
programs. </p>

<p> &quot;D.A.R.E. has a following and sales force that is
extremely powerful in fighting for scarce resources,&quot; says
University of Michigan researcher Lloyd Johnston, who conducts
the government's survey of teen drug use. &quot;But its growth is
totally out of scale to its effectiveness.&quot; </p>

<p> Johnston and others aren't sure why D.A.R.E. isn't working
better. </p>

<p> Some think it targets children too young; some think teachers
and older students get better results than uniformed police;
others say the program relies on psychological theories that
don't work. </p>

<p> Levant thinks critics are just jealous of D.A.R.E.'s success.
&quot;We're like apple pie,&quot; he says. &quot;But I guess you
can always find someone who doesn't like apple pie.&quot; </p>

<p> -- <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>