
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-59</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B012-98</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/mjeff1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050131 text/html 62002
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:24 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:08:44 GMT
Content-length: 61784
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>The Effects of Marijuana on Consciousness</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49632" -->

<h2>THE EFFECTS OF MARIJUANA ON CONSCIOUSNESS </h2>

<p>ANONYMOUS </p>

<p>From: <i>Altered States of Consciousness</i>, edited by
Charles T. Tart, Doubleday &amp; Co., 1972, Chapter 22 </p>

<hr>

<p>A marijuana high usually lasts two or three hours, during
which a wide range of effects may occur, varying both in
intensity and quality. The usual, most noticeable effect is
intensification of sensation and increased clarity of perception.
Visually, colors are brighter, scenes have more depth, patterns
are more evident, and figure-ground relations both more distinct
and more easily reversible. Other sense modalities do not have
the variety of visual stimuli, but all seem to be intensified.
Sounds become more distinct, with the user aware of sounds he
otherwise might not have noticed. Music, recorded and live, is
heard with increased fidelity and dimension, as though there were
less distance between the source and the listener. Taste and
smell are also enhanced under marijuana. The spice rack is a
treasure of sensation, and food develops a rich variety of
tastes. </p>

<p>Skin receptors are also effected. Heat, cold, and pressure
receptors become more sensitive. Pain produces paradoxical
effects. If attention is not on the area of pain, there is a
reduced sensitivity to the hurt. But awareness of pain from a
lesion, such as a burn or cut, will often persist for a longer
period than usual, even allowing for the changed perception of
time under marijuana. </p>

<p>Awareness of proprioceptive responses is enhanced. The person
using marijuana may become aware of usually automatic,
non-conscious, muscle tensions, small movements, feedback and
control processes, and feelings of physical comfort and
discomfort. These can be perceived with great clarity and
distinctness. </p>

<p>Such effects vary with the individual and the situation.
Sometimes one modality will predominate; sometimes a sequence of
effects will occur; sometimes nothing will seem to happen. The
direction or modality of effect can be often manipulated by the
individual if he deliberately exposes himself to the stimulus,
such as music, or paintings. However, such setting may not affect
the perception if the person is not otherwise ready to respond in
that way. Effects more often call attention to themselves; the
user observes what he is experiencing in the situation and
realizes it is not how he usually experiences the stimuli. On the
other hand, some sense modalities may function in a straight
pedestrian manner, neither being enhanced nor diminished. </p>

<p>The person himself is the most important determinant of how
the enhancement will appear. Some persons orient primarily to
visual stimuli and visual thinking, others to sound, others to
tactile impressions. Visual orientation seems to predominate
among persons in our culture; audile and tactile thinking is less
common. It seems likely that sensory enhancement of a marijuana
high would be most noticed in the predominate sense modality of
the user; it certainly should have a differential response in
relation to less used ways of perceiving. </p>

<p>Another factor which affects the response is that persons
unfamiliar with the marijuana state frequently must
&quot;learn&quot; that they are perceiving experience in a
different way. That is, someone makes them aware of changed
perception by showing them objects, playing music, and calling
their attention to the difference in sights and sounds. Then they
become consciously aware of the perceptual changes. This
initiation procedure has led sociologist H. S. Becker (Becker,
I963; partially reproduced in Solomon, I966) to suggest that most
of the effects of marijuana are learned, not spontaneous. He says
(accurately, I am sure) that the user must learn to notice the
effects, categorize them, and connect them to the total
experience of using the drug. What is learned in most cases is
not a new way of perceiving, but the awareness of a change in
perception. Few persons observe what they are doing in the sense
of observing their seeing, and it is not surprising that many
should have to learn how to become aware of themselves
experiencing by checking current perception against memory and
expectations. </p>

<p>The user's internal psychological needs will also influence
his response. A fear of being overwhelmed by too much input will
often reduce any changes to only those which the user can cope
with or to changes only in certain modes. A fear of losing
control over the perception of experience may suppress most of
the effects and even shut down responses to below normal. On the
other hand, emotional involvement with some part of the
environment may enhance its perception. Internal physical needs
also affect the response, e.g., hunger may be intensified so the
person finds himself ravenous on getting high. </p>

<p>For a person using marijuana for the first few times sensory
changes occur sequentially, rather than all at once. First he may
notice increased brightness and clarity of colors, then sounds,
then visual structures, such as paintings or designs. (Two
dimensional photographs and motion pictures may be seen in three
dimensions in the marijuana high, a perception which can be
transferred to the normal state under certain conditions.) Then
proprioceptive sensations may present themselves. Any order of
the effects may occur during one high state or several. Often
effects will develop to particular levels and then stabilize
without further elaboration. I know some individuals who listen
to music during a high, and this is their major use and
apparently their only enhancement. </p>

<p>There are two states of awareness which relate to these
sensory effects. The basic one can be called pure awareness. In
this state the person is completely and vividly aware of his
experience, but there are no processes of thinking, manipulating,
or interpreting going on. The sensations fill the person's
attention, which is passive but absorbed in what is occurring,
which is usually experienced as intense and immediate. Pure
awareness is experiencing without associations to what is there. </p>

<p>The other state of awareness is one which can be termed
conscious awareness, in which the sensory experience is connected
to meanings, plans, functions, decisions, and possible actions.
This is our normal way of perceiving and how we usually go about
our daily lives. We do not sense the world directly, but with the
incorporation of our memories, meanings, and uses. In the state
of pure awareness objects are experienced as sensory qualities,
without the intrusion of interpretation. There are examples of
this in normal life. The sensation of sexual orgasm may be (and
hopefully is) experienced with pure awareness. Natural beauty,
such as flowers, mountains, oceans, and sunsets, is sometimes
experienced from a point of awareness without adding conscious
thinking. </p>

<p>These two processes of awareness have been described by
Charles Solley and Gardner Murphy (1960, Chapter 14) as
non-reflective consciousness and reflective consciousness. Alan
Watts compares the awareness state to a floodlight of attention,
which shows a broad area and lights up anything that is there.
Consciousness awareness he compares to a spotlight, which is
focused and can be directed, though on a narrower area. This is a
good analogy in pointing out that no deliberate directing is done
in the awareness state, although it is sometimes the case that
the area perceived in awareness may be a small one seen in great
detail. </p>

<p>The awareness state can be called &quot;choiceless&quot;
because choice is a part of consciousness functions. Decisions
made outside of consciousness are not called &quot;by
choice&quot; since choice implies conscious action. In a state of
direct awareness there are no choices made and no decisions or
actions occur. The stream of sensation flows and the person is
aware of what is happening; if he acts he does so without
consciously deciding to move. (That is, action is handled by some
process other than the consciousness monitoring the awareness
experience.) When complicated action becomes necessary conscious
attention is activated and the sensation is used as stimuli,
criteria, or information for the choices, plans, or action. </p>

<p>The awareness is not always experienced purely under
marijuana, but often is mixed with some, though reduced,
conscious attention. Consciousness, conscious awareness, or
conscious attention involves a connecting function which observes
experience in relation to past experience, memory images, memory
recording, expectancies, plans, goals, etc. This type of
consciousness may intrude on the awareness state at a low level.
However, when awareness fills the attention there is a
&quot;becoming lost&quot; in the experience, in which there is
often not even a memory of what occurred. This seems to be a
state in which consciousness functions are not present, and all
experience is at the level of awareness. Consciousness,
attention, and memory recording are apparently not active. (It is
possible that attention was present and either was not remembered
or the memory is not accessible to consciousness.) Such a state
of pure awareness is at one end of a continuum of varying degrees
of conscious activity, with the other end at a state in which the
contents of awareness are used for decisions, plans, inferences,
etc., and are not experienced for their primary sensory
qualities; they are information rather than experiences. </p>

<p>This analysis suggests a reason for sensory enhancement under
marijuana, a movement of attention from consciousness processes
to awareness processes. We usually think of attention as
synonymous with consciousness, but it is an uneasy synonymy.
Consciousness seems to be more than attention, but we cannot
describe a consciousness without attention. Perhaps it is
possible for attention energy to move into sensory processes and
operate less in the decisional, deliberative processes of
consciousness. If this happens it would provide much more energy
for attending to sense data, and we could expect the sensory
experience to be more vivid and more detailed. </p>

<p>Intensity of sensory experience seems related to the total
proportion or amount of attention which is involved in the
process. If attention is used in conscious or unconscious
processes in making decisions, remembering, evaluating, etc.,
then this much is removed from the awareness of the sense
experience. Thus it may be that one of the causes of sensory
enhancement under marijuana is that attention energy moves from
consciousness processes into awareness processes, which amplifies
the experience. </p>

<h4>TIME DISTORTION </h4>

<p>Besides sensory enhancement, the other most immediate effect
of marijuana is a change in the perception of time: events take
longer to occur. Bach's first Brandenburg Concerto lasts hours.
An hour seems to have passed, but the dock records 25 minutes.
The person's internal fantasies are long and involved, but only a
few minutes have passed in government time. In this state the
fantasies and music do not move at a faster pace---they move at
their own usual rate, though often more fluently and more dearly.
The impression is that external time must have slowed down, while
the internal experience continues at the same rate. There is not
the impression of speed or rapidity, but that the time available
to the user is magnified. </p>

<p>There are similar effects in normal experience. Time spent at
a boring talk seems to pass more slowly, and one thinks in
dismay, &quot;What, only five minutes have passed since I looked
at my watch?&quot; </p>

<p>A method used by Linn Cooper (1956) to induce time distortion
under hypnosis is useful to note here. A metronome set at one
beat per second is used. The hypnotized subject is told that the
metronome is slowing down to one beat every two seconds, every
five seconds, once a minute. Verbally or conceptually we can now
say that the subject's internal rate has remained the same, but
external time relative to the subject has slowed down. Has the
subject's own pace actually speeded up? I do not know, and I can
think of no reliable criteria for determining this. Brain wave
research shows that the basic alpha rhythm can be speeded up by a
flickering light (called photic driving), but not very much, and
not even to twice its normal rhythm. Cooper's subjects report
that they do mentally imagine the amount of thoughts appropriate
to the expanded time available, including counting imagined
objects. This may be a convenient hallucination or it may be an
accurate description of what they do. (Even calculation of real
problems would not be a valid test because calculating geniuses
can answer complex mathematical problems almost instantaneously,
and this ability may be available under hypnosis, though it has
never been reported to my knowledge under marijuana or hypnosis.)
In this procedure under hypnosis and also in marijuana the
subjective experience of time is disconnected from the marking of
social or government time. </p>

<p>The effect under marijuana is analogous to effects in visual
and sound modalities. Visual scenes often have more depth, sounds
are heard with more dimension; so too with time-there is an
expansion of the fabric of time so there is a feeling of depth
instead of the usual two dimensional flow. </p>

<p>The explanation of this sometimes given by marijuana users is
that more is happening: they are thinking faster or more thoughts
are occurring in the same time period. This could cause external
time to be relatively slower. Although it need not be the case
that internal processes change at a faster rate it is possible
that a person is aware of more perceptions in a given amount of
time as a result of the enhancement of sensory data. With visual
enhancement more details of the movements of the self and others
are attended to. This means that more information is perceived in
the same amount of time. This is also true of proprioceptive and
tactile responses. Time is somewhat conditioned to a normal rate
of information input in particular contexts. One has a
&quot;standard rate of intake&quot; and if the amount of
information is increased for a unit of time, then one of the
responses may be that time is going slower. To be conscious of
any change in experience there must be a comparison with previous
similar situations. Thus if the time experience while high is
compared with a similar normal experience, or with a time pace
constructed from normal experience, it may be perceived as
slower. </p>

<p>A more important cause for time distortion under marijuana can
be found by noting how persons normally judge the passage of
time, then investigating the changes in these criteria caused by
marijuana. This is rather difficult because no one knows how we
judge time. Nevertheless there are some relevant observations
which can be made.(1) </p>

<p>Notice the situations in which time seems to alter for many
persons in everyday experience and out-of-the-ordinary
experience. These are situations in which the experience itself
is the focus of attention, they are not means to extrinsic goals.
Persons totally involved in making love seem to have no awareness
of how much time may pass. Persons in a state of anger do not
become aware of time lapse until the emotion subsides or ego
controls are invoked. Psychotherapy hours in which emotional
material is covered seem to be out of time awareness. Mystics
become unaware of the passage of time during meditation, as do
persons having peak experiences (Maslow, I964). In dreams,
daydreams, fantasies, ecstasy, and strong emotional states, the
sense of time is absent or changed. And in the state of pure
awareness, as I have used the term, there is no perception of the
rate of time. These are all personal experiences in which
conscious attention is not dominant, and immediate experience,
rather than goals, expectancies, plans, and decisions, is
predominant. Time perception is a socially reinforced response.
The experiences and states I have described are not states which
are socially conscious; they are not internally subordinated to
social time or schedules. Anger cannot be paced with conscious
control, nor can ecstasy. Feelings, fantasies, dreams, and
awareness do not incorporate the sense of time which is built up
by and maintained in the consciousness. Thus when one is
experiencing such content there is no marking of the passage of
time, and to the extent this material is the content of
awareness, the less social time is noted. Immediate experience is
always timeless; time is perceived in relation to the uses of
experience in controlling or predicting the future or
interpreting the past, the present being perceived in relation to
past or future. This is one of the major functions of
consciousness. In a normal conscious state when the internal or
external input is to be changed or manipulated the time required
is automatically projected, based on past experience. This
imposes the knowledge of time on the consciousness. One of the
effects of marijuana is to reduce the strength of expectancies
and goals which are socially reinforced. Thus non-time
experiences are increased in relative strength and time oriented
associations are decreased, which creates the sense that time is
expanded. </p>

<p>Some indication that this is what occurs may be seen in
reports of marijuana users that time passes instantaneously. One
girl reported that when high she suddenly discovered 45 minutes
had passed without her realization of this. And there are reports
of listening to music when the individual realizes the music had
stopped, without his remembering hearing the selection as it was
playing. What happens in these cases is that most of the person's
attention is in non-time processes, so that time passage is not
noted until the social consciousness returns. Then it seems that
no time has passed, since there was no process noting its
passage. Just as in sleep, amnesic hypnosis, or anaesthesia,
there is no consciousness of the duration of the state, and the
conscious time flow seems unbroken from the moment of falling
asleep to the moment of waking. </p>

<p>When observing sensory stimuli, listening to music,
fantasying, etc., there is the feeling of expanded time because
the outside experiences are overwhelmed by the mental, internal
experience which is not marking time and there is no way to gauge
their pace. The quantity of the time change varies. If the user
is almost totally involved with the awareness processes, with
little conscious attention, then there will be little sense of
duration, and long periods of clock time will go by quickly. </p>

<p>Events themselves are timeless, in that they are always in the
present---they do not echo their past nor presage their future
states; we alone do that to them, for ourselves. And we ourselves
do not experience the past or the future; we experience memories
or expectancies, which may be realistic or fantasies. So our
experience of the passage of time is based on our comparison of
present experience with our remembrance of the past, usually the
immediate past, or our anticipation of the future and how we get
there. </p>

<p>Marijuana decreases the strength of the automatic memory,
expectancy, and anticipation processes; thus the perception of an
experience is not surrounded by the usual multitude of past
encounters, future possibilities, and potential uses. In contexts
requiring action on the basis of expectations and plans, such as
driving an automobile, they are available and often with more
focused attention. Given a situation not requiring activity or
decisions, the penumbra of response patterns, functions, and
potentials surrounding experience decreases, and the immediate
experience per se is perceived, rather than its position in a
pattern of change. This decreases comparison of the present with
the past, and again reduces the feeling of duration or passing of
time. (&quot;Passing of time&quot; is a curious phrase, because
time passing cannot be empirically observed. One may conclude the
passage of time by observing changes in experience, but it is not
really an inference either. What seems to be described is the
mental reviewing of the preceding changes which led up to the
present point. Re-running the succession in memory from some
point up to the present gives the sensation of passing time. We
are aware of events which are different from the ones we now
experience but that are connected by physical changes in which we
have participated (directly or through observation). This
awareness may be &quot;awareness of the passage of time.&quot; </p>

<p>In summary, under marijuana, the sense of time is distorted.
First, because mental contents and awareness processes which are
not connected to time needs or markers are strengthened. These
include daydreams, fantasies, event memories, peak experiences,
emotions, and the pure awareness state. Second, because goals,
anticipations, and expectancies are decreased in prominence,
reducing attention given to possible changes in the environment,
which decreases awareness of future states. Third, memory of
immediate past experience is decreased in strength, which reduces
knowledge of change and moves attention to the present. If
consciousness is completely passive, and non-time elements fill
attention, then the experience seems timeless. If some
consciousness processes and associations are maintained time will
seem to have slowed, as attention moves among the various
contents. </p>

<h4>EXPECTANCIES </h4>

<p>Both the intensification of sensory experience and the
expansion of time are part of an increased attentiveness to
immediate experience in contrast to memories of the past or plans
for the future. Memories and plans are experienced but only as
they arise out of the immediate content and needs of the person's
internal and external experience; they do not automatically
operate as in normal consciousness. Every action and potential
action, in the normal state, is evaluated according to its
consequences: what results will follow. Mental processes imagine
as many consequences as they have experience to do so, both
immediate and long range, testing these consequences against
criteria or goals of valued states. The consequences which are
most valued control the action. For example, if a person feels
angry toward another he may want to insult him verbally. He
mentally anticipates the possible consequences of this action,
which may include the release and satisfaction of the anger,
feelings of masculinity, enhanced self concept of strength, etc.,
on the positive side, and the anger or disapproval of the other
person, loss of self control, fear of his own impulses, what his
mother would think of the action, etc. on the negative side.
Depending on the person's past experience, his needs and
strengths of various values, the action will be taken, modified,
or inhibited. Every action a person engages in is surrounded and
extended mentally (consciously and unconsciously) by such
expectancies, and every situation experienced by a person is
responded to by anticipating its potential consequences and
relating them to desirable and undesirable conditions. (Of
course, the opposite of such action---its inhibition---is also
subject to the same processes.) Some of this process is
conscious, especially when the situation is new, unfamiliar, very
important, or ambiguous, but most of the expectancy and
anticipation process is done preconsciously. Normally persons are
not aware of the activity which occurs to determine an action;
expectancies have become incorporated into automatic responses. </p>

<p>The mind is efficient in making its activities automatic.
First an action is consciously made in response to a need or
situation. If it is successful (reinforced) it becomes habitual,
and is taken automatically without the need of conscious
attention, much as driving a car, sewing, tying your shoes, and
smoking a cigarette are all composed of large blocks of now
automatic actions which once had to be done with conscious
attention at every point. Later only the major elements must be
controlled with conscious attention, such as changing lanes when
driving, searching for an ashtray, etc. How can an action be
released without conscious attention? What must happen is that
criteria for action and the particular action are connected by
the conscious mind; then the process can be made automatically.
When the criteria are fulfilled, then the action is made.(2) This
suggests that there is some process or energy which releases
action but which does not need conscious attention. Similarly,
most of the expectancies around experiences are not
conscious---only the more important ones or ones which are so
complex as not to be automatically used. </p>

<p>Such expectancies and anticipations function to keep behavior
consistent, goal directed, and reasonably integrated. They help
avoid conflicts within the personality and with the environment,
including other persons. They have obvious survival value and
undoubtedly are reinforced by our society and our own needs. The
function of reinforcement is clear: The reinforcement value of
the projected consequences of an action come to affect our
decision to take or not to take the action. These expectancies
are responses to possible futures, and orient our actions to the
future} not the present. </p>

<p>One of the major effects of marijuana is to decrease the
strength of these expectancies and anticipations, on both
conscious and preconscious levels. Thus in the high state the
expectancy processes decrease their influence on behavior. Since
these are always oriented to future states, they take attention
away from perception of immediate experience and turn it to
following imagined states. Thus when attention given to imagined
states is reduced, the perception of the present experience will
increase in strength or intensity, either because more energy is
available for such awareness or because there are fewer processes
to attend to, and present experience becomes relatively more
predominant in the mental field. This enhancement of immediate
experience is reflected in the effects of marijuana on sense data
and time perception. Indeed, the decrease in expectancies, which
are connected to goals, may be one of the reasons for the change
in the awareness of time, since time is perceived in terms of
changes, including changes in relation to a potential state of
affairs. If the knowledge provided by expectancies is reduced,
then the immediate experience will not be seen as a point in time
with a future, but more as an event, <i>per se</i>. </p>

<p>The reduction in the strength of expectancies also contributes
to the increase in intensity of sensory experience. Objects as
well as situations and actions are surrounded by our potential
responses to them, such as our past experiences with them, how we
might use them, other forms they have taken, how they are made,
their qualities in other sense modalities, etc. When we perceive
an object, whether a fire in a fireplace, a photograph of a fire,
a fire engine, or a fiery speaker, not only are we aware of the
object, but also we have incorporated in our awareness these
other elements which give structure and meaning to the sense
data. Thus we know that the object is a bird cage or a rib cage,
and we know its qualities, functions, and potentials. Usually
these are keyed to our verbal response, our classification, but
they are known non-verbally as well (e.g., we can have emotional
responses or motor responses without verbal responses). </p>

<h4>FUNCTIONAL ASSOCIATIONS </h4>

<p>Particularly important to us is the function of objects.(3)
One sees this in a child's definition: a hole is to dig. A bridge
is to walk over to get to the other side. Someone said that home
is &quot;A place where when you go there, they have to take you
in.&quot; There is an essential effect of these operational
definitions: they force classifications rather than specificity.
Any hole is to dig and how hole X differs from hole Y is not
important so long as each can be dug. My home is not different
from your home, since they will both take us in. Such definitions
attempt to capture some particular criteria of whatever they
define. The criteria of definition are the only characteristics
which need to be observed in perceiving the object, and we are
trained to perceive in this way. We learn as children to see the
function of objects and to see the similarities of objects,
rather than experience them in all possible ways. The advantage
of this is obvious: we survive because we can use the
environment, we can generalize, we can cooperate within a
socially constructed reality. The disadvantages are obvious: we
may not see reality except in terms of functions, which shuts out
an enormous amount of reality (some of which would be functional
in various contexts). And often persons see objects only in terms
of their own functional needs, which narrows their perspective
considerably. (Psychologists might see persons as experimental
subjects, an insurance salesman might see one as a prospect,
etc.) </p>

<p>This leads, incidentally, to failures of discrimination in
perception, illustrated by the classical occidental observation
that all Chinese look alike, and no doubt Chinese observe the
same about occidentals. One of my friends took an astronomy
course and discovered that stars were not all the same color, as
he had previously perceived, but were red, blue, yellow, and
white. This led him to realize that all trees looked alike to
him. Of course he would not have said that they were identical,
but I doubt if he could have told the differences between an elm
and an oak, even standing in front of them, because a tree is
with leaves and to be shaded by. And after all, which of us could
easily describe essential differences between two holes dug by a
child in the sand at the beach? Though the child probably could. </p>

<p>Under marijuana the functional associations of objects are
decreased in strength. In addition to this specific association,
other associations such as verbal labeling and memory constructs
of such objects are decreased in strength. Normally all these
elements are imposed on the conscious experience of the object,
some incorporated into the perception (such as seeing the object
as a teapot) and some claiming attention on the periphery of
consciousness (such as knowing it is hot and not touching it).
When these associations are decreased there are fewer mental
impositions on the sensory perception of the object. Aspects
which would normally be shut out (such as a blemish on the teapot
or the shape of the handle) are given equal attention, and hence
are seen instead of being ignored. When attention is directed by
goals, as it usually is in the normal state, it is simply not
given to non-functional stimuli, i.e., elements that do not have
anything to do with what the person wants at the moment. </p>

<p>The person under marijuana is not seeing this object as
&quot;flowers&quot; with a mental image of flowers and his
memories of flowers being confirmed by these flowers, which are
to look at and smell and if one can look at and smell these one
has confirmed that they are flowers and that settles that part of
reality, and so on to another. Rather he has a great deal of time
and it is not urgent what uses these have or what consequences
could result and much more of his awareness is filled by these
flowers.. And there are textures, colors, shades, shapes, feels,
crevices, shadows, smells; all things that are there; experienced
rather than used. </p>

<p>An important principle is that you can experience something
only if you do not think in terms of its function. You can know
what it is only if you do not impose what it will be or could be
or ought to be. This often becomes quite evident under marijuana.
</p>

<p>This suggests a principle regarding processes of attention.
When attention is reduced for some elements in perception, the
amount given to other elements increases, as though attention is
a mobile amount of energy, and when a quantity is not needed at
one point it moves to another point. This is consistent with
Freudian theory, which holds that as energy is released from
conflict points it becomes available to the general system. With
marijuana, when association processes reduce their demands on
attention, it flows to whatever else is in the consciousness. (I
am using a fluid metaphor, but other models will do equally well.
Electrically one can speak in terms of activation. Cybernetically
we could refer to homeostatic balancing of elements. Or we could
talk of homunculi leaving the study and going to the patio.) </p>

<h4>ASSOCIATIONS </h4>

<p>This reduction of associations is an important basic effect of
marijuana. It contributes to the expansion of time, to sensory
enhancement, and to the increase in attention which is given to
the focus of consciousness. However, not all association patterns
are decreased in strength in the high state. Well known are the
flights of fantasy and dreaming stimulated by hashish and
cannabis.(4) And in non-fantasy high states users have reported
that they can perceive connections and associations of ideas that
were not accessible to them in the non-high state (usually called
&quot;straight&quot; by users). This seems inconsistent with what
I have just said about the decrease in association strength.
However, while associations, particularly those based on social
learning, are reduced in strength, any association may gain in
strength if it becomes the focus of the detailed attention
possible under marijuana. Thus fantasies and creative thinking
may have increased associations and may be more fully developed
than in the normal state of consciousness. </p>

<p>The associations which are reduced in strength seem to be
those which are learned through social reinforcement: meanings
and behaviors which are taught by society. Functions of objects
are socially taught. Patterns of communication are social.
Language and verbal knowledge (Columbus discovered America in
1492) is social in origin. Inhibitions and controls on behavior
are socially reinforced, and are often incorporated into the
verbal system through &quot;should&quot; and &quot;should
not&quot; statements. When social norms are the same as personal
needs, desires, and meanings, there is consistency in the
response to a situation or object. When conflict between social
and personal directions occurs it must be resolved, and usually
it is resolved in favor of social meanings, functions, and
approved behavior (usually called rational). Thus the social
perception of a situation may exclude many of the potential
meanings, behaviors, and emotions. Under marijuana this excluding
function of socially learned associations is reduced in strength.
The excluding function has certain survival value. It keeps our
consciousness from being dogged up with unnecessary and
distracting contents. Thus a scholar looks at a book and notices
the title but not the binding; for a book binder the opposite is
the case. Associations which contribute to the goals of society
are learned by persons through social reinforcement, and one
effect of these associations is to inhibit other associations.
Marijuana decreases this inhibition and lowers the reinforcement
value of the association. In effect this makes all associations
more equal, and the network of associations is less guided or
channeled in socially reinforced directions. A person who is high
may be aware that an object is a pencil, but he may successively
also see it as a shape, a phallic metaphor, a geometrical solid,
the printing on it, etc. He has more associations once they are
away from the strict control of social perception. </p>

<h4>INHIBITIONS </h4>

<p>The same pattern can be seen in expectancies and
anticipations. Socially oriented behavior makes great use of
expectancies to control behavior in an effort to maximize
approval and minimize or avoid disapproval, which are social
reinforcers.(5) Such behavior thus involves a large amount of
inhibition. By inhibition I mean any kind of control to prevent
activity from reaching a certain level. The activity can be
thoughts, action, fantasies, or emotions. Inhibitions in Freudian
terms are controlled by anti-cathexes, in learning theory by
aversive stimuli, and in terms used here, by expectations of
aversive stimuli. Inhibitions need not be on anti-social acts,
but are often to direct behavior into patterns normal in our
society. Persons maintain appropriate social distances (which are
arbitrary), you do not tug at the beard of someone you have just
met (though the thought may cross your mind), and a man does not
cry in public. These may seem minor but they are controlled with
great power by social reinforcement, as can be seen by the strong
rejection of the behavior if it occurs. Of course, inhibitions
are also placed on behavior which would be dangerous to society,
such as aggressive or destructive acts. </p>

<p>When behavior is inhibited, the psychological tendency is to
inhibit any mental activity which might lead to such behavior.
Feelings, impulses, images, fantasies, etc., may be inhibited and
decreased in strength, or even prevented from entering
consciousness. Such inhibited feelings and impulses may appear in
consciousness in the high state, often without effort of the
person. This may cause anxiety and the person may use ego defense
measures to block their appearance or diminish their threat. On
the other hand, he can also use methods of analysis and
self-therapy in the high state to deal with conflict material,
and may free himself from neurotic responses. </p>

<p>The effects of the reduction of social inhibitions can be seen
in various ways. At marijuana social gatherings persons may not
feel pressure to participate in conversational games, play
behavior increases, physical activity may increase. The decrease
of socially reinforced inhibitions also accounts for the actions
of users which claim public attention: jumping over fireplugs and
parking meters, uninhibited dancing (erotic and non-erotic), and
playful behavior (which is subtly taboo in our society). Here the
person is expressing impulses in behavior which would usually be
inhibited by expectancy of negative social reinforcement (frowns,
rejection, blame, punishment and other expressions of
disapproval). However, this reduction in strength of social
inhibitions does not usually result in anti-social acts (unless
jumping fireplugs is considered anti-social). This is curious
because social inhibitions are usually considered the bulwark
against committing crimes, aggressing against others, raping
women, etc. But we do not have cases of contemporary users of
marijuana burglarizing or attacking others, though such effects
are evident in the use of alcohol, where users are much more
likely to express violent and aggressive behavior. </p>

<p>Why then if inhibitions are reduced in strength do not users
become violent and aggressive? One reason may be that aggression
is usually specific to situations and expectancies about
situations, and the use of marijuana today rarely is in a
conflict situation. With reduced pressure from memories and
expectancies one would also expect less non-relevant feeling.
Beyond this, one of the psychological effects of marijuana is
euphoria. Thus anger and aggressive impulses are less strong and
do not draw much support from the rest of the personality. This
effect may also be related to the decrease in the strength of
social reinforcers, since chronic anger is often the result of
conflicts between social requirements and personal desires. </p>

<h4>ATTENTION </h4>

<p>The process of attention is clearly affected by marijuana. The
most obvious effect is to narrow the amount of diverse contents
in the focus of attention. The person under marijuana usually
perceives fewer objects of attention, which may mean physical
objects, actions, social elements, emotions, etc. We have already
noted this effect: a person who is high may become absorbed in an
object, event, or process to the exclusion of everything else. A
train of fantasy may occupy all of a person's attention. This is
a psychological analogy of tunnel vision, with the contents of
the tunnel expanded. </p>

<p>In the normal, straight state, conscious and non-conscious
processes give continual attentiveness to many internal and
external stimuli, with responses such as awareness, memories,
expectancies, and the many associations we have already noted.
Many of these are conscious, especially those on which decisions
are necessary. Others, and probably the bulk of the responses,
autonomously operate without being consciously attended to, and
come to consciousness only when necessary. These are in a
preconscious state, but nevertheless involve perception,
associations, memories, and expectancies.(6) Such processes often
regulate behavior when consciousness does not intervene (as in
driving a car automatically). But whenever novel stimuli appear
or more than routine decisions must be made, the contents become
part of the conscious state. </p>

<p>In the consciousness processes connections can be made among
several types of information, and in different contexts of
meaning---making connections with the many factors relevant to a
decision or the resolution of conflict.. Conscious attention
moves easily from one interpretation to another interpretation of
information, with the various memories and expectancies which go
with each interpretation, thus obtaining more information for the
decision. These interpretations and associations are drawn from
the preconscious processes, which, alone, cannot make
interconnections among themselves as fluidly as can
consciousness. Connections of ideas are made in preconscious
states, but these seem based on almost any relation, from
contiguity to puns. Consciousness can select the significant or
realistic connections and systematize their use. </p>

<p>We can regard the conscious system as the system which does
just that: selects and interprets information in relation to a
goal or purpose. It does this when it is activated by attention
energy. It may be that attention is the activating energy of
awareness. Attention usually is in the conscious system, which
consists of processes which select information to make decisions.
It can also be activated in preconscious contents, which contain
information, emotional values, and random associations. Most of
the time awareness is of the conscious processes. </p>

<p>Under marijuana attention-awareness energy may move into the
preconscious system and be less in consciousness processes. Since
there are fewer elements in attention the person is more strongly
aware of any individual element of meaning, memory, emotion,
etc., and less of its relation to other elements which would be
relevant in the conscious </p>

<p>system. Whatever is in the center of attention occupies all of
awareness: this may be sensory data, such as visual stimuli, or
imagery, such as fantasies. The effect can be termed a unity of
attention, in that all attention is focused on one subject. In
normal conscious states, several channels can be used at once,
e.g., reading a book while listening to music. Attention may
alternate, but even so keeps all channels of input on the edge of
attention. This does not occur with marijuana, which so far as
awareness goes, fills the attention with one thing at a time. If
one is recalling an experience from the memory, then almost all
attention is on the event, and almost none on the external
environment, expectancies or plans. Processes in normal states
which seem to parallel this would be extreme concentration on a
book or television, exciting conversations, and the state of
romantic love. </p>

<p>It is not the case that there is less attention, for the
quantity seems at least the same. Analogically it is as though a
portion of a photograph were blown up to the size of the original
picture, thus maintaining the size of the print but increasing
the magnification of a smaller relative section. </p>

<p>Some of the processes which contribute to this effect are
obvious. The reduction in expectancies and associations reduces
peripheral contents of consciousness. Many of these elements are
maintained continuously at a low level, appropriate to the
environment and needs of the person. Some items are continuously
monitored, much as a hostess may habitually check how each of her
guests is getting along. Such monitoring takes some attention
away from any central content, just as the hostess may not
concentrate fully on her own conversation if she is attending to
the state of her party. However, without the need for these side
glances, attention flows to the central subject. This means that
the plans, anticipations, etc., are not automatically attended
to, although if such an element enters the central position it
receives the intense central attention and is attended to in
great detail. </p>

<p>Peripheral attention and its contents are reduced in the high
state; central attention receives the energy which would
otherwise be used in peripheral attention. This could be because
each type of attention is different, and thus differentially
affected, or because the peripheral contents are reduced in
strength because of the reduction in the strength of
associations. The latter seems to be true; the former may be
also. </p>

<h4>MEMORY </h4>

<p>One of the processes important in perception is the comparing
of current input with similar past experience. When we see a
friend, a memory image of his face is presented to our
consciousness along with the sensation of his actual present
appearance. This memory image (which can be called a schema)
blends with the current sensation, so that the perception is a
combination of the two. The relative strengths of each source of
information probably vary from person to person. Some primarily
perceive the memory image, with the sensory input serving as
confirmation of the identification. For others, the memory image
may be so weak that reorientation and identification is
continually necessary. Though the construction and recall of this
image is not clearly understood, it must be partially constructed
from previous experience of the stimulus (including verbal
knowledge) up to a point where the person knows all he needs to
know for purposes of his response. After this, encounters with
the stimulus do not add to the memory image appreciably; further
discrimination is unnecessary and the image stabilizes. (Of
course, the person may continue to make discriminations. One of
the valued behaviors in science is to make perceptual
discriminations for which we have no functional need, assuming
that such information is valuable per se or may be valuable
later.) </p>

<p>Most persons rely principally on memory images in perception
unless there are evident differences in the immediate situation,
and their responses are keyed to the memory image. Consequently
we do not respond only to immediate experience. We identify
current experience according to past experience and then respond
on the basis of past experience, modified by whatever differences
we perceive to be significant in the current information. Our
actions originate from past experience, they are connected to the
structures built up in our memories, and these memories are
elicited by the immediate stimulus. In unfamiliar settings, no
memory image is available. Then we must deliberately and
consciously act, randomly act, follow instructions or models, or
act according to the most similar memory image. Any situation is
a combination of elements, and may call for complex combinations
of memories and response patterns, some new, some familiar. </p>

<p>Marijuana has two effects on this process. The first is to
reduce the general automatic availability of memory images; the
second is to increase the strength of memories when they are
relevant to central needs. We have already discussed the general
reduction in strength of memories in response to current
experience, which is principally in the automatic recall of
memory schema. The strength or visibility of the mental image is
reduced, with a resulting increase in the brightness of the data
themselves (there being nothing else to look at). This explains
also why experiences seem new: they are observed without the
feeling of familiarity caused by memory images. For most persons
in straight consciousness it is likely that sensation is checked
against a memory image (at a preconscious level) and what is seen
from the current stimulus is what is necessary to fulfill the
criteria for identification, based on the memory schema. The
relevant elements, the criteria, are affected by the goals or
functions which are important to the person. We do not perceive
dust on a typewriter when we look for something to type on. When
we look for a friend in a crowd we do not look at his face, we
identify it. Similarly, in conversation and daily life we
generally know what we are seeing, so perception is more
identification than observation. However, when fewer memory
images are available, as when high, one must respond to the sense
data as unfamiliar material. This may cause anxiety, depending on
the individual and the environment, or it may result in pleasure
at the enhancement or challenge of current perception. It may
also increase the potential responses, since there is less
pressure for a learned habitual response, which would normally
inhibit other responses. </p>

<p>(This may, incidentally, suggest an explanation for the <i>jamais
vu</i> sensation, in which there is the feeling that a normally
familiar situation is totally unfamiliar. Several experiences of <i>jamais
vu </i>reported to me seem to have occurred when there are
unfamiliar emotional elements present, as though the usual memory
schema and their associated responses were not available.) </p>

<p>At the same time, some memory images may be strengthened if
they are emotionally salient. A person having paranoid fears, for
example, may find his imagery increased in strength. One person
reports that once when high he observed a friend sitting to one
side of him staring directly at him. He turned to face his friend
and found him looking in another direction, his face turned
partially away from him. Apparently a fear activated the image of
a full staring face, which was superimposed on the profile of the
other person. It may be that psychotic or schizophrenic
perceptual projections are partially caused by increased internal
imagery. Under marijuana, at least, emotional force may activate
internal imagery which is used to search for, identify, or
interpret incoming stimuli. </p>

<p>So also if the person deliberately attempts to recall past
experiences there will often be increased recall, either of
events in great detail or Hashes of experiences. This is
particularly true if there is salient emotional content. Recall
which appears to be eidetic may occur under marijuana, and images
which are like playbacks of the original perceptual experience
may become accessible at will to conscious attention. If the
conscious attention is allowed to unfocus, so that only
monitoring is going on, almost instantaneous images can be
obtained of visual and sometimes auditory or tactile stimuli. The
image must be seen when it occurs; if there is an attempt to hold
it in consciousness a mental composite image takes its place. It
is possible that what occurs is an activation of the actual
memory record, selected from the stream of consciousness which is
recorded in the brain.(7) Only one flash comes at a time. This
ability, incidentally, has been transferred to straight, non-high
control after it has been observed under marijuana. The essential
feature seems to be in allowing the conscious attention not to
try to hold on to the image when it appears. One must learn to
see rather than look. </p>

<p>Another type of memory which is strengthened is that for
emotion-laden events. Strong emotional responses, such as grief,
fear, guilt, etc., often arise under marijuana. These are
responses to remembered events, responses which might normally be
suppressed. Usually the person's sense of identity is
functioning, so he can either accept the emotion and be a part of
it, which is usually therapeutic, or reject it, which may produce
dissonance and anxiety. &quot;Bad trips&quot; are sometimes
caused by emotions or pressures which threaten the person's self
concept or his sense of control. While suppression processes are
usually not too effective as defenses, distraction is, because of
the mobile flow of attention under marijuana. For this reason,
movement such as dancing, running, exercise, showers, etc., will
usually change the emotional tone. </p>

<p>One other effect on memory should be noted. Normally we have a
short-term recall process which holds memories in access for
about 20 minutes, and then a long-term storage, which is
permanent. In the high state, short-term memory becomes shorter,
and in very high states the sequence of thoughts is not
remembered past one or two transitions. The sequence can
sometimes be recalled with an effort, or reconstructed, but there
is no automatic remembering as there is normally. On the other
hand, after the high, events within it can be remembered,
indicating that at least some of the experiences are being filed
in long-term memory. </p>

<p>Partly due to the reduction in strength of memory there is
less intellectual control over the stream of consciousness.
Memory seems to be needed to maintain concepts or goals under
which to manipulate thoughts. Another cause of the reduced
control is the lowered inhibition processes, which are used in
thinking to filter irrelevant material and keep it from
cluttering the conscious attention. Logical ideas and connections
may also be enforced by such inhibitions; these would be loosened
by the decrease in association strength. </p>

<h4>VARIABLES </h4>

<p>In general for marijuana to have effects the user must
cooperate with it and facilitate the effects. He must learn to
allow himself to respond. There are some persons whose response
to marijuana is almost unnoticeable; their consciousness seems
not to change. These may be persons who have fears about and
strong defenses against losing control, and elements of their
feeling, thoughts, or action which threaten their control are
strongly rejected. Such personality systems are endangered by
marijuana effects and often maintain their structure against
these effects. Sometimes they will respond, but what effects are
occurring will be blocked from their conscious awareness. The
most noticeable effect is often time distortion, indicated by
long silences and broken often by a comment that nothing is
happening. </p>

<p>The effect of the physical and interpersonal setting on the
response to marijuana is strong and usually controls the tone of
the experience. The basic fact is that the individual creates the
reaction, not the drug. If the person feels under pressure, then
the drug will enhance his feeling of stress, and the effect will
depend on how the person can deal with the stimulus. If he feels
energetic, the drug will enhance his willingness to be active.
Some persons become less self- conscious, others more
self-conscious. Some move physically, others sit quietly. Some
talk, others are silent. Users of marijuana are as individual as
they are. For this reason, one must expect different effects to
occur from different times and varying physical and interpersonal
surroundings. For some the effect is quite different when smoked
alone than with other persons, probably because social situations
elicit different personality elements and present various
pressures. </p>

<p>These variable factors should be noted in considering research
and investigation of the effects of marijuana. The plant probably
does everything anybody has claimed for it, but only in a
situation which enables it to do whatever is claimed for it. One
highly respectable philosopher and author, who has explored a
variety of chemicals, says that marijuana will take a person as
far as LSD. To which I would add, especially if you can go as far
as LSD on it. This is not tautologous, for it cannot be said of
coffee or orange juice; even if you are ready, coffee will not
take you there. </p>

<p>There are further effects of marijuana which relate to complex
structures of association, learning, values, intra-personality
communication, interpersonal perception, and consciousness. It is
difficult to separate the awareness of these effects from the
effects of the awareness. It seems best to stop at this point,
having discussed what seems verbalizable at present. </p>

<p>Given facilitating conditions, the effects I have described
will develop. Sensations are enhanced and clarified: sight,
hearing, taste, touch. Time perception changes. Attention becomes
more unified, and moves more into preconscious material and the
state of pure awareness. The many broad processes of association,
such as social meanings, memory images, expectancies, and plans
are reduced in number and relevance. Inhibitions and suppressions
relax, allowing emotions, thoughts, fantasies, and memories to
How more freely. The development and strength of these effects
will depend on the individual, the times he has used marijuana,
how he has used marijuana, and the environment. </p>

<p>(1) See &quot;Time and the Unconscious&quot; by Marie
Bonaparte (1940) for speculation on this problem from the
framework of psychoanalysis. </p>

<p>(2) This is the behavior structure described insightfully in
Plans and the Structure of Behavior, by George Miller, Eugene
Galanter, and Karl Pribram (1960). </p>

<p>(3) An excellent discussion of this and other relations of
language to perception is in Semantics and Communication, by John
C. Condon (1966, Chapter 3). </p>

<p>(4) Accounts of such experiences can be found in The Drug
Experience (Ebin, 61). </p>

<p>(5) Julian B. Rotter (I955) discusses this process in
&quot;The Role of the Psychological Situation in Determining the
Direction of Human Behavior.&quot; </p>

<p>(6) By preconscious processes, I mean a state of mental
functioning which goes on outside of conscious attention.
Lawrence Kubie describes this foggy territory in Neurotic
Distortion of the Creative Process ( 1961 ) . </p>

<p>(7) This kind of recall can be obtained by electrical
stimulation of the brain. See Wilder Penfield and Larnar Roberts'
book Speech and Brain Mechanisms (1959), Chapter 3. <br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49632" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>