
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-39</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B038-32</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/General/lesne1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122071021 text/html 11124
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:10:09 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:29:34 GMT
Content-length: 10906
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Lower East Side Needle Exchange T-Shirt</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<h1>The Lower East Side Needle Exchange T-Shirt</h1>

<p><b>(my naive attempt to relate to a heroin user as if he were
a normal person)</b> </p>

<p><b>by Bob Ramsey (rmz@computek.net)</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>In Mid-November, I attended the 8th International Conference
on Drug Policy Reform at a hotel in Washington, D.C. On the last
evening I was walking past the propaganda table at the main
ballroom and passed this guy ambling the other way. He was
wearing a leather jacket that was unzipped revealing his black
T-shirt with white letters in a nifty graphic saying &quot;Lower
East Side Needle Exchange&quot;. We passed without greeting and
after about 5 steps I thought &quot;I want one of those
T-shirts&quot;. After 5 more steps I thought &quot;maybe he knows
where I could get one&quot;... 5 more and &quot;I'll never find
out if I don't ask him now&quot;. I turned and scurried around
the corner where he had just disappeared. </p>

<p>There were just the two of us in the 50 yard walkway alongside
the ballrooms... &quot;Excuse me, sir... excuse me... hey,
where'd you get that T-shirt? Can I get one?&quot; </p>

<p>He stopped and turned methodically. &quot;Well yeah, man,
we're selling them for 10 bucks&quot;. </p>

<p>&quot;Do you have any in extra large?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;No. All we got left is large. Do you think you could get
by with... No, I guess you need an extra large. I could send you
one when we get back to New York.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;How much would it be with shipping and handling?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Well gee, I dunno... I guess it would be less than
$20&quot;. </p>

<p>&quot;I suppose it would! How about 15?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;I guess that'd prob'ly do it. But hey, maybe my boss has
an extra large left. We could walk around and check.&quot; </p>

<p>We exchanged pleasantries as we walked back around past the
conference entrance where I had first seen him. He found that I
was from outside of Dallas and asked if they have a needle
exchange there, but I didn't know. When we came to the small
meeting room on the other side he went in. The meeting was just
breaking up and people started filing out, some leaving, some
forming small groups in the hallway. He came out with four or six
people kind of dressed like him who assembled by the windows as
he came back over to me. &quot;I'm sorry, man, we're out of extra
large, but if you give me $15, I'll mail you one right when I get
home.&quot; </p>

<p>I didn't have correct change, but after some fumbling and
discussions with passers-by, I ended up giving him a twenty and a
five, and he gave me a ten. </p>

<p>&quot;I don't have any cards left&quot;, I said, &quot;do you
have some place I can write down my address?&quot; </p>

<p>He rifled through his stack of leaflets and handed me a light
blue half-sheet that was blank on the back. I sat on the bench
along the wall to write my address, but found that my pencil
didn't show up well on the blue paper. </p>

<p>&quot;Do you have a pen?&quot; I asked. </p>

<p>&quot;Sure!&quot; he said, and he handed me a syringe. The
part you push on with your thumb was in the &quot;out&quot;
position, and the glass tube was filled with a reddish
translucent liquid that I suppose was intended to represent a
mixture of blood and heroin. At the end where the needle would be
was a ball-point pen. </p>

<p>&quot;Well!&quot; I said. &quot;I've never seen anything quite
like this! Do you have any more of these?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;No, man, that's from a needle exchange across town. We
just have the T-shirts.&quot; </p>

<p>Sitting there on the bench, I wrote down &quot;X-Large&quot;
and my address and handed it up to the disheveled gentleman in
black. As he leaned over to retrieve his pen, his dark wavy hair
fell alongside his face and I was hit with a strong gust of
mysterious aromas punctuated by tobacco. </p>

<p>&quot;Thanks, man. We appreciate it. I'll send you some
literature, too.&quot; </p>

<p>As he hurried off to join his comrades, he turned and waved.
&quot;Thanks again, it's for a good cause.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<p>When I got back to the office on Monday, I was a big hit with
my tales about the drug law conference and the literature I
brought back. Everyone gathered around to read &quot;Prison
Life&quot; monthly, with its advice column &quot;Ask Bubba&quot;.
Bubba dished up sage advice on such topics as &quot;My celly
snores&quot;, and &quot;I've got this thing for Hillary Clinton,
what should I do?&quot; </p>

<p>And you can imagine the mirth and merriment when I told them
about the Lower East Side Needle Exchange T-Shirt: &quot;You mean
to tell me you gave fifteen dollars CASH to a guy in a T-shirt
saying &quot;Lower East Side Needle Exchange?!!!&quot;, and
&quot;Just what was that 'good cause'?&quot; I had to agree it
was a good joke, even if it was at my expense. But I decided it
was an excellent value. For the humble sum of $15, I had bought a
ticket to the Greatest Show on Earth, a show that would last
several days at least: </p>

<p>Would I get my T-shirt, and if so, when? I thought about
starting an office pool, but nobody wanted to bet me. After all,
they felt sorry that I was already out 15 bucks. And what kind of
odds could I get? And how long is too long? </p>

<p>The T-shirt became a test of stereotypes about drug users.
Everyone assumed this guy must be into heroin and the money would
necessarily disappear. </p>

<p>So the question becomes: </p>

<p>Is it possible for a heroin user to behave responsibly? Can a
junkie carry $15 in cash from Washington to New York and render
perceived value to a faraway stranger known only by a scawled
address on a scrap of paper? Or would he need the money for
something more important? </p>

<p>That night I slept well, but awoke an hour or two early,
thinking about my interest in changing our drug laws. Injuring
people to protect them from themselves... The problem seems to
get bigger the more resources we throw at it... Would
civilization grind to a halt if we let consumers consume what
they want? Would a foreign enemy conquer us? Is the right to
remain silent the only right we have left? Do we have the right
to? Do we have the right not to? What is right? About here God
kicks in. I have had some prayers answered in my day. I'm not
very good at praying, but I've heard God only cares about
sincerity, so I went ahead, and it went something like this: </p>

<p>Dear Lord, If it be thy will, hear my prayer. I'm just a
white-bread white-boy, what don't know nothing about the evils of
heroin. I believe our laws are causing these problems, but now
I'm not so sure. I've been working on this social issue with the
goal of letting half a million people out of jail... a course of
action that would stifle the growth of America's prison industry
that has such high hopes of taking up the slack where the
military is laying off... that would make tens of thousands of
government employees rethink their career plans... </p>

<p>Give me a sign, Lord. Is prohibition a vain attempt to plug
some safety valves you installed in our souls? Can a junkie wrap
up a T-shirt and lick a stamp? I need to know if what I'm doing
is right. Either way it comes out, I promise to submit the facts
to a candid world like it says in the Declaration of
Independence. And if you really want to make it a sign, then
bless the postman's fingers and grant him Godspeed. In Jesus'
name I pr.... </p>

<p>No, that would be cheating. If it be THY will, Lord. Let's
leave Jesus out of this... Well... Jesus, if you WANT to get
involved in this, feel free. Thy will is pretty important too.
And God, if you REALLY want to make it a sign, you can put
crosses on the package or something really over-the-top that I
wouldn't even think of and..... </p>

<p>As my prayer further deteriorated into meandering brain cells
firing in the night, I closed it out and went back to sleep. </p>

<p>In the following days, I thought about the test I had
proposed. The U.S. Postal Service, or U.P.S. or whoever, didn't
break any delivery speed records, and the T-shirt didn't show up
as we were saying Grace before Thanksgiving dinner. But Time-Life
wants 4-6 weeks to send out a CD. Andwhether it shows up or not,
what is proved by a statistical sample of one? </p>

<p>I can't even send a letter to my mother- why should I expect a
nameless junkie on the Lower East Side to send me something that
costs money? A woman at work predicted I would get the T-shirt
&quot;about March. He'll lose the address and find it later.
He'll think that's soon. Those people don't think about time like
we do.&quot; </p>

<p>At the office the joking has died down, but now and again we
find someone who hasn't heard about the Lower East Side Needle
Exchange T-Shirt and it's good for another laugh. Whether I get
the shirt or not, that fifteen dollars is still providing value,
so I suppose it's way up there on the list of the best money I
ever spent. Still, there are a couple of reasons I'm hoping that
guy can get his act together. One is a positive answer to this
momentous question. The other is- I want one of those T-shirts. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>