
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B044-188</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/whiteb1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122021344 text/html 73436
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:13:36 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:40 GMT
Content-length: 73218
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs in the United
States </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<h1>The History of the Non-Medical Use of Drugs in the United
States </h1>

<p><b>by Charles Whitebread, Professor of Law, USC Law School<br>
</b></p>

<p><b>A Speech to the California Judges Association 1995 annual
conference <br>
<img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"><br>
</b></p>

<p><b>Links to Related Documents</b> </p>

<p>This speech is derived from <a
href="../LIBRARY/studies/vlr/vlrtoc.htm">The Forbidden Fruit and
the Tree of Knowledge:</a> An Inquiry into the Legal History of
American Marijuana Prohibition by Professor Richard J. Bonnie
&amp; Professor Charles H. Whitebread, II </p>

<p>In this speech, Professor Whitebread refers to the following
documents which are online in this library, either in whole or in
part. </p>

<p><a href="../hemp/taxact/taxact.htm">The Hearings of the
Marihuana Tax Act</a> and related documents. </p>

<p><a href="../library/studies/nc/ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal
of Misunderstanding</a>, by the National Commission on Marihuana
and Drug Abuse. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Introduction</b> </p>

<p>This session is going to be about the history of the
non-medical use of drugs. Let me say that, because this is going
to be a story, that I think it will interest you quite a bit. The
topic is the history of the non-medical use of drugs and I think
you ought to know what my credentials are for talking about this
topic. As you may know, before I taught at the University of
Southern California, I taught at the University of Virginia for
fifteen years, from 1968 to 1981. In that time period, the very
first major piece that I wrote was a piece entitled, &quot;The
Forbidden Fruit and the Tree of Knowledge - The Legal History of
Marihuana in the United States&quot;. I wrote it with Professor
Richard Bonnie, still of the faculty of the University of
Virginia. It was published in the Virginia Law Review in October
of 1970 and I must say that our piece was the Virginia Law Review
in October of 1970. The piece was 450 pages long. It got a ton of
national attention because no one had ever done the legal history
of marijuana before. As a result of that, Professor Bonnie was
named the Deputy Director of the National Commission on Marihuana
and Drug Abuse and I was a consultant to that commission. </p>

<p>As a result of Richard's two year executive directorship of
the National Commission in 1971 and 1972 he and I were given
access to both the open and the closed files of what was then
called the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, what had
historically been called the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and what
today is called the Drug Enforcement Agency. Based upon our
access to those files, both open and closed, we wrote a book
called &quot;The Marihuana Conviction- The Legal History of Drugs
in the United States&quot; and that book went through six
printings at the University of Virginia press before being sold
out primarily in sales to my friends at the FBI over the years.
It is based upon that work that I bring you this story. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>The Situation in 1900</b> </p>

<p>If you are interested in the non-medical use of drugs in this
country, the time to go back to is 1900, and in some ways the
most important thing I am going to say to you guys I will say
first. That is, that in 1900 there were far more people addicted
to drugs in this country than there are today. Depending upon
whose judgment, or whose assessment, you accept there were
between two and five percent of the entire adult population of
the United States addicted to drugs in 1900. </p>

<p>Now, there were two principal causes of this dramatic level of
drug addiction at the turn of the century. The first cause was
the use of morphine and its various derivatives in legitimate
medical operations. You know as late as 1900, particularly in
areas where medical resources were scarce it was not at all
uncommon for you to say, let's say you would have appendicitis,
you would go into the hospital, and you would get morphine as a
pain killer during the operation, you would be given morphine
further after the operation and you would come out of the
hospital with no appendix but addicted to morphine. </p>

<p>The use of morphine in battlefield operations during the Civil
War was so extensive that, by 1880, so many Union veterans were
addicted to morphine that the popular press referred to
morphinism as the &quot;soldier's disease&quot;. Now I will say,
being from Virginia as I am, that the Confederate veterans didn't
have any problems about being addicted to morphine because the
South was too poor to have any, and therefore battlefield
operations on the Confederate Army were simply done by chopping
off the relevant limb while they drank a little whiskey. But the
Northern troops heavily found themselves, as the result of
battlefield operations and the use of morphine, addicted to
morphine.<br>
</p>

<p>Now, the other fact that I think that is so interesting about
drug addiction at the turn of the century, as opposed to today is
who the addicts were, because they were the exact opposite of who
you would think most likely to be an addict today. If I were to
ask you in terms of statistical groups who is most likely to be
involved with drugs today, you would say a young person, a male,
who lives in the city and who may be a minority group member.
That is the exact opposite of who was most likely to be addicted
to drugs at the turn of the century. </p>

<p>In terms of statistical groups, who was most likely to be
addicted to drugs at the turn of the century? A rural living,
middle-aged white woman. The use of morphine in medical
operations does not explain the much higher incidence of drug
addiction among women. What does is the second cause of the high
level of addiction at the turn of the century -- the growth and
development of what we now call the &quot;patent medicine&quot;
industry. </p>

<p>I think some of you, maybe from watching Westerns on TV if
nothing else are aware that, again, as late as 1900, in areas,
particularly rural areas where medical resources were scarce, it
was typical for itinerant salesmen, not themselves doctors, to
cruise around the countryside offering potions and elixirs of all
sorts advertised in the most flamboyant kinds of terms.
&quot;Doctor Smith's Oil, Good for What Ails You&quot;, or
&quot;Doctor Smith's Oil, Good for Man or Beast.&quot; </p>

<p>Well, what the purveyors of these medicines did not tell their
purchasers, was that later, when these patent medicines were
tested, many of them proved to be up to fifty percent morphine by
volume. </p>

<p>Now, what that meant, as I have always thought, was the most
significant thing about the high morphine content in patent
medicines was it meant they tended to live up to their
advertising. Because no matter what is wrong with you, or your
beast, you are going to feel a whole lot better after a couple of
slugs of an elixir that is fifty percent morphine. So there was
this tendency to think &quot;Wow! This stuff works.&quot; Down
you could go to the general store and get more of it and it could
be sold to you directly over the counter. </p>

<p>Now, for reasons that we weren't able to full research, but
for reasons, I think, probably associated with the role of women
rural societies then patent medicines were much more appealing to
women than to men and account for the much higher incidence of
drug addiction in 1900 among women than among men. </p>

<p>If you want to see a relatively current portrayal of a woman
addicted to patent medicine you might think of Eugene O'Neil's
play &quot;A Long Day's Journey Into Night&quot;. The mother
figure there, the one that was played by Katherine Hepburn in the
movies was addicted to patent medicines. </p>

<p>In any event, the use of morphine in medical operations and
the sale of patent medicines accounted for a dramatic level of
addiction. Again, between two and five percent of the entire
adult population of the United States was addicted to drugs as
late as 1900. </p>

<p>Now if my first point is that there was a lot more addiction
in 1900 than there is today and that the people who were addicted
are quite a different group than the group we would be thinking
of today, my next point would be that if you look at drug
addiction in 1900, what's the number one way in which it is
different than drug addiction today? Answer: Almost all addiction
at the turn of the century was accidental. </p>

<p>People became involved with drugs they did not know that they
were taking, that they did not know the impact of. The first
point, then, is that there was more drug addiction than there is
now and most of it was accidental. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>The Pure Food and Drug Act</b> </p>

<p>Then the single law which has done the most in this country to
reduce the level of drug addiction is none of the criminal laws
we have ever passed. The single law that reduced drug addiction
the most was the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act. </p>

<p>The Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 did three things: </p>

<p>1). It created the Food and Drug Administration in Washington
that must approve all foods and drugs meant for human
consumption. The very first impact of that was that the patent
medicines were not approved for human consumption once they were
tested. </p>

<p>2) The Pure Food and Drug Act said that certain drugs could
only be sold on prescription. </p>

<p>3) The Pure Food and Drug Act, (and you know, this is still
true today, go look in your medicine chest) requires that any
drug that can be potentially habit-forming say so on it's label.
&quot;Warning -- May be habit forming.&quot; </p>

<p>The labeling requirements, the prescription requirements, and
the refusal to approve the patent medicines basically put the
patent medicine business out of business and reduced that
dramatic source of accidental addiction. The Pure Food and Drug
Act of 1906, not a criminal law, did more to reduce the level of
addiction than any other single statute we have passed in all of
the times from then to now. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>The Harrison Act</b> </p>

<p>The very first criminal law at the Federal level in this
country to criminalize the non-medical use of drugs came in 1914.
It was called the Harrison Act and there are only three things
about the Harrison Act that we need to focus on today. </p>

<p>Number one is the date. Did you hear the date, 1914? Some of
you may have come this morning thinking that we have used the
criminal law to deal with the non-medical use of drugs since the
beginning of the Republic or something. That is not true. The
entire experiment of using the criminal sanction to deal with the
non-medical use of drugs really began in this country in 1914
with the Harrison Act. </p>

<p>The second interesting thing about the Harrison Act was the
drugs to which it applied, because it applied to almost none of
the drugs we would be concerned about today. The Harrison Act
applied to opium, morphine and its various derivatives, and the
derivatives of the coca leaf like cocaine. No mention anywhere
there of amphetamines, barbiturates, marijuana, hashish,
hallucinogenic drugs of any kind. The Harrison Act applied only
to opium, morphine and its various derivatives and derivatives of
the coca leaf like cocaine. </p>

<p>The third and most interesting thing for you all as judges
about the Harrison Act was its structure, because the structure
of this law was very peculiar and became the model for every
single piece of Federal legislation from 1914 right straight
through 1969. And what was that model? </p>

<p>It was called the Harrison Tax Act. You know, the drafters of
the Harrison Act said very clearly on the floor of Congress what
it was they wanted to achieve. They had two goals. They wanted to
regulate the medical use of these drugs and they wanted to
criminalize the non-medical use of these drugs. They had one
problem. Look at the date -- 1914. 1914 was probably the high
water mark of the constitutional doctrine we today call
&quot;states' rights&quot; and, therefore, it was widely thought
Congress did not have the power, number one, to regulate a
particular profession, and number two, that Congress did not have
the power to pass what was, and is still known, as a general
criminal law. That's why there were so few Federal Crimes until
very recently. </p>

<p>In the face of possible Constitutional opposition to what they
wanted to do, the people in Congress who supported the Harrison
Act came up with a novel idea. That is, they would masquerade
this whole thing as though it were a tax. To show you how it
worked, can I use some hypothetical figures to show you how this
alleged tax worked? </p>

<p>There were two taxes. The first (and again, these figures
aren't accurate but they will do to show the idea) tax was paid
by doctors. It was a dollar a year and the doctors, in exchange
for paying that one dollar tax, got a stamp from the Government
that allowed them to prescribe these drugs for their patients so
long as they followed the regulations in the statute. Do you see
that by the payment of that one dollar tax, we have the doctors
regulated? The doctors have to follow the regulations in the
statute. </p>

<p>And there was a second tax. (and again, these are hypothetical
figures but they will show you how it worked.) was a tax of a
thousand dollars of every single non-medical exchange of every
one of these drugs. Well, since nobody was going to pay a
thousand dollars in tax to exchange something which, in 1914,
even in large quantities was worth about five dollars, the second
tax wasn't a tax either, it was a criminal prohibition. Now just
to be sure you guys understand this, and I am sure you do, but
just to make sure, let's say that in 1915 somebody was found,
let's say, in possession of an ounce of cocaine out here on the
street. What would be the Federal crime? Not possession of
cocaine, or possession of a controlled substance. What was the
crime? Tax evasion. </p>

<p>And do you see what a wicked web that is going to be? As a
quick preview, where then are we going to put the law enforcement
arm for the criminalization of drugs for over forty years -- in
what department? The Treasury Department. Why, we are just out
there collecting taxes and I will show you how that works in a
minute. </p>

<p>If you understand that taxing scheme then you understand why
the national marijuana prohibition of 1937 was called the
Marihuana Tax Act. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>The Early State Marijuana Laws</b> </p>

<p>But before we get to that next big piece of Federal
legislation, the marihuana prohibition of 1937, I would like to
take a little detour, if I may, into an analysis of the early
state marijuana laws passed in this country from 1915 to 1937. </p>

<p>Let me pause to tell you this. When Professor Bonnie and I set
out to try to track the legal history of marijuana in this
country, we were shocked that nobody had ever done that work
before. And, secondly, the few people who had even conjectured
about it went back to the 1937 Federal Act and said &quot;Well,
there's the beginning of it.&quot; No. If you go back to 1937,
that fails to take account of the fact that, in the period from
1915 to 1937, some 27 states passed criminal laws against the use
of marijuana. What Professor Bonnie and I did was, unique to our
work, to go back to the legislative records in those states and
back to the newspapers in the state capitols at the time these
laws were passed to try to find out what motivated these 27
states to enact criminal laws against the use of marijuana. What
we found was that the 27 states divided into three groups by
explanation. </p>

<p>The first group of states to have marijuana laws in that part
of the century were Rocky Mountain and southwestern states. By
that, I mean Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Montana. You didn't
have to go anywhere but to the legislative records to find out
what had motivated those marijuana laws. The only thing you need
to know to understand the early marijuana laws in the southwest
and Rocky Mountain areas of this country is to know, that in the
period just after 1914, into all of those areas was a substantial
migration of Mexicans. They had come across the border in search
of better economic conditions, they worked heavily as rural
laborers, beet field workers, cotton pickers, things of that
sort. And with them, they had brought marijuana. </p>

<p>Basically, none of the white people in these states knew
anything about marijuana, and I make a distinction between white
people and Mexicans to reflect a distinction that any legislator
in one of these states at the time would have made. And all you
had to do to find out what motivated the marijuana laws in the
Rocky mountain and southwestern states was to go to the
legislative records themselves. Probably the best single
statement was the statement of a proponent of Texas first
marijuana law. He said on the floor of the Texas Senate, and I
quote, &quot;All Mexicans are crazy, and this stuff (referring to
marijuana) is what makes them crazy.&quot; Or, as the proponent
of Montana's first marijuana law said, (and imagine this on the
floor of the state legislature) and I quote, &quot;Give one of
these Mexican beet field workers a couple of puffs on a marijuana
cigarette and he thinks he is in the bullring at Barcelona.&quot;
</p>

<p>Well, there it was, you didn't have to look another foot as
you went from state to state right on the floor of the state
legislature. And so what was the genesis for the early state
marijuana laws in the Rocky Mountain and southwestern areas of
this country? It wasn't hostility to the drug, it was hostility
to the newly arrived Mexican community that used it.<br>
</p>

<p>A second group of states that had criminal laws against the
use of marijuana were in the Northeast, Connecticut, Rhode
Island, New York -- had one and then repealed it and then had one
again -- New Jersey. Well, clearly no hypothesis about Mexican
immigration will explain the genesis of those laws because, as
you know, the Northeast has never had, still doesn't really, any
substantial Mexican-American population. So we had to dig a
little deeper to find the genesis of those laws. We had to go not
only to the legislative records but to the newspapers in the
state capitols at the time these laws were passed and what we
found, in the early marijuana laws in the Northeast, we labeled
the &quot;fear of substitution.&quot; If I may, let me paraphrase
an editorial from the New York Times in 1919 so we will get
exactly the flavor of this fear of substitution. </p>

<p>The New York Times in an editorial in 1919 said, &quot;No one
here in New York uses this drug marijuana. We have only just
heard about it from down in the Southwest,&quot; and here comes
the substitution. &quot;But,&quot; said the New York Times,
&quot;we had better prohibit its use before it gets here.
Otherwise&quot; -- here's the substitution concept -- &quot;all
the heroin and hard narcotics addicts cut off from their drug by
the Harrison Act and all the alcohol drinkers cut off from their
drug by 1919 alcohol Prohibition will substitute this new and
unknown drug marijuana for the drugs they used to use.&quot; </p>

<p>Well, from state to state, on the theory that this newly
encountered drug marijuana would be substituted by the hard
narcotics addicts or by the alcohol drinkers for their previous
drug that had been prohibited, state to state this fear of
substitution carried, and that accounted for 26 of the 27 states
-- that is, either the anti-Mexican sentiment in the Southwest
and Rocky Mountain areas or fear of substitution in the
Northeast. That accounted for 26 of the 27 states, and there was
only one state left over. It was the most important state for us
because it was the first state ever to enact a criminal law
against the use of marijuana and it was the state of Utah. </p>

<p>Now, if you have been hearing this story and you have been
playing along with me, you think &quot;Oh, wait a minute,
Whitebread, Utah fits exactly with Colorado, Montana, -- it must
have been the Mexicans.&quot; </p>

<p>Well, that's what I thought at first. But we went and did a
careful study of the actual immigration pattern and found, to our
surprise, that Utah didn't have then, and doesn't have now, a
really substantial Mexican-American population. So it had to be
something else. </p>

<p>Come on folks, if it had to be something else, what do you
think it might have been? Are you thinking what I was thinking --
that it must have had something to do with the single thing which
makes Utah unique in American history -- its association with the
Mormon church.<br>
</p>

<p>With help from some people in Salt Lake City, associated with
the Mormon Church and the Mormon National Tabernacle in
Washington -- with their help and a lot of work we found out what
the genesis was of the first marihuana law in this country. Yes,
it was directly connected to the history of Utah and Mormonism
and it went like this.<br>
</p>

<p>I think that a lot of you know that, in its earliest days, the
Mormon church permitted its male members to have more than one
wife -- polygamy. Do you all know that in 1876, in a case called
Reynolds against the United States, the United States Supreme
Court said that Mormons were free to believe what they wanted,
but they were not free to practice polygamy in this country.
Well, who do you think enforced that ruling of the Supreme Court
in 1876? At the end of the line, who enforces all rulings of the
Supreme Court? Answer: the state and local police. And who were
they in Utah then? All Mormons, and so nothing happened for many
years. Those who wanted to live polygamously continued to do so. </p>

<p>In 1910, the Mormon Church in synod in Salt Lake City decreed
polygamy to be a religious mistake and it was banned as a matter
of the Mormon religion. Once that happened, there was a crackdown
on people who wanted to live in what they called &quot;the
traditional way&quot;. So, just after 1910, a fairly large number
of Mormons left the state of Utah, and indeed left the United
States altogether and moved into northwest Mexico. They wrote a
lot about what they wanted to accomplish in Mexico. They wanted
to set up communities where they were basically going to convert
the Indians, the Mexicans, and what they referred to as &quot;the
heathen&quot; in the neighborhood to Mormonism. </p>

<p>By 1914, they had had very little luck with the heathen, but
our research shows now beyond question that the heathen had a
little luck with them. What happened apparently -- now some of
you who may be members of the church, you know that there are
still substantial Mormon communities in northwest Mexico -- was
that, by and large most of the Mormons were not happy there, the
religion had not done well there, they didn't feel comfortable
there, they wanted to go back to Utah where there friends were
and after 1914 did. </p>

<p>And with them, the Indians had given them marijuana. Now once
you get somebody back in Utah with the marijuana it all becomes
very easy, doesn't it? You know that the Mormon Church has always
been opposed to the use of euphoriants of any kind. So, somebody
saw them with the marijuana, and in August of 1915 the Church,
meeting again in synod in Salt Lake City decreed the use of
marijuana contrary to the Mormon religion and then -- and this is
how things were in Utah in those days -- in October of 1915, the
state legislature met and enacted every religious prohibition as
a criminal law and we had the first criminal law in this
country's history against the use of marijuana. </p>

<p>That digression into the early state marijuana laws aside, we
will now get back on the Federal track, the year is 1937 and we
get the national marijuana prohibition -- the Marihuana Tax Act <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</b> </p>

<p>Now, first again, does everybody see the date, 1937? You may
have thought that we have had a national marijuana prohibition
for a very long time. Frankly, we haven't. </p>

<p>The marijuana prohibition is part and parcel of that era which
is now being rejected rather generally -- the New Deal era in
Washington in the late 30s.<br>
</p>

<p>Number two, you know, don't you, that whenever Congress is
going to pass a law, they hold hearings. And you have seen these
hearings. The hearings can be extremely voluminous, they go on
and on, they have days and days of hearings. Well, may I say,
that the hearings on the national marijuana prohibition were very
brief indeed. The hearings on the national marijuana prohibition
lasted one hour, on each of two mornings and since the hearings
were so brief I can tell you almost exactly what was said to
support the national marijuana prohibition. </p>

<p>Now, in doing this one at the FBI Academy, I didn't tell them
this story, but I am going to tell you this story. You want to
know how brief the hearings were on the national marijuana
prohibition? <br>
</p>

<p>When we asked at the Library of Congress for a copy of the
hearings, to the shock of the Library of Congress, none could be
found. We went &quot;What?&quot; It took them four months to
finally honor our request because -- are you ready for this? --
the hearings were so brief that the volume had slid down inside
the side shelf of the bookcase and was so thin it had slid right
down to the bottom inside the bookshelf. That's how brief they
were. Are you ready for this? They had to break the bookshelf
open because it had slid down inside. </p>

<p>There were three bodies of testimony at the hearings on the
national marijuana prohibition. <br>
</p>

<p>The first testimony came from Commissioner Harry Anslinger,
the newly named Commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.
Now, I think some of you know that in the late 20s and early 30s
in this country there were two Federal police agencies created,
the FBI and the FBN -- the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and
the Federal Bureau of Narcotics. <br>
</p>

<p>In our book, I talk at great length about how different the
history of these two organizations really are. But, the two
organizations, the FBI and the FBN had some surface similarities
and one of them was that a single individual headed each of them
for a very long time. In the case of the FBI, it was J. Edgar
Hoover, and in the case of the FBN it was Harry Anslinger, who
was the Commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics from 1930
until 1962.<br>
</p>

<p>Commissioner Anslinger gave the Government testimony and I
will quote him directly. By the way, he was not working from a
text that he had written. He was working from a text that had
been written for him by a District Attorney in New Orleans, a guy
named Stanley. Reading directly from Mr. Stanley's work,
Commissioner Anslinger told the Congressmen at the hearings, and
I quote, &quot;Marihuana is an addictive drug which produces in
its users insanity, criminality, and death.&quot; That was the
Government testimony to support the marijuana prohibition from
the Commissioner. </p>

<p>The next body of testimony -- remember all of this took a
total of two hours -- uh .. You understand what the idea was,
don't you? The idea was to prohibit the cultivation of hemp in
America. You all know, because there has been some initiative
here in California, that hemp has other uses than its euphoriant
use. For one, hemp has always been used to make rope. Number two,
the resins of the hemp plant are used as bases for paints and
varnishes. And, finally, the seeds of the hemp plant are widely
used in bird seed. Since these industries were going to be
affected the next body of testimony came from the industrial
spokesmen who represented these industries. </p>

<p>The first person was the rope guy. The rope guy told a
fascinating story -- it really is fascinating -- the growth of a
hemp to make rope was a principle cash crop right where I am
from, Northern Virginia and Southern Maryland at the time of the
Revolutionary War. But, said the rope guy, by about 1820 it got
cheaper to import the hemp we needed to make rope from the Far
East and so now in 1937 we don't grow any more hemp to make rope
in this country -- it isn't needed anymore. </p>

<p>If you heard that story, there are two things about it that I
found fascinating. Number one, it explains the long-standing
rumor that our forefathers had something to do with marijuana.
Yes, they did -- they grew it. Hemp was the principal crop at
Mount Vernon. It was a secondary crop at Monticello. Now, of
course, in our research we did not find any evidence that any of
our forefathers had used the hemp plant for euphoriant purposes,
but they did grow it. </p>

<p>The second part of that story that, to me is even more
interesting is -- did you see the date again - 1937? What did the
rope guy say? We can get all the hemp we need to make rope from
the Far East, we don't grow it hear anymore because we don't need
to. </p>

<p>Five years later, 1942, we are cut off from our sources of
hemp in the Far East. We need a lot of hemp to outfit our ships
for World War II, rope for the ships, and therefore, the Federal
Government, as some of you know, went into the business of
growing hemp on gigantic farms throughout the Midwest and the
South to make rope to outfit the ships for World War II. </p>

<p>So, even to this day, if you are from the Midwest you will
always meet the people who say, &quot;Gosh, hemp grows all along
the railroad tracks.&quot; Well, it does. Why? Because these huge
farms existed all during World War II. </p>

<p>But, the rope people didn't care. The paint and varnish people
said &quot;We can use something else.&quot; And, of the
industrial spokesmen, only the birdseed people balked. The
birdseed people were the ones who balked and the birdseed person
was asked, &quot;Couldn't you use some other seed?&quot; </p>

<p>These are all, by the way, direct quotes from the hearings.
The answer the birdseed guy gave was, &quot;No, Congressman, we
couldn't. We have never found another seed that makes a birds
coat so lustrous or makes them sing so much.&quot; </p>

<p>So, on the ground that the birdseed people needed it -- did
you know that the birdseed people both got and kept an exemption
from the Marihuana Tax Act right through this very day for
so-called &quot;denatured seeds&quot;? </p>

<p>In any event, there was Anslinger's testimony, there was the
industrial testimony -- there was only one body of testimony left
at these brief hearings and it was medical. There were two pieces
of medical evidence introduced with regard to the marijuana
prohibition. <br>
</p>

<p>The first came from a pharmacologist at Temple University who
claimed that he had injected the active ingredient in marihuana
into the brains of 300 dogs, and two of those dogs had died. When
asked by the Congressmen, and I quote, &quot;Doctor, did you
choose dogs for the similarity of their reactions to that of
humans?&quot; The answer of the pharmacologist was, &quot;I
wouldn't know, I am not a dog psychologist.&quot; <br>
</p>

<p>Well, the active ingredient in marijuana was first synthesized
in a laboratory in Holland after World War II. So what it was
this pharmacologist injected into these dogs we will never know,
but it almost certainly was not the active ingredient in
marijuana. <br>
</p>

<p>The other piece of medical testimony came from a man named Dr.
William C. Woodward. Dr. Woodward was both a lawyer and a doctor
and he was Chief Counsel to the American Medical Association. Dr.
Woodward came to testify at the behest of the American Medical
Association saying, and I quote, &quot;The American Medical
Association knows of no evidence that marihuana is a dangerous
drug.&quot; </p>

<p>What's amazing is not whether that's true or not. What's
amazing is what the Congressmen then said to him. Immediately
upon his saying, and I quote again, &quot;The American Medical
Association knows of no evidence that marihuana is a dangerous
drug.&quot;, one of the Congressmen said, &quot;Doctor, if you
can't say something good about what we are trying to do, why
don't you go home?&quot; <br>
</p>

<p>That's an exact quote. The next Congressman said,
&quot;Doctor, if you haven't got something better to say than
that, we are sick of hearing you.&quot; </p>

<p>Now, the interesting question for us is not about the medical
evidence. The most fascinating question is: why was this legal
counsel to the most prestigious group of doctors in the United
States treated in such a high-handed way? And the answer makes a
principle thesis of my work -- and that is -- you've seen it,
you've been living it the last ten years. The history of drugs in
this country perfectly mirrors the history of this country. </p>

<p>So look at the date -- 1937 -- what's going on in this
country? Well, a lot of things, but the number one thing was
that, in 1936, President Franklin Roosevelt was reelected in the
largest landslide election in this country's history till then.
He brought with him two Democrats for every Republican, all, or
almost all of them pledged to that package of economic and social
reform legislation we today call the New Deal. </p>

<p>And, did you know that the American Medical Association, from
1932, straight through 1937, had systematically opposed every
single piece of New Deal legislation. So that, by 1937, this
committee, heavily made up of New Deal Democrats is simply sick
of hearing them: &quot;Doctor, if you can't say something good
about what we are trying to do, why don't you go home?&quot;<br>
</p>

<p>So, over the objection of the American Medical Association,
the bill passed out of committee and on to the floor of Congress.
Now, some of you may think that the debate on the floor of
Congress was more extensive on the marijuana prohibition. It
wasn't. It lasted one minute and thirty-two seconds by my count
and, as such, I will give it to you verbatim.<br>
</p>

<p>The entire debate on the national marijuana prohibition was as
follows -- and, by the way, if you had grown up in Washington, DC
as I had you would appreciate this date. Are you ready? The bill
was brought on to the floor of the House of Representatives --
there never was any Senate debate on it not one word -- 5:45
Friday afternoon, August 20. Now, in pre-air-conditioning
Washington, who was on the floor of the House? Who was on the
floor of the House? Not very many people. </p>

<p>Speaker Sam Rayburn called for the bill to be passed on
&quot;tellers&quot;. Does everyone know &quot;tellers&quot;? Did
you know that for the vast bulk of legislation in this country,
there is not a recorded vote. It is simply, more people walk past
this point than walk past that point and it passes -- it's called
&quot;tellers&quot;. They were getting ready to pass this thing
on tellers without discussion and without a recorded vote when
one of the few Republicans left in Congress, a guy from upstate
New York, stood up and asked two questions, which constituted the
entire debate on the national marijuana prohibition. </p>

<p>&quot;Mr. Speaker, what is this bill about?&quot; </p>

<p>To which Speaker Rayburn replied, &quot;I don't know. It has
something to do with a thing called marihuana. I think it's a
narcotic of some kind.&quot; </p>

<p>Undaunted, the guy from Upstate New York asked a second
question, which was as important to the Republicans as it was
unimportant to the Democrats. &quot;Mr. Speaker, does the
American Medical Association support this bill?&quot; </p>

<p>In one of the most remarkable things I have ever found in any
research, a guy who was on the committee, and who later went on
to become a Supreme Court Justice, stood up and -- do you
remember? The AMA guy was named William C. Woodward -- a member
of the committee who had supported the bill leaped to his feet
and he said, &quot;Their Doctor Wentworth came down here. They
support this bill 100 percent.&quot; It wasn't true, but it was
good enough for the Republicans. They sat down and the bill
passed on tellers, without a recorded vote. </p>

<p>In the Senate there never was any debate or a recorded vote,
and the bill went to President Roosevelt's desk and he signed it
and we had the national marijuana prohibition. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>1938 to 1951</b> </p>

<p>Now, the next step in our story is the period from 1938 to
1951. I have three stories to tell you about 1938 to 1951. </p>

<p>The first of them. Immediately after the passage of the
national marijuana prohibition, Commissioner Anslinger decided to
hold a conference of all the people who knew something about
marijuana -- a big national conference. He invited forty-two
people to this conference. As part our research for the book, we
found the exact transcript of this conference. Ready? </p>

<p>The first morning of the conference of the forty-two people
that Commissioner Anslinger invited to talk about marijuana, 39
of them got up and said some version of &quot;Gee, Commissioner
Anslinger, I don't know why you asked me to this conference, I
don't know anything about marijuana.&quot; </p>

<p>That left three people. Dr. Woodward and his assistant -- you
know what they thought. </p>

<p>That left one person -- the pharmacologist from Temple
University -- the guy with the dogs. </p>

<p>And what do you think happened as a result of that conference?
Commissioner Anslinger named the pharmacologist from Temple
University the Official Expert of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics
about marijuana, a position the guy held until 1962. Now, the
irony of trying to find out what the drug did after it had been
prohibited -- finding out that only one person agrees with you --
and naming him the Official Expert, speaks for itself. </p>

<p>The next story from this time period was a particular favorite
of the police groups to whom I spoke at the FBI Academy, because
it is a law enforcement story. </p>

<p>After national marijuana prohibition was passed, Commissioner
Anslinger found out, or got reports, that certain people were
violating the national marijuana prohibition and using marijuana
and, unfortunately for them, they fell into an identifiable
occupational group. Who were flouting the marijuana prohibition?
Jazz musicians. And so, in 1947, Commissioner Anslinger sent out
a letter, I quote it verbatim, &quot;Dear Agent So-and-so, Please
prepare all cases in your jurisdiction involving musicians in
violation of the marijuana laws. We will have a great national
round-up arrest of all such persons on a single day. I will let
you know what day.&quot; </p>

<p>That letter went out on, I think, October 24, 1947. The
responses by the resident agents were all in the file. My
favorite -- at the bottom line, there wasn't a single resident
agent who didn't have reservations about this idea -- came from
the Hollywood agent. This is the exact letter of the FBN agent in
charge in Hollywood. </p>

<p>&quot;Dear Commissioner Anslinger, </p>

<p>I have your letter of October 24. Please be advised that the
musical community here in Hollywood are unionized and very tight
we have been unable to get an informant inside it. So, at the
present time, we have no cases involving musicians in violation
of the marihuana laws.&quot; </p>

<p>For the next year and a half, Commissioner Anslinger got those
kinds of letters. He never acknowledged any of the problems that
the agents said they were having with this idea and always wrote
them back the same letter. </p>

<p>&quot;Dear Agent so-and-so, </p>

<p>Glad to hear you are working hard to give effect to my
directive of October 24, 1947. We will (and he always underlined
the word 'will') have a great national round-up arrest of
musicians in violation of the marijuana laws all on a single day.
Don't worry, I will let you know what day.&quot;<br>
</p>

<p>This went on -- and, of course, you know that some jazz
musicians were, in fact, arrested in the late 40's -- this all
went on until it ended just the way it began -- with something
that Anslinger said. I don't see anybody in here really old
enough to appreciate this point, but Commissioner Anslinger was
testifying before a Senate Committee in 1948. He was saying,
&quot;I need more agents.&quot; And, of course, the Senators
asked him why. </p>

<p>&quot;Because there are people out there violating the
marijuana laws.&quot; </p>

<p>Well, you know what the Senators asked -- &quot;Who?&quot; </p>

<p>And in a moment that every Government employee should avoid
like the plague, Anslinger first said, &quot;Musicians.&quot; But
then he looked up at that Senate committee and he gave them a
little piece of his heart and said the single line which provoked
the most response in this country's history about the non-medical
use of drugs. Anslinger said, &quot;And I don't mean good
musicians, I mean jazz musicians.&quot; </p>

<p>Friends, there is no way to tell you what a torrent ensued.
Within 24 hours, 76 newspaper editorials slammed him, including
special editions the then booming trade press of the jazz music
industry. With three days, the Department of the Treasury had
received fifteen thousand letters. bunches of them were still in
bags when I got there -- never been opened at all. I opened a
few. Here was a typical one, and it was darling. </p>

<p>&quot;Dear Commissioner Anslinger, </p>

<p>I applaud your efforts to rid America of the scourge of
narcotics addiction. If you are as ill-informed about that as you
are about music, however, you will never succeed.&quot; </p>

<p>One of the things that we had access to that really was fun
was the Commissioner's own appointment book for all of his years.
And, five days after he says &quot;I don't mean good musicians, I
mean jazz musicians.&quot; there is a notation: 10 AM --
appointment with the Secretary of the Treasury.&quot; Well, I
don't know what happened at that appointment, but from that
appointment on, no mention is ever made again of the great
national round-up arrest of musicians in violation of the
marijuana laws all on a single day, much to the delight of the
agents who never had any heart for it in the first place.<br>
</p>

<p>The final story from this period is my favorite story from
this period, by far, and, again, there is simply nobody here who
is really old enough to appreciate this story. You know, if you
talk to your parents -- that's the generation we really need to
talk to -- people who were adults during the late 30's and 40's.
And you talk to them about marijuana in particular you would be
amazed at the amazing reputation that marijuana has among the
generation ahead of you as to what it does to its users. </p>

<p>In the late 30's and early 40's marihuana was routinely
referred to as &quot;the killer drug&quot;, &quot;the assassin of
youth&quot;. You all know &quot;reefer madness&quot;, right?
Where did these extraordinary stories that circulated in this
country about what marijuana would do to its users come from? </p>

<p>The conventional wisdom is that Anslinger put them over on
Americans in his effort to compete with Hoover for
empire-building, etc. I have to say, in some fairness, that one
of the things that our research did, in some sense, was to
rehabilitate Commissioner Anslinger. Yes, there was some of that
but, basically, it wasn't just that Anslinger was trying to dupe
people. </p>

<p>The terrific reputation that marijuana got in the late 30s and
early 40s stemmed from something Anslinger had said. Does
everybody remember what Anslinger said about the drug?
&quot;Marihuana is an addictive drug which produces in its users
insanity, criminality, and death.&quot; </p>

<p>Well, this time the magic word -- come along lawyers out
there, where's the magic word? -- Insanity. Marihuana use, said
the Government, would produce insanity. </p>

<p>And, sure enough, in the late 30s and early 40s, in five
really flamboyant murder trials, the defendant's sole defense was
that he -- or, in the most famous of them, she -- was not guilty
by reason of insanity for having used marijuana prior to the
commission of the crime. </p>

<p>All right, it's time to take you guys back to class here. If
you are going to put on an insanity defense, what do you need?
You need two things, don't you? Number one, you need an Expert
Witness. </p>

<p>Where, oh where, in this story, are we going to find an expert
witness? Here it comes -- sure enough -- the guy from Temple
University -- the guy with the dogs. I promise you, you are not
going to believe this. </p>

<p>In the most famous of these trials, what happened was two
women jumped on a Newark, New Jersey bus and shot and killed and
robbed the bus driver. They put on the marijuana insanity
defense. The defense called the pharmacologist, and of course,
you know how to do this now, you put the expert on, you say
&quot;Doctor, did you do all of this experimentation and so
on?&quot; You qualify your expert. &quot;Did you write all about
it?&quot; &quot;Yes, and I did the dogs&quot; and now he is an
expert. Now you ask him what? You ask the doctor &quot;What have
you done with the drug?&quot; And he said, and I quote,
&quot;I've experimented with the dogs, I have written something
about it and&quot; -- are you ready -- &quot;I have used the drug
myself.&quot; </p>

<p>What do you ask him next? &quot;Doctor, when you used the
drug, what happened?&quot; </p>

<p>With all the press present at this flamboyant murder trial in
Newark New Jersey, in 1938, the pharmacologist said, and I quote,
in response to the question &quot;When you used the drug, what
happened?&quot;, his exact response was: &quot;After two puffs on
a marijuana cigarette, I was turned into a bat.&quot; </p>

<p>He wasn't done yet. He testified that he flew around the room
for fifteen minutes and then found himself at the bottom of a
two-hundred-foot high ink well </p>

<p>Well, friends, that sells a lot of papers. What do you think
the Newark Star Ledger headlines the next day, October 12, 1938?
&quot;Killer Drug Turns Doctor to Bat!&quot; </p>

<p>What else do we need to put on an insanity defense? We need
the defendant's testimony -- himself or herself. OK, you put
defendant on the stand, what do you ask? &quot;What happened on
the night of . .&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Oh, I used marijuana.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;And then what happened?&quot; </p>

<p>And, if the defendant wants to get off, what is he or she
going to say? &quot;It made me crazy.&quot; </p>

<p>You know what the women testified? In Newark they testified,
and I quote, &quot;After two puffs on a marijuana cigarette my
incisor teeth grew six inches long and dripped with blood.&quot; </p>

<p>This was the craziest business you ever saw. Every one of
these so-called marijuana insanity defenses were successful. </p>

<p>The one in New York was just outlandish. Two police officers
were shot and killed in cold blood. The defendant puts on the
marijuana insanity defense and, in that case, there was never
even any testimony that the defendant had even used marijuana.
The testimony in the New York case was that, from the time the
bag of marijuana came into his room it gave off &quot;homicidal
vibrations&quot;, so he started killing dogs, cats, and
ultimately two police officers. </p>

<p>Commissioner Anslinger, sitting in Washington, seeing these
marijuana insanity defenses, one after another successful, he
writes to the pharmacologist from Temple University and says,
&quot;If you don't stop testifying for the defense in these
matters, we are going to revoke your status as the Official
Expert of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics.&quot; He didn't want
to lose his status, so he stopped testifying, nobody else would
testify that marijuana had turned them into a bat, and so these
insanity defenses were over but not before marijuana had gotten
quite a reputation, indeed. </p>

<p>The next step -- and now we are going to move very quickly
here -- in 1951. We get a whole new drug law called the Boggs Act
and it is important to us for only two reasons. </p>

<p>Number one, it reflects what I am going to call the formula
for drug legislation in this country. Here is the formula. The
formula really is always the same, think about it in our
lifetime. </p>

<p>The formula is that someone, and by the way, that someone is
usually the media, perceive an increase in drug use. What's the
answer? The answer in the history of this country is always the
same -- a new criminal law with harsher penalties in every single
offense category. </p>

<p>Where did the perception come from this time? Well, if you
have ever seen movies from this time period like High School
Confidential, the perception was that kids in high school were
starting to use drugs. What's the answer? The answer is always
the same. The Boggs Act of 1951 quadrupled the penalties in every
single offense category and, by the way, the Boggs Act had a
whole new rationale for the marijuana prohibition. </p>

<p>Do you remember the old rationale -- that marijuana was an
addictive drug which caused in its users insanity, criminality,
and death? Just before Anslinger was to testify on the Boggs Act,
the doctor who ran for the Government the Lexington, Kentucky
narcotics rehabilitation clinic testified ahead of Anslinger and
testified that the medical community knew that marijuana wasn't
an addictive drug,. It doesn't produce death, or insanity, and
instead of producing criminality, it probably produces passivity,
said the doctor. </p>

<p>Who was the next witness? Anslinger. And, if you see, that the
rug had been pulled out from under everything he had said in the
1937 hearings to support the marijuana prohibition. In what I
call a really slick Federal shuffle -- Anslinger, you know, had
been bitten bad enough by what he said, he didn't want that again
-- he said, the doctor is right, marijuana -- he always believed,
by the way, that there was something in marijuana which produced
criminality -- is not an addictive drug, it doesn't produce
insanity or death but it is &quot;the certain first step on the
road to heroin addiction.&quot; And the notion that marijuana was
the stepping stone to heroin became, in 1951, the sole rationale
for the national marijuana prohibition. It was the first time
that marijuana was lumped with all the other drugs and not
treated separately, and we multiply the penalties in every
offense category. </p>

<p>By the way, I told you that the history of drug legislation
reflects the history of the country. 1951, what's going on? The
Korean War, the Cold War. It didn't take the press a minute to
see this perceived use in drug use among high school kids as our
&quot;foreign enemies&quot;, using drugs to subvert the American
young. In our book, we have ten or fifteen great political
cartoons. My favorite is a guy with a big Fu Man Chu (mustache)
labeled &quot;Oriental Communism.&quot; He has a big needle
marked &quot;Dope&quot; and he has the American kids lying down
-- &quot;Free World&quot; it is marked. There it was -- that our
foreign enemies were going to use drugs to subvert the American
young. What did we do? We passed a new law that increased the
penalties in every offense category by a factor of four. </p>

<p>Well, now once you buy it, the ball is going to roll like
crazy. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>1956 and the Daniel Act</b> </p>

<p>1956, we get another new drug law, called the Daniel Act,
named for Senator Price Daniel of Texas. It is important to us
for only two reasons. One, it perfectly reflects the formula
again. What is the formula? Somebody perceives an increase in
drug use in this country and the answer is always a new criminal
law with harsher penalties in every offense category. </p>

<p>Where did the perception in 1956 come from that there was an
increase in drug use? Answer: Anybody remember 1956? In 1956, we
had the first set ever of televised Senate hearings. And whose
hearings were they? They were the hearings of Senator Estes
Kefauver of Tennessee about organized crime in America. </p>

<p>These hearings, which everybody watched on their little sets
showed two things that we all know today, but it sure made their
socks roll up and down then. Number one, there is organized crime
in America and number two, it makes all its money selling drugs.
There it was, that was all the perception we needed. We passed
the Daniel Act which increased the penalties in every offense
category, that had just been increased times four -- times eight.
</p>

<p>With the passage of each of these acts, the states passed
little Boggs acts, and little Daniel acts, so that in the period
1958 to 1969, in the Commonwealth of Virginia, and Virginia was
typical, the most heavily penalized crime in the Commonwealth was
possession of marijuana, or any other drug. </p>

<p>It led to a mandatory minimum sentence of twenty years, no
part of which you were eligible for parole or probation, and as
to no part of it were you eligible for a suspended sentence. </p>

<p>Just to show you where it was, in the same time period first
degree murder in Virginia had a mandatory minimum sentence of
fifteen years. Rape, a mandatory minimum sentence of ten years.
Possession of marijuana -- not to mention sales of marijuana with
its mandatory minimum of forty years -- mandatory minimum of
twenty years. </p>

<p>That is the situation in 1969 when we have a new drug law, the
first one in this country's history that does not follow the
formula. It is the 1969 Dangerous Substances Act. For he first
time in this country's history, we have a perception of an
increase in drug use during the Sixties, but instead of raising
the penalties, we lower them. And, further, in the Dangerous
Substances Act of 1969, for the first time we finally abandon the
so-called &quot;taxing&quot; mythology. </p>

<p>In the 1969 Act, what the Federal law does is, it takes all
the drugs we know -- if you can't fill in this next blank, you
are in trouble -- except two -- which two? Which two are never
going to be mentioned? Nicotine and alcohol. But, other than
nicotine and alcohol -- every other drug. </p>

<p>By the way, I tried this with the FBI for twenty years and
they wouldn't listen, and you won't listen either but, I am going
to try. If you are going to go out and talk about drugs and
whatever you are going to do with drugs, will you please discard
the entirely antiquated and erroneous word &quot;narcotics.&quot;
Narcotics are drugs that put people to sleep. Almost all of the
drugs that we are interested in today don't do that. </p>

<p>So, in 1969, the Dangerous Substances Act gave up the effort
to define what are narcotic drugs. What the 1969 act did, and
what most state laws still do, is to classify all drugs except
nicotine and alcohol by two criteria. What is the drug's medical
use? And, what is the drug's potential for abuse? </p>

<p>We put all the drugs, by those two criteria, in schedules, and
then we tie the penalties for possession, possession with intent
to sell, sale, and sale to a minor to the schedule of the drug in
question. Now, again, I am no good at this anymore, I have not
kept up with the drug laws, I don't know who is in what schedule,
and many states have abandoned the schedule but, to give you a
flavor of it: The first schedule, Schedule One Drugs were drugs
that had little or no medical use and a high potential for abuse.
What's going to go in there? LSD, marijuana, hashish, they are
all in Schedule One -- little or no medical use and a high
potential for abuse. </p>

<p>Then you get some medical use, high potential for abuse --
what do you want there? Barbiturates, amphetamines,. </p>

<p>Then we are going to get what? High medical use and high
potential for abuse. Morphine, codeine. Codeine is the best one
because codeine is in almost every single prescription cough
medicine and it is addictive as can be. </p>

<p>Then you go on down and get the antibiotics -- high medical
use, almost no potential for abuse, and there you are. </p>

<p>Once you schedule your drugs, you then tie the penalties for
the drugs to the schedule and then, because in 1969 they wanted
to reduce the marijuana penalties they had to deal with marijuana
separately and did so. </p>

<p>But the 1969 act important for two reasons again: One, we
abandoned the taxing mythology and; two, it was the first law in
this country's history that, instead of raising the penalties in
every offense category, lowered them. </p>

<p>Well, then you know what happened. We get the War on Drugs.
You know how it all went down. We got perceptions in the 80s that
there was an increase in drug use, a great dramatic decision to
declare war on drugs and, predominantly, war on drug users. </p>

<p>What I want to say to you is this, and this is where I think
some of you are going to be a little surprised. You know as much
about that process as I do. You watched it. You saw how we had
one law after another, raising the penalties so that as late as
1990, thirty percent of the minority group population of the City
of Baltimore who are male and between 20 and 29 are under court
supervision for drugs. Thirty percent, that's the number you are
looking for. </p>

<p>The War on Drugs, a very interesting war, because why? It was
cheap to fight. It was cheap to fight at first -- why? You heard
me in the &quot;Recent Decisions&quot; talk. What was last year's
big moment, and the year before? The change in cheap and easy
forfeiture. Criminal forfeiture was used to make this a costless
war. That is, easy forfeiture from those who were caught allowed
us to pay for the war in that way. I think we are going to have
some real questions about whether people want to pay for the war
on drugs through their taxes because now the Court has made
forfeiture much, much more difficult in their overall concern for
property rights. </p>

<p>But here is what I think may surprise some of you. You guys
know as much about the War on Drugs as I do. I didn't come hear
to talk, or to harangue, or to give you any opinions on that
point. I think it speaks for itself. It is a failure and I think
it will be judged as a failure. What I wanted to bring you
instead was, instead of talking about that that everybody is
talking about -- and you guys will ultimately resolve it and you
guys are the ones who are seeing all the drug cases, day in and
day out, and always will, until this changes. But, what I thought
I could bring you was the part of the story you hadn't heard --
how we got to where we were when the War on Drugs was declared.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>Conclusion - The Issue of Prohibition </b></p>

<p>And one other thing I want to do with you this morning, and
that's this -- I want to say one thing. To tell you the real
truth, my interest isn't in drugs, or in the criminalization of
drugs although I think we should abolish the criminal penalties
for drugs, and deal with it as the Europeans do in a medical way,
but who cares? That's an opinion.<br>
</p>

<p>What interests me though, isn't drugs. What interests me is
that larger issue, and the reason that I wrote the piece, and the
reason they were my tenure pieces, I am interested in a much
larger issue, and that is the idea of Prohibition -- the use of
criminal law to criminalize conduct that a large number of us
seem to want to engage in. <br>
</p>

<p>And, for my purposes, -- now, Professor Bonnie went on to be
associated with NIDA and with all kinds of drug-related
organizations and continues to be interested in the drug laws --
I am not. My interest is in criminal prohibitions and, for my
purposes, as a criminal law scholar, we could have used any
prohibition -- alcohol prohibition, the prohibition against
gambling that exists still in many states. How about the
prohibition in England from 1840 to 1880 against the drinking of
gin? Not drinking, just gin -- got it? We could have used any of
these prohibitions. We didn't. We chose the marijuana prohibition
because the story had never been told -- and it is an amazing
story.<br>
</p>

<p>We could have used any of these prohibitions. We could have
used the alcohol prohibition. The reason we didn't is because so
much good stuff has been written about it. And are you aware of
this? That every single -- you know how fashionable it is to
think that scholars can never agree? -- Don't you believe that --
Every single person who has ever written seriously about the
national alcohol prohibition agrees on why it collapsed. Why? </p>

<p>Because it violated that iron law of Prohibitions. What is the
iron law of Prohibitions? Prohibitions are always enacted by US,
to govern the conduct of THEM. Do you have me? Take the alcohol
prohibition. Every single person who has ever written about it
agrees on why it collapsed. </p>

<p>Large numbers of people supported the idea of prohibition who
were not themselves, opposed to drinking. Do you have me? What?
The right answer to that one is Huh? Want to hear it again? </p>

<p>Large numbers of people supported the idea of prohibition who
were not themselves, opposed to drinking. Want to see it? </p>

<p>Let me give you an example, 1919. You are a Republican in
upstate New York. Whether you drink, or you don't, you are for
the alcohol prohibition because it will close the licensed
saloons in the City of New York which you view to be the corrupt
patronage and power base of the Democratic Party in New York. So
almost every Republican in New York was in favor of national
alcohol prohibition. And, as soon as it passed, what do you think
they said? &quot;Well, what do you know? Success. Let's have a
drink.&quot; That's what they thought, &quot;let's have a
drink.&quot; &quot;Let's drink to this.&quot; A great success,
you see. </p>

<p>Do you understand me? Huge numbers of people in this country
were in favor of national alcohol prohibition who were not
themselves opposed to drinking. </p>

<p>I just want to go back to the prohibition against the drinking
of gin. How could a country prohibit just the drinking of gin,
not the drinking of anything else for forty years? Answer: The
rich people drank whiskey and the poor people drank what? -- gin.
Do you see it? </p>

<p>Let's try the gambling prohibition. You know when I came to
Virginia, this was a very lively issue, the gambling prohibition.
By the way, I think it's a lively issue in California. Are you
ready for it?<br>
</p>

<p>Have you ever seen the rhetoric that goes around the gambling
prohibition? You know what it is. Look, we have had a good time.
We have been together yesterday, we have been together today, I
have known a lot of you guys for ages. How about after the talk,
we have a minute or two, let's go on up to your room and we will
play a little nickel, dime, quarter poker. Want to play some
poker this afternoon? Why not? It's a nice thing to do.<br>
</p>

<p>Would we be outraged if the California State Police came
barreling through the door and arrested us for violation of
California's prohibition on gambling? Of course we would.
Because, who is not supposed to gamble? Oh, you know who is not
supposed to gamble -- them poor people, that's who. My God, they
will spend the milk money. They don't know how to control it.
They can't handle it. But us? We know what we are doing.<br>
</p>

<p>That's it. Every criminal prohibition has that same touch to
it, doesn't it? It is enacted by US and it always regulates the
conduct of THEM. And so, if you understand that is the name of
the game, you don't have to ask me, or any of the other people
which prohibitions will be abolished and which ones won't because
you will always know. The iron law of prohibitions -- all of them
-- is that they are passed by an identifiable US to control the
conduct of an identifiable THEM. <br>
</p>

<p>And a prohibition is absolutely done for when it does what?
Comes back and bothers US. If, at any time, in any way, that
prohibition comes back and bothers us, we will get rid of it for
sure, every doggone time. Look at the alcohol prohibition if you
want a quick example. As long as it is only THEM --- you know,
them criminals, them crazy people, them young people, them
minority group members --- we are fine. But any prohibition that
comes back and bothers US is done for.<br>
</p>

<p>Let's just try the marijuana prohibition as a quick one. Who
do you think was arrested 650,000 strong two years ago for
violation of the marijuana laws? Do you think it was all minority
group members? Nope. It was not. It was some very identifiable
children of US -- children of the middle class. You don't have to
answer my opinion. No prohibition will stand -- ever-- when it
comes back and penalizes our children -- the children of US who
enacted it. And in fact, do you have any real doubt about that?
Do you know what a fabulous sociological study we will be if we
become the first society in the history of the world to penalize
the sons and daughters of the wealthy class? Unheard of. </p>

<p>And so, yeah, we will continue the War on Drugs for a while
until everybody sees its patent bankruptcy. But, let me say that
I am not confident that good sense will prevail. Why? Because we
love this idea of prohibition. We really do. We love it in this
country. And so I will tell you what I predict. You will always
know which ones are going out and which ones are coming in. And,
can't you see the one coming right over the hill? Well, folks, we
are going to have a new prohibition because we love this idea
that we can solve difficult medical, economic, and social
problems by the simple enactment of a criminal law. We adore
this, and of course, you judges work it out, we have solved our
problem. Do you have it? Our problem is over with the enactment
of the law. You and the cops work it out, but we have solved our
problem. </p>

<p>Here comes the new one? What's it going to be? No, it won't be
guns, this one starts easy. This one is the Surgeon General has
what? --Determined -- not &quot;we want a little more checking it
out&quot;, not &quot;we need a few more studies&quot;, not
&quot;reasonable people disagree&quot; -- &quot;The Surgeon
General has determined that the smoking of cigarettes will kill
you.&quot; </p>

<p>Now, all you need, and here is my formula, for a new
prohibition every time is what? We need an intractable,
difficult, social, economic, or medical problem. But that is not
enough. There has to be another thing. It has to divide by class
--- by social or economic class, between US and THEM. </p>

<p>And so, here it comes. ' </p>

<p>You know the Federal Government has been spending a lot of
money since 1968 trying to persuade us not to smoke. And, indeed,
the absolute numbers on smoking have declined very little. But,
you know who has quit smoking, don't you? In gigantic numbers?
The college-educated, that's who. The college-educated, that's
who doesn't smoke. Who are they? Tomorrow's what? Movers and
kickers, that's who. Tomorrow's movers and kickers don't smoke.
Who does smoke? Oh, you know who smokes out of all proportion to
their numbers in the society -- it is the people standing in your
criminal courtrooms, that's who. Who are they? Tomorrow's moved
and kicked, that's who. </p>

<p>And, there it is friends, once it divides between the movers
and kickers and the moved and kicked it is all over and it will
be all over very shortly. </p>

<p>It starts with &quot;You know, they shouldn't smoke, they are
killing themselves.&quot; Then it turns, as it has -- you see the
ads out here -- &quot;They shouldn't smoke, they are killing
us.&quot; And pretty soon, that class division will happen, we
will have the legislatures full of tomorrow's movers and kickers
and they are going to say just what they are going to say any
time now. &quot;You know, this has just gotta stop, and we got an
answer for it.&quot; We are going to have a criminal statute that
forbids the manufacture, sale, or possession of tobacco
cigarettes, or tobacco products period. </p>

<p>You know that the cigarette companies are expecting it. What
have they been doing? They have been shifting all of their
operations out of the United States and diversifying like crazy.
Where are they going to sell their cigarettes? In China, that's
where. And they are already moving, because they see it and I see
it. </p>

<p>Ready? What are we going to have? You know what we are going
to have. One day -- when's it gonna happen, ten years, fifteen?
-- some legislator will get up and, just as though it had never
been said before, &quot;You know we gotta solve this smoking
problem and I got a solution -- a criminal prohibition against
the manufacture, sale, or possession of tobacco cigarettes.&quot;
And then you know what happens. Then everybody who did want a
cigarette here today, if there is anyone here who smokes, you are
going to have to hide in the bathroom. And cigarettes are no
longer going to be three dollars a pack, they are going to be
three dollars a piece. And who's going to sell them to you? Who
will always sell them to you? The people who will sell you
anything -- organized crime. You got the concept, we will go
through the whole darn thing again because I am telling you this
country is hooked on the notion of prohibition. </p>

<p>Let me conclude, and again this is my prediction -- I will
tell you I don't think it is subject to opinion. Just look at it.
Just take a look at what has happened now and what will happen. I
will tell you how inexorable it is. If we get together here in
the year 2005, I will bet you that it is as likely as not that
the possession of marijuana may not be criminal in this state.
But the manufacture, sale, and possession of tobacco will be, and
why? Because we love this idea of prohibitions, we can't live
without them. They are our very favorite thing because we know
how to solve difficult, social, economic, and medical problems --
a new criminal law with harsher penalties in every category for
everybody.<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>