
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-36</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B010-57</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Other/prisons.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040728 text/html 8087
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:07:17 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:41 GMT
Content-length: 7870
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Prisons-R-Us</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_other_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="other.htm">Other Publications related to drug policy</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="25252" -->

<h1>Prisons-R-Us </h1>

<p><b>The following is a summary of an article entitled,
&quot;Prisons-R-Us&quot; on the American Correctional Association
&quot;prisonfest&quot; held last month in Cincinnati, Ohio. The
article appeared in The Dayton Voice on September 20 and was
written by Alan Prendergast, a Denver based free-lance writer.</b>
</p>

<p><b>Copies of this issue of The Voice (Vol. 3, No. 38) can be
obtained by sending $1.00 to: The Dayton Voice, 915 Salem Ave.,
Dayton, OH 45406.</b> </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<p>Here's the summary: </p>

<p>Sponsored by the American Correctional Association (ACA), this
Congress is the world's largest gathering of corrections
professionals -- roughly 5,000 prison guards and administrators,
educators, halfway house operators, and probation and parole
officers. It's also a flag-waving, back-patting, glad-handing
tribute to the growing power and prestige of the booming prison
industry. U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno, the keynote speaker,
gushed, &quot;You see the meanest, most vicious among us, and you
protect us from them...Well, I'm here today to tell you how much
this nation owes you.&quot; </p>

<p>And just how much does this nation owe the prison industry?
Plenty, judging from the hordes of exhibitors who descend on the
Congress every year, hoping to cash in on the prison boom. Even
as Reno spoke, more than 500 vendors were setting up shop in the
city's convention center, hawking everything from razor wire and
fancy restaint beds to inmate phone services and modular cells
that could be assembled like Lego blocks. </p>

<p>&quot;Business is great,&quot; reported Cathy Perry, an
account manager with Access Catalog of St. Louis, that sells
approved TVs, clothing, stereos and other personal items to
inmates by mail order, raking in roughly $5 million in sales last
year... </p>

<p>Thanks to stiffer drug laws, tougher parole requirements,
mandatory minimum sentences, &quot;three strikes&quot; laws and
other legislation, the American prison population has tripled
since 1980...The growth has been particularly dramatic -- and
painful in Ohio, which now competes with California for the
dubious honor of having the most overcrowded prison system in the
country. Niki Schwartz, the Cleveland attorney who helped
negociate an end to the Lucasville riot, is fond of pointing out
that Ohio's prison budget was 1/6 of its higher education budget
in 1982; as of 1993, it has risen to 1/3. &quot;Soon we'll be
spending more on corrections than on higher education, and that's
crazy,&quot; Schartz declares. </p>

<p>Punishment, not rehabilitation, is the name of the game... At
the 125th congress there was no shortage of speeches denouncing
the current prison binge, an indication of the growing anxiety
among corrections professionals over swollen budgets, crowded
prisons, and increasing punitive legislation that is making those
prisons harder to manage. </p>

<p>Jim Gondles, the soft-spoken, genial executive director of the
ACA, says the biggest task facing the ACA is&quot;educating
people who don't work in corrections&quot; about the industries
growing professionalism and changing needs. </p>

<p>One of the ACA's principal sources of revenue is the
Commission on Accreditation for Corrections, which promotes
professional standards and &quot;audits&quot; prisons as part of
the accreditation process. Accreditation is no guarantee that
conditions within a prison are constitutional or even safe, but
the operators or more than 1,200 jails and prisons have invested
millions in training and renovation in an effort to meet ACA
standards. </p>

<p>Gondles urged &quot;a balanced&quot; approach to corrections,
meaning more of everything: more halfway houses, more rehab
programs, more boot camps, more prisons. And that's an agenda the
corrections' industry boosters can live with -- espeacilly its
gung-ho private sector constituency, which has expanded rapidly
as public monies invested in corrections have soared. </p>

<p>Although private prisons are still a rarity, virtually every
aspect of corrections now involves some degree of public-private
partnership. </p>

<p>Some aspects of privitazation involve lucrative kickbacks to
corrections agencies, at the expense of prisoners and their
families. Phone companies bid agressively for the right to
provide costly, hi-tech phone services to prisoners...the
companies offer a commission on billing revenues to the prison
that range as high as 35%. Inmate collect calls are a sore point
with Charles Sullivan, director of CURE (Citizens United for
Rehabilitation of Errants), a national prison reform lobbying
group. </p>

<p>The cost of an inmate phone call can vary widely from system
to system, depending on what the phone companies can slide past
the regulators. &quot;We don't think that kind of gouging is
right,&quot; Sullivan says, &quot;Why should prisons be making
money from families on inmate phone calls?&quot; </p>

<p>Even the building of prisons is not as straightforward as it
once was. </p>

<p>Typically, the state corrections system will &quot;lease&quot;
a new prison from a state authority, which issues bonds through
private underwriters such as Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, and
Prudential. The investors receive a significantly higher rate of
interest than that paid by general obligation bonds. &quot;Prison
bonds are a good investment,&quot; reports Brad Sprague, an
investment banker with Columbus office of A.G. Edwards Co.
&quot;I put my kid's money in them. You get individual investors,
bank trust departments, mutual funds, insurance companies -- they
all know the state of Ohio isn't going to go out of the prison
business anytime soon.&quot; </p>

<p>But Gondles senses that public concern about prison costs and
conditions is rising. &quot;We are going to see more citizens
interested in jails and prisons, &quot;he predicts, &quot;The
rate of incarceration is becoming so high that we are going to
reach a point where everyone knows someone who is in jail or
prison.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_other_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="other.htm">Other Publications related to drug policy</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="25252" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>