
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B032-238</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/adverse.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122063416 text/html 27822
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:34:05 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:23:52 GMT
Content-length: 27603
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Adverse Effects of Psychedelic Drugs</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<hr>

<h2 align="center">A NOTE ON ADVERSE EFFECTS</h2>

<p align="center">From: <i>Psychedelic Reflections,</i> Lester
Grinspoon &amp; James B. Bakalar <br>
Copyright Human Sciences Press, 1983</p>

<hr>

<p>While we are talking about the uses of psychedelic drugs, it
is appropriate to discuss their dangers. The psychedelic voyage
does produce some casualties; the question is how many and how
serious they are, what causes them, and how to prevent them. This
has been a matter of controversy since the 1960s. Drug users
sometimes would not confess that they had any problems, because
doubts and regrets were supposed to be a sign of rigidity or
repression or some other inadmissible personal problem. Anti-drug
crusaders sometimes would not admit that there was such a thing
as a good trip or an insight to be derived from psychedelic
drugs. </p>

<p>The most common adverse effect is the bad trip, which takes
many forms, from anxiety or panic to a (rare) psychotic state.
The worst kind is a fixed intense emotion or distorted thought
that can seem like an eternity of hell; for example, remorse,
suspicion, delusions of persecution or of being irreversibly
insane. Bad trips do not outlast the immediate effect of the
drug, and recovery is usually complete. They are not adverse drug
reactions in the narrow sense of something completely unintended
and unexpected. Even the best trips may have moments of anxiety
or depression, and every psychedelic drug user knows that
eventually he may have a trip dominated by painful or frightening
feelings: they are hardly more avoidable than fear when climbing
a mountain or pain when running a marathon. Bad trips are
sometimes regarded as more valuable than good ones, on the ground
that they teach the drug taker more about himself; the suffering
has the virtue of not seeming meaningless. In one study of LSD
users, 24 percent of the subjects had had what they considered
bad trips, and 50 percent considered the bad trips beneficial
(McGlothlin &amp; Arnold, 1971, p. 47). </p>

<p>Prolonged adverse reactions to psychedelic drugs are just as
varied in form as bad trips, and defy diagnostic classification
just as much. In fact, one way of looking at them is as
prolonged, more or less attenuated, or more or less intermittent
bad trips. As the defenses of the ego are altered, repressed
feelings and memories rise into consciousness, and they may
create enough anxiety to disrupt the organization of the mind.
Almost always, the defenses are reconstituted when the drug's
influence wears off; but if the drug user's personality is
unstable or the situation unsuitable&#151;if the set and setting
are wrong&#151;the disorganization may persist or return under
stress, as a kind of continuation of the unfinished psychedelic
experience. The result is a great variety of altered mental
states, from a mild recurrence of some drug-induced perceptual
change to depersonalization or outright psychosis. </p>

<p>By far the most common of these altered states is the
spontaneous recurrence or flashback. By the broadest definition,
a flashback is the transitory recurrence of emotions and
perceptions originally experienced while under the influence of a
psychedelic drug. It can last seconds or hours; it can mimic any
of the myriad aspects of a trip; and it can be blissful,
interesting, annoying, or frightening. Ordinarily they are only
slightly disturbing, especially since the drug user usually
recognizes them for what they are; they may even be regarded
lightheartedly as &quot;free trips. &quot; Occasionally they last
longer, and in a small minority of cases they turn into repeated
frightening images or thoughts. Usually they quickly decrease in
number and intensity. Flashbacks are most likely to occur under
emotional stress or at a time of altered ego functioning; they
are often induced by conditions like fatigue, drunkenness,
marihuana intoxication, and even meditative states. Marihuana
smoking is probably the most common single source of flashbacks. </p>

<p>On a broad definition, flashbacks are very common. According
to some studies, as many as a quarter of psychedelic drug users
have experienced some form of flashback; about half consider them
frightening and half consider them pleasant (Naditch &amp;
Fenwick, 1977). If the term is defined more narrowly for clinical
purposes as &quot;repeated intrusions of frightening images in
spite of volitional efforts to avoid them, &quot; it seems that
about 5 percent of habitual psychedelic drug users have
experienced them (McGlothlin, 1974, p. 27). </p>

<p>Other prolonged adverse reactions are much rarer. They have
been classified as chronic anxiety reactions, depressive
reactions, and psychoses. One study describes 16 hospitalized
patients who suffered from &quot;philosophical delusions,&quot;
intense visual hallucinations, and what the authors call a
striking variety of affective and neurotic symptoms, often they
had at least partial insight into the nature of their problems.
Many of them received electroconvulsive therapy, and the average
hospital stay was five and one-half weeks (Dewhurst &amp;
Hatrick, 1972). </p>

<p>The following is an example of a chronic anxiety state
produced by LSD: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>After much persuasion by his friends a twenty-year-old
    university student took 150 micrograms of LSD It was an
    &quot;interesting but disturbing time. &quot; Thereafter it
    became very difficult for him to study or concentrate, and he
    decided to drop out of school. He was unable to continue his
    part- time job as a stock clerk. There were strong feelings
    of the meaninglessness of life and he said that he was
    &quot;philosophically confused.&quot; Some days he felt
    normal again for a few hours, but then the strange, moving,
    compressing walls and time standing still made him fear he
    was going crazy. He had occasional thoughts of
    self-destruction. He would become very upset and panicky,
    break out into a sweat and sometimes freeze in terror. With
    considerable support, strong reassurance and tranquilizer
    therapy, the condition subsided six months after the LSD
    session (Cohen, 1970 [1965], p. 92). </p>
</blockquote>

<p>Because of inadequate reporting and problems in interpreting
symptoms and causes, it is hard to tell how common adverse
reactions are. At Bellevue Hospital in New York from early 1965
to 1967, 200 patients appeared with complaints related to
LSD&#151;mostly panic reactions and flashbacks (Frosch, 1969). By
1969 Bellevue was seeing only one LSD reaction every 2 weeks, and
most of these were thought to be borderline schizophrenics in
whom the drug had precipitated a psychosis (Stern &amp; Robbins,
1969). A 1971 Canadian government survey of the hospital records
of 22,885 psychiatric patients found 67 cases (0.3 percent) where
LSD was mentioned as a factor in the primary diagnosis; most of
these patients had used many drugs, and the precise influence of
LSD was often unclear (Final Report, 1973, p. 378). </p>

<p>A questionnaire survey by J. Thomas Ungerleider and his
colleagues suggests a much larger number of adverse reactions.
The period covered was July 1, 1966 to January 1, 1968, and the
questionnaire was sent to 2,700 physicians, psychiatrists,
psychologists, and other health professionals in Los Angeles
County. Of the 1,584 who replied, 27 percent (including 47
percent of the psychiatrists) had seen adverse reactions to LSD;
the total number of adverse reactions was 8,958 (Ungerleider et
al., 1968). Unfortunately, the definition of adverse reaction was
left to the respondents, and the effect, the authors suggest, was
probably to define anything that made a drug user seek
professional help as an adverse reaction. The prevailing social
attitudes have to be taken into account; for example, it is
suspicious that in the same survey 1,887 adverse reactions to
marihuana were reported. Many of the &quot;adverse
reactions&quot; may have been nothing more than difficult moments
during drug trips that were mentioned in psychiatric interviews
because they seemed relevant to the problem under discussion;
some may have been simply drug-induced insights that made people
believe they needed help. </p>

<p>Serious adverse reactions to psychedelic drugs are rare today,
partly because they are being used more carefully and at smaller
doses than in the first flush of psychedelic enthusiasm, and
partly because LSD is no longer being unofficially promoted as a
solution for emotional crises in the lives of seriously disturbed
people. The most likely candidate for adverse reactions are
schizoid and pre-psychotic personalities with a barely stable ego
balance and a great deal of anxiety, who cannot cope with the
perceptual changes, body-image distortions, and symbolic
unconscious material produced by the drug. Murray Naditch has
found through questionnaires that adverse reactions to LSD and
marihuana (defined essentially as bad trips&#151;strong
unpleasant feelings, panic, fear of insanity or death, thoughts
of suicide) are associated with high scores on psychological test
scales representing schizophrenic tendencies, social
maladjustment, and regression (Naditch, 1975). L.J. Hekimian and
Samuel Gershon examined 47 patients admitted to Bellevue Hospital
between January and July 1967 after using a psychedelic drug in
the preceding 48 hours . In 31 cases psychotic conditions already
present were intensified. Ultimately 32 were diagnosed as
schizophrenic, 4 as schizoid, 6 as sociopaths, and 5 as
depressive or neurotic. The authors were struck by the frequency
of pre-existing schizophrenia (Hekimian &amp; Gershon, 1968). </p>

<p>It is certainly impossible to assume that anyone who suffers
from psychosis, depression, or chronic anxiety after using a
psychedelic drug would always have had the same problems in any
case, but it is also wrong to suppose that these problems are
likely to descend suddenly at any moment on a reasonably stable
person who takes a psychedelic drug in a reasonably protected
setting. The best analogy for adverse psychedelic drug reactions
is psychosis precipitated by cannabis. The egos of a few people
are so fragile that they can be precipitated into psychosis by
any severe stress or alteration in consciousness, including
surgery, an automobile accident, or alcohol intoxication; it is
they who will suffer the rare psychotic reactions to cannabis.
LSD and drugs like it are much more powerful mind-modifiers, and
more people are vulnerable to their disruptive effects, including
a few with no strong previous signs of emotional disturbance.
Psychedelic drugs are capable of magnifying and bringing into
consciousness almost any internal conflict, so there is no
typical prolonged adverse reaction to LSD in the sense in which
there is, say, a typical amphetamine psychosis (always paranoid).
Instead, as many different affective, neurotic, and psychotic
symptoms may appear as there are individual forms of
vulnerability. This makes it hard to distinguish between LSD
reactions and unrelated pathology, especially when some time
passes between the drug trip and the onset of the disturbance. </p>

<p>The best treatment for a bad trip is reassurance and
&quot;talking down&quot; in a quiet, friendly setting; that is
the way thousands have been handled with or without intervention
by psychiatrists. Sometimes this reassurance may take the form of
urging the drug user to go with it, give up resistance and allow
loss of control, dissolution of the ego, and a cathartic
resolution. Interpreting, judging, discussing, and being
&quot;objective&quot; are disastrous; asking questions almost
always exacerbates the problem by making impossible demands on
the drug taker. Anything that might cause suspicion and paranoia,
like superfluous movements or conversations, should be avoided.
Use of a tranquilizer or sedative should be only a last resort,
after talking down fails; diazepam (Valium) is better than
anti-psychotic drugs like chlorpromazine (Thorazine), which act
too abruptly and intensely. The appropriate treatment for
prolonged reactions to psychedelic drugs is the same as the
treatment for similar symptoms not produced by drugs:
psychotherapy and drugs where necessary. </p>

<p>The most important fact about chronic or long-term psychedelic
drug use is that there is very little of it. Psychedelic drugs
produce no psychological compulsion or craving and certainly no
physical addiction. A drug that takes people into a different
stretch of unfamiliar mental territory for 8 hours every time
they use it is not for every day or even every weekend. Drug
users soon come to understand that psychedelic trips are not to
be embarked on lightly, and they tend to stop using LSD or cut
down their consumption greatly after a short time. </p>

<p>Nevertheless, for a few people in the late sixties and early
seventies, LSD use became what H.S. Becker has called a
&quot;master trait.&quot; This kind of chronic user was known as
an acidhead or acid freak, and a not very flattering composite
portrait can be drawn from journalism, psychiatric papers, and
other sources. He speaks softly and his manner is meek; he is
passive and unwilling to take initiative. He talks a great deal
about love but fears genuine intimacy and often feels emotionally
lifeless. He is easily shattered by aggression or argument, finds
the &quot;hassles&quot; of daily life an ordeal, and prefers to
live in a world of drug-induced fantasy. He finds it difficult to
follow an argument or concentrate on a thought; he is given to
superstitious beliefs and magical practices. He does not work
regularly or go to school; he rejects the accepted social forms
and proselytized for LSD as a means of liberation from the
standard &quot;ego games&quot; that constitute most people's
lives, he blames society for his troubles and tends to see
himself as a martyr. On the other hand, he is often at least
superficially open, friendly, warm, relaxed, and uncompetitive;
he is childlike as well as childish, and people often like him
and feel protective toward him. But he may express aggression
indirectly through his unconventional dress and manner, by
absent- minded inconsiderateness, or by resentment of challenges
to his unjustified conviction of superior awareness and moral
insight. </p>

<p>Even if no one fits this stereotype perfectly and most
psychedelic drug users do not fit it at all, it does seem to have
some basis in reality. K.H. Blacker and his colleagues, using a
control group for comparison, studied 21 volunteer subjects who
had used LSD 15 to 300 times (average 65 times), and found some
of the features of the stereotypical acidhead: openness and
relaxation, likeableness, passivity and introversion, occult and
magical beliefs, hippie dress and hair styles. Four said they had
memory blanks and sometimes found it difficult to organize
thoughts and form sentences. </p>

<p>On the electroencephelogram (EEG), which records brain waves,
they did not have an unusually high rate of abnormalities; but
they did show significantly more energy in all frequency bands
than normal control subjects and psychiatric patients, and this
suggested lower than usual levels of anxiety. On tests of
intellectual capacity and auditory evoked response (both usually
sensitive to the disorganization produced by schizophrenia) the
LSD users were normal. But they were extraordinarily sensitive to
visual stimuli of low intensity, which confirmed their opinion
that they could observe gestures, postures, and shades of color
better than most people. They also seemed to modulate and
organize sensory stimuli in an unusual way, since there was no
relationship between their evoked visual responses and their
subjective tactile ones. The authors describe these subjects as
eccentric or childlike but not schizophrenic or otherwise
pathologically impaired. They emphasize that it was hard to
separate the effects of the drug from those of personality and
social climate. </p>

<p>Psychedelic drug users have also been tested for organic brain
damage. William McGlothlin and his colleagues (McGlothlin et al.,
1969) compared 16 subjects who had taken LSD 20 times or more
(the range was 20 to 1,100, the median was 75 times) with 16
controls; they examined the subjects clinically and also
administered the Halstead-Reitan test battery. There were no
clinical organic symptoms, and no scores on the
neuropsychological tests that suggested brain damage; but on a
test measuring capacity for nonverbal abstraction the LSD users
scored lower. As in the case of Tucker's Rorschach results, the
amount of LSD was not related to the score. Nevertheless, the
authors conclude that continual heavy use may cause minor organic
brain pathology: six of the LSD subjects, including the three
heaviest users, were regarded as &quot;moderately
suspicious&quot; in this respect. In another study, Morgan Wright
and Terrence P. Hogan (1972) found no difference between subjects
who had used LSD an average of 29 times and controls (matched for
age, sex, education, and IO) on a variety of neuropsychological
tests, including the ones used by McGlothlin. At most, these
studies confirm the existence of an eccentric acidhead
personality; they do not clearly imply mental illness or brain
damage. </p>

<p>In considering long-term psychedelic drug use, even more than
in assessing acute reactions, it is hard to extricate the
pharmacological contribution from the complex web of associations
tying it to personality and social setting. The limitations of
retrospective studies are notorious, but that is all we have. How
many long-term psychedelic drug users ever were really acidheads,
and how permanent is the condition? How often is psychopathology
associated with psychedelic drug use, and when it is, is the drug
cause, symptom, or attempted cure? In this case there is also a
potential for cultural bias that creates further complications.
When are eccentric beliefs and behavior pathological, and when
are they simply a hippie way of life? Now that some of the social
views and personal styles of the drug culture of the 1960s have
become more popular, we know that they never implied a
drug-induced personality change. </p>

<p>Obviously many heavy drug users are seriously disturbed
people, but the drug use is usually a symptom more than a cause
of the trouble. If emotional problems were always a cause and not
an effect of chronic psychedelic drug use, the status of acidhead
would be nothing but a refuge or role-disguise for certain
schizoid or inadequate personalities. But sometimes drug abuse
itself, whatever the original reasons for it, becomes the central
problem, notoriously so when the drug is addictive, like alcohol
or heroin. The same thing may happen with LSD, but that has been
rare since the 1960s and was not common even then . The best
model for understanding the changes in behavior that occur after
psychedelic drug use is not a drug-induced personality change or
modification of the brain but the changes in one's views of self
and world after a voyage to a strange country . </p>

<p>A note on genetic damage and birth defects has to be added,
because misconceptions about this subject still exist. Chromosome
damage from LSD was first reported by Maimon Cohen and his
colleagues in Science in 1967 (Cohen &amp; Marmilli, 1967). They
found a higher than normal proportion of chromosome breaks in a
paranoid schizophrenic patient who had been treated with LSD 15
times, as well as with chlorpromazine and other drugs; they also
found that LSD caused chromosome breaks in leukocytes (white
blood cells) artificially cultured in the laboratory. In the
rather overheated atmosphere of 1967, this paper gained an
immediate celebrity and became the basis for a sensationalistic
propaganda campaign featuring pictures of deformed children. Some
LSD users switched to what they thought was mescaline or
psilocybin and in fact was almost always mislabeled LSD or
phencyclidine (PCP). </p>

<p>Many other studies of this subject have appeared and continue
to appear; it would be impossible and pointless to review them
all. The literature review published in Science by Norman I.
Dishotsky and his colleagues in 1971 established the reassuring
conclusions that are now generally accepted. Examining nearly a
hundred papers, they found that LSD was a weak mutagen, effective
only at very high doses. It was not carcinogenic and did not
cause chromosome damage in human beings at normal doses. One
study showed that it caused no more chromosome breaks in
Laboratory-cultured cells than aspirin. Illicit drug users often
had more damaged chromosomes than control subjects; this was
attributable not to LSD but to malnutrition, infectious disease,
and general ill health as well as possible impurities in street
drugs. The few available prospective studies, mostly of
psychiatric patients before and after LSD use, showed no
chromosome damage. There was no evidence of a high rate of birth
defects in children of LSD users (Dishotsky et al., 1971). This
paper is well known and adequately covers the research up to
1971; later studies have allayed persisting doubts. There is also
no clear evidence that LSD or any other psychedelic drug causes
birth defects in the child when it is taken by a pregnant woman.
Nevertheless, pregnant women should avoid all drugs, especially
in the first three months. </p>

<p>To sum up, then, bad trips and mild flashbacks are common and
even expected, but usually considered a nuisance&#151;and
occasionally even an opportunity&#151;rather than a danger. More
serious but relatively rare problems are recurrent frightening
flashbacks, prolonged reactions (usually a few days but sometimes
weeks or longer), suicides, and accidents. Thought and perception
changes occur in some chronic users, but it is hard to say when
these are immediate drug effects and when they are the result of
reflection on the experience; in any case, they are rarely
pathological and and almost never irreversible. There is no good
evidence of organic brain damage or genetic alterations. The
dangers are greatest for unstable personalities and in
unsupervised settings. The most important limitation on the abuse
of these drugs is the absence of a reliable euphoria, which means
that people rarely go on using them, as they often go on using
stimulants and sedatives, in spite of repeated disasters. Bad
trips usually become deterrents before they become dangerous. </p>

<h3>REFERENCES</h3>

<p>Cohen, S. <i>Drugs of Hallucination.</i> St. Albans, England:
Paladin, 1970 (orig. 1965). </p>

<p>Cohen, M.M., &amp; Marmillo, M.J. Chromosomal damage in human
leukocytes induced by Iysergic acid diethylamide. <i>Science,</i>
1967, 155:1417-1419. </p>

<p>Dewhurst, K., &amp; Hatrick, J.A. Differential diagnosis and
treatment of Iysergic acid diethylamide induced psychosis. <i>The
Practitioner</i>, 1972, 209:327-332. </p>

<p>Dishotsky, N.I., Loughman, W.D., Mogar, R.E., &amp; Lipscomb,
W.R. LSD and genetic damage. <i>Science</i>, 1971, 172:431-440. </p>

<p><i>Final Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the
Non-Medical Use of Drugs.</i> Ottawa: Information Canada, 1973. </p>

<p>Frosch, W.A. Patterns of response to self-administration of
LSD. In Roger E. Meyer (Ed.), <i>Adverse Reactions to
Hallucinogenic Drugs.</i> Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1969, pp. 74-79. </p>

<p>Hekimian, L.J., &amp; Gershon, S. Characteristics of drug
abusers admitted to a psychiatric hospital. <i>Journal of the
American Medical Association</i>, 1968, 205:125-130. </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W.H. The epidemiology of hallucinogenic drug use.
In E. Josephson &amp; E. C . Carrol (Eds . ), <i>Drug Use:
Epidemiological and Sociological Approaches</i>. Washington,
D.C.: Hemisphere Publishing Corp., 1974, pp. 279-301. </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W.H., &amp; Arnold, D.O. LSD revisited: A ten-year
follow-up of medical LSD use. <i>Archives of General Psychiatry,</i>
1971, 24:35-49. </p>

<p>McGlothlin, W.H., Arnold, D.O., &amp; Freedman, D.X.
Organicity measures following repeated LSD ingestion. <i>Archives
of General Psychiatry,</i> 1969, 21:704-709. </p>

<p>Naditch, M.P. Ego functioning and acute adverse reactions to
psychoactive drugs. <i>Journal of Personality</i>, 1975,
43:305-320. </p>

<p>Naditch, M.P., &amp;Fenwick, S. LSD flashbacks and ego
functioning. <i>Journal of Abnormal Psychology</i>, 1977, 86:
352-359. </p>

<p>Schwartz, C .J . The complications of LSD: A review of the
literature. <i>Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease</i>, 1968,
146: 174- 186. </p>

<p>Stern, M., &amp; Robbins, E.S. Clinical diagnosis and
treatment of psychiatric disorders subsequent to use of
psychedelic drugs. In R. Hicks and P. Fink (Eds.), <i>Psychedelic
Drugs</i>. New York: Grune and Stratton, 1969, pp. 55-65. </p>

<p>Ungerleider,J.T., Fisher, D.D., Goldsmith, S.R., Fuller, M.,
&amp; Forgy, E. A statistical survey of adverse reactions to LSD
in Los Angeles County. <i>American Journal of Psychiatry</i>,
1968, 125:352-357. </p>

<p>Wright, M., &amp; Hogan, T.P. Repeated LSD ingestion and
performance on neuropsychological tests. <i>Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease</i>, 1972, 154:432-438. </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <p><a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/persmenu.htm">Psychedelics
    and Personal Growth Menu Page</a></p>
    <!--webbot bot="Include"
    u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
    startspan --><p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
    href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
    href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>
    <p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
    href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
    href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
    <!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="52671" -->
</blockquote>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>