
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-47</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B035-88</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/child1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064250 text/html 39921
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:42:35 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:29:48 GMT
Content-length: 39702
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LSD, My Problem Child · How LSD Originated </title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Albert Hofmann">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<hr>
<center>

<h3>1. How LSD Originated </h3>
</center>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp; <center><i>In the realm of scientific observation, luck<br>
is granted only to those who are prepared. </i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
&nbsp; &#151;Louis Pasteur</center></p>

<p> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Time and again I hear or read that LSD was
discovered by accident. This is only partly true. LSD came into
being within a systematic research program, and the
&quot;accident&quot; did not occur until much later: when LSD was
already five years old, I happened to experience its
unforeseeable effects in my own body&#151;or rather, in my own
mind. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Looking back over my professional career to trace
the influential events and decisions that eventually steered my
work toward the synthesis of LSD, I realize that the most
decisive step was my choice of employment upon completion of my
chemistry studies. If that decision had been different, then this
substance, which has become known the world over, might never
have been created. In order to tell the story of the origin of
LSD, then, I must also touch briefly on my career as a chemist,
since the two developments are inextricably interrelated. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the spring of 1929, on concluding my chemistry
studies at the University of Zurich, I joined the Sandoz
Company's pharmaceutical-chemical research laboratory in Basel,
as a co-worker with Professor Arthur Stoll, founder and director
of the pharmaceutical department. I chose this position because
it afforded me the opportunity to work on natural products,
whereas two other job offers from chemical firms in Basel had
involved work in the field of synthetic chemistry. </p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>First Chemical Explorations </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; My doctoral work at Zurich under Professor Paul
Karrer had already given me one chance to pursue my interest in
plant and animal chemistry. Making use of the gastrointestinal
juice of the vineyard snail, I accomplished the enzymatic
degradation of chitin, the structural material of which the
shells, wings, and claws of insects, crustaceans, and other lower
animals are composed. I was able to derive the chemical structure
of chitin from the cleavage product, a nitrogen-containing sugar,
obtained by this degradation. Chitin turned out to be an analogue
of cellulose, the structural material of plants. This important
result, obtained after only three months of research, led to a
doctoral thesis rated &quot;with distinction.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; When I joined the Sandoz firm, the staff of the
pharmaceutical-chemical department was still rather modest in
number. Four chemists with doctoral degrees worked in research,
three in production. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In Stoll's laboratory I found employment that
completely agreed with me as a research chemist. The objective
that Professor Stoll had set for his pharmaceutical-chemical
research laboratories was to isolate the active principles (i.e.,
the effective constituents) of known medicinal plants to produce
pure specimens of these substances. This is particularly
important in the case of medicinal plants whose active principles
are unstable, or whose potency is subject to great variation,
which makes an exact dosage difficult. But if the active
principle is available in pure form, it becomes possible to
manufacture a stable pharmaceutical preparation, exactly
quantifiable by weight. With this in mind, Professor Stoll had
elected to study plant substances of recognized value such as the
substances from foxglove <i>(Digitalis),</i> Mediterranean squill
<i>(Scilla maritima)</i>, and ergot of rye (<i>Claviceps purpurea</i>
or <i>Secale cornutum</i>), which, owning to their instability
and uncertain dosage, nevertheless, had been little used in
medicine. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; My first years in the Sandoz laboratories were
devoted almost exclusively to studying the active principles of
Mediterranean squill. Dr. Walter Kreis, one of Professor Stoll's
earliest associates, launched me in this field of research. The
most important constituents of Mediterranean squill already
existed in pure form. Their active agents, as well as those of
woolly foxglove (<i>Digitalis lanata</i>), had been isolated and
purified, chiefly by Dr. Kreis, with extraordinary skill. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The active principles of Mediterranean squill
belong to the group of cardioactive glycosides (glycoside =
sugar-containing substance) and serve, as do those of foxglove,
in the treatment of cardiac insufficiency. The cardiac glycosides
are extremely active substances. Because the therapeutic and the
toxic doses differ so little, it becomes especially important
here to have an exact dosage, based on pure compounds. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At the beginning of my investigations, a
pharmaceutical preparation with Scilla glycosides had already
been introduced into therapeutics by Sandoz; however, the
chemical structure of these active compounds, with the exception
of the sugar portion, remained largely unknown. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; My main contribution to the <i>Scilla</i> research,
in which I participated with enthusiasm, was to elucidate the
chemical structure of the common nucleus of Scilla glycosides,
showing on the one hand their differences from the <i>Digitalis </i>glycosides,
and on the other hand their close structural relationship with
the toxic principles isolated from skin glands of toads. In 1935,
these studies were temporarily concluded. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Looking for a new field of research, I asked
Professor Stoll to let me continue the investigations on the
alkaloids of ergot, which he had begun in 1917 and which had led
directly to the isolation of ergotamine in 1918. Ergotamine,
discovered by Stoll, was the first ergot alkaloid obtained in
pure chemical form. Although ergotamine quickly took a
significant place in therapeutics (under the trade name Gynergen)
as a hemostatic remedy in obstetrics and as a medicament in the
treatment of migraine, chemical research on ergot in the Sandoz
laboratories was abandoned after the isolation of ergotamine and
the determination of its empirical formula. Meanwhile, at the
beginning of the thirties, English and American laboratories had
begun to determine the chemical structure of ergot alkaloids.
They had also discovered a new, water-soluble ergot alkaloid,
which could likewise be isolated from the mother liquor of
ergotamine production. So I thought it was high time that Sandoz
resumed chemical research on ergot alkaloids, unless we wanted to
risk losing our leading role in a field of medicinal research,
which was already becoming so important. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Professor Stoll granted my request, with some
misgivings: &quot;I must warn you of the difficulties you face in
working with ergot alkaloids. These are-exceedingly sensitive,
easily decomposed substances, less stable than any of the
compounds you have investigated in the cardiac glycoside field.
But you are welcome to try.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And so the switches were thrown, and I found myself
engaged in a field of study that would become the main theme of
my professional career. I have never forgotten the creative joy,
the eager anticipation I felt in embarking on the study of ergot
alkaloids, at that time a relatively uncharted field of research.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Ergot </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; It may be helpful here to give some background
information about ergot itself.[For further information on ergot,
readers should refer to the monographs of G. Berger, <i>Ergot and
Ergotism</i> (Gurney and Jackson, London, 1931 ) and A. Hofmann, <i>Die
Mutterkornalkaloide</i> (F. Enke Verlag, Stuttgart, 1964). The
former is a classical presentation of the history of the drug,
while the latter emphasizes the chemical aspects.] It is produced
by a lower fungus (<i>Claviceps purpurea</i>) that grows
parasitically on rye and, to a lesser extent, on other species of
grain and on wild grasses. Kernels infested with this fungus
develop into light-brown to violet-brown curved pegs (sclerotia)
that push forth from the husk in place of normal grains. Ergot is
described botanically as a sclerotium, the form that the ergot
fungus takes in winter. Ergot of rye (<i>Secale cornutum</i>) is
the variety used medicinally. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Ergot, more than any other drug, has a fascinating
history, in the course of which its role and meaning have been
reversed: once dreaded as a poison, in the course of time it has
changed to a rich storehouse of valuable remedies. Ergot first
appeared on the stage of history in the early Middle Ages, as the
cause of outbreaks of mass poisonings affecting thousands of
persons at a time. The illness, whose connection with ergot was
for a long time obscure, appeared in two characteristic forms,
one gangrenous (<i>ergotismus gangraenosus</i>) and the other
convulsive (<i>ergotismus convulsivus</i>). Popular names for
ergotism&#151;such as &quot;mal des ardents,&quot; &quot;ignis
sacer,&quot; &quot;heiliges Feuer,&quot; or &quot;St. Anthony's
fire&quot;&#151;refer to the gangrenous form of the disease. The
patron saint of ergotism victims was St. Anthony, and it was
primarily the Order of St. Anthony that treated these patients. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Until recent times, epidemic-like outbreaks of
ergot poisoning have been recorded in most European countries
including certain areas of Russia. With progress in agriculture,
and since the realization, in the seventeenth century, that
ergot-containing bread was the cause, the frequency and extent of
ergotism epidemics diminished considerably. The last great
epidemic occurred in certain areas of southern Russia in the
years 1926-27. [The mass poisoning in the southern French city of
Pont-St. Esprit in the year 1951, which many writers have
attributed to ergot-containing bread, actually had nothing to do
with ergotism. It rather involved poisoning by an organic mercury
compound that was utilized for disinfecting seed.] <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The first mention of a medicinal use of ergot,
namely as an ecbolic (a medicament to precipitate childbirth), is
found in the herbal of the Frankfurt city physician Adam Lonitzer
(Lonicerus) in the year 1582. Although ergot, as Lonitzer stated,
had been used since olden times by midwives, it was not until
1808 that this drug gained entry into academic medicine, on the
strength of a work by the American physician John Stearns
entitled <i>Account of the Putvis Parturiens, a Remedy for
Quickening Childbirth.</i> The use of ergot as an ecbolic did
not, however, endure. Practitioners became aware quite early of
the great danger to the child, owing primarily to the uncertainty
of dosage, which when too high led to uterine spasms. From then
on, the use of ergot in obstetrics was confined to stopping
postpartum hemorrhage (bleeding after childbirth). <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It was not until ergot's recognition in various
pharmacopoeias during the first half of the nineteenth century
that the first steps were taken toward isolating the active
principles of the drug. However, of all the researchers who
assayed this problem during the first hundred years, not one
succeeded in identifying the actual substances responsible for
the therapeutic activity. In 1907, the Englishmen G. Barger and
F. H. Carr were the first to isolate an active alkaloidal
preparation, which they named ergotoxine because it produced more
of the toxic than therapeutic properties of ergot. (This
preparation was not homogeneous, but rather a mixture of several
alkaloids, as I was able to show thirty-five years later.)
Nevertheless, the pharmacologist H. H. Dale discovered that
ergotoxine, besides the uterotonic effect, also had an
antagonistic activity on adrenaline in the autonomic nervous
system that could lead to the therapeutic use of ergot alkaloids.
Only with the isolation of ergotamine by A. Stoll (as mentioned
previously) did an ergot alkaloid find entry and widespread use
in therapeutics. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The early 1930s brought a new era in ergot
research, beginning with the determination of the chemical
structure of ergot alkaloids, as mentioned, in English and
American laboratories. By chemical cleavage, W. A. Jacobs and L.
C. Craig of the Rockefeller Institute of New York succeeded in
isolating and characterizing the nucleus common to all ergot
alkaloids. They named it lysergic acid. Then came a major
development, both for chemistry and for medicine: the isolation
of the specifically uterotonic, hemostatic principle of ergot,
which was published simultaneously and quite independently by
four institutions, including the Sandoz laboratories. The
substance, an alkaloid of comparatively simple structure, was
named ergobasine (syn. ergometrine, ergonovine) by A. Stoll and
E. Burckhardt. By the chemical degradation of ergobasine, W. A.
Jacobs and L. C. Craig obtained lysergic acid and the amino
alcohol propanolamine as cleavage products. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I set as my first goal the problem of preparing
this alkaloid synthetically, through chemical linking of the two
components of ergobasine, lysergic acid and propanolamine (see
structural formulas in the appendix). <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The lysergic acid necessary for these studies had
to be obtained by chemical cleavage of some other ergot alkaloid.
Since only ergotamine was available as a pure alkaloid, and was
already being produced in kilogram quantities in the
pharmaceutical production department, I chose this alkaloid as
the starting material for my work. I set about obtaining 0.5 gm
of ergotamine from the ergot production people. When I sent the
internal requisition form to Professor Stoll for his
countersignature, he appeared in my laboratory and reproved me:
&quot;If you want to work with ergot alkaloids, you will have to
familiarize yourself with the techniques of microchemistry. I
can't have you consuming such a large amount of my expensive
ergotamine for your experiments.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The ergot production department, besides using
ergot of Swiss origin to obtain ergotamine, also dealt with
Portuguese ergot, which yielded an amorphous alkaloidal
preparation that corresponded to the aforementioned ergotoxine
first produced by Barger and Carr. I decided to use this less
expensive material for the preparation of lysergic acid. The
alkaloid obtained from the production department had to be
purified further, before it would be suitable for cleavage to
lysergic acid. Observations made during the purification process
led me to think that ergotoxine could be a mixture of several
alkaloids, rather than one homogeneous alkaloid. I will speak
later of the far-reaching sequelae of these observations. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Here I must digress briefly to describe the working
conditions and techniques that prevailed in those days. These
remarks may be of interest to the present generation of research
chemists in industry, who are accustomed to far better
conditions. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We were very frugal. Individual laboratories were
considered a rare extravagance. During the first six years of my
employment with Sandoz, I shared a laboratory with two
colleagues. We three chemists, plus an assistant each, worked in
the same room on three different fields: Dr. Kreiss on cardiac
glycosides; Dr. Wiedemann, who joined Sandoz around the same time
as I, on the leaf pigment chlorophyll; and I ultimately on ergot
alkaloids. The laboratory was equipped with two fume hoods
(compartments supplied with outlets), providing less than
effective ventilation by gas flames. When we requested that these
hoods be equipped with ventilators, our chief refused on the
ground that ventilation by gas flame had sufficed in
Willstatter's laboratory. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; During the last years of World War I, Professor
Stoll had been an assistant in Berlin and Munich to the
world-famous chemist and Nobel laureate Professor Richard
Willstatter, and with him had conducted the fundamental
investigations on chlorophyll and the assimilation of carbon
dioxide. There was scarcely a scientific discussion with
Professor Stoll in which he did not mention his revered teacher
Professor Willstatter and his work in Willstatter's laboratory. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The working techniques available to chemists in the
field of organic chemistry at that time (the beginning of the
thirties) were essentially the same as those employed by Justus
von Liebig a hundred years earlier. The most important
development achieved since then was the introduction of
microanalysis by B. Pregl, which made it possible to ascertain
the elemental composition of a compound with only a few
milligrams of specimen, whereas earlier a few centigrams were
needed. Of the other physical-chemical techniques at the disposal
of the chemist today&#151;techniques which have changed his way
of working, making it faster and more effective, and created
entirely new possibilities, above all for the elucidation of
structure - none yet existed in those days. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; For the investigations of <i>Scilla</i> glycosides
and the first studies in the ergot field, I still used the old
separation and purification techniques from Liebig's day:
fractional extraction, fractional precipitation, fractional
crystallization, and the like. The introduction of column
chromatography, the first important step in modern laboratory
technique, was of great value to me only in later investigations.
For structure determination, which today can be conducted rapidly
and elegantly with the help of spectroscopic methods (UV, IR,
NMR) and X-ray crystallography, we had to rely, in the first
fundamental ergot studies, entirely on the old laborious methods
of chemical degradation and derivatization. </p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Lysergic Acid and Its Derivatives </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Lysergic acid proved to be a rather unstable
substance, and its rebonding with basic radicals posed
difficulties. In the technique known as Curtius' Synthesis, I
ultimately found a process that proved useful for combining
lysergic acid with amines. With this method I produced a great
number of lysergic acid compounds. By combining lysergic acid
with the amino alcohol propanolamine, I obtained a compound that
was identical to the natural ergot alkaloid ergobasine. With
that, the first synthesis&#151;that is, artificial
production&#151;of an ergot alkaloid was accomplished. This was
not only of scientific interest, as confirmation of the chemical
structure of ergobasine, but also of practical significance,
because ergobasine, the specifically uterotonic, hemostatic
principle, is present in ergot only in very trifling quantities.
With this synthesis, the other alkaloids existing abundantly in
ergot could now be converted to ergobasine, which was valuable in
obstetrics. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After this first success in the ergot field, my
investigations went forward on two fronts. First, I attempted to
improve the pharmacological properties of ergobasine by
variations of its amino alcohol radical. My colleague Dr. J.
Peyer and I developed a process for the economical production of
propanolamine and other amino alcohols. Indeed, by substitution
of the propanolamine contained in ergobasine with the amino
alcohol butanolamine, an active principle was obtained that even
surpassed the natural alkaloid in its therapeutic properties.
This improved ergobasine has found worldwide application as a
dependable uterotonic, hemostatic remedy under the trade name
Methergine, and is today the leading medicament for this
indication in obstetrics. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I further employed my synthetic procedure to
produce new lysergic acid compounds for which uterotonic activity
was not prominent, but from which, on the basis of their chemical
structure, other types of interesting pharmacological properties
could be expected. In 1938, I produced the twenty-fifth substance
in this series of lysergic acid derivatives: lysergic acid
diethylamide, abbreviated LSD-25 (Lyserg-säure-diäthylamid) for
laboratory usage. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I had planned the synthesis of this compound with
the intention of obtaining a circulatory and respiratory
stimulant (an analeptic). Such stimulating properties could be
expected for lysergic acid diethylamide, because it shows
similarity in chemical structure to the analeptic already known
at that time, namely nicotinic acid diethylamide (Coramine).
During the testing of LSD-25 in the pharmacological department of
Sandoz, whose director at the time was Professor Ernst Rothlin, a
strong effect on the uterus was established. It amounted to some
70 percent of the activity of ergobasine. The research report
also noted, in passing, that the experimental animals became
restless during the narcosis. The new substance, however, aroused
no special interest in our pharmacologists and physicians;
testing was therefore discontinued. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; For the next five years, nothing more was heard of
the substance LSD-25. Meanwhile, my work in the ergot field
advanced further in other areas. Through the purification of
ergotoxine, the starting material for lysergic acid, I obtained,
as already mentioned, the impression that this alkaloidal
preparation was not homogeneous, but was rather a mixture of
different substances. This doubt as to the homogeneity of
ergotoxine was reinforced when in its hydrogenation two
distinctly different hydrogenation products were obtained,
whereas the homogeneous alkaloid ergotamine under the same
condition yielded only a single hydrogenation product
(hydrogenation = introduction of hydrogen). Extended, systematic
analytical investigations of the supposed ergotoxine mixture led
ultimately to the separation of this alkaloidal preparation into
three homogeneous components. One of the three chemically
homogeneous ergotoxine alkaloids proved to be identical with an
alkaloid isolated shortly before in the production department,
which A. Stoll and E. Burckhardt had named ergocristine. The
other two alkaloids were both new. The first I named ergocornine;
and for the second, the last to be isolated, which had long
remained hidden in the mother liquor, I chose the name
ergokryptine (kryptos = hidden). Later it was found that
ergokryptine occurs in two isomeric forms, which were
differentiated as alfa- and beta-ergokryptine. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The solution of the ergotoxine problem was not
merely scientifically interesting, but also had great practical
significance. A valuable remedy arose from it. The three
hydrogenated ergotoxine alkaloids that I produced in the course
of these investigations, dihydroergocristine,
dihydroergokryptine, and dihydroergocornine, displayed
medicinally useful properties during testing by Professor Rothlin
in the pharmacological department. From these three substances,
the pharmaceutical preparation Hydergine was developed, a
medicament for improvement of peripheral circulation and cerebral
function in the control of geriatric disorders. Hydergine has
proven to be an effective remedy in geriatrics for these
indications. Today it is Sandoz's most important pharmaceutical
product. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Dihydroergotamine, which I likewise produced in the
course of these investigations, has also found application in
therapeutics as a circulation- and blood-pressure-stabilizing
medicament, under the trade name Dihydergot. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; While today research on important projects is
almost exclusively carried out as teamwork, the investigations on
ergot alkaloids described above were conducted by myself alone.
Even the further chemical steps in the evolution of commercial
preparations remained in my hands&#151;that is, the preparation
of larger specimens for the clinical trials, and finally the
perfection of the first procedures for mass production of
Methergine, Hydergine, and Dihydergot. This even included the
analytical controls for the development of the first galenical
forms of these three preparations: the ampoules, liquid
solutions, and tablets. My aides at that time included a
laboratory assistant, a laboratory helper, and later in addition
a second laboratory assistant and a chemical technician. </p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Discovery of the Psychic Effects of LSD </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; The solution of the ergotoxine problem had led
to fruitful results, described here only briefly, and had opened
up further avenues of research. And yet I could not forget the
relatively uninteresting LSD-25. A peculiar presentiment&#151;the
feeling that this substance could possess properties other than
those established in the first investigations&#151;induced me,
five years after the first synthesis, to produce LSD-25 once
again so that a sample could be given to the pharmacological
department for further tests. This was quite unusual;
experimental substances, as a rule, were definitely stricken from
the research program if once found to be lacking in
pharmacological interest. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Nevertheless, in the spring of 1943, I repeated the
synthesis of LSD-25. As in the first synthesis, this involved the
production of only a few centigrams of the compound. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the final step of the synthesis, during the
purification and crystallization of lysergic acid diethylamide in
the form of a tartrate (tartaric acid salt), I was interrupted in
my work by unusual sensations. The following description of this
incident comes from the report that I sent at the time to
Professor Stoll: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Last Friday, April 16,1943, I was forced to interrupt my
    work in the laboratory in the middle of the afternoon and
    proceed home, being affected by a remarkable restlessness,
    combined with a slight dizziness. At home I lay down and sank
    into a not unpleasant intoxicated-like condition,
    characterized by an extremely stimulated imagination. In a
    dreamlike state, with eyes closed (I found the daylight to be
    unpleasantly glaring), I perceived an uninterrupted stream of
    fantastic pictures, extraordinary shapes with intense,
    kaleidoscopic play of colors. After some two hours this
    condition faded away. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This was, altogether, a remarkable
experience&#151;both in its sudden onset and its extraordinary
course. It seemed to have resulted from some external toxic
influence; I surmised a connection with the substance I had been
working with at the time, lysergic acid diethylamide tartrate.
But this led to another question: how had I managed to absorb
this material? Because of the known toxicity of ergot substances,
I always maintained meticulously neat work habits. Possibly a bit
of the LSD solution had contacted my fingertips during
crystallization, and a trace of the substance was absorbed
through the skin. If LSD-25 had indeed been the cause of this
bizarre experience, then it must be a substance of extraordinary
potency. There seemed to be only one way of getting to the bottom
of this. I decided on a self-experiment. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Exercising extreme caution, I began the planned
series of experiments with the smallest quantity that could be
expected to produce some effect, considering the activity of the
ergot alkaloids known at the time: namely, 0.25 mg (mg =
milligram = one thousandth of a gram) of lysergic acid
diethylamide tartrate. Quoted below is the entry for this
experiment in my laboratory journal of April 19, 1943.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Self-Experiments </h4>

<blockquote>
    <p>4/19/43 16:20: 0.5 cc of 1/2 promil aqueous solution of
    diethylamide tartrate orally = 0.25 mg tartrate. Taken
    diluted with about 10 cc water. Tasteless. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>17:00: Beginning dizziness, feeling of anxiety, visual
    distortions, symptoms of paralysis, desire to laugh. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Supplement of 4/21: Home by bicycle. From 18:00- ca.20:00
    most severe crisis. (See special report.) </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Here the notes in my laboratory journal cease. I
was able to write the last words only with great effort. By now
it was already clear to me that LSD had been the cause of the
remarkable experience of the previous Friday, for the altered
perceptions were of the same type as before, only much more
intense. I had to struggle to speak intelligibly. I asked my
laboratory assistant, who was informed of the self-experiment, to
escort me home. We went by bicycle, no automobile being available
because of wartime restrictions on their use. On the way home, my
condition began to assume threatening forms. Everything in my
field of vision wavered and was distorted as if seen in a curved
mirror. I also had the sensation of being unable to move from the
spot. Nevertheless, my assistant later told me that we had
traveled very rapidly. Finally, we arrived at home safe and
sound, and I was just barely capable of asking my companion to
summon our family doctor and request milk from the neighbors. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In spite of my delirious, bewildered condition, I
had brief periods of clear and effective thinking&#151;and chose
milk as a nonspecific antidote for poisoning. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The dizziness and sensation of fainting became so
strong at times that I could no longer hold myself erect, and had
to lie down on a sofa. My surroundings had now transformed
themselves in more terrifying ways. Everything in the room spun
around, and the familiar objects and pieces of furniture assumed
grotesque, threatening forms. They were in continuous motion,
animated, as if driven by an inner restlessness. The lady next
door, whom I scarcely recognized, brought me milk&#151;in the
course of the evening I drank more than two liters. She was no
longer Mrs. R., but rather a malevolent, insidious witch with a
colored mask. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Even worse than these demonic transformations of
the outer world, were the alterations that I perceived in myself,
in my inner being. Every exertion of my will, every attempt to
put an end to the disintegration of the outer world and the
dissolution of my ego, seemed to be wasted effort. A demon had
invaded me, had taken possession of my body, mind, and soul. I
jumped up and screamed, trying to free myself from him, but then
sank down again and lay helpless on the sofa. The substance, with
which I had wanted to experiment, had vanquished me. It was the
demon that scornfully triumphed over my will. I was seized by the
dreadful fear of going insane. I was taken to another world,
another place, another time. My body seemed to be without
sensation, lifeless, strange. Was I dying? Was this the
transition? At times I believed myself to be outside my body, and
then perceived clearly, as an outside observer, the complete
tragedy of my situation. I had not even taken leave of my family
(my wife, with our three children had traveled that day to visit
her parents, in Lucerne). Would they ever understand that I had
not experimented thoughtlessly, irresponsibly, but rather with
the utmost caution, an-d that such a result was in no way
foreseeable? My fear and despair intensified, not only because a
young family should lose its father, but also because I dreaded
leaving my chemical research work, which meant so much to me,
unfinished in the midst of fruitful, promising development.
Another reflection took shape, an idea full of bitter irony: if I
was now forced to leave this world prematurely, it was because of
this Iysergic acid diethylamide that I myself had brought forth
into the world. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; By the time the doctor arrived, the climax of my
despondent condition had already passed. My laboratory assistant
informed him about my self-experiment, as I myself was not yet
able to formulate a coherent sentence. He shook his head in
perplexity, after my attempts to describe the mortal danger that
threatened my body. He could detect no abnormal symptoms other
than extremely dilated pupils. Pulse, blood pressure, breathing
were all normal. He saw no reason to prescribe any medication.
Instead he conveyed me to my bed and stood watch over me. Slowly
I came back from a weird, unfamiliar world to reassuring everyday
reality. The horror softened and gave way to a feeling of good
fortune and gratitude, the more normal perceptions and thoughts
returned, and I became more confident that the danger of insanity
was conclusively past. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Now, little by little I could begin to enjoy the
unprecedented colors and plays of shapes that persisted behind my
closed eyes. Kaleidoscopic, fantastic images surged in on me,
alternating, variegated, opening and then closing themselves in
circles and spirals, exploding in colored fountains, rearranging
and hybridizing themselves in constant flux. It was particularly
remarkable how every acoustic perception, such as the sound of a
door handle or a passing automobile, became transformed into
optical perceptions. Every sound generated a vividly changing
image, with its own consistent form and color. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Late in the evening my wife returned from Lucerne.
Someone had informed her by telephone that I was suffering a
mysterious breakdown. She had returned home at once, leaving the
children behind with her parents. By now, I had recovered myself
sufficiently to tell her what had happened. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Exhausted, I then slept, to awake next morning
refreshed, with a clear head, though still somewhat tired
physically. A sensation of well-being and renewed life flowed
through me. Breakfast tasted delicious and gave me extraordinary
pleasure. When I later walked out into the garden, in which the
sun shone now after a spring rain, everything glistened and
sparkled in a fresh light. The world was as if newly created. All
my senses vibrated in a condition of highest sensitivity, which
persisted for the entire day. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This self-experiment showed that LSD-25 behaved as
a psychoactive substance with extraordinary properties and
potency. There was to my knowledge no other known substance that
evoked such profound psychic effects in such extremely low doses,
that caused such dramatic changes in human consciousness and our
experience of the inner and outer world. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; What seemed even more significant was that I could
remember the experience of LSD inebriation in every detail. This
could only mean that the conscious recording function was not
interrupted, even in the climax of the LSD experience, despite
the profound breakdown of the normal world view. For the entire
duration of the experiment, I had even been aware of
participating in an experiment, but despite this recognition of
my condition, I could not, with every exertion of my will, shake
off the LSD world. Everything was experienced as completely real,
as alarming reality; alarming, because the picture of the other,
familiar everyday reality was still fully preserved in the memory
for comparison. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Another surprising aspect of LSD was its ability to
produce such a far-reaching, powerful state of inebriation
without leaving a hangover. Quite the contrary, on the day after
the LSD experiment I felt myself to be, as already described, in
excellent physical and mental condition. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I was aware that LSD, a new active compound with
such properties, would have to be of use in pharmacology, in
neurology, and especially in psychiatry, and that it would
attract the interest of concerned specialists. But at that time I
had no inkling that the new substance would also come to be used
beyond medical science, as an inebriant in the drug scene. Since
my self-experiment had revealed LSD in its terrifying, demonic
aspect, the last thing I could have expected was that this
substance could ever find application as anything approaching a
pleasure drug. I failed, moreover, to recognize the meaningful
connection between LSD inebriation and spontaneous visionary
experience until much later, after further experiments, which
were carried out with far lower doses and under different
conditions. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The next day I wrote to Professor Stoll the
above-mentioned report about my extraordinary experience with
LSD-25 and sent a copy to the director of the pharmacological
department, Professor Rothlin. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As expected, the first reaction was incredulous
astonishment. Instantly a telephone call came from the
management; Professor Stoll asked: &quot;Are you certain you made
no mistake in the weighing? Is the stated dose really
correct?&quot; Professor Rothlin also called, asking the same
question. I was certain of this point, for I had executed the
weighing and dosage with my own hands. Yet their doubts were
justified to some extent, for until then no known substance had
displayed even the slightest psychic effect in
fraction-of-a-milligram doses. An active compound of such potency
seemed almost unbelievable. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Professor Rothlin himself and two of his colleagues
were the first to repeat my experiment, with only one-third of
the dose I had utilized. But even at that level, the effects were
still extremely impressive, and quite fantastic. All doubts about
the statements in my report were eliminated. </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <a href="child2.html"><p>Chapter 2</a> <!--webbot
    bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
    tag="BODY" startspan --><p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a>
    | <a href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
    href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>
    <p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
    href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
    href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
    <!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="63531" --> </p>
</blockquote>
</body>
<!--
 This file is transmitted under the "Fair Use" rulings regarding the 1976 Copyright Act for NON-profit academic and general information purposes. -->
</html>
</DOC>