
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B014-172</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/abc0406.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101626 text/html 9974
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:16:19 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:18 GMT
Content-length: 9757
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>ABC News WAR ON DRUGS:</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h1>ABC News WAR ON DRUGS: </h1>

<h2>SEARCHING FOR SOLUTIONS: A Summary </h2>

<p>This is a summary of the major points of the show, as written
by Jim Hoffman </p>

<hr>

<p>On Thursday evening (Apr 6, 1995) ABC news aired the special
report: WAR ON DRUGS: SEARCHING FOR SOLUTIONS, which explored
harm reduction policy alternatives to the 'WAR ON DRUGS' as
practiced in the United States. </p>

<p>Although limited in scope -- the only drugs mentioned were
heroin, cocaine, amphetamine, and marijuana, with the focus being
on heroin -- I found the quality of the show very encouraging. </p>

<p>I encourage everyone to contact ABC News and commend them for
airing this special. For those who missed it, I have provided a
synopsis below. </p>

<p>Note: quotes are not necessarily verbatim; Names may be
misspelled. </p>

<p>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<p>AMERICA'S WAR ON DRUGS: SEARCHING FOR SOLUTIONS: A SUMMARY </p>

<p>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<p>STATED PURPOSE: </p>

<p>The claimed purpose of the show was 'not to advocate specific
policy' but to 'open up the discussion' and consider new
approaches, as this issue 'deserves debate'. It advised viewers
not to dismiss approaches just because they seem too radical. </p>

<p>TOPIC: </p>

<p>The show focused on those approaches to the drug problem known
as 'harm reduction'. Although marijuana was touched on several
times, the focus was on 'hard drugs' such as heroin. </p>

<p>FORMAT: </p>

<p>The show was composed primarily of excerpts of interviews with
various people, primarily advocates of harm reduction, stitched
together with narrative by Catherine Cryer and footage of police
raids, prisons, people shooting drugs, etc. </p>

<p>It is sprinkled with assertions by drug war zealot
extraordinaire William Bennet, </p>

<p>which are in most cases followed by refutations which look
much more reasoned. </p>

<p>SUMMARY: </p>

<p>The show opened with some observations: </p>

<p>* We are losing the 'War on Drugs'. </p>

<p>* There is a striking lack of public debate about alternatives
to current policies. </p>

<p>* The crime problem cannot be addressed without addressing the
drug problem. </p>

<p>and some facts: </p>

<p>* The 'War on Drugs' is the longest running war in US history.
</p>

<p>* Over 300,000 people are in prison for drug law violations. </p>

<p>* There are as many illegal drugs on the streets today as
ever. </p>

<p>It then interviewed Jim Montgomery, a paraplegic who was
sentenced to life imprisonment for 2 ounces of cannabis (later
reduced to 10 years) in Oklahoma. (He had no prior criminal
record.) He smokes marijuana to relieve the pain of his broken
back. </p>

<p>It quotes his attorney pointing out that violent offenders are
released from jail to make room for people like Jim Montgomery. </p>

<p>Next, three influential advocates of harm reduction in the USA
are introduced: </p>

<p>Conservative California Judge James Gray: </p>

<p>* declares the War on Drugs has turned into a war on our
people. </p>

<p>* points out nothing is accomplished by imprisoning drug
users. </p>

<p>* favors government regulated distribution of drugs coupled
with education. </p>

<p>Baltimore mayor Kurt Shmoke: </p>

<p>* points out violence in the drug trade is caused by profits,
not by drugs themselves. </p>

<p>* advocates taking the profit out of drug distribution,
through government distribution and a focus on education and
treatment. </p>

<p>* points out only 20% of addicts can get treatment. </p>

<p>New Haven police chief Nick Pastor: </p>

<p>* is shown interacting with inner-city youth talking about
drugs. </p>

<p>William Bennet summarizes the prohibitionist mindset: </p>

<p>'You will never persuade the citizens of this country that
drugs should be legalized.' 'It (drug use) is a deadly and
poisonous activity.' 'We must never admit defeat in the war on
drugs.' 'People should be imprisoned for long periods of time for
using drugs.' </p>

<p>Next it moves to Europe and looks at the experiences with harm
reduction in </p>

<p>Holland and Britain. </p>

<p>Holland </p>

<p>* Use of cannabis is tolerated (scenes of people smoking up in
coffee shops). </p>

<p>* Tolerance of cannabis is attributed for the prevention of
the use of hard drugs by youth. </p>

<p>* A large proportion of crime is caused by foreign tourists
comming from countries with more repressive drug policies. </p>

<p>* Prosecution is reserved for large distributors, not users of
even hard drugs. </p>

<p>* Since free needle exchanges were introduced the HIV
infection rate among IV drug users dropped from 11% to 4%, now
one of lowest in world. </p>

<p>* Public policy seeks to keep addicts healthy, productive
citizens. </p>

<p>* There is still a black market in hard drugs, which many
believe will not be eliminated until complete legalization is
implemented. </p>

<p>* Holland is pressured by the US to roll back its harm
reduction policy. </p>

<p>Britain </p>

<p>* Heroin maintenance, which seeks to stabilize and help
addicts by providing pharmaceutical heroin, is practiced. </p>

<p>* The physical health of junkies is ruined by adulterants in
illicit heroin. </p>

<p>(Pharmaceutical heroin can be used lifelong without medical
consequences.) </p>

<p>* People on heroin maintenance are able to lead relatively
normal healthy lives. </p>

<p>* If given a chance, most people mature out of addiction, so
heroin maintenance </p>

<p>buys time, allowing the user to build a life as an alternative
to addiction. </p>

<p>* A 15-fold reduction in crimes by addicts on heroin
maintenance has been documented. </p>

<p>* Many on heroin maintenance are eventually successful in
kicking the addiction. </p>

<p>Back to the USA ... </p>

<p>treatment: </p>

<p>* America's lack of commitment to treatment is highlighted. </p>

<p>* The success rate of treatment (American style) is at best
25%. </p>

<p>AIDS infection </p>

<p>* Ethen Nadelman, a harm reduction proponent, questions the
morality of policies </p>

<p>which result in IV drug users getting HIV, perhaps infecting
their lovers and children, and producing a huge economic burden
on society. </p>

<p>* A study of the effectiveness of needle exchange programs in
New York shows a drop in HIV infection among IV drug users from
6% to 2%. </p>

<p>Marijuana </p>

<p>* Dr. Lester Grinspoon, (author of Marijuana Forbidden
Medicine (not mentioned)) </p>

<p>dispels gateway theory of cannabis. He says cannabis is 'less
of a problem than tobacco or alcohol by orders of magnitude'. </p>

<p>* US Government reports dispel gateway theory. </p>

<p>* The 1972 Schafer Commission, appointed by Richard Nixon,
recommends the legalization of the possession and sale of small
quantities of cannabis. </p>

<p>* The partial adoption of this strategy in California saved
billions of dollars. </p>

<p>* The nation's leaders purposely ignore findings of Schafer
Commission. </p>

<p>William Bennet again </p>

<p>'law enforcement is very effective prevention' </p>

<p>'harm reduction policies would immediately lead to 50 million
hard drug users </p>

<p>in the USA' </p>

<p>* These assertions are both made to look rather dubious by
subsequent rebuttals. </p>

<p>Drugs and children </p>

<p>* PDFA commercials initially had &quot;great impact&quot; in
discouraging drug use. </p>

<p>* The lack of education has recently led to increased use
among kids. </p>

<p>(These two points I take issue with, as I attribute the
increase to a loss </p>

<p>of credibility brought about by exaggeration in 'drug
education'.) </p>

<p>* Due to prohibition there are pushers in schools - drugs are
readily available </p>

<p>in spite of (or because of) prohibition. </p>

<p>Memorable metaphor </p>

<p>Kurt Shmoke describes the drug war as a 'domestic Vietnam'. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>