
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B032-9</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065528 text/html 39206
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:55:20 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:53 GMT
Content-length: 38987
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Chapter 12</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>12. The Jordan and the Ganges</h2>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Nature does not count, said Bergson. Neither does
it measure. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The French philosopher, who died in 1941, has been
harshly judged for his anti-intellectualism and for the essential
role he assigned to intuition in man's perception of ultimate
reality. But his views on the limitations of the intellect have
acquired a new significance today in light of the contemporary
developments we have discussed in this book, and they may help
illuminate an important aspect of drug cultism and related
movements. In Bergson, indeed, those movements may yet discover
their metaphysician. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In criticizing intellect, and therefore science as
well, Bergson asserted that intellect has its eyes turned always
to the rear. By this he meant that the rational mind is concerned
primarily with prediction based on past experience, or in other
words with the anticipation that cause-and-effect events will
repeat themselves in the future. And intellect favors this kind
of perception because intellect is interested only in action, or
in using things by acting upon them (I-It). Lecomte du Nouy made
the same point, no doubt taking it from Bergson, when he
commented, &quot;The aim of science is to foresee, and not, as
has often been said, to understand.&quot; Of course it <i>does</i>
foresee. It is highly successful as far as its own limited goals
are concerned, and the world's work could not be done without it.
But it does not understand, and philosophers delude themselves,
said Bergson, &quot;when they import into the domain of
speculation a method of thinking made for action.&quot;
Cause-and-effect prediction is valid enough in one sense, but the
intellect in another sense has actually created cause and effect.
It has done so by artificially dividing and, as it were, freezing
in time a reality which in fact consists of a dynamic and
indivisible Whole. The intellect cannot comprehend movement, and
it cannot comprehend the Whole. In short, it cannot comprehend
life. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Dividing? Freezing? What did Bergson mean? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the first instance, to borrow an example which
Bergson used himself, suppose for a moment that reality consisted
of a curved line. Science imagines it can grasp the ultimate
truth about life by chopping the Whole into pieces&#151;by
reducing reality to ever smaller units of matter and energy.
Science therefore would divide the curved line into individual
points or segments, and it would then try to explain the Whole in
terms of its parts. But each of the individual segments would, in
itself, be almost a straight line&#151;and the smaller the
segment, the greater the illusion of straightness. Thus, by
restricting its vision, science quite likely would propose that
reality consists of a straight line, or rather a series of
straight lines. Following the same sort of logic, we can imagine
science announcing the discovery that Wordsworth's ode is
composed of twenty-six basic particles (the letters of the
alphabet), and while this observation is perfectly correct, it
hardly captures the meaning and significance of the poem as a
Whole. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As for movement, Bergson likened the intellect to a
motion picture camera. The intellect simulates movement by taking
a series of snapshots, each one of which is frozen in time for
purpose of analysis. Intellect studies these snapshots and thinks
that in doing so it is studying true motion. But clearly it is
not. This Bergson referred to as the <i>cinematographical fallacy</i>,
which has its basis in &quot;the absurd proposition that movement
is made of immobilities.&quot; And thus Bergson explained the
paradoxes of the ancient Greek philosopher Zeno, including the
paradox of the arrow fired from a point A to a point B. According
to Zeno, the flying arrow must successively occupy a series of
lesser points between A and B. and it must obviously be at rest
at each such point, at least for a moment; therefore it is
motionless during the entire course of its passage. Or again, the
arrow in its flight must first cover half the distance from A to
B. But before it can do that, it must first cover half the
distance from A to the midpoint. And half of that distance. And
half of <i>that</i> distance. And so on, until at last we see
that it is impossible for the arrow to get started at all. But we
know that the arrow does travel from A to B. so there must be
something wrong with Zeno's argument, and Bergson resolved the
problem by suggesting that the flight is in fact &quot;an
indivisible movement.&quot; Once the flight is over, you can
count as many imaginary points as you like along its trajectory.
The fact remains that the flight itself was accomplished &quot;in
one stroke,&quot; from A to B. although a certain amount of time
was required for this flight. Thus Bergson accused the intellect
of neglecting time, or duration, as an actual factor in the
mosaic of reality. Science deals with points of time, he said,
but it does not deal with time itself or with motion as such. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; On the other hand, said Bergson, instinct directly
installs itself within movement and reality. It refuses to
recognize those points of time and those snapshots of life which
are nothing more than &quot;arrests of our attention.&quot;
Instinct thereby provides us with a form of knowledge which is
&quot;practically useless, except to increase pure understanding
of reality.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Bergson did not advocate that we rely solely on
instinct. Nor did he deny the necessary function of the
intellect. But he did reject an utter reliance on intellect alone
or instinct alone. The one is necessary for survival, the other
for understanding. &quot;There are things that intelligence alone
is able to seek, but which, by itself, it will never find. These
things instinct alone could find; but it will never seek
them.&quot; But <i>intuition</i> can both seek and find them.
Intuition for Bergson was a combination of instinct and
intelligence&#151;it was instinct guided by intelligence&#151;and
the same happy marriage has been proposed by many others,
including Gibran. Thus instinct is the wind which fills the sails
of our little ship, as it skims over the waves of this earthly
existence. And intellect is the rudder with which we steer the
ship. Similarly, life is complicated only when we consider its
parts rather than the Whole, and its apparent complexity
increases in proportion with the number of parts which we
synthetically ascribe to that Whole. And this perhaps is the
basis of the Hindu teaching: &quot;He who knows OM knows
all.&quot; (He who knows the monistic One knows all.) If the
consciousness that slumbers in instinct should awake, said
Bergson, &quot;it would give up to us the most intimate secrets
of life.&quot; It would do so by revealing to us the Whole,
philosophy being nothing less than man's attempt to dissolve once
more into that Whole from which he has estranged
himself&#151;that Whole where there are no measurements and no
laws (only science has laws, not nature), where &quot;there is
nothing left but the reality that flows, together with the
knowledge ever renewed that it impresses on us of its present
state.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; That, in brief, was Bergson's case against a
slavish reliance on the rational intellect, and it would seem
that his point of view today is reflected to a considerable
extent in the assertions of radical theology, psychology, and
pharmacology. Maslow, for example, has expressed his criticism of
&quot;the need-motivated kind of perception, which <i>shapes</i>
things . . . in the manner of a butcher chopping apart a
carcass.&quot; We must give up, he said, &quot;our 3,000-year-old
habit of dichotomizing, splitting and separating in the style of
Aristotelian logic.... Difficult though it may be, we must learn
to think holistically rather than atomistically.&quot; In the
same sense, in the context of Zen, Suzuki stated that the central
fact of life &quot;cannot be brought to the dissecting table of
the intellect,&quot; and he said further: &quot;To stop the flow
of life and to look into it is not the business of Zen.&quot;
Taking a metaphor from chess, Dr. Sidney Cohen described LSD
perception as a kind of knight's-move thinking which leaps over
logical premises and formal syllogisms. Huxley called for a
recognition of the non-verbal humanities, or &quot;the arts of
being directly aware of the given facts of our existence.&quot;
There is New Theology's emphasis upon &quot;presentness&quot; and
here-now, derived especially from Bonhoeffer, Bultmann, and
Buber. We could give many more examples, but perhaps we have made
our point&#151;that the psychic pendulum may be swinging again
from the rational and the conscious to the intuitive and the
unconscious, for better or for worse, resulting in a phenomenon
which Maslow has termed &quot;the current call back to raw
experience as prior to any concepts or abstractions.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Our acceptance of the intellect's perceptions has
always been tempered, to some degree at least, with doubt and
uncertainty. Consider a nightmare. What does it represent, if not
a temporary suspension of the natural order we normally perceive?
And what does it express, if not a concealed fear that cause and
effect are not wholly to be trusted or depended upon&#151;that
they may break down at any moment in waking life, leaving us
naked and defenseless? We sense perhaps that the ordered universe
with its immutable laws is not real at all but our own invention,
and there is no guarantee that those laws tomorrow may not be
rescinded. In the nightmare they are rescinded, revealing to us
our subliminal anxiety. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But anxiety can turn to joy&#151;and does so in the
mystical, peak, and psychedelic experiences. We are suggesting,
then, that there is a common factor in all of these
meta-experiences. The common factor is an apparent suspension of
cause and effect&#151;and this in turn is the result of a
temporary paralysis of the intellect, as Bergson defined the
intellect. Simply that and nothing more&#151;or that and nothing
less. We are suggesting also, as indicated earlier, that the
intellect is the basis for the myth of the Demiurge, that
imperfect deity who is the cause of the fall from pure Being, the
creation of matter, our phenomenal existence, and the Net of
Illusion. And such an interpretation might well enable us to
accommodate within the radical Western framework many fundamental
doctrines of Eastern metaphysics. After all, it is possible to
demythologize the East as well as the West, and such an effort
now could lead at last to that reconciliation which has long been
predicted. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the East, as also in Plato's philosophy, the Net
of Illusion has commonly been blamed on the body, or more
specifically the senses, with the assertion that the world
perceived by the senses is not real. The Eastern viewpoint has
therefore appeared to be world-denying, and as such it has found
small favor in the West, where men for the most part have obeyed
an impulse to affirm the world, sorry as it may seem. But there
is an alternative theory, and the contemporary meta-experience
might seem to confirm it. It is not the body which is at fault,
but only a <i>part</i> of the body: namely, the noetic brain, or
that prefrontal bulge, pronounced in man, which accounts for the
rational process and the rational way of viewing the world. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Thus the world itself is real enough; it is only
our way of looking at the world which is not real. It is our mode
of perception that leads us astray, and it is not the senses
which deceive us but rather the mind or intellect which receives
and interprets the sensory input. That evolutionary gift, the
cerebral cortex, has enabled us so far to survive and to prosper,
but it also has distorted our vision of ultimate reality. It
directs our vision in such a way that we can see the world now
only in a symbolic fashion, in terms of use and action. We know
what happens, for example, when a man puts on a pair of those
inverting spectacles which cause all images to appear upside
down; after a time the man will adjust to the situation, and the
images will appear to him right side up again. In the same way,
perhaps, there is something which determines that we shall always
see things in a certain manner: a kind of internal processing
center for the raw data from the senses. No doubt this is for our
own good, just as the rigid rules and the white lies of the
parent are no doubt intended for the welfare of the child. But it
is nevertheless restrictive, and it is based in a sense on a form
of deceit. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It might be argued, then, that Eastern wisdom
conceals an esoteric teaching along the lines of this same
proposition. The East, it may be, has also meant <i>&quot;as
if.&quot;</i> The Net of Illusion does not refer to the world at
all; it refers to our perception of the world. By the same token,
OM is not an immaterial abstraction which transcends the world of
matter and earthly existence; it is the world we live in but do
not see: it is here-now, I-Thou, and &quot;the reality that
flows.&quot; Nirvana therefore does not imply a release from the
body which leaves the world behind; it implies a mental or
spiritual awakening which allows us to look at the world as it
actually is. It does not deny the world. It affirms the world but
rejects all partial views of it. It rejects the intellect, and it
rejects the supposed order which intellect imagines it perceives
in cause-and-effect relationships. As Spinoza suggested, this
order perhaps is self-realizing. It is what we look for, what we
are used to, and what we expect. If the world tomorrow should
fall into disorder, we should soon perceive this too as perfect
order. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In Mahayana Buddhism, the East itself has appeared
to move toward a similar interpretation&#151;from a denial of the
world to a more perfect affirmation of the world&#151;and this
movement, as we have seen, comes to full expression in the
teachings of Japanese Zen Buddhism. The goal of Zen is <i>satori</i>.
And <i>satori</i> is not a denial of the world, nor is it a form
of release from the world. It is, said Suzuki, <i>the acquiring
of a new viewpoint</i>. It is a new way of looking at things, and
it is designed specifically to overcome the intellect's way of
looking at things. It is designed to destroy the intellect. As
Suzuki put it: <i>&quot;Satori</i> may be defined as intuitive
looking-into, in contradiction to intellectual and logical
understanding.&quot; It is not interested in concepts,
abstractions, and a limited perception; &quot;it does not care so
much for the elaboration of particulars as for a comprehensive
grasp of the whole, and this intuitively.&quot; It is interested
in the here and now, and it accepts the world. &quot;What was up
in the heavens, Zen has brought down to earth.&quot; It too
proclaims the reality that flows. Thus the Zen master denies that
reality is this, that, or the other thing; and when he is asked
what is left, he slaps his pupil and declares, &quot;You fool,
what is this?&quot; <i>Satori</i>, then, is a new kind of
perception; but it is nevertheless a perception of this world.
&quot;It is not that something different is seen, but that one
sees differently.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; All this would seem to indicate that the radical
West and the demythologized East are not so far apart concerning
the Net of Illusion, and the worldly Westerner need not hesitate
for this reason to join that so-called leap to the East. From
Dietrich Bonhoeffer to James Bond, the contemporary emphasis upon
this world and this time is wholly compatible with the esoteric
interpretation of Eastern thought. In so far as they confirm the
reality of this world, the new insights into the nature of
meta-experiences challenge the orthodox Hindu as much as they do
the orthodox Baptist, and we may be experiencing today not so
much a leap to the East as the emergence at last of a possible
East-West synthesis: a historic blending, as it were, of the
waters of the Jordan and the Ganges. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; If the East and West should agree that the world is
real, however, where would this leave the question of
immortality? And what of reincarnation? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Reincarnation has been represented as a cycle of
death and rebirth, while nirvana has been represented as a
release from this cycle&#151;and a release thereby from the
world. After a final death, according to the popular Western
view, one merges with the Absolute and thus achieves immortality
in a state of pure Being somewhere beyond the pitiful world of
appearances and phenomena. We have said, however, that the world
beyond the world of appearances is <i>this</i> world seen in a
different way. We have said that nirvana is realized in this
world by living men, not in some other world by dead men. <i>Nirvana
is the pure experience of the present moment in this world here
and now</i>. That at least was the esoteric interpretation, and
we might very well ask, then, what this interpretation has to say
on the question of death and immortality. Does it not in fact
neglect the question altogether, leaving unanswered the fate of
man when life is ended and death occurs? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The esoteric reply might be that life never ends
and that death is just one more delusion of the intellect.
Immortal life is not experienced in some ethereal realm beyond
this world; it is experienced in this world, here, and that was
the deeper meaning of the statement that nirvana is realized in
this world by living men. To see the world as it really is means
to understand that life is immortal. And thus the myth of the
terrible wheel of death and rebirth. The wheel is caused by the
intellect, and it is nothing more than the rational way of
looking at things. The wheel is the I-It mind. It does not mean
that we are cursed to return again and again to this world, for
there is no other place we could possibly go. <i>There is only
this world. There is nothing else</i>. The myth means that we are
compelled by the intellect to go on and on imagining there is
something else, and also to go on and on imagining the world
exists as the intellect portrays it. To escape from the wheel
means simply to become aware that the world it portrays is not
the real world at all, or not the whole world. To escape from the
wheel means to understand that death is false and that life is
immortal. You shall know the truth and the truth shall set you
free, from death as well as mechanism. If the intellect by nature
cannot understand life, it follows that the intellect by nature
cannot understand death. Its view of death results from the fact
that it looks only at the parts, not at the Whole. If it would
once look at the Whole, it would see immediately that life is
immortal. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This interpretation would seem to justify
immortality on a strictly monistic basis, by sacrificing
pluralism; it preserves the One only by denying the reality of
the individual selves. And what of the Western emphasis on
personal survival of the individual self or soul? The esoteric
doctrine would be that it is precisely our insistence on personal
immortality which makes us blind to our actual immortality. The
individual ego or personality has no real significance, and
therefore the death of this personality has no real significance
and should not be regretted. It is only because we insist on the
significance of the one that the fact of the other seems so
terribly important to us. And anyway, what do we really mean by
personal? The truth is, the Western emphasis on this element has
lately become at least somewhat less emphatic. In rejecting what
he called the religious interpretation of Christianity,
Bonhoeffer wrote from his prison in Berlin: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>In my view, that means to speak on the one hand
    metaphysically and on the other hand individualistically.
    Neither of these is relevant to the Bible message or to the
    man of today. Is it not true to say that individualistic
    concern for personal salvation has almost completely left us
    all? Are we not really under the impression that there are
    more important things than bothering about such a matter?
    (Perhaps not more important than the matter itself, but more
    than bothering about it.) I know it sounds pretty monstrous
    to say that. But is it not, at bottom, even biblical? Is
    there any concern in the Old Testament about saving one's
    soul at all? Is not righteousness and the Kingdom of God on
    earth the focus of everything, and is not Romans 3.14 ff.,
    too, the culmination of the view that in God alone is
    righteousness, and not in an individualistic doctrine of
    salvation? It is not with the next world that we are
    concerned, but with this world . . . </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Tillich wrote: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Even if the so-called arguments for the &quot;immortality
    of the soul&quot; had argumentative power (which they do not
    have) they would not convince existentially. For
    existentially everybody is aware of the complete loss of self
    which biological extinction implies. The unsophisticated mind
    knows instinctively what sophisticated ontology formulates:
    that reality has the basic structure of self-world
    correlation and that with the disappearance of the one side,
    the world, the other side, the self, also disappears, and
    what remains is their common ground but not their structural
    correlation. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Again, what do we mean by personal&#151;and by
personal survival? The meta-experience suggests that we are all
expressions or aspects of a primary state of Being. And this is
immortal. Therefore, we too are immortal&#151;for we are it. In
each of us the primary state comes briefly to a sharp focus: we
suddenly appear, like the dew that condenses from the still
morning air, or a wave that lifts from the surface of the sea.
The dew burns away, the wave drops, and we die. But there is no
real death. There is something elemental which survives and
re-expresses itself. Thus a great actor might look back on the
roles he has created and might also forget some of his lesser
performances; but he does not imagine that he himself died with
the closing of a play: he goes on, growing in talent, and even
his failures may serve to instruct him. Similarly, what dies when
a man dies is simply a role. What dies is merely a point of focus
where Being had concentrated itself. What dies, in the last
analysis, are only the particular memories which Being had
accumulated at this point or that point, in this role or the
other. And even the better of these are preserved by speech and
by pen. What dies are only particular points of view. And the
better of these are also preserved, for so long as they seem
valid: until still better replace them. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; All this is what the meta-experience seems to tell
us, and no doubt it does not look very convincing or comforting
on the printed page. Perhaps it appears to say only that life
goes on&#151;meaning that life goes on but you do not. But
descriptions of the meta-experience are not the same as the
experience, and the experience would seem to mean something more
than life goes on: it would seem to mean that you go on
too&#151;although not in the traditional sense of reappearing
somewhere after death with all of your thoughts, memories, and
personal cachets intact. However desirable this latter kind of
survival might normally appear to us, the fact remains that the
meta-experiencer finds it neither desirable nor in any sense
important. In a state of unsanity, it just doesn't matter. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Possibly the West could assimilate this
interpretation of immortality, if it had to, since nobody really
believes in personal survival anyway. We might be able to accept
a monistic structure after death. What is far more difficult to
accept is the thought that life has this character here upon the
earth. The idea that other people do not really exist as separate
entities can be a terrifying idea&#151;pure hell, in
fact&#151;for it leaves you more alone even than Sartre would
leave you. Not we are alone, with no excuses, but I am alone.
There is an appalling difference between those two statements,
and it is really the fundamental difference between the Western
view and the Eastern. If life after death can be purchased only
by paying the price of earthly pluralism, there are many perhaps
who would not care to pay that price&#151;who would give up the
former, if they could, to retain the latter. And obviously you
cannot have both a monistic immortality and a pluralistic
mortality, since monistic survival is predicated on the
assumption that life itself is monistic. There may therefore be a
deep and basic wisdom reflected in the West's instinctive
rejection of this horror. On the other hand, however, it could be
a matter not of wisdom but of courage, or the lack of it: to say
that the idea is terrifying is not to say that it is not true. In
any case, it is a question to be faced&#151;posed again now by
the meta-experience. And it is hard. Very hard. This is why we
said earlier that the Eastern challenge to pluralism is more
critical even than the challenge to transcendence. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Meta-experience does not really deny the
possibility of some unseen dimension which transcends the
experience; it simply fails to provide us with any evidence to
support the possibility&#151;and, further, it does not suggest
any need for this hypothesis. If there is a transcendent power,
well and good. If not, that is all right too. The reality
suggested by the experience is reality enough, if that is all
there is, and the experience therefore has nothing to do with the
existence or non-existence of a separate God. The experience
tells us only that our normal perception of the world is limited
and limiting: that we are deceived in our perception by a mental
process, the seat of which can be anatomically localized in the
human brain&#151;which can even in fact be excised by surgery.
The experience tells us to stop living only in the past and the
future, or in a present moment which is perceived always in terms
of the past and the future. It tells us that we need no longer be
estranged from reality and from ourselves. The Eden story can now
come to its inevitable and happy conclusion; the flaming sword
has been extinguished, and we are free at last to re-enter the
garden. It tells us this, and it does not tell us there is no
transcendent God. After all, how could it? Negatives are hard to
prove in any instance, and I cannot, for example, conclusively
demonstrate that there is not at this moment a pink owl perched
in a lime tree on the fifth moon of Jupiter. Nor do I especially
care whether there is or isn't. But only a fool would insist that
his vision necessarily takes in the whole of reality, and one
wonders if God himself could ever be sure there was not somewhere
some other God who transcends him. Thus the meta-experience tells
us only what it sees; it speaks to us of this world&#151;and it
may be that this esoteric interpretation at least partially
answers the objection of Tillich and Buber that mysticism is
world-denying and therefore an inadequate response to existential
anxiety. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The meta-experience, then, is not directly
concerned with the question of God; but it is not for this reason
any the less fundamental in its assertions. As William James put
it to us, quoting Leuba: &quot;Does God really exist? How does he
exist? What is he? are so many irrelevant questions. Not God, but
life, more life, a larger, richer, more satisfying life, is, in
the last analysis, the end of religion. The love of life, at any
and every level of development, is the religious impulse.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Let us assume, for the sake of argument, that the
meta-experience offers an accurate perception of ultimate
reality. We still must ask whether it is wise or prudent to seek
that experience and achieve that perception. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; For one thing, the experience suggests that symbols
serve only to distort our view of the actual world. But I can
never forget Helen Keller's story of that day at the well house,
at the age of seven, when she first learned the meaning of
language. Before that, she said, she had been only a wild little
animal lost in the dark, unable to give love or receive it.
&quot;Before that supreme event there was nothing in me except
the instinct to eat and drink and sleep. My days were a blank,
without past, present, or future, without hope or anticipation,
without interest or joy.&quot; Then Anne Sullivan held one of her
hands under the running pump, and into the other she spelled out
&quot;w-a-t-e-r.&quot; The meta-experiencer would say of course
that &quot;w-a-t-e-r&quot; and water are two different things;
but Miss Keller has given us her own reaction. &quot;I knew then
that 'w-a-t-e-r' meant the wonderful cool something that was
flowing over my hand. That living word awakened my soul, gave it
light, hope, joy, set it free!&quot; Or again: &quot;All at once
there was a strange stir within me &#151;a misty consciousness, a
sense of something remembered.... Nothingness was blotted out....
That word 'water' dropped into my mind like the sun in a frozen
winter world.&quot; And we might do well to remember this before
we decide to blow out that sun. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; An obvious objection to the meta-experience is that
it denies or ignores the existence of evil&#151;which it
considers simply a dualistic deception. And this was the main
objection James had to the optimistic mysticism of Whitman. You
cannot ignore evil, said James, for &quot;the skull will grin in
at the banquet.&quot; &quot;Here on our very hearths and in our
gardens,&quot; he said, &quot;the infernal cat plays with the
panting mouse, or holds the hot bird fluttering in her jaws.
Crocodiles and rattlesnakes and pythons are at this moment
vessels of life as real as we are; their loathsome existence
fills every minute of every day that drags its length
along.&quot; For his part, James preferred an optimism which
first acknowledged evil and yet saw hope. Only this could we
really trust. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There are the clear and present dangers which
threaten the individual who is in the grips of a meta-experience:
running in front of cars, leaping from windows with the
expectation of flying, a generalized indifference to injury and
death. But there is also a less clear and even more present
danger which threatens the vitality and welfare of society
itself, and this is the danger of a quietistic indifference to
social goals and social rewards. Until very recently there was
little cause for concern about this, and Maslow provides us with
an excellent example. While he conceded there was a possible
quietistic danger inherent in the peak experience, he added that
the experience came rarely even to self-actualizing people, and
as late as 1962 he wrote: &quot;Therefore the problem posed here
is more an ultimate than an immediate one, more a theoretical
problem than a practical one.&quot; Now LSD has made the problem
both immediate and practical, and the issue must be dealt with. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Prohibitive laws are one answer, and certainly
there is little to be said for the so-called Gumball Machine
theory that psychedelics should be freely dispensed to the
general population, with no restrictions. We do after all have
gun laws (though not very good ones); we have laws regarding the
purchase and consumption of liquor; and there are regulations and
licensing procedures for people who want to drive autos or fly
airplanes. In view of the potential dangers of an immediate
nature, it might seem fair to put psychedelics in the same
category as alcohol, guns, planes, and cars. But in fact the
governmental response has been to outlaw them almost altogether.
This apparently has succeeded only in frustrating some very
important research by scientists, and it is doubtful in any case
whether legal measures can resolve the more basic questions that
are raised by the drug movement. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There is the other side of the Delphic coin. <i>Know
Thyself</i>, yes. But also <i>Nothing in Excess</i>. As Suzuki
put it: &quot;There is also such a thing as too much attachment
to the experience of <i>satori</i>, which is to be
detested.&quot; This appears to be a very neat answer, but it is
much too easy telling people to behave themselves, and urging
moderation in this thing of all things is no solution. LSD may
not be addictive, but truth is. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This brings us to the test James suggested for the
revelations of drunkenness. &quot;If merely 'feeling good' could
decide,&quot; said James, &quot;drunkenness would be the
supremely valid human experience.&quot; The question is&#151;does
the experience work out when it is inserted into the environment?
This is another way of asking whether the individual continues to
function and survive, and whether or not the world's work still
gets done. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But the psychedelic quietist would reply that none
of these things matters. It is the environment that is out of
joint, and the world's work is ridiculous. As for survival, life
is eternal&#151; especially so for a psychic mutant. And just by
the way, there is nothing evil about pythons and rattlesnakes. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This is not to say that all drug cultists are
quietists. In fact, there is a fundamental dichotomy within the
drug movement, and this is reflected in the programs and
philosophies of the two major psychedelic churches&#151;the
Church of the Awakening and the Neo-American Church&#151;that
existed before Timothy Leary's League for Spiritual Discovery was
founded in 1966. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Church of the Awakening, mentioned earlier,
might be described as the middle-class right wing of the
movement. Many of its members are businessmen or professional
people, and the church insists that even psychedelic religion has
both an internal and an external function&#151;the latter to be
expressed in terms of &quot;love,&quot; &quot;service,&quot; and
&quot;growth.&quot; In its statement of purpose, the church adds:
</p>

<blockquote>
    <p>It is important to recognize and to understand the
    existence of these two functions, internal and external; to
    recognize that we have a basic need and urge to <i>learn</i>,
    and an equally basic one to <i>serve</i>, to share. Next, of
    course, there must be an aspiration of the achievement of
    these objectives within the heart of each of us. And then,
    this knowledge and aspiration must be channeled into action.
    We must <i>do</i> something about it! </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Neo-American Church, on the other hand,
represents more or less the bohemian left wing of the drug
movement. It would seem to be dedicated only to &quot;the
appreciation of Transcendental Reality,&quot; and, although the
church officially advocates a kind of revolutionary nihilism, the
membership in general appears to be more interested in withdrawal
than revolt. The inclination is to &quot;turn on and drop
out.&quot; There are individual exceptions, of course, but this
is the overall impression one gets. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Neo-American Church to date has received far
more publicity than the Church of the Awakening has, and it has
been more aggressive in recruiting new members&#151;particularly
among the young. While a cleavage does exist, then, it would seem
nevertheless that there are now many more quietists than
activists within the drug movement as a whole, and the problem
grows more pressing with every day that passes. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The psychedelic quietist of course does not
consider his attitude a problem&#151;he considers-it a
solution&#151;and in fact he might argue that there is precedent
for his decision to withdraw from the mainstream, renouncing the
goals and rewards of society. Would not identical consequences
follow if Christians started to take the New Testament literally?
<br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The quietist asserts that there is no destination
ahead of us; we are already there. He announces, in effect, that
he is getting off the bus. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It may be, then, that the question comes down to
this: Is the cosmic bus going anywhere? </p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | <a
    href="braden13.htm">Chapter 13</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>