
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B025-131</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/mcn/mcn1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124609 text/html 13034
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:45:59 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:00:37 GMT
Content-length: 12818
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Stop the War - A Former Police Chiefs Plea to the New Drug
Czar </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mcnamara_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../../other/other.htm">Other Publications</a> | <a
href="mcntoc.htm">Joseph McNamara Collection</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="47040" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="5">Stop the War</font><font size="6"> </font></p>

<p><font size="2"><strong>A Former Police -Chiefs Plea to
Clinton's New Drug Czar</strong></font><strong> </strong></p>

<p><font size="2">By Joseph D. McNamara</font> </p>

<p>The Washington Post - Sunday, May 19, 1996 </p>

<p><font size="2">President Clinton appointed the wrong general
as drug czar. There is no question of Gen. Barry McCaffrey's
courage, dedication to duty and ability. I experienced danger and
was injured a few times during my 35-year police career, but came
nowhere close to being a hero like McCaffrey, who was wounded
three times in combat. I admire him. My questions about his
appointment result from what he said a few weeks ago in Miami.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">While accompanying the president to announce a
'new' anti drug strategy, McCaffrey called the 'drug war' a bad
metaphor. It is more appropriate, he said, to describe America's
drug problem as a cancer. I concur. That's what leads me to
conclude that Clinton should have appointed a surgeon general not
an Army general, to head the campaign against drugs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Of course, responding to the zany politics of
drug control, the president, in the past, fired a surgeon general
who dared to suggest that drug abuse was more of a medical than a
criminal problem Now, by appointing a man of McCaffrey's stature,
Clinton finessed Republican efforts to nail him as being soft on
drugs. To complete the coup, the White House and its drug czar
announced yet another renewed effort against drugs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Each time public attention begins to focus on
the colossal costs and failures of drug prohibition, a 'new'
program is announced or &quot;new' progress is cited. Such
campaigns and claims of victory have been endless since President
Nixon first declared the drug war in 1972. Yet, despite frequent
reports of the biggest bust or drug seizure ever or increased
cooperation from other nations, the public and law enforcement
officers across the country see the drug problem as unabated or
worsening.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In fact, the latest tactics coming from the
White House are essentially the same strategies pursued by the
government for decades: encouraging other countries to stop
production of drugs, interdicting drugs at the border, massive
law enforcement and harsh mandatory sentences for drug crimes
domestically, coupled with aggressive seizure of private property
connected however tangentially to the 'drug trade.' And, of
course, increased prevention and treatment efforts.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Equally troubling is the continuation of a kind
of pharmacological McCarthyism. Those who question the
government's faded strategies are labeled traitors. These critics
are said to encourage drug use and undermine law enforcement.
Consequently, William Bennett and his successors were quick to
blame critics as being responsible for increases in drug use, not
failed government policies. Naturally, when there are periodic
claims of decreases in drug use, government takes the credit</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Still, one has to admire President Clinton's
political chutzpah. The one truly new announcement in Miami was
that the government has concluded that Clinton's 'new' strategies
will take 10 years to succeed. After all, as Bennett (the first
drug czar, appointed by President Bush to end the &quot;scourge
of drugs&quot;), said, &quot;We're in this for the long
haul.&quot; He resigned and went on to other things 18 months
later.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCaffrey, like his predecessor, Lee Brown,
says that the answer is not to lock up another million Americans.
Unfortunately, despite his dislike of the war metaphor, the
general will find, as Brown did, that this war will continue to
lock up hundreds of thousands of people.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">A corrections administrator responsible for
running San Francisco jails told me recently that when the county
of San Francisco decided that smoking would no longer allowed in
public buildings, cigarettes were banned in the jail. The
immediate consequence: The price of cigarettes the underground
jail market went to $120 a pack. It sums up prohibition; $500
worth of drugs in a foreign country can bring as much as $100,000
on the streets of an American city merely because they are
illegal. All of the armies, cops and prisons in the world can not
stop that kind of economic force.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It is said that the first casualty in any war
is truth. At West Point, McCaffrey studied the wars and battles
of history so that during his career he would not repeat the
mistakes of past warriors. Even the greatest military leaders in
history were defeated when they settled on a vision of what they
wished instead of reality. It would be helpful to pursue the same
West Point scholarship for the drug war.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Most Americans are startled to hear that until
the passage of the Harrison Act in 1914, drug use was viewed as a
medical and social problem and was not against the criminal law.
There was no billion-dollar black market. No violent drug trade
No widespread official corruption. No widespread disrespect for
drug laws. Drug users went to their doctors if they needed
treatment.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">There were drug problems. In fact, around the
turn of the century large numbers of housewives were addicted to
opium. Nerve medicine for women, containing opium, was sold
across the counter at drug stores. Other addictive substances
were sold as patent medicines. Gradually. the medical profession
became more aware of the addictive nature of some drugs and
supported the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906,
which required labeling and warnings for habit-forming
substances.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">That law was a civil one; it did not
criminalize drug users. It is instructive. The number of addicts
and users was greatly reduced by educating them, not by arresting
them.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Criminalizing drugs in the United States was a
remarkable change in public policy. But it wasn't the police who
were lobbying for the passage of the Harrison Act, which was the
cornerstone of increasingly punitive laws against drug users and
sellers. The Protestant missionary societies in China, the
Women's Christian Temperance Union and the Anti-Saloon League and
other organized religions were the prime movers. In their view,
drug use was sinful and people had to be saved from their baser
instincts. In effect, they managed to get their version of sin
enacted into the penal code, an old habit of power elites in
America.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">This view of drug users as M criminals
continues to haunt us and makes rational political debate
impossible. It is too appealing for politicians to picture
themselves as the good guys fighting evil.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">A ear ago, some of the nation's top law
enforcement officials gathered at the Hoover Institution at
Stanford University for a two day seminar to ponder the drug
problem. They concluded that the drug war was a failure and that
more education and prevention would be better than more arrests
and prisons. They recommended that a national commission be
appointed to study the harm that the drug war causes and to
consider alternative approaches to discouraging drug use.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The top cops were concerned about some of the
costs of the present policies as well as their failure to curb
drug use. For example, the arrest and imprisonment rates for
nonwhites are four to five times greater than for whites,
although 80 percent of drug crimes are committed by whites.
Criminologist Alfred Blumstein describes it as an assault on the
African-American community.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It is difficult enough to motivate youngsters
in these areas to stay in school and find jobs in the few
legitimate businesses in the inner cities. Easy drug money and
glamour associated with the trade are creating well armed and
vicious teenaged gangsters just as Prohibition did during the
days of Al Capone.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Nobel-winning economist Milton Friedman, doing
a comparative analysis with homicide rates during Prohibition,
estimated that as many as 10,000 murders a year are caused by the
illegality of drugs. In addition, corruption of law enforcement,
the legal profession and even the armed forces related to drug
money is spreading.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Congress and the president should put aside
their demagoguery and appoint an objective commission to report
on the costs and achievements of the drug war. We should
immediately stop arresting people whose only crime is possessing
wall amounts of drugs for their own use. The Supreme Court has
ruled that being a drug addict is not a crime.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Putting a halt to demonizing drug users will
allow us to pursue drug maintenance experiments similar to those
in other countries, In the United States, public health campaigns
caused a reduction in smoking and consumption of hard liquor and
high cholesterol foods, without putting people in jail and
establishing a black market.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Marijuana should be treated the same as alcohol
and cigarettes. There is much conflicting medical evidence as to
whether pot is more dangerous than alcohol or nicotine, yet it is
unthinkable that we would give the death penalty or fife in
prison to those who sell booze or cigarettes. The claim that
marijuana is a stepping stone to crime and harder drugs is not
supported by facts.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Bill Clinton, Newt Gingrich, most of the cops I
hired during my 18 years as police chief and some 70 million
Americans have tried marijuana. They have not gone on to
mainlining heroin, snorting cocaine and robbing banks. At a time
when the public is concerned about violent crime, the police
should not be wasting scarce resources arresting a half million
or so people every year for marijuana offenses.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">One of the women in a Miami drug rehab program
told McCaffrey that Clinton's new policy excluding drug users
from public housing made it impossible for those trying to kick
the habit to get a place to live and a job. The general mused
that his gut told him it was like throwing one person in a
lifeboat overboard 'to save the other nine.' However, there is no
evidence that throwing people overboard stops others from using
drugs. More importantly, how could we throw 70 million Americans
overboard and remain the free nation that McCaffrey fought so
valiantly to preserve?<br>
<br>
</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mcnamara_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../../other/other.htm">Other Publications</a> | <a
href="mcntoc.htm">Joseph McNamara Collection</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="47040" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>