
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B18-242</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B040-111</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/DEA/bonner-4.html 206.61.184.43 19970122071751 text/html 4461
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:17:34 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:11:31 GMT
Content-length: 4246
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<PRE>
     PETITIONER'S STATEMENT OF GROUNDS FOR RESCHEDULING 
 
     The Controlled Substances Act (CSA), 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et 
seq., contains five schedules, the first of which (Schedule I) 
contains substances which have no medical use in treatment in the 
United States, and the final four of which (Schedules II through 
V) contain substances which have medical use in treatment in the 
United States but which are available only by a physician's 
prescription.  Marijuana is currently in Schedule I of the CSA. 

     On March 26, 1992, the Administrator made a final decision 
in a marijuana rescheduling petition, DEA No. 86-22, rejecting 
the finding of an administrative law judge that marijuana has 
medical use in treatment in the United States, and rejecting the 
administrative law judge's recommendation that marijuana be moved 
to Schedule II of the CSA.  57 FR 10499. 

     The essence of the decision was that marijuana is a plant 
and not a drug.  The Administrator argued that the chemistry of 
the marijuana plant is complex, varies from plant to plant, and 
is incapable of reproduction in standardized dosages (attributes 
common to all plants), and that a drug is a scientifically 
established chemical compound capable of reproduction in 
standardized dosages. 

     The Administrator's decision has been appealed to the United 
States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia by several 
parties seeking medical access to marijuana plants. 

     According to the Administrator, "the petition to reschedule 
marijuana did not involve the scheduling of any medically useful 
compound to be extracted from the plant material."  The 
Administrator went on the say, "the petition involved unsupported 
claims for medical use of smoked marijuana."  See Exhibit A. 

     As for other plants in Schedule II, the Administrator said, 
"In placing coca leaves and opium plant material in Schedule II, 
Congress was very much aware that these plant materials have 
historically been recognized as the source for a variety of 
accepted and useful medications."  The Administrator went on to 
say, "Neither of these plants are used medicinally as plant 
material."  See Exhibit A. 

     It must follow from the Administrator's explanation that 
marijuana need not have an accepted medical use in treatment in 
the United States in order to be rescheduled from Schedule I to 
Schedule II of the CSA, it only needs to be shown that marijuana 
is a source for an accepted and useful medication. 

     On October 11, 1985, the Administrator proposed to 
reschedule dronabinol to Schedule II of the CSA.  50 FR 42186 
(October 18, 1985); 21 C.F.R. § 1308.12(f)(1) (1991).  Dronabinol 
is the synthetic equivalent of the isomer of delta-9-
tetrahydrocannabinol which is the principle psychoactive 
substance present in Cannabis Sativa L., marijuana.  50 FR 42186 
(October 18, 1985). 

     Dronabinol is the U.S. Adopted Name (USAN) for the substance 
(6aR-trans)-6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6H-
dibenzo [b,d] pyran-1-ol or (-)-delta-9-(trans)-
tetrahydrocannabinol, the principle psychoactive substance in 
Cannabis sativa L., marijuana.  50 FR 42186 (October 18, 1985).  
It has the empirical formula C21H30O2 with molecular weight of 
314.45.  1989 Physician's Desk Reference, page 1859.   

     On May 24, 1991, the United Nations Economic and Social 
Council (ESCOR) rescheduled delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol from 
Schedule I to Schedule II of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic 
Substances.  U.N. Doc. E/CN.7/1991/26.  Report of the Commission 
on Narcotic Drugs on its thirty-fourth session, U.N. Doc. 
E/1991/24, Supp. No. 4.  The United States is a party to that 
international convention pursuant to the Psychotropic Substances 
Act of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-633, November 10, 1978).  50 FR 42186 
(October 18, 1985). 

     Since marijuana is now a source for an accepted and useful 
medication, it must now be moved from Schedule I to Schedule II 
of the CSA. 
 
     Respectfully submitted, 

     Carl Eric Olsen 
     Post Office Box 4091 
     Des Moines, Iowa 50333 
     (515) 243-7351
</PRE>
</HTML>
</DOC>