
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-38</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B023-267</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/psycviol.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122094105 text/html 43460
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:40:55 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:29 GMT
Content-length: 43242
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Psychoactive Substances and Violence</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Psychoactive Substances and Violence </h1>

<p> by Jeffrey A. Roth </p>

<p> Series: Research in Brief, US Dept. of Justice </p>

<p> Published: February 1994 </p>

<p> 19 pages </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>Issues and Findings </h2>

<p> Discussed in the Research in Brief: The current status of
research on the links connecting violence to alcohol and illegal
psychoactive drugs, and evaluations of interventions to prevent
violence related to these substances. </p>

<p> Key issues: Correlations between violence and psychoactive
substances; the social, economic, cultural, psycho-social,
neurobehavioral, and other factors that explain the correlations;
and prevention strategies for reducing the violence associated
with these substances. </p>

<h3>Key findings: </h3>

<ul>
    <li>Research has uncovered strong correlations between
        violence and psycho-active substances, including alcohol
        and illegal drugs, but the underlying relationships
        differ by type of drug. </li>
    <li>The links between violence and psychoactive substances
        involve broad social and economic forces, the settings in
        which people obtain and consume the substances, and
        biological processes that underlie all human behavior.
        These factors interact in chains of events that may
        extend back from an intermediate triggering event such as
        an argument to long-term predisposing processes that
        begin in childhood. </li>
    <li>Of all psychoactive substances, alcohol is the only one
        whose consumption has been shown to commonly increase
        aggression. After large doses of amphetamines, cocaine,
        LSD, and PCP, certain individuals may experience violent
        outbursts, probably because of preexisting psychosis.
        Research is needed on the pharmacological effects of
        crack, which enters the brain more directly than cocaine
        used in other forms. </li>
    <li>Alcohol drinking and violence are linked through
        pharmacological effects on behavior, through expectations
        that heavy drinking and violence go together in certain
        settings, and through patterns of binge drinking and
        fighting that sometimes develop in adolescence. </li>
    <li>The most promising strategies for reducing
        alcohol-related violence are to reduce underage drinking
        through substance abuse preventive education, taxes, law
        enforcement, and peer pressure. </li>
    <li>Illegal drugs and violence are linked primarily through
        drug marketing: disputes among rival distributors,
        arguments and robberies involving buyers and sellers,
        property crimes committed to raise drug money and, more
        speculatively, social and economic interactions between
        the illegal markets and the surrounding communities. </li>
    <li>The most promising strategy for reducing violence related
        to illegal drugs appears to be reducing the demand that
        fuels violent illegal markets. Promising tactics include
        preventive education, pretrial monitoring of arrestees
        through urinalysis and, for convicted violent offenders,
        in-prison therapeutic communities integrated with
        postrelease treatment followup. </li>
    <li>In the future, medications may reduce violence by
        reducing cocaine craving and by blocking the
        aggression-promoting effects of opiate withdrawal and
        alcohol consumption. </li>
</ul>

<p> Target audience: State and local policymakers, court
administrators, law enforcement and juvenile justice
practitioners, and drug treatment program staff. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> As noted by the Panel on the Understanding and Control of
Violent Behavior, the character of violence presents simultaneous
challenges to understanding and opportunities for prevention.
First, violence is diverse. Acts as different as spontaneous
drive-by shootings and met-iculously planned serial killings, for
example, are both included in the legal and statistical category
of murder. Second, the causes of violence are complex, involving
a very wide variety of factors. The panel found it useful to
classify these factors in terms of four levels of analysis at
which they are usually studied: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Broad social and economic forces (macrosocial). </li>
    <li>Encounters between people in particular settings
        (microsocial). </li>
    <li>Individual behavioral development from childhood through
        adulthood (psychosocial). </li>
    <li>Neurobehavioral and other biological processes that
        underlie all human behavior (neurobehavioral). </li>
</ul>

<p> Factors at these four levels operate and interact in chains
of events that may begin long before the violent event that
results. Therefore, the panel's classification framework also
categorized causal factors in terms of their temporal proximity
to the violent event itself: from the immediate triggering
mechanism (for example, a response to an insult), back through
the situation that led up to the triggering event, to
predisposing factors that months or years earlier increased the
risk of a future violent event. </p>

<p> This diversity and complexity might at first glance seem to
discourage efforts to prevent violence. In fact, however, they
create promising opportunities. Merely acknowledging the
diversity breaks the overall &quot;violence problem&quot; into
separate problems that may be preventable through interventions
by different public agencies. Recognizing the causal complexity
expands the list of options for preventing a particular violence
problem by highlighting all the points at which chains of events
leading to it may be breakable. Problem-solving
initiatives--programs that involve design and evaluation of
preventive interventions at various links in these chains of
events, that revise these interventions in light of the
evaluation findings, and that replicate the evaluations--have the
potential to simultaneously reduce violence and increase the
understanding of its causes. </p>

<p> Many chains of causal events for violence include links to
alcohol or to illegal psychoactive drugs. The panel found these
links worth exploring in depth for at least three reasons. First,
statistics consistently demonstrate correlations between violent
events and involvement with alcohol and other psychoactive drugs.
Second, the variety of potential causal links between violence
and different psychoactive substances--alcohol, opiates, cocaine
in smokable and powdered form, amphetamines, hallucinogens, and
other illegal drugs--presents an especially rich example of the
panel's classification framework. Third, preliminary evidence
from research and evaluations suggests that certain interventions
related to psychoactive substances should be considered in
developing strategies for controlling violence. </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h3>

<h3>Correlations between violence and psychoactive substances </h3>

<p> Research supported by the National Institute of Justice and
other organizations has repeatedly found strong correlations
between violence and psychoactive substances: </p>

<ul>
    <li>For at least the last several decades, alcohol
        drinking--by the perpetrator of a crime, the victim, or
        both--has immediately preceded at least half of all
        violent events, including murders, in the samples studied
        by researchers. </li>
    <li>Chronic drinkers are more likely than other people to
        have histories of violent behavior. </li>
    <li>Criminals who use illegal drugs1 commit robberies and
        assaults more frequently than do nonuser criminals, and
        they commit them especially frequently during periods of
        heavy drug use. </li>
    <li>In a study of New York City murders in 1988, researchers
        classified more than half the homicides (53 percent) as
        drug-related: 39 percent in the course of drug
        distribution, 8 percent through pharmacological effects
        on the offender, 2 percent while the offender was
        obtaining money to buy drugs, and 4 percent through more
        than one of these links.2 </li>
</ul>

<p> Data from the National Institute of Justice Drug Use
Forecasting (DUF) program, which tests for drug use among booked
arrestees in 24 sites nationwide, showed the following patterns
in 1989: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Most males and females who were interviewed after arrest
        for a violent crime reported drinking alcohol within 72
        hours before the crime for which they were arrested. </li>
    <li>About 60 percent of arrestees booked for violent crimes
        were confirmed by laboratory test to have used at least
        one illegal drug3 in the hours before arrest. </li>
</ul>

<h3><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h3>

<h3>Explaining the correlations </h3>

<p> While these statistical patterns strongly suggest that
psychoactive substances play significant roles in acts of
violence, they do not explain the nature of those relationships.
In trying to sort out links between violence and psychoactive
substances, the panel categorized potential links in terms of the
four levels noted above: </p>

<h4>o Social and economic forces (macrosocial): </h4>

<p> Processes that affect large social units such as nations or
communities. Examples include cultural practices related to
alcohol use and, in the United States, economic and social
processes surrounding the illegal markets in which psychoactive
drugs other than alcohol are sold. </p>

<h4>o Encounters between people (microsocial): </h4>

<p> Characteristics of encounters between people. Examples
include group drinking in settings where violence is expected and
socially acceptable; arguments that are begun or aggravated
because the participants are under the influence of drugs or
alcohol; and disputes involving organizations, buyers, and
sellers in illegal drug markets. </p>

<h4>o Psychosocial: </h4>

<p> Influences on individuals' behavior patterns, which begin
developing in early childhood and continue to evolve throughout
adulthood. Examples include patterns of heavy drinking and
aggression that develop during adolescence and psychoses that
predispose a few individuals toward violent psychotic episodes
while under the influence of certain drugs. </p>

<h4>o Neurobehavioral: </h4>

<p> Processes in the brain that underlie all human behavior and
that may be altered by pharmacological effects of alcohol and
other drugs. Examples include effects of substance abuse during
pregnancy on fetal development, effects of chronic substance
abuse on brain functioning, and temporary neurological effects of
being &quot;high&quot; or &quot;blue.&quot; </p>

<p> These and other examples of links at all four levels between
violence and alcohol or other drugs are displayed in table 1.
Much of the evidence for specific links is suggestive rather than
conclusive. One challenge in understanding and verifying the
links is the complexity of interactions among factors at
different levels. It would be difficult at best to sort out such
interactions. What makes the challenge even greater is that most
studies measure factors at only one or two levels at a time, so
that the full range of interactions is rarely observed in a
single study. In addition, it is difficult to study violent
events using methods that yield generalizable conclusions.
Controlled experiments under laboratory conditions produce the
strongest confirmation of factors that influence behavior, but
practical and ethical constraints generally limit those methods
to studies of behaviors that are far milder than the potentially
lethal violence that occurs in homes and communities. At present,
therefore, there are only fragments of scientific evidence
providing partial support for the existence of many causal links
between psychoactive substances and violence. These findings
neither explain definitively how the links interact nor provide a
basis for ranking them in order of importance in explaining
variation in violence related to alcohol or other drugs. </p>

<h5>Neurobehavioral explanations </h5>

<p> Research on humans and many animal species suggests there are
several neurobehavioral links between violence and psychoactive
substances: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Expectant mothers' use of psychoactive substances during
        pregnancy adversely affects fetal development. The
        resultant damage causes learning and communication
        problems that, in turn, increase the risk of early grade
        school failure, a well-documented precursor of violent
        behavior. </li>
    <li>Alcohol is the only psychoactive drug that in many
        individuals tends to increase aggressive behavior
        temporarily while it is taking effect. However, factors
        at other levels--behavior patterns when people are not
        drinking, the setting in which people drink, and local
        drinking customs, for example--influence the strength of
        this relationship. </li>
    <li>Among alcohol abusers, those who also abuse other
        psychoactive substances, who are diagnosed with
        antisocial personality disorder, and whose parents have
        been diagnosed as alcohol abusers are at especially high
        risk of chronic violent behavior. Some researchers have
        suggested that a genetic process may contribute to this
        relatively rare pattern. </li>
    <li>Marijuana and opiates temporarily inhibit violent
        behavior, but withdrawal from opiate addiction tends to
        exaggerate both aggressive and defensive responses to
        provocations. </li>
</ul>

<p> Individual humans and animals deviate widely from these
&quot;average&quot; behaviors. For example, the
aggression-promoting effects of alcohol are strongest in animals
having high blood levels of testosterone, the principal male
hormone that distinguishes males from females; humans may or may
not exhibit the same pattern. A study of violent Finnish alcohol
abusers suggests that the alcohol-violence link may be associated
with abnormally low levels of blood sugar (that is, hypoglycemia)
and of metabolites of the brain chemical serotonin. Another study
suggests that the alcohol-violence link is especially strong in
people who exhibit certain abnormal brain wave patterns, both at
rest and while responding to outside stresses. </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h3>

<h3>Common Assumptions Called Into Question </h3>

<p> On the other hand, several common assumptions about
connections between drugs and violence are called into question
by research findings: </p>

<ul>
    <li>There is no evidence to support the claim that snorting
        or injecting cocaine stimulates violent behavior.
        However, research is urgently needed on the behavioral
        effects of smoking cocaine in crack form, which affects
        the brain more directly. </li>
    <li>Anecdotal reports notwithstanding, no research evidence
        supports the notion that becoming high on hallucinogens,
        amphetamines, or PCP stimulates violent behavior in any
        systematic manner. The anecdotes usually describe chronic
        users with histories of psychosis or antisocial behavior,
        which may or may not be related to their chronic use of
        drugs. </li>
    <li>Occasional anecdotes about &quot; 'roid
        rages&quot;--violent outbursts by men who use anabolic
        steroids to accelerate muscle growth--appear to describe
        isolated coincidences rather than any common, systematic
        effect. </li>
</ul>

<h3><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h3>

<h3>Psychosocial links </h3>

<p> Evidence from research on animals and humans indicates that
patterns of substance abuse and aggressive behavior reinforce
each other. It cannot be said that one &quot;causes&quot; the
other. For example, alcohol may trigger violent episodes in
aggressive animals and people, but rarely in submissive ones. </p>

<p> Patterns of aggressive behavior and substance abuse often
become intertwined starting in childhood. Early childhood
aggression is a predictor of later heavy drinking, and the
combination is associated with an above-average risk of adult
violent behavior, especially among those who also abuse other
psychoactive drugs. </p>

<p> Research suggests at least four possible explanations for the
link between substance abuse and violent behavior in adolescents.
First, adolescents may chronically use psychoactive substances to
help them temporarily escape from such feelings as rage, guilt,
worthlessness, or depression--emotions that often precede
aggressive behavior. Second, repeated family arguments over
teenage substance abuse may eventually take on a violent
character. Next, underlying family problems or socially expected
responses may lead some adolescent males to patterns of heavy
drinking and fighting as ways to demonstrate their masculinity.
Last, boys who regularly observe older males fighting while
drinking may learn to expect that violent behavior accompanies
alcohol use. All of these processes may be at work, but their
roles, interactions, and importance as explanations have not yet
been sorted out. </p>

<p> Preexisting psychosis appears to account for occasional
violent outbursts by people who are under the influence of
amphetamines or hallucinogens, especially PCP. While these drugs
are well known to cause disorganized, bizarre behavior, they
trigger violence in very few people who are not also psychotic.
In studies of laboratory mice and monkeys, bizarre behavior on
the part of animals under the influence of PCP fairly commonly
provokes violent attacks by others in the group. Anecdotal
information and newspaper accounts report similar attacks on
humans using alcohol, amphetamines, powdered cocaine, or LSD, but
this relationship has not been systematically studied in humans. </p>

<h4>Encounters between people </h4>

<p> In a variety of ways, alcohol and drugs modify encounters
between people in ways that make these substances greater hazards
for violence. In the case of alcohol, these hazards tend to be
related to use, while for illegal psychoactive drugs they tend to
be related to distribution and purchase. </p>

<p> Alcohol use and sexual violence. Some therapists who treat
violent sex offenders have reported that their patients tend to
have both histories of alcohol abuse and high blood levels of
testosterone. Without comparisons to men who are not violent sex
offenders, these clinical observations cannot demonstrate that
alcohol abuse or high testosterone levels cause sexual violence.
Studies of many animal species suggest a causal connection--that
alcohol reduces testosterone levels but has stronger
aggression-promoting effects in individual high-testosterone
animals. However, that relationship has not yet been tested in
humans. The frequent involvement of alcohol in acquaintance rapes
suggests that social expectations may also be at work; that is,
young men who expect to have sex after drinking may try to
satisfy their expectations, sometimes forcibly if they encounter
resistance. </p>

<p> Illegal drug markets. Illegal drug markets operate outside
the world of contract law, courts and mediators for resolving
disputes, and business customs that distinguish socially
acceptable from unac- ceptable approaches to buying and selling.
Illegal markets often develop substitute mechanisms that involve
the threat or actual use of violence. Examples include: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Violence by drug distributors in the course of
        territorial disputes between rival organizations, threats
        of violence to make &quot;staff&quot; obey organizational
        rules, violent punishment of rulebreakers to keep the
        threats credible, battles with police, and protection of
        sellers or drugs on the street. </li>
    <li>Violence between buyer and seller during a drug
        transaction, caused, for example, by attempted robbery of
        one or the other, failure to hand over drugs or money, or
        &quot;honest&quot; misunderstandings of local rules of
        the game on the part of buyers and sellers. </li>
    <li>Violence involving people other than buyers and sellers
        who are found around drug markets--third parties such as
        innocent bystanders and people operating in related
        illegal markets for &quot;protection,&quot; guns, or
        prostitution. </li>
</ul>

<p> As places where violence tends to occur for the reasons
listed above, illegal drug markets may also serve as
&quot;magnets.&quot; As such, they attract valuable drugs and
cash, weapons, and people who are accustomed to violence. The mix
of these ingredients creates hazardous conditions for robberies
and other forms of violence that may not be directly related to
drugs. </p>

<p> Obtaining drug purchase money. In some settings, the need for
money to buy drugs also increases the chance of a violent
encounter. A taxi driver carrying a passenger late at night, for
example, is presumably at greater risk of being robbed if the
passenger wants to buy drugs but lacks the cash to do so. While
robbery is still a common way to obtain money to buy drugs, it
has been replaced by drug selling in some large cities. </p>

<p> Using alcohol and drugs. If alcohol caused violence only by
making individuals behave more aggressively, violence would be
equally common in all places where drinking occurs. In fact,
however, most drinking places are rarely scenes of violence. A
few acquire reputations as &quot;animal houses&quot; or
&quot;fighting bars,&quot; where people expect drinking and
violence to go hand in hand. </p>

<p> Just what characteristics of a drinking place make it a
hazard for violence are not precisely known, but there is
supporting evidence for several possible explanations. People who
drink in fighting bars may behave violently in order to &quot;fit
in&quot; or to advance socially. People who experience anger or
frustration may seek out such settings, because they believe that
drinking in these types of establishments means social permission
to engage in violent behavior. One study of a group of young men
who were observed during an evening of drinking illustrates this
by suggesting that behavior patterns and situational influences
may play off each other. As the evening progressed, the group
began both to behave more aggressively and to move on to
establishments where aggressive behavior was more socially
acceptable. </p>

<p> Connections between drinking and violence have been
identified by researchers in many countries with predominantly
European cultures. But they have not been found in many tribal
and folk societies, even where binge drinking is common. For
reasons not yet known, expectations that violence follows
drinking have failed to develop in those cultures. </p>

<p> Finally, it seems likely that substance abuse is indirectly
related to violence in ways that are difficult to identify and
count. Examples of indirect relationships include robberies
committed to replace household money spent on drugs or alcohol,
or spouse assaults arising from disputes over money or time spent
away from home drinking or taking drugs. </p>

<p> Violence is related to the distribution, purchase, and use of
illegal drugs or alcohol in a wide variety of human interactions.
Unfortunately, the difficulty of counting such interactions makes
it also difficult to rank them in order of importance. Better
counts would help in focusing violence prevention strategies on
the most common interactions in which drug- and alcohol-related
violence occurs. </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h3>

<h3>Social and economic forces </h3>

<p> If the patterns of behavior discussed above were the only
links between illegal drug distribution and violence, every city
that experienced a crack epidemic in the 1980's would also have
seen a substantial increase in homicide at the same time. Indeed,
policymakers have occasionally claimed a &quot;uniform, straight
line relationship&quot; between illegal drug use and murder.4 </p>

<p> The reality is more complex. The murder rate increased 350
percent in Washington, D.C., and by a smaller amount in New York
City as their crack epidemics unfolded. However, during the crack
epidemics in Detroit and Los Angeles these cities experienced
decreases in the murder rate. This suggests that the
relationships between illegal drug market activity and lethal
violence are intertwined with social and economic processes in
the surrounding community. </p>

<p> What are these processes? Because causal patterns at the
social level are especially difficult to establish, the answers
are necessarily speculative. Fragments of evidence suggest that
some or all of the following factors may influence the
relationship between levels of violence and illegal drug market
activity: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Stability of drug market control: Situations that produce
        violent encounters--fights over territorial allocations
        or misunderstandings between buyers and sellers, for
        example--arose relatively infrequently in markets
        controlled by old, stable organizations that had
        developed operating rules decades ago and enforced them
        through a standing threat to punish violators violently.
        Where the spread of crack manufacturing technology
        encouraged new organizations to enter the markets, the
        resulting destabilization may temporarily have increased
        the frequency of violent encounters. </li>
    <li>Community access to legitimate economic opportunities:
        Where the rise of crack markets followed the exodus of
        legitimate economic opportunities from central cities,
        economic rewards shifted away from skills valued by
        legitimate employers to those valued by crack
        distribution organizations; these included the ability to
        threaten and use violence. </li>
    <li>Strength of informal violence controls: Where the exodus
        of legitimate economic opportunities from urban
        communities took with it many people committed to legal,
        nonviolent values, those people were no longer available
        for roles in preventing drug-related violence. They were
        not available, for example, as nonviolent role models for
        adolescents, as passers-by who might discourage drug
        buyers or intervene in emerging violent events, or as
        concerned individuals who might inform parents if their
        children began drifting toward involvement in drug
        markets. </li>
    <li>Social status and moral authority: During crack epidemics
        in some communities, successful young drug entrepreneurs
        either supplanted or intimidated neighborhood &quot;old
        heads&quot;--unofficial community leaders who upheld
        traditional values and had exercised moral authority in
        the neighborhood. Where this occurred, it tended to
        weaken cultural restraints against violence in all
        contexts, including drug markets. </li>
</ul>

<p> Because such relationships are difficult to verify, evidence
supporting their influence is only suggestive and fragmentary,
and new research is needed to explore them more fully. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>Preventive interventions </h2>

<p> A number of intervention strategies for preventing violence
related to psychoactive substances have been proposed: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Police disruption of illegal drug markets. </li>
    <li>Selectively longer incarceration of violent drug-using
        criminals. </li>
    <li>Reducing teenagers' access to alcohol. </li>
    <li>Substance abuse prevention. </li>
    <li>Drug abuse treatment. </li>
    <li>Pharmacological therapies to reduce drug craving and
        aggressive tendencies associated with alcohol use and
        heroin addiction. </li>
</ul>

<p> Some of these strategies have been evaluated to test their
effectiveness in reducing violence. Only a few have demonstrated
success under any conditions; none have shown universal
effectiveness. Developing better interventions will require
collaborative problem-solving initiatives that involve
representatives of criminal justice agencies, providers of
substance abuse treatment and other social services, and
evaluation researchers. These initiatives are needed to turn
promising ideas into workable programs, to evaluate the programs,
and to refine them in light of the evaluation results. The
findings of evaluations conducted thus far are summarized in the
following sections. </p>

<p> <strong>Disrupting illegal drug markets.</strong> Police
attack illegal drug markets through a number of tactics:
undercover investigations leading to dealers' arrests;
cooperation with community antidrug efforts; and large-scale,
high-visibility crackdowns. Evaluations of these tactics in
Birmingham, Alabama; Lawrence and Lynn, Massachusetts; New York
City; Oakland, California; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and
Washington, D.C., present a mixed picture. Perhaps the strongest
supportable statement is that their chance of success is improved
by intervening early in emerging markets, by creating a highly
committed police force, and by generating community receptivity
and cooperation in advance. NIJ's Drug Market Analysis (DMA)
program is helping with the first prerequisite--early detection
of drug markets. Specific techniques for creating supportive
climates in police departments and the surrounding communities
are less well understood, although many approaches are now being
tested as part of community policing initiatives. </p>

<p> <strong>Incarcerating violent drug-using criminals. </strong>Researchers
have generally found that compared to other violent offenders,
those who use drugs tend to have higher average frequencies of
violent crimes such as robbery and assault. This finding raises
the possibility that sentencing drug-involved offenders who are
convicted of these crimes to longer prison terms might reduce
violence. However, analyses suggest that this strategy of
&quot;selective incapacitation&quot; would reduce violent crime
levels very little unless it were accompanied by massive
increases in prison populations. </p>

<p> <strong>A related strategy--monitoring pretrial releasees'
drug use through urinalysis</strong>--showed rather surprising
effects in a Washington, D.C., evaluation. Although positive drug
test results did not predict significantly higher pretrial
rearrest rates, failure to show up for the test was a strong
predictor of subsequent new crimes leading to rearrest. </p>

<p> <strong>Reducing teenagers' access to alcohol.</strong>
Evidence is fairly clear that increases in tax rates and other
measures that reduce the availability of alcohol to adolescents
(social pressure and enforcement of underage drinking laws) in
turn reduce drinking and certain associated problems such as
death rates due to auto collisions. Therefore, these strategies
may also reduce adolescents' disproportionate share of violence.
That conjecture remains to be tested, however. </p>

<p> <strong>Substance abuse prevention. </strong>By reducing the
demand that fuels violent, illegal drug markets, substance abuse
prevention should, in theory, reduce violence levels. Many
substance abuse prevention programs have been evaluated,
including the Drug Abuse Resistance Education (DARE), which
brings police officers into classrooms as instructors.
Evaluations of prevention programs have generally found them
effective in delaying the onset of tobacco, alcohol, and
marijuana use. Evaluations have not generally found that
education succeeds in preventing use of &quot;harder&quot; drugs,
perhaps because use of those drugs was rare even in the control
groups that did not receive preventive education. However, to the
extent that minor drugs are &quot;stepping stones&quot; to the
harder ones,5 the programs may have meaningful, yet delayed,
effects for violence reduction. </p>

<p> <strong>Prevention</strong> may have an especially important
role to play for one category of adolescents--males whose
behavior meets diagnostic criteria for antisocial personality
disorder and whose parents abuse alcohol. Research indicates that
these two factors, coupled with both alcohol and drug abuse,
create a high-risk profile for violent behavior in adulthood. </p>

<p> <strong>Drug abuse treatment</strong>. Successful drug
treatment programs reduce criminal activity among adult clients.
For drug abusers who are not in prison, stays of at least 3
months in therapeutic communities reduce the tendency to commit
crime after discharge. Up to about 18 months, longer stays in the
therapeutic community produce greater reductions. </p>

<p> For drug abusers in prison, treatment usually involves only
individual or group sessions a few times a week with no
postrelease followup. Evaluations of this approach have not found
it sufficient to reduce criminal behavior following release.
However, a more intensive approach--combining inprison
therapeutic communities, planning for postrelease treatment, and
postrelease treatment in the community--reduces overall rearrest
rates of inmates who complete the program. At least three
programs have used this approach: Stay 'n Out (in a New York
prison), Cornerstone (in the Oregon State Hospital), and the
California Civil Addict Program. </p>

<p> In addition to these beneficial effects of drug treatment on
offenders' behavior, successful treatment may reduce aggregate
levels of violence related to drug markets by lowering the demand
that fuels the markets. Such an effect would, however, be
difficult to measure. </p>

<p> <strong>Pharmacological interventions.</strong> Like other
forms of drug treatment, pharmacological therapies that reduce
drug craving may also lower the demand that supports violent drug
markets. For decades, methadone and related chemicals have been
used to reduce craving for heroin. There is no analogue to
methadone for treating addiction to cocaine in powdered or
smokable form. However, using animals as test subjects,
researchers have identified the receptors for certain subtypes of
two brain chemicals, dopamine and norepinephrine, as promising
sites to begin developing such medications. Animal research also
suggests neurochemical starting points for developing medications
that reduce violence in other ways: by disrupting the
aggression-promoting effects of alcohol and by preventing
aggression during withdrawal from heroin addiction. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>Conclusion </h2>

<p> Too few of the links between violence and psychoactive
substances have been established with enough certainty to
advocate a comprehensive national policy for preventing violence
related to those substances. Instead, a program of testing and
evaluating tactics for implementing a variety of promising
strategies is called for. Among these strategies, criminal
justice agencies have particular roles in developing and testing
tactics to disrupt illegal drug markets, in monitoring drug use
of pretrial releasees, in establishing drug abuse treatment for
convicted criminals, and in creating effective substance abuse
prevention programs. Fulfilling these roles will require
cooperation between the criminal justice system and drug
treatment, prevention, and education authorities. Eventually,
efforts to prevent drug-related violence may be assisted by
pharmacological therapies to reduce the aggression-promoting
effects of alcohol and the craving for other psychoactive drugs. </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>Notes </h2>

<p> 1. Among studies of this relationship, many group all illegal
drugs together. Those that distinguish among drugs usually list
cocaine, heroin, amphetamines, barbiturates, and hallucinogens
other than marijuana. See, for example, Elliott, D.S., and D.
Huizinga, The Relationship Between Delinquent Behavior and ADM
[Alcohol, Drug, and Mental Health] Problems, National Youth
Survey Report No. 26. Boulder, Colorado: Behavioral Research
Institute, 1984. </p>

<p> 2. Goldstein, P.J., H.H. Brownstein, P.J. Ryan, and P.A.
Bellucci, &quot;Crack and Homicide in New York City, 1988: A
Conceptually Based Event Analysis,&quot; Contemporary Drug
Problems 16 (Winter 1989):651--687. </p>

<p> 3. The DUF program uses urinalysis to confirm self-reports.
The urine specimens are tested for cocaine, opiates, marijuana,
PCP, methadone, benzodiazepine (Valium), methaqualone,
propoxyphene (Darvon), barbiturates, and amphetamines. Samples
are collected at the time of arrest on a voluntary basis; an
average of 80 percent of arrestees voluntarily cooperate. Test
criteria are set to detect use of most drugs in the preceding 24
to 48 hours, but marijuana and PCP can be detected in the urine
several weeks after use. </p>

<p> 4. Isikoff, M., and K. Sawyer, &quot;Thornburgh Says All Drug
Abusers Fuel Nation's Crisis,&quot; Washington Post, August 17,
1990. </p>

<p> 5. Until recently, research on developmental pathways
consistently found these drugs to be &quot;gateways&quot; or
&quot;stepping stones&quot; to cocaine use. Preliminary findings,
presented after the Panel completed its report, suggest that
since the New York City &quot;crack epidemic&quot; of the early
1980's, crack-using youth in increasing numbers are skipping the
gateway drugs and starting directly with crack. </p>

<p> Author's Biography </p>

<p> Dr. Jeffrey A. Roth served as study director for the Panel on
the Under-standing and Control of Violent Behavior. Currently he
is research director in the Bethesda, Maryland, office of the Law
and Public Policy area of Abt Associates, Inc. </p>

<p> Sidebar 1 </p>

<p> Panel on the Understanding and Control of Violent Behavior </p>

<p> Violence is universally recognized as a pervasive part of
contemporary American society and of our Nation's past as well.
Many of the attempts to understand the phenomenon have been made
in response to specific situations, such as the lawlessness of
the Prohibition era, the assassination of President John F.
Kennedy, and the urban riots of the mid-1960's. Other attempts at
understanding violence singled out particular causes for
analysis. In none of these studies, however, was the full body of
research on violence reviewed comprehensively, and none of them
took an interdisciplinary approach. </p>

<p> The Panel on the Understanding and Control of Violent
Behavior was set up to meet the need for a more comprehensive
assessment of what is known about violent behavior. It was
established in response to a request made by three Federal
agencies: the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National
Institute of Justice (NIJ), and the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC). NSF asked for a review of current knowledge
about the causes of violent behavior and recommendations for
future research. The other two agencies shared these goals, but
their areas of interest reflected their particular missions. As
the research arm of the U.S. Department of Justice, NIJ wanted to
find out about means to prevent and control violent crime. The
CDC wanted assistance in setting priorities for preventing
injuries and deaths caused by violence. </p>

<p> Created in 1989, the panel reviewed research on
&quot;interpersonal violence&quot;--events involving at most a
few perpetrators and victims. This limitation excluded suicide
and self-mutilation as well as large-scale collective and State
violence. The focus was on describing, understanding, and
controlling violence in the United States. Research in
biomedical, psychological, and other social sciences was
reviewed. The work of the panel was intended both to help guide
future research and evaluation projects aimed at prevention and
control and to suggest strategic directions for violence control
policy. </p>

<p> The findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the panel
were published in Volume 1 of Understanding and Preventing
Violence, published by the National Academy Press. Three volumes
of background papers commissioned by the panel are forthcoming.
The panel concluded that numerous, often interacting factors give
rise to violent events. Although the underlying interactions are
not well understood, attention to the factors suggests many
promising preventive interventions. Testing and evaluating these
interventions creates opportunities to prevent particular types
of violence while gaining better understanding of them. The panel
made recommendations in a number of areas, among them development
of problem-solving initiatives to control and understand
violence; better statistical systems for measuring violence; and
a program of research to identify underlying causes. This
Research in Brief is one of a series that summarizes the panel's
findings. </p>

<p> NIJ is committed to implementing the recommendations of the
panel. Its commitment has begun through support for the Program
on Human Development and Criminal Behavior, a longitudinal,
multicommunity research project that is exploring the factors
associated with violence. In addition, the panel's
recommendations have helped shape the goals of NIJ research and
evaluation activities and its long-range plans for research. </p>

<p> Copies of Understanding and Preventing Violence are available
from the National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Avenue N.W.,
Washington, DC 20418 (800-624-6242). </p>

<p> . </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>