
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-5</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B016-200</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf31_40.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043511 text/html 37364
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:34:37 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:15 GMT
Content-length: 37146
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp Facts 31-40</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>Hemp FACT #31-U.K. Artcl.Pt.7 </p>

<p>Date: 95-02-12 12:30:25 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is Part VII of an article that appeared in the Guardian
Newspaper on 9/18/93. </p>

<p>Please remember that this article was written in the UK all
comments in ( ) are the poster's. </p>

<p>According to Andy Waller, marijuana should
&quot;theoretically&quot; cost less per acre than wheat to grow.
Yet Nabilone, the only synthetic cannabinoid legally prescribed
in the UK, costs the NHS [National Health Service] 39.70 [pounds
about 60-70 dollars?] for twenty capsules. &quot;The
pharmaceutical industry and regulatory system are addicted to the
cult of synthesis,&quot; complains Robert Randall. &quot;It's as
if every drug has to come out of a factory. God forbid that it
might be natural. There's an attitude that man can make a better
Garden Of Eden scientifically.&quot; </p>

<p>In fact, Dr Grinspoon doubts whether synthetic compounds would
be as effective as the natural substance. &quot;It's the synergy
of so many cannabinoids in natural marijuana which may be the
secret to it's wide-ranging properties,&quot; says Grinspoon.
However, he doubts whether straightforward cannabis will become a
prescription drug. As a plant, cannabis cannot be patented and is
therefore an uncommercial proposition for the drug companies. </p>

<p>Legalized prescription would also need to cope with the
problems of standardization and leakage on to the market.
&quot;There would be queues outside every GP's office,&quot;
jokes Mike Goodman of Release, the national drugs and legal
advice service. &quot;If you can get marijuana for $10 an ounce
from your doctor rather than $600 (poster's note--$600 AN
OZ.--Must be some incredible stuff ;-)) on the street,&quot; says
Grinspoon, &quot;it's obvious why prescription won't work.
Cannabis must be given the same status as alcohol - legal, with
appropriate limitations, for use by adults for any purpose.&quot;
</p>

<p>Robert Randall echoes others in vehemently disagreeing with
Grinspoon's call for general legalization. &quot;The idea that
sick people are the key to decriminalization is to hold the
welfare of the ill hostage to reformist fantasies. We want it on
prescription, like morphine, to help people. Not so that a hippie
can have a good time in the afternoon.&quot; </p>

<p>Once deemed the weed that propgated flowerpower, the
subversive dropout's favoured intoxicant, marijuana has since
moved mainstream. It is no longer the narcotic of youthful
rebellion for baby-boomers of non-inhaler Bill Clinton's
generation. Mike Goodman insists more people now roll joints and
eat hash brownies than attend football [soccer] matches, art
galleries or church. A survey to be published by two Manchester
criminologists next month suggests that close to 50 per cent of
teenagers aged 14-16 in urban areas use illicit drugs regularly
[does this include alcohol underage?], most commonly cannabis.
According to Peter McDermott, editor of the International Journal
On Drug Policy: &quot;Cannabis can no longer be regarded as
deviant activity. It's part of our national social life.&quot; </p>

<p>In a recent survey at a leading teaching hospital, the results
of which one source admits to being asked to suppress, &quot;over
60 per cent of medical students were found to be marijuana
users.&quot; In the same survey, only 30 per cent admitted to
smoking cigarettes. </p>

<p>Even senior police officers, such as Commander John Grieve of
the Metropolitan Police, have proposed licensing a network of
drug suppliers and dealers. Brian Hilliard, editor of Police
Review, has called for the legalization of cannabis for several
years. &quot;Legalizing cannabis wouldn't do any harm to
anybody,&quot; he says &quot;We should be concentrating on the
serious business of heroin and amphetamines.&quot; </p>

<p>Part 8 of dis berry interesting article coming soon to a
message board near you. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #31-U.K. Artcl.Pt.8 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-13 11:02:01 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is the final part of an article that appeared in the
Guardian Newspaper on 9/18/93. </p>

<p>Please remember that this article was written in the UK all
comments in ( ) are the poster's. </p>

<p>The conviction of 42,209 people in 1991 on marijuana charges
contributes to the clogging of the courts and the overcrowding of
prisons. Almost 90 per cent of drug offences involve cannabis.
Yet the British government spends 500 million pounds (750,000,000
dollars approx?) a year on &quot;overall responses to drugs
(international and national)&quot; and receives no tax revenue
from the UK's estimated 1.8 billion pound (2.7 billion dollars?)
illicit drugs market. </p>

<p>Increasingly, those pressing for marijuana's legalization
mirror Grinspoon's belief that, &quot;since scientific scepticism
of marijuana has all but collapsed&quot;, the chief opposition to
cannabis rests on a moral and political, not toxicological,
foundation. </p>

<p>The real damage that cannabis causes, the argument goes, is to
the body politic. In his recent book, Food Of The Gods, Terence
McKenna neatly encapsulates dope's lasting social potentcy:
&quot;It (cannabis) dimishes the power of ego, has a mitigating
effect on competition. causes one to question authority, and
reinforces the notion of merely relative importance of social
values.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;It's clear that the government's war on drugs takes
precedence over medical rationality,&quot; says Nick Partridge of
the Terrence Higgins Trust (A national UK charity dealing with
AIDS (I think)). &quot;At present we're criminalizing many people
in massive pain at the end of their lives. Yet I don't expect the
medical arguments to break through the political dogma
surrounding marijuana and that is deeply regrettable.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Marijuana has empowered many sick people for the first
time,&quot; says Robert Randall. &quot;For many, it is the only
drug that works. The real problem with marijuana is perhaps it
threatens to put people in charge of their own medical lives. The
question is: who is going to control individual's biology - large
corporations, doctors and governments, or people
themselves?&quot; </p>

<p>------------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>Thanks go to ALEX KERSHAW who wrote this interesting and
revealing article for the Guardian Newspaper. </p>

<p>If anyone is interested in the article in its entirety, email
the poster. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #32-Buckley.Pt.1 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-14 11:01:23 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This column by William F. Buckley was in The Albuquereque
Journal June 9, 1993. It makes a good argument for marijuana
legalization. William Buckley's columns are copyright by the
Universal Press </p>

<p>Syndicate. </p>

<p><b>Legalization of Marijuana Long Overdue</b> </p>

<p>In a recent encounter, Edward Koch reminded his interlocuter
that many years ago, Rep. Edward Koch had sought backing for a
congressional investigation into the marijuana laws. I had been
reminded by the former mayor of New York that along about
1967-68, the typical congressman had to reflect that any law
requiring one or five or 10 years in jail as a penalty for being
caught using marijuana endangered his own sons and daughters in
college. Koch got the support he sought. </p>

<p>But no meaningful reforms, if that is the word we are
permitted to use, were enacted. In 1967, all drug arrests came to
121,000. Of these, marijuana arrests were one-half, 61,000. In
1991, all drug arrests were 1 million, marijuana 285,000. </p>

<p>Background data give us perspective. Sixty-six million
Americans have smoked marijuana, and at least 10 million -
perhaps many more - continue to do so regularly. Comparable
figures? Twenty-two million have used cocaine, 1.5 million still
do; 150 million have used tobacco, 50 million still do. In 1976,
12 percent of children age 12-17 had used marijuana during the
preceding month. By 1990, this figure was down to 5 percent. Over
age 26, the percentage had not changed: 3.5 percent in 1976, 3.6
percent in 1990. </p>

<p>The social vectors within the drug-law-reform movement have
during the period since Koch asked for an investigation of
federal marijuana laws moved as follows: </p>

<p>-The informed public is gradually willing to acknowledge a
difference between marijuana and more lethal drugs. </p>

<p>-It is, however reluctantly, acknowledged that marijuana can
have therapeutic uses, in particular to bring relief to those
suffering from radiation or chemotherapy treatments for cancer. </p>

<p>-There is a gradual awakening of the moral sensibilities of
the alert members of the public. My own belated arrival on the
scene stings in the memory. It came with a letter from a father
in his early 30s who neither smoked nor drank, who had three
children, was gainfully employed, and engaged in civic-minded
activity - but liked on Saturday nights, to retreat to his
woodshed and smoke a joint. He was caught at it, arrested, his
house seized, and is now in jail, and sentenced to 10 years. It
is hard to understand the moral disposition of the prosecuter who
asked for that sentence, and the judge who imposed it. </p>

<p>Part 2 Tomorrow. email the poster for complete copies of
articles. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #33-Buckley.Pt.2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-15 12:18:36 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is Part 2 of a column by William F. Buckley in The
Albuquereque Journal June 9, 1993. It makes a good argument for
marijuana legalization. </p>

<p>William Buckley's columns are copyright by the Universal Press
Syndicate. </p>

<p><b>Legalization of Marijuana Long Overdue</b> </p>

<p>The National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws has
a program, which is to bring on the legalization of marijuana by
the year 1997. The president of NORML, as it is everywhere
referred to, is a man of considerable literary and polemical
skills. Richard Cowan is a graduate of Yale and a co-founder of
Young Americans for Freedom. He is here and there given to
hyperbole, as when he cites the support given to the Partnership
for a Drug Free America (PDFA) by corporate America as
&quot;reminiscent of the support given the Nazis by German
industrialists.&quot; </p>

<p>But Cowen is on to something, the root credentials of which
are: </p>

<p>-However one feels about legalizing cocaine, the case for
legalizing marijuana is an entire world removed from that
question. </p>

<p>-The amount of money and of legal energy being given to
prosecute hundreds of thousands of Americans who are caught with
a few ounces of marijuana in their jeans simply makes no sense -
the kindest way to put it. A sterner way to put it is that it is
an outrage, an imposition on basic civil liberties and on the
reasonable expenditure of social energy. </p>

<p>-The point must surely come when the American people
acknowledge that the drive against marijuana is not proving
anything at all, given the continuing availability of the drug
and its (relatively modest) patronage. </p>

<p>Richard Cowan makes a telling point, namely that the media are
notoriously insensitive to the abuses of the narcocracy.
&quot;Most people are unaware of the nature of the marijuana
prohibition in America today, the extent of its cruelty and
injustice, and the threat that it poses to everyone's freedom.
Ironically, many of those who are aware of the extent of the
problem view it as being so great that they despair of being able
to end it. Consequently, as an act of triage, they abandon it as
a lost cause, to work on something which they view as at least
possible.&quot; Like what? The rehabilitation of President
Clinton? </p>

<p>More stuff manana -- Keep those cards and letters coming ;-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #34-PFDFA </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-16 11:39:03 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>This is Part 1 of an article that appeared in The Hartford
Courant. It shows the lies perpetrated by the Partnership for a
Drug Free America.</b> </p>

<p>&quot;Untruths, unreliable data create obstacles in war on
drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>It is a stark message designed to persuade youths to stay away
from marijuana. </p>

<p>And it is a lie. </p>

<p>The narrator tells television viewers they are watching the
brain waves of a normal 14-year-old. As he speaks, squiggly lines
with high peaks show an obviously active brain. </p>

<p>The picture changes: The lines flatten. These, the narrator
says, are the brain waves of a 14-year-old on marijuana. </p>

<p>The problem with this national television advertisement is
that the flatter &quot;brain waves&quot; are not those of a
teenager on dope; they are not brain waves at all. The
electroencephalograph was not hooked up to anyone. </p>

<p>It is not just brain waves that are being manipulated in the
war against drugs. Truth has been a casualty in other areas as
well. </p>

<p>For example: </p>

<p>A study cited by presidents and business leaders to
demonstrate the effect of drug use on worker productivity has no
scientific validity according to the organization that conducted
it. </p>

<p>No one has been able to produce another widely quoted study
that purportedly showed drug users cost companies more in
worker's compensation claims and medical benefits. </p>

<p>A third study, used to show that marijuana could cause
long-term impairment, was improperly conducted and reached
conclusions no other study has been able to duplicated, according
to one of its authors. </p>

<p>[article goes on to say that drugs are bad but that lying
about it destroys the credibility of the anti-drug crusade.] </p>

<p>&quot;Part of the problem we have as drug educators today is
that kids don't believe us,&quot; said Dr. Lester Grinspoon, an
associate professor of psychiatry at the Harvard Medical School
who has researched the effects of marijuana. </p>

<p>&quot;They've been told for so long that marijuana is very bad
for them and then they go off to college and see a brilliant
English major that smokes dope and nothing's happened to his or
her brain or heart. Then they use it themselves and discover it's
the least harmful illegal drug. So they say that maybe they've
been lied to about cocaine or PCP, too.&quot; </p>

<p>But such questions are not the foremost concern of the
organization that created the brain-wave advertisement. The
Partnership for a Drug-Free America wants, above all else, to
prevent people from using drugs. </p>

<p>Theresa Grant, public information director for the nonprofit
organization, said she doesn't see any problem with the ad.
&quot;The marijuana brain-wave commercial was one of the ads that
we used as a fact, rather than a fear-inducing ad,&quot; Grant
said. later, she acknowledged: &quot;It was a simulation. They
manipulated the machine. It was not attached to any person. It
was not scientific. At the time we created it in 1987, we were
told that it was an appropriate representation,&quot; by the
government's National Institute on Drug Abuse. </p>

<p>... She emphasized that the partnership has not conceded that
the brain-wave representation was inaccurate ... </p>

<p>&quot;It's a flat lie,&quot; said Grinspoon. &quot;Marijuana
has no clinically significant effect on the
electroencephalograph.&quot; ... </p>

<p>Citing a Harvard Medical School study, he said, &quot;Nobody
has been able to demonstrate one iota of brain damage from
smoking marijuana.&quot; </p>

<p>Part 2. Tomorrow </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #35-PFDFA </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-17 11:18:52 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>This is part 2 of an article that appeared in The Hartford
Courant in 90 or 91</b> </p>

<p>&quot;Untruths, unreliable data create obstacles in war on
drugs.&quot; It is a stark message designed to persuade youths to
stay away from marijuana. </p>

<p>And it is a lie. </p>

<p>Social 'Studies' </p>

<p>Last year President Bush declared that &quot;drug abuse among
American workers costs businesses anywhere from $60 billion to
$100 billion a year in lost productivity, absenteeism,
drug-related accidents, medical claims and theft.&quot; </p>

<p>Where did he get those number? </p>

<p>Bush, and President Reagan before him, have based their
comments about drugs and productivity on a study conducted by the
Research Triangle Institute, a nonprofit research organization
near Raleigh, N.C., according to Henrick J. Harwood, who led the
study and now is senior policy analyst in the White House drug
policy office. ... </p>

<p>&quot;It was an inexpensive study done with inadequate
data,&quot; said Reid Maness, senior manager of communications
for Research Triangle Institute. &quot;Unfortunately, there
hasn't been attempt since then to do anything better. This still
remains the most recent and best study of its type. </p>

<p>&quot;When we see people being critical about it, we don't get
too upset. RTI would agree that the study does not have a lot of
precision. We never claimed that it did,&quot; Maness said. </p>

<p>The study concluded: </p>

<p>o People who had *ever* been heavy marijuana users cost the
nation $34.2 billion in diminished worker productivity in 1980. </p>

<p>o Adding the costs of drug-related health problems, crime and
accidents --figures that exist only in very rough estimates --
the study concluded that all drug abuse, excluding alcohol, cost
the country $47 billion in 1980. </p>

<p>How did the institute come up with its figures? </p>

<p>Using statistics from a 1982 household survey by the National
Institute on Drug Abuse, the institute compared the average
income for households in which one person admitted to having
every used marijuana daily to the average for households in which
no one admitted to having ever used marijuana daily. </p>

<p>Households with former heavy smokers of marijuana had an
average income 27.9 percent lower than similar households in
which marijuana had not been used heavily, the institute said. </p>

<p>The study concluded that, when the figures were extrapolated
to the general population, marijuana abuse caused an estimated
loss in income of $34.2 billion in 1980. In turn, the researchers
equated the reduced income with reduced productivity. ... </p>

<p>&quot;The study is worthless,&quot; said Dr. John P. Morgan,
medical professor and head of the pharmacology department at the
City University of New York Medical School. &quot;It is obviously
absurd. It has to do with the fact that NIDA is functioning
chiefly as a minister of propaganda in the war on drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>The study did not prove any relationship between marijuana use
and reduced household income. Despite its conclusion that
&quot;The [productivity] loss due to marijuana abuse was
estimated at $34.2 billion for 1980,&quot; the study elsewhere
notes that the reduced income was not necessarily a result of
marijuana use. </p>

<p>Even if it were, income does not equal productivity. </p>

<p>In an article in the University of Kansas Law Review, Morgan
write that if income were the same as productivity, then &quot;a
judge is less productive than a practicing lawyer, a medical
school professor is less productive than a practicing physician,
a farmer is less productive than a florist and an elementary
school teacher is less productive than an owner of a daycare
center.&quot; </p>

<p>The study arrived at one particularly curious conclusion: </p>

<p>People who were *currently* abusing any illegal drug cost the
nation nothing in diminished worker productivity. </p>

<p>A 34-year-old who told researchers in 1982 that he had smoked
marijuana every day during the summer of 1966 and had not touched
an illegal drug since would be classified as a worker whose
productivity was significantly diminished by drug use. </p>

<p>Part 3. Tomorrow - The Study that Wasn't </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #36-PFDFA </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-18 11:46:22 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>This is Part 3 of an article from The Hartford Courant</b> </p>

<p><b>&quot;Untruths, unreliable data create obstacles in war on
drugs.&quot;</b> </p>

<p><b>The study that wasn't.</b> </p>

<p>Shocking anti-drug statistics seem always to make headlines,
regardless of what they are based upon. </p>

<p>In 1983, Dr. Sidney Cohen, a clinical professor of psychiatry
at UCLA, wrote in the Drug Abuse and Alcoholism Newsletter that
drug users were five times as likely to file workers'
compensation claims and that they received three times the
average level of benefits for illness. </p>

<p>His source was a study purportedly done by the Firestone Tire
and Rubber Co. Many other drug fighters, particularly people in
favor of widespread drug testing of employees, have quoted either
the Firestone study or the newsletter edited by Cohen, who has
since died. </p>

<p>In fact, there appears to have been no such study. </p>

<p>&quot;About three people have asked me for that study,&quot;
said the Firestone medical director, Dr. E. Gates Morgan.
&quot;I'm unaware of it. We had an [employee assistance program]
man with us, but left the company in 1983 and died in 1987. I've
looked all over for the stuff he wrote, but we don't have any
copies of it at all.&quot; ... </p>

<p>A life of their own </p>

<p>Other widely quoted studies have even larger margins of error
-- but you wouldn't know that by listening to the people who
quote them. &quot;Marijuana does not wear off in a couple of
hours,&quot; said Rosanna Creighton, president of the nonpartisan
lobbying group &quot;Citizens for a Drug-free Oregon.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;The pleasure high is gone, but the effect it has ... on
motor skills, eye-to-hand coordination, peripheral vision ... is
not gone. A Stanford University study showed that 24 hours after
smoking marijuana, the ability of airplane pilots was
impaired.&quot; </p>

<p>Creighton was referring to a 1985 study paid for by the
National Institute on Drug Abuse and the Veterans Administration
Medical Research Service. It has been used to show that even
casual marijuana use is dangerous -- despite many government
studies that have concluded the opposite. ... </p>

<p>The study said that although the pilots were unaware they were
impaired, their marijuana-induced errors could easily lead to
airplane crashes. </p>

<p>But a co-author of the study is not confident of those
findings. </p>

<p>&quot;The results of the study were suggestive, non
conclusive,&quot; said Dr. Von Otto Leirer, an experimental
psychologist. &quot;We didn't have the appropriate controls for
the experiment. That was a real serious problem.&quot; </p>

<p>Leirer said a follow-up study, using the proper controls and
methods, was conducted. That study was published in December, but
attracted little notice. </p>

<p>... </p>

<p>In the past 20 years, studies have shown marijuana to cause
brain damage, paranoia, early senility, heart malfunction and
sexual problems, Grinspoon said. In every case, he said,
follow-up studies failed to confirm that marijuana caused any of
those problems. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #37-DARE1 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-20 12:13:01 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is an article found on the &quot;net&quot; to add
additional insight on D.A.R.E. </p>

<p><b>The Dark Side of DARE</b> </p>

<p><b>by Pastor Jaymes Douglass Fyr</b> </p>

<p>Police officers visiting schools - anti-drug programs -
neither one is new. I remember being told as a child &quot;the
policeman is your friend.&quot; I still have the worn old book
preaching against drugs and alcohol from high school. These
things have been ar ound for decades. </p>

<p>Now they have come together. Former Los Angeles police chief
Daryl Gates created the Drug Abuse Resistance Education program
in 1983 as a joint effort of the police department and the L.A.
school district to fight drug use in the city's schools. It has
since spread nationwide and abroad, as far away as Australia and
New Zealand. Millions have been exposed to it. </p>

<p>So what is DARE? In most forms it consists of 17 one hour
sessions, held weekly and covering subjects ranging from refusal
skills to alternatives to drug use. It is taught by uniformed
police officers and usually begins with fifth graders. Funding
comes from both governmental and private sources. </p>

<p>Nothing is wrong with teaching anybody of any age to assert
themselves and think for themselves. Teens often have a hard time
saying &quot;no.&quot; Breaking the back of peer pressure is hard
to do. And this can also help reject pressure to engage in
unwanted sex and other temptations. </p>

<p>What makes DARE different is having police officers teach the
classes. That's kind of like having teachers arrest muggers.
That's not their job - it's not what they have been trained to
do. Why not have public health officials lecture about the harmfu
l aspects of drugs? To be balanced, why not invite NORML members
or Native American shamans to tell how drugs can be used in
beneficial ways? Is the information presented truthful? For
example, the discredited research of Dr. Gabriel Nahas is still
touted about the supposed evils of marijuana use. Are alcohol,
tobacco, caffeine and prescription drugs covered, or only
&quot;illegal&quot; drugs? Is this an effort to promote awareness
of health and safety, or just another attempt to enforce blind
obedience to the law? </p>

<p>And finally, is DARE really out to fight the &quot;drug
problem&quot; by encouraging children to inform on people they
know who use illegal drugs? </p>

<p>The Wall Street Journal, in a front page article on April 20,
1992, reported the case of Crystal Grendell, a fifth grader who
was asked if she knew anyone who used drugs. Crystal was taking
DARE classes taught by Searsport, Maine, police chief James Gil
lway in the spring of 1991. She was worried because her parents
grew and smoked marijuana. She didn't say anything at the time,
but later went to Gillway and reported her parents. Six cops
raided the family home, seized Crystal and 49 one foot high
marijuana plants and arrested the parents. The mother lost her
job and the father got one year's probation. Crystal's straight
A's turned into C's, she now fears the police and frequently has
nightmares. The article also mentions other parents who have been
turned in by their children - at the instigation of DARE.
Parents' anti-DARE groups are beginning to form. A lady from L.A.
told me that her child had broken down under interrogation and
admitted that &quot;mom smokes pot.&quot; This lady received a
stern lecture from local child protective &quot;services.&quot; </p>

<p>But DARE is wildly popular among politicians, school
administrators and cops! Every cop car in town has a DARE bumper
sticker on it. Lots of civilian cars have them too. You see
people everywhere wearing DARE t-shirts. I even recently saw a
black city bus plastered with the DARE logo and slogan, in big
red letters. It's an election year, everybody! Climb onto the
politically correct bandwagon! </p>

<p>Part 2 on FACT 38 </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #37-DARE2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-20 12:15:32 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Part 2 of the article from FACT 37.</b> </p>

<p>Didn't the Hitler Youth and the KGB indoctrinate children in
Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union? Weren't children encouraged to
spy on their parents? Just because something is illegal doesn't
mean it's wrong and just because it's legal doesn't make it
right. Wasn't Hitler elected to power according to German law?
Weren't the laws persecuting Jews enacted by due process? </p>

<p>The &quot;War on Drugs&quot; is now using our children as its
eyes and ears, having failed with drug screenings and inaccurate
propaganda. It's not enough that they demand to analyze samples
of our hair and urine; not enough to fly helicopters over houses
with he at detectors to find hidden growrooms in attics; not
enough that they seize utility records to see how much
electricity we use. Now they deputize our kids to be their spies!
</p>

<p>All to coerce people into mindless compliance with racist laws
enacted long before most people now alive had even been born. </p>

<p>The dark side of DARE. The dark side of our government. The
dark side of ourselves! </p>

<p>Poster's note: There is an organization called Parents Against
Dare. email for address and phone # </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #39-Police News </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-21 11:12:11 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Kinda got messed up on those numbers yesterday. It won't
happen again ;) </p>

<p>This next series of posts were found while &quot;surfing&quot;
and came from Police News. </p>

<p><b>A World Gone Mad Part 1</b> </p>

<p><b>By Ronald W. Rose United States Magistrate Judge</b> </p>

<p><b>In Police News Spring 94</b> </p>

<p>Twenty years ago as a young prosecutor, my job was to put
people in jail for dealing in drugs. As a result, many were
convicted. I was absolutely certain that vigorous enforcement and
long jail terms was the way to go. I had every confidence that
throwing resources, manpower, additional judges, mandatory
minimum sentences, life without parole, etc., etc., etc., would
soon solve the problem. </p>

<p>Within a few months, I tried another drug case involving the
largest (at that time cocaine seizure in the history of Florida -
23 pounds. It was front page news for days. These defendants were
likewise convicted and are probably still in prison. Has this
solved anything? In my opinion, absolutely nothing was
accomplished, except I got to chalk up another victory at a cost
to the taxpayers of thousands of dollars each year, for clothing
and feeding these dregs of society. </p>

<p>Instead of seizing pounds of cocaine, we now seize buildings
full of the stuff. The drug lords in South America are laughing
at us all the way to the bank. They know that for every mule or
mid-level dealer we take out, there are fifty more waiting to
take their place. There is just so much money to be made that the
slim chance of being caught is always worth the risk. Believe me,
after twenty years as a prosecutor and judge, I can assure you
that we only catch the stupid ones. </p>

<p>In disadvantaged neighborhoods, drug dealers are the local
heroes. Every kid in the ghetto wants to be one. These children
see it as a way out of their despair and poverty. They can make
more selling &quot;crack&quot; cocaine, in one afternoon, than a
hard working person with a job can make in a week. I customarily
speak with DEA agents who visit my office for search warrants.
Their attitude is universally one of despair. They spend entire
careers believing each day they come to work that their presence
makes a difference, but the problem gets worse no matter what
they do. It is getting worse in logarithmic proportions. We
already have more people in jail, per capita, than any other
country on earth (About five times as many per capita). </p>

<p>We used to ignore the battlefield carnage of the street gangs,
as they were only killing each other in their own neighborhoods.
Now theses same gangs are coming out of their ghettos. They are
increasingly taking their act on the road. One new tactic is to
cruise the freeways at night looking for wealthy individuals who
they can follow home, brutalize, rape and pillage, all for the
sake of supporting a drug habit. </p>

<p>Year after year we are treated to the same tired political
solutions. We now have a &quot;drug czar.&quot; Whoop-de-do! The
first one got his picture taken a few hundred times, gave a few
speeches, declared victory and resigned. We have spent decades
throwing more judges into the system, adding prosecutors,
investigators, building prisons (but not in my backyard), using
the military, and in short spending an incredible bundle of
money. </p>

<p>We have nothing to show for it but a bunch of photo
opportunities where a few pounds of the stuff and some seized
cash are exhibited in grand style to demonstrate how well law
enforcement does its job. The carrot is always held out that we
are turning the corner; there is a light at the end of this
tunnel. Sure. </p>

<p>By and large law enforcement is composed of men and women
truly dedicated to their profession - individuals who would lay
their lives on the line and often do. They have an unenviable
job. Yet their function has been reduced to stamping out
cockroaches without any ability to get to the nest. A total waste
of time and energy. The drug lords love it. </p>

<p>Part 2 of this article tomorrow </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #40-Police News </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-22 10:56:15 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This next series of posts were found while &quot;surfing&quot;
and came from Police </p>

<p>News. </p>

<p><b>A World Gone Mad Part 2</b> </p>

<p><b>By Ronald W. Rose United States Magistrate Judge</b> </p>

<p><b>In Police News Spring 94</b> </p>

<p>My solution is not politically correct and is certainly not
acceptable to those upstanding politicians (oxymoron, sorry) we
have entrusted to make our decisions for us. It is, simply, to
decriminalize the use and possession of drugs. Not only
decriminalize them, hut actually give them away to anyone insane
enough to want them. </p>

<p>Before anyone goes ballistic here, I do not advocate giving
drugs to children. This should always be a capital offense. We
have to take the profit motive out of this Dante's Inferno that
is killing us like the Chinese &quot;death from a thousand
cuts.&quot; Prohibition did not work with alcohol and it is not
working with drugs. I harbor no illusions that this solution is
perfect, but it is essentially the only one remaining. </p>

<p>The Colombian cartels, the Jamaican gangs, the Ins Angeles
street gangs, and our local drug lords make the Mafia look like a
troop of girl scouts. The terror is coming to our shores, a
little bit at a time, and we just sit back and take it. Why can't
we realize what is happening to us before it is too late? </p>

<p>If we used the money presently being squandered to lose the
drug war, funnel it into drug treatment and education, the
problem would largely disappear in a few years. There would be no
profit left. Drugs would be free, drug lords would lose their
millions and millions in profits, corruption would all but
disappear (except maybe in the Savings and Loan industry), our
elderly would not feel trapped in their homes, and most
importantly, our children would have a future free from the
specter of slaughter in their schools or having to endure the
nightmare of addiction. The present generation of drug user is
probably beyond hope. Perhaps treatment will help, but we have to
cut our loses and protect what is left. </p>

<p>Coming Tomorrow to a Message Board near you: </p>

<p>Our Drug Laws Have Failed </p>

<p>By James P. Gray, U.S. Superior Court Judge </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>