
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B048-56</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/duapip/pip1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023040 text/html 89594
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:30:29 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:01 GMT
Content-length: 89376
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Use in America - Defining the Issues</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schduapip_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | </p>

<p><a href="pipmenu.htm">Drug Use in America, Problem in
Perspective</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61062" -->

<h1>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse </h1>

<h2>Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective </h2>

<p><b>Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972</b>
</p>

<h2>Chapter One - Defining the Issues</h2>

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"><br>
</p>

<p>The need to solve the &quot;drug problem&quot; has been a
recurrent theme of political and social commentary in the United
States for most of the past decade. The apparent increase in drug
use - itself defined as the problem - has precipitated a serious
inquiry into its causes, a massive investment of social efforts
to contain it, and a mobilization of medical and para-medical
resources to treat its victims. </p>

<p>The Commission does not deny that a &quot;drug problem&quot;
exists. We share the public's concern that an apparent rise in
crime and other anti-social behavior may be related in part to
drug-using or drug-seeking behavior. Likewise, we share the
public alarm over the attraction to drug use by large portions of
this nation's youth, particularly when such use is indiscriminate
and apparently oblivious to its risks. The lives and futures of
our young people can only be hurt by such behavior. We share,
too, the frustration which comes from knowing that drug use
spreads by example, and that a continuing growth in the using
population augurs no better for tomorrow. </p>

<p>While recognizing that a drug problem exists, we cannot allow
our distress to interfere with the performance of our mandate. We
were appointed not to fan public anxiety, but to convert it into
meaningful activity with constructive proposals. This can be done
only 'by refusing to accept at face value many of the common
assumptions about drugs and the drug problem. We must examine the
reasons behind the fears, conducting the inquiry without passion
and with candor. Confident social action comes from an
understanding of the problem and from an impartial assessment of
the impact of alternative strategies. We have sought to define
the problem and to provide at least an initial assessment of the
possible responses to it. </p>

<p>The Commission has carefully surveyed the social response to
the contemporary drug problem, and has been struck by a
persisting uneasiness which seems to color the entire effort. On
the street and in the councils of government, increasing numbers
of drug abuse &quot;experts&quot; wonder whether their commitment
and efforts have had any actual imp-act on the problem. Many of
them assume optimistic positions in public, while suspecting
privately that no solution will be found. The Commission
understands the reasons for this malaise. We are convinced that
public policy, as presently designed, is premised on incorrect
assumptions, is aimed at the wrong targets, and is too often
unresponsive to human needs and aspirations. </p>

<p>In this Chapter, the Commission seeks to bring the issue of
drug use into focus. First, we will explore the way our society
thinks about drugs by analyzing both the vocabulary of the drug
problem and the historical roots of contemporary attitudes. After
considering the way in which the drug problem is presently
defined, we will redefine it, first by broadening the scope to
cover the entire range of drug use in America and then by
narrowing it to that drug-using behavior which properly should
arouse social concern. </p>

<p>After the problem has been carefully defined, the
policy-making task begins. In this sense, this Chapter, and the
two which follow, are designed primarily to create a climate for
the formulation of new policy concepts. Chapter Four details the
policy-making process and sets forth specific recommendations for
immediate implementation by governmental and private
institutions. Chapter Five will then provide a broad perspective
on the development of a long-term social response to drug-using
behavior.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>DEFINITIONAL CONFUSION: WHAT IS DRUG ABUSE?</b> </p>

<p>The use of psychoactive drugs is commonplace in American life.
Distribution of these drugs is an integral part of the social and
economic order. In 1970, 214 million prescriptions for
psychoactive drugs were issued, representing annual retail sales
of approximately $1 billion (Balter and Levine, 1971). The
alcohol industry produced over one billion gallons of spirits,
wine and beer for which 100 million consumers paid about $24
billion. </p>

<p>What is the pertinence of this information for a Commission
mandated to report to the American people on drug
&quot;abuse?&quot; Can such familiar American behavior include
drug abuse, even though that term is generally thought to refer
only to the consumption of psychoactive substances obtained
illicitly from a market with an estimated annual volume of $2
billion? </p>

<p>The Commission concluded early in its deliberations that the
focus of inquiry should not be determined by general impressions
or facile labels. Instead, formulation of a coherent social
policy requires a consideration of the entire range of
psychoactive drug consumption, and a determination as to whether
and under what circumstances drug-using behavior becomes a matter
of social concern. For example, does youthful experimentation
with alcohol involve different social policy considerations than
experimentation with marihuana? Do alcoholism and heroin
dependence present similar or dissimilar social policy questions?
Do the social policy implications of repeated use of barbiturates
or minor tranquilizers depend solely on whether a physician has
prescribed the drug or on the motivations for such use? In order
to deal coherently with such questions, it is necessary to
examine how this society thinks about drugs and their use.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>Drugs-The All-Purpose Concept </b></p>

<p>The meaning of the word drug often varies with the context in
which it is used. From a strictly scientific point of view, a
drug is any substance other than food which by its chemical
nature affects the structure or function of the living organism.
From this perspective, the term includes some agricultural and
industrial chemicals. The physician might define a drug as any
substance used as a medicine in the treatment of physical or
mental disease; when treatment of illness is the referent, the
lay public may use the word in the same sense. However, when used
in the context of drug &quot;abuse&quot; or the drug
&quot;problem,&quot; the meaning of &quot;drug&quot; becomes
social rather than scientific. </p>

<p>In its social sense, drug is not a neutral term. This point is
best illustrated by the fact that &quot;drug problem&quot; is
frequently used not as a descriptive phrase, but a substitute for
the word drug. In our visits to communities throughout this
country and other nations, we have noted that local leaders often
feel compelled to report not simply that drugs are available or
that they are used, but that there is a &quot;drug problem.&quot;
</p>

<p>This value component of the word drug is reflected in the
selective application of this term by the general public. Table
T-1, drawn from a Commission-sponsored National Survey (Abelson
et al, 1973) * illustrates that the public tends uniformly<b> </b>to
regard heroin as a drug, as well as other substances associated
with the drug problem, such as marihuana, cocaine, the
amphetamines and the barbiturates. Some psychoactive substances,
such as alcohol and tobacco, are generally not regarded as drugs
at all. In neither public law nor public discussion is alcohol
regarded as a drug. It may be called a beverage, -a food, a
social lubricant or a relaxant, but rarely is it called a drug.<br>
</p>

<p><img src="pip10001.gif" align="bottom" width="447"
height="228"><br>
*The survey, conducted by Response Analysis, involved
face-to-face interviews with a random sample of 2,411 adults and
880 young persons age 12-17 in the contiguous -states. Findings
from the Survey are reported and discussed throughout this
Report. The reader should note that surveys which employ
probability samples may be generalized to the population as a
whole within known limits. it should also be noted that the
Survey data presented here involve unweighted bases with
percentages calculated on weighted bases. </p>

<p>Depending on the context in which the term &quot;drug&quot; is
used, statements about what a given drug does are liable to
differ. If the therapeutic meaning is employed, for example, the
characterization is likely to involve the reasons for using the
drug, the dose, the frequency of use and an evaluation of its
effects in terms of medical benefits. It might be asked whether
the drug made an individual feel better, cured his illness, or
made him less anxious or depressed. If the social meaning is
being used, however, the analysis generally focuses on toxicity,
lethality, dependence liability, possible genetic defects,
psychosis and effects of<b> </b>high doses; that is, on drug
effects in terms of their risks. </p>

<p>The imprecision of the term &quot;drug&quot; has had serious
social consequences. Because alcohol<b> </b>is excluded, the
public is conditioned to regard a martini as something
fundamentally different from a marihuana cigarette, a barbiturate
capsule or a bag of heroin. Similarly, because the referents of
the word &quot;drug&quot; differ so widely in the therapeutic and
social contexts, the public is conditioned to believe that
&quot;street&quot; drugs act according to entirely different
principles than &quot;medical&quot; drugs. The result is that the
risks of the former are exaggerated and the risks of the latter
are overlooked. </p>

<p>This confusion must be dispelled. Alcohol <font size="1">is </font>a
drug. All drugs act according to the same general principles.
Their effects vary with dose. For each drug there is an effective
dose (in terms of the desired effect), a toxic dose and a lethal
dose. All drugs have multiple effects. The lower the dose, the
more important non-drug factors become in determining drug
effect. At high dose levels, and for some individuals at much
lower dose levels, all drugs may be dangerous. The individual and
social consequences of drug use escalate with frequency and
duration of use. American drug policy will never be coherent
until it is founded on uniform principles such as these, which
apply to all drugs.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="1">'Unless otherwise noted, the word drug is
Intended to encompass only &quot;psychoactive drugs,&quot; or
those which have the capacity to influence behavior by altering
feeling, mood, perception or other mental states.<br>
</font></p>

<p><b>Drug Abuse: Synonym for Social Disapproval</b> </p>

<p>Drug abuse is another way of saying drug problem. Now
immortalized in the titles of federal and state governmental
agencies (and we might add, in our own), this term has the virtue
of rallying all parties to a common cause: no one could possibly
be for abuse of drugs any more than they could be <i>for </i>abuse
of minorities, power or children. By the same token, the term
also obscures the fact that &quot;abuse&quot; is undefined where
drugs are concerned. Neither the public, its policy makers nor
the expert community share a common understanding of its meaning
or of the nature of the phenomenon to which it refers. </p>

<p>The Commission has noted over the last two years that the
public and press often employ drug abuse interchangeably with
drug use. Indeed, m . any &quot;drug abuse experts,&quot;
including government officials, do so as well. </p>

<p>The Commission was curious about whether the public had any
more precise conception of the meaning of drug abuse than the
experts. In our second National Survey, public attitudes on this
issue were probed. The public was requested to give a
free-response explanation of what drug abuse meant. (See Table
I-2.)<br>
<img src="pip10002.gif" align="bottom" width="456" height="367"> </p>

<p>In this multiple-response question, the public was divided
between perceptions related to the purpose or motivation of drug
taking (the first three responses) on the one hand, and to the
consequences of use on the other (the remaining responses).
Roughly 30% of both youth and adult populations associate drug
abuse with the use of drugs for other than medical purposes,
including any use of those substances which have been prohibited
because they have no medical uses. In contrast, large numbers of
both adults and youth relate the term to the consequences of drug
taking. Excessive doses (27% and 16%), dependence (17% and 15%)
and danger to health (11% and lWc) are the most common examples.
Also of interest were those respondents who indicated that they
didn't know what drug abuse meant (13% and 20%). </p>

<p>In another part of the Survey, the respondents were asked
whether they regarded ten specific drug-using behaviors as drug
abuse. These data illustrate that drug abuse is an entirely
subjective concept. It is any drug use the respondent frowns
upon. Most respondents disapprove of the use of
medically-distributed pills for other than medical purposes
(those sanctioned by a physician), any use of heroin, and any use
which suggests that the user is dependent or seeking pleasure. </p>

<p>Significantly fewer respondents seem to disapprove of daily
use of<b> </b>alcohol, weekly use of marihuana and
experimentation with legitimate pills not obtained through a
physician. (See Table 1-3.)<br>
</p>

<p><img src="pip10003.gif" align="bottom" width="455"
height="396"> </p>

<p>As the National Survey data demonstrate, drug abuse may refer
to any type of drug or chemical without regard to its
pharmacologic actions. It is an eclectic concept having only one
uniform connotation: societal disapproval. </p>

<p>The Commission believes that the term drug abuse must be
deleted from official pronouncements and public policy dialogue.
The term has no functional utility and has become no more than an
arbitrary codeword for that drug use which is presently
considered wrong. Continued use of this term <b>, </b>with its
emotional overtones, will serve only to perpetuate confused
public attitudes about drug-using behavior. </p>

<p>Drug abuse, or any similar term, creates an impression that
all<b> </b>drug-using behavior falls in one of two clear-cut
spheres: drug use which is good, safe, beneficial and without
social consequence; and drug &quot;abuse&quot; which is bad,
harmful, without benefit and carrying high social cost. From
either a descriptive or an evaluative standpoint, the matter is
much too complex to be handled in such a polarized fashion. The
Commission urges that the public and its policy makers avoid such
labels and focus instead on the relative risks and social
consequences of various patterns of drug-taking behavior.<br>
</p>

<p><b>The Roots of a &quot;Problem&quot; </b></p>

<p>We have focused our initial attention on vocabulary for an
important reason. The linguistic symbols which our society
attaches to certain drugs and drug-related conduct illustrate the
extent to which present attitudes and social responses are rooted
in the past. &quot;Drug abuse&quot; is only the most recent in a
long line of such symbols which this society has applied to
disapproved drug-taking behavior or to disapproved substances. In
fact, the history of drug vocabulary is also a history of the
changing perception of the drug &quot;problem&quot; in the United
States. </p>

<p>Current social policy is largely an accumulation of <i>ad hoc </i>policy
responses to the use of particular substances. &quot;Street&quot;
use of a previously unknown substance at a time of social tension
tends to generate a set of untested assumptions about the drug,
often including a presumed consequence of undesirable behavior,
and to result in a restrictive legal policy, all of which become
imbedded in public attitude. </p>

<p>Drug policy as we know it today is a creature of the 20th
Century. Until the last third of the 19th Century, America's
total legal policy regarding drugs was limited to regulation of
alcohol distribution (and the periodic regional attempts to
prohibit its use altogether), localized restrictions on tobacco
smoking, and the laws of the various states regulating pharmacies
and restricting the distribution of &quot;poisons.&quot;
Nineteenth century statutory vocabulary was simple and direct:
arsenic, tobacco, alcohol, morphine and other opium alkaloids
were all &quot;poisons.&quot; Until the Civil War, distribution
of opium and morphine, which were widely used as therapeutic
agents, was substantially unregulated. Gradually, however,
official reliance was placed on the health professions to police
distribution of these drugs; Pennsylvania enacted what may have
been the first prescription law in 1860, and most other states
followed suit over the next three decades. Medical lexicons
classified opium and morphine as &quot;narcotics,&quot; along
with most other psychoactive substances then in use, including
alcohol; however, that term was not employed in most of these
laws or in common parlance. </p>

<p>As early as the 18th Century, the medical profession was aware
that the oral use of opium could result in the development of an
&quot;appetite&quot; or &quot;habit,&quot; a phenomenon which was
generally classed in the same category as the &quot;alcohol
habit.&quot; This awareness was not of sufficient consequence to
suggest the need for caution when morphine was discovered in 1803
and when the hypodermic syringe was introduced in the middle of
the century. As the hypodermic use of morphine became common in
the United States, the syringes were left with patients for their
own use to remedy practically every painful condition. </p>

<p>The drug was used indiscriminately during the Civil War for
the wholesale relief of pain and, most significantly, to treat
common gastrointestinal ailments. After the War, morphine was
widely used in medical practice and was easily available outside
the medical system in proprietary medicines. Within a few years,
&quot;morphinomania&quot; (or the &quot;army&quot; disease)
became a recognizable medical entity. Nonetheless, use of the
drug was only minimally restricted either from outside the
medical profession or within it, as Terry and Pellens noted in
their classic work: </p>

<p>Meanwhile the ease with which pain could be relieved through
the hypodermic administration of the drug, the time it saved the
physician in his busy rounds, the contentment it brought the
patient, and above all, the all too common inclination to relieve
symptoms rather than cause, contributed to increase the practice.
Consequently throughout the period of the earlier warnings of its
dangers, the employment of this mode of administration was
increasing by leaps and bounds wherever medicine was practiced.
(Terry and Pellens, 1928) </p>

<p>This phenomenon of medically-based opiate use was largely
invisible and was not a matter of major concern outside the
medical profession for several decades. </p>

<p>Meanwhile, a public response was triggered by use of these
same drugs and cocaine in another social context. Beginning with
increased Chinese immigration after the Civil War, the practice
of smoking opium took root on the West Coast and spread rapidly
across the country to most urban areas. Although the practice was
confined mainly to the Chinese, it also appeared to attract
&quot;sporty characters&quot; and the underworld figures in the
cities. </p>

<p>In 1875, San Francisco enacted an ordinance prohibiting the
smoking or possession of opium, the possession of opium pipes and
the maintenance of &quot;opium dens.&quot; As the practice
spread, it generated a succession of similar state laws and<b> </b>local,
ordinances. Despite a growing problem of opiate dependence
arising from unrestrained distribution of these drugs within the
medical system in the United States, it was the
&quot;street&quot; use of the opiates and cocaine which
accelerated professional and public interest in their
habit-forming properties. </p>

<p>By the turn of the century, the nation had become aware of a
large opiate-dependent population in its midst. Although
contemporary estimates of its size varied as widely as current
figures do, most researchers have concluded that the total never
exceeded a quarter of a million, divided evenly between
&quot;medical&quot; and &quot;street&quot; dependence. As a
result of increased awareness, the medical profession and state
legislatures intensified their efforts to control availability of
these substances, primarily by tightening the restrictions on<b> </b>medical
distribution and prohibiting non-medical distribution. In 1906,
the Congress passed the Pure Food and Drug Act, the first major
federal drug legislation, which required labelling of all
preparations containing &quot;habit-forming&quot; drugs, and
proprietaries containing significant quantities of opiates soon
disappeared. </p>

<p>By 1900, then, policy makers and the medical profession were
attuned to the dangers of chronic drug use, and some commentators
have suggested that the availability of more accurate information
within the profession and improved methods of medical education
would have retarded the medically-based opiate-dependence problem
had it not been for the introduction of heroin in 1898 (Terry and
Pellens, 1928). This new cough suppressant was promoted on the
theory that it possessed many of the virtues and few of the
dangers of morphine; some even suggested that it would be useful
in the treatment of morphinism itself. From the time of its
introduction, however, there were conflicting claims regarding
its capacity for producing dependence. Regardless of these
claims, the drug was available for the next decade in proprietary
medicines and throughout medical practice. </p>

<p>By 1910, the medical profession had become seriously concerned
about the habit-forming characteristics of heroin. The publicity
attending its pleas for legislative controls on the availability
of this drug, together with a crusade being waged by law
enforcement officials against the street use of opiates and
cocaine, aroused public anxiety about a &quot;narcotics
problem&quot; of major proportions. Although almost every state
had regulatory laws of some kind, most observers contended that
the states could not control the problem. Federal legislation was
also said to be necessary to implement international treaties. In
addition, the movement for national alcohol prohibition began
gathering steam in 1913, sensitizing the public to the
possibility of national drug prohibitions. All these factors
culminated in passage of the Harrison Narcotic Act in 1914
(.Musto, 1973). </p>

<p>The Harrison Act crystallized a national policy of curtailing
the availability of &quot;habit-forming&quot; substances. The
previous failure to appreciate the habit-forming properties of
new substances had now resulted in professional and legislative
preoccupation with this issue. Whereas the term narcotics
formerly referred to those substances which produced
stupefication and sleep (&quot;narcosis&quot;), including
alcohol, the term now assumed a new meaning, one defined by the
public policy bearing its name. The term was now associated with
any unfamiliar drug which appeared on the streets among those
populations which were associated with the opiates and cocaine.
The acute effects of the various specific drugs became blurred.
Because physicians and policy makers had now become exceedingly
cautious about the dependence issue, any new drug was carefully
scrutinized for habit-forming properties; if the drug was used on
the streets it was often presumed &quot;habit forming&quot; and
therefore classified as a &quot;narcotic.&quot; </p>

<p>Within the next three decades, peyote and marihuana were
inserted in the &quot;narcotics&quot; laws of many states;
chloral hydrate, which had been covered by earlier drug laws, was
also included in the definition of &quot;narcotics&quot; in the
new legislation. It should be noted that legal classification of
a drug as a &quot;narcotic&quot; tended to malign its therapeutic
utility. For example, heroin, and later marihuana, were purged
from the pharrnacopoeia altogether. In sum, the word
&quot;narcotics&quot; had been purged of its scientific meaning
and became, instead, a symbol of socially disapproved drugs. </p>

<p>Other substances were introduced into the practice of
medicine, notably the barbiturates and amphetamines, but they
were regulated under general pharmacy laws rather than under the
&quot;narcotics&quot; laws. Although amphetamines were introduced
in 1929 and the short-acting barbiturates appeared a few years
later, they did not enter the illicit marketplace on a massive
scale in the United States until the 1960's and consequently were
not associated with the narcotics until then. </p>

<p>During the last decade, succeeding waves of hallucinogens,
amphetamines and barbiturates escaped from the laboratories,
pharmacies and medicine chests and found they way into the
streets. Together with marihuana, which moved from one
socio-economic &quot;street&quot; to another, use of these drugs
defined a new phenomenon and became associated with a new kind of
drug user<b>. </b>To a substantial degree, the narcotics policy
had from the beginning been identified with underprivileged
minorities, criminals and social outsiders in general, although a
common feature of each periodic drug scare, including cocaine at
the turn of the century, heroin in the 1920's, marihuana in the
1930's and heroin again in the 1950's, was the fear that drug use
would spread to youth. However, the drug problem of the 1960's
was clearly identified with the children of the middle and upper
classes. Drug use was now associated with unfamiliar life styles,
youthful defiance of the established order, the emergence of a
visible street culture, campus unrest, communal living, protest
politics and even political radicalism. </p>

<p>The drug taking of this youth population coincided with
pervasive social anxieties regarding social disorder in general
and youthful behavior specifically. To many, youthful drug use,
offered a convenient explanation for these problems, and, as the
Commission noted in its first Report, marihuana in particular
came to symbolize the entire spectrum of social concern. Existing
legislative controls and vocabulary were closely tied to the old
stereotypes, and society responded to this new drug-using
behavior through separate legislative action (the Drug Abuse
Control Amendments of 1965) and a new linguistic symbol.
&quot;Dangerous drugs&quot; emerged as the statutory label for
the nonnarcotic drugs, such as hallucinogens, amphetamines and
barbiturates, whose non-medical use was socially disapproved. </p>

<p>The single-mindedness of American drug policy is illustrated
clearly by the reorganization of the federal drug bureaucracy
which took place in 1968. For technical reasons stemming from the
revenue structure of the Harrison Act, narcotics enforcement had
always been lodged in the Treasury Department. When the,
&quot;dangerous drugs&quot; were brought under regulatory control
in 1965, enforcement responsibility was assigned to a new bureau
in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Then in
1968, the responsibilities of the two agencies were merged in a
new agency established in the Department of Justice: the Bureau
of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs. Public policy had the
appearance of coherence once again. </p>

<p>But this was not enough. Marihuana use continued to increase
throughout the decade, and the public was caught up in a highly
emotional debate. For the first time since the inception of the
American &quot;narcotics&quot; policy, public opinion focused on
some of the fundamental assumptions. Not surprisingly, debate on
the marihuana issue was often couched in terms of the statutory
vocabulary which has come to symbolize drug policy. For example,
the scientifically indefensible classification of marihuana as a
&quot;narcotic&quot; immediately provoked an erosion of the
symbolic coherence which had previously characterized drug
policy. Similarly, the inevitable comparison between alcohol and
marihuana called into question the substantive separation between
narcotics and dangerous drug policies on the one hand and alcohol
policy on the other<font size="1">.2 </font>After all, alcohol
can legitimately be classified as a &quot;narcotic&quot; in a
very specific sense of that term, and it is surely a
&quot;dangerous drug&quot; as well. </p>

<p>2 <font size="1">During most of the period of national alcohol
prohibition, the Bureau of Prohibition was responsible for
enforcement of the Harrison Act as well as the Volstead Act; but
passage of these two laws had parallel rather than shared
histories, a point clearly demonstrated by subsequent events.</font>
</p>

<p>Until the close of the 1960's, official defenses of marihuana
policy continued to be premised on the implications of the
statutory vocabulary. Although the narcotic ideology was quickly
abandoned, many official pronouncements continued to link
marihuana with the opiates because of their association in the
law and to insist that marihuana was a &quot;dangerous drug&quot;
even if it was not a &quot;narcotic.&quot; An historical
understanding apprises us that these classifications are
reflections of, rather than reasons for social disapproval. </p>

<p>It became clear by the end of the decade that
&quot;narcotics&quot; and &quot;dangerous drugs&quot; were no
longer adequate symbols of social policy; consequently &quot;drug
abuse&quot; was adopted as a replacement symbol. However, the
need to distinguish marihuana use from other forms of &quot;drug
abuse&quot; resulted in yet another distinction: marihuana was
classified as a &quot;soft&quot; drug as opposed to the
&quot;hard&quot; drugs, suggesting the same kind of distinction
drawn between &quot;hard liquor&quot; and other alcoholic
beverages. But, as has been the case with all drug vocabulary,
this distinction serves a social rather than a scientific
purpose. This terminology generally indicates an attempt to
distinguish marihuana from heroin and cocaine, the stereotypical
&quot;hard&quot; drugs. However, there is no consensus whatsoever
as to which other substances, if any, are considered to be
&quot;hard.&quot; If hard drugs is a narrow category, referring
only to the opiates and cocaine, it is simply another way of
saying &quot;narcotics;&quot; on the other hand, if it is taken
to mean everything other than marihuana, it is simply an
expedient way of disassociating marihuana from other disapproved
drugs. </p>

<p>Like &quot;drug abuse,&quot; the hard-soft terminology
reflects a nascent effort to reestablish a sphere of
&quot;bad&quot; drug use. Within the official community as well
as the<b> </b>general public, attempts are being made to grade
drugs according to their potential hazards, particularly their
capacity for inducing physical dependence. To the extent that
this is true, the new linguistic symbols suggest that public
concern has in some ways returned full circle to where it began
almost a century ago.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE SOCIAL RESPONSE: FALSE PREMISES AND THE PERPETUATION OF
A PROBLEM <br>
</b></p>

<p>As this brief historical summary illustrates, American drug
policy is almost seven decades old, and not once during this
period have the underlying assumptions been systematically
evaluated and a broad, coherent foundation for policy making
established. As a result, each new occurrence in drug development
and each new use pattern have been viewed as unfamiliar, with the
unfamiliarity breeding a sense of crisis, and the crisis
precipitating <i>ad hoe </i>policy responses. </p>

<p>The Commission feels strongly that the present institutional
response, despite sincere efforts to move it in the right
direction, continues to be rooted in the mistakes of the past,
and, indirectly, tends to perpetuate the &quot;problem.&quot;
Accordingly, it is useful to scrutinize the goals toward which
the policy is directed and the premises which support it, as well
as to describe briefly some of the present governmental responses
which are guided by these assumptions. Finally, as a prelude to
the remainder of the Report, the concluding sections of this
Chapter will attempt to &quot;wipe the slate clean&quot; and to
sketch a general frame-work for defining the problem and
formulating a coherent social policy. <br>
</p>

<p><b>The Assumptions and Premises of Present Policy<br>
</b></p>

<p><b><i>Elimination of Non-Medical Drug Use<br>
</i></b></p>

<p>American drug policy has been predicated on one fundamental or
the societal objective is to eliminate &quot;non-medical&quot;
drug use. Inquiry has rarely been addressed to whether this goal
is desirable or possible. Failure to address such questions is
abetted by the exclusion of certain drugs and certain types of
drug taking from the realm of social distress. For example, the
non-medical use of alcohol and tobacco would be inconsistent with
the declared goal; thus, statutory vocabulary and social folklore
have established the fiction that they are not drugs at all.
Although use of these substances may arouse concern, they are not
viewed in the wider context of drug use. </p>

<p>Another area excluded from public discussion is drug use
sanctioned by medical judgment. While most medically-approved
consumption of psychoactive drugs is substantially different from
the situation where the individual chooses to use the drug
himself, this is not always true. The absence of the intervening
judgment of a third party does not mean that the individual's
motivation is &quot;non-medical,&quot; or hedonistic. Nor does
the intervention of medical judgment assure that the drug will be
used for medically-intended purposes.3 </p>

<p><font size="1">3 The third party judgment may intervene
directly, as is the case with prescription drugs, or indirectly,
as is the case with over-the-counter preparations previously
approved for this purpose by the Food and Drug Administration. </font></p>

<p>Drug policy makers cannot truthfully assert that this society
aims to eliminate non-medical drug use. No semantic fiction will
alter the fundamental composition of alcohol and tobacco.
Further, even if the objective is amended to exclude these drugs,
human history discounts the notion that drug-using behavior can
be so tightly confined as a self-medication in pharmacy, where
their prescription drugs with them, the proliferation of
over-the-counter preparations, the advertising of mood-altering
drugs, and the popularity of minor tranquilizers are all
manifestations of an important contemporary trend. </p>

<p>The medical/non-medical distinction has become increasingly
blurred as emotional ailments increase. Many individuals tend
today to assess their own needs and define the purposes for which
they use a drug. For this reason, generalized societal
proclamations regarding the need to eliminate non-medical drug
use raise an important question that must be honestly answered:
how does the daily use of a prescribed barbiturate to bring a
person &quot;down&quot; from the day differ from the similar use
of a self-prescribed minor tranquilizer or, for that matter, a
martini? </p>

<p>Deferring for the moment our own view as to what society's
objective in this area ought to be, we do know that it is not as
clear cut as official pronouncements imply. In determining the
appropriate objective, a task that we will undertake in Chapter
Four, policy makers must recognize the scope and complexity of
drug-using behavior and develop rational distinctions between
that which should be disapproved and that which should be
tolerated, or even approved. Within the area of disapproval,
policy makers should not consider all disapproved drug use to be
of equal importance; priorities must be assigned on the basis of
actual and potential social consequence, and not just on the
basis of numbers of users.<br>
</p>

<p><i>Risk-Taking and Health <br>
</i></p>

<p>Often cited in support of societal disapproval of non-medical
drug use is the proposition that individuals should not risk
their health by using drugs. Without regard to the philosophical
propriety of this premise as a guide for social policy, this view
appears to be somewhat at odds with the facts about drug use and
with prevailing social attitudes toward risk-taking in other
areas. </p>

<p>Much emphasis has been placed on whether or not a drug is a
dangerous drug; and analogies have been drawn between
&quot;street&quot; drugs and such substances as cyclamates. These
examples illustrate how closely public discussion of drug abuse
has become tied to matters of individual health. In supporting
present social policy, spokesmen often list those drug effects
which are potentially harmful to individual health rather than
focusing on the social consequences of drug-using behavior. </p>

<p>The Commission believes that persons who take this approach
have misconstrued the nature of the drug issue. The assumption
that all psychoactive drug use is a high-risk behavior presumes a
progression from irregular use of low doses to continuous use of
high doses, thereby ignoring pharmacological variations among
drugs and the importance of frequency of use, method of
administration, dose, and non-drug factors as determinants of
risk. In fact, injury to health is associated primarily with
chronic heavy use and at times with the acute effects of high
doses. </p>

<p>Further, there is no correlation whatsoever between the
capacity of psychoactive drugs to induce behavioral disorders and
their capacity to induce organic or somatic toxicity or
pathology. Of the drugs which are most commonly associated with
dependence or drug-induced behavior, alcohol produces the most
clearly established and reproducible brain pathology. Cocaine,
amphetamines and other stimulants, heroin and morphine-like
drugs, and cannabis do not appear to have this effect. On the
other hand, very heavy use of phenacitin, which has no
significant behavioral impact at all, may produce renal damage,
and heavy tobacco smoking is associated with greatly increased
risk of lung cancer. If the standard for social policy were
potential injury to individual health, barbiturates, alcohol, and
tobacco would present the clearest cases for prohibition. Yet,
the latter two are available for self-defined purposes, and the
former is widely used in the practice of medicine. </p>

<p>Nonetheless, the approach often applied to &quot;drugs of
abuse&quot; is the same as that applied to non-psychoactive
substances: risks to individual health will be tolerated only if
the medical needs for the substance justify the risks. But
individuals would not choose to use psychoactive drugs if they
did not perceive some advantage to themselves. So the fundamental
question arises: Who is to weigh the perceived advantages of drug
use against the risk, the individual or the society? </p>

<p>To deal with this question, we must examine the pattern of
social response to risk-taking behavior in general. For example,
we urge our youth -to be curious and to explore. Until recent
years, Americans tended to place a premium on high-powered
automobiles. We tolerate the private ownership of firearms. We
tend to applaud the courageous mountain climber or other
adventurer who ignores the risks in the effort to establish human
dominion over nature. In short, risk-taking behavior is
-permitted and often encouraged by many of our social
institutions, which defer to individual judgment the weighing of
often intangible benefits against the quite tangible risks. </p>

<p>Society has long been aware of the individual and social risks
of alcohol use. Even with the effort now being made to inform the
public of the risks of tobacco use, society still permits this
drug to be widely available. In both cases, society clearly
subordinates the risks inherent in such behavior, deferring
instead to individual judgment. </p>

<p>The Commission is not suggesting that health risks are
irrelevant to the formulation of drug policy. However, whatever
appropriate weight is given to health considerations, it is a
peripheral, rather than focal, concern. Drug policy must be based
on the social consequences of drug use, and on the social impact
of drug-induced behavior.<br>
</p>

<p><i>Motivation for Mood Alteration </i></p>

<p>Subsumed within the societal goal of eliminating non-medical
drug use is the value judgment that use of drugs for the explicit
purpose of mood alteration is <i>per se </i>undesirable. To
harmonize this judgment with approved conduct, we avoid analyzing
the motivations of similar behaviors. </p>

<p>As noted earlier, we do not verbalize the motivation f or
alcohol use in terms of pleasure but rather in terms of the
drug's function as a relaxant, as a social lubricant, and as a
beverage. We do not think about the alcohol experience as an
altered state of consciousness but rather as a means to some
other end, such as promoting conviviality or stimulating
conversation. </p>

<p>Within the medical setting, the individual is increasingly
making the decision to use medically approved drugs and selecting
them according to their capacity to alter his mood. The National
Survey shows that 157o of the adult population reported that they
&quot;take a pill to calm down or cheer up&quot; when they feel
&quot;out of sorts . . . not really sick, but nervous, or
depressed or under stress.&quot; Eighteen percent of the public
reported that they used alcohol for similar purposes. The use of
a variety of new mood altering drugs to cope with stress is
undoubtedly a, significant social development, particularly among
women. This option to employ drugs for what is essentially an
individual diagnosis of felt needs has, to a large extent,
changed public perception concerning the role of the drugs as
mood alterants in our society. </p>

<p>Whatever the biological and psychological foundations for the
common human desire to alter consciousness, policy makers must
recognize that drugs have always been used for this purpose. Most
societies have institutionalized at least one form of
drug-induced mood alteration; only the drugs differ, not the
essential purpose. Instead of assuming that mood alteration
through some drugs is inherently objectionable, while similar use
of others is not, the public and its leaders must focus directly
on the appropriate role of drug induced mood alteration. It is no
longer satisfactory to defend social disapproval of use of a
particular drug on the ground that it is a &quot;mind-altering
drug&quot; or a &quot;means of escape.&quot; For so are they all.
<br>
</p>

<p><i>Drugs and Individual Responsibility </i></p>

<p>Implicit in present policy is the concern that many
individuals cannot be trusted to make prudent or responsible
decisions regarding drug-taking. Certain drugs are thought to
possess even greater powers than they have, including the
capacity to overbear individual will. Most people are not
accustomed to thinking about drug effects in terms of
probabilities and uncertainties, of dose-response curves, of
multiple effects (some desirable and some undesirable), of
reactions which vary from individual to individual and from time
to time in the same individual. </p>

<p>A deep-seated popular belief that some drugs diminish or
destroy the individual's capacity to control his behavior is
reflected in hypotheses such as &quot;drugs cause crime&quot; or
&quot;drugs cause dropping out&quot; or &quot;drugs cause mental
illness.&quot; Any perceived correlation between use of the drug
and the unwanted consequence is attributed to the drug, removing
the individual from any and all responsibility. Similarly, while
it is true that certain drugs offer more intense psychological
rewards than others, seduction characteristics are attributed to
all psychoactive drugs, suggesting a chain of progression from
light to heavy use, from weak to stronger drugs, all without the
intervention of individual choice. </p>

<p>A drug has no effect until it interacts with an organism. The
effects of any drug, psychoactive drugs included, are mainly dose
related. At low or moderate doses they are determined mainly by
non-drug factors, such as the psychological characteristics of
the individual, the reasons why he uses the drug, what he expects
the effects will be, the physical and social setting in which he
uses it, and how he perceives its use or non-use in relation to
self-defined goals. Further, how his friends, his sub-culture,
and his society define and respond to his drug use are equally
important f actors. These psychological and social criteria not
only influence the reaction to a specific drug but they are key
factors in determining use or non-use, selection of substance,
and the pattern and circumstances of use.<br>
</p>

<p><b>An Overview of the Present Response</b> </p>

<p>Because of this confusion about objectives, the formal
institutional response to the drug problem has been more
reflexive than rational, more situation-oriented than strategic.
The <i>ad hoc </i>responses to use of specific psychoactive drugs
have interfered with examination of the fundamental questions
relating to behavior patterns and the appropriate means of social
control. </p>

<p>Research has provided us with an almost endless stream of
psychoactive substances. The tendency is to identify a new
substance, determine its potential hazards as a chemical and then
to insert it into the existing system. This procedure tends to
perpetuate the public focus on the drugs rather than on the
prevention of behavior about which society is concerned. When the
drug appears in the streets, as it inevitably does, social
institutions respond as if the behavior was unanticipated, and
because they are ill-prepared to deal with the situation, an
atmosphere of crisis is generated. </p>

<p>Because the focus has always been on the elimination of
prohibited substances altogether and on the elimination of the
street use of therapeutically useful drugs, social institutions
have directed primary attention to the problem of use of s<i>pecific
drugs. </i>Patterns of drug-using behavior have been ignored
except as an afterthought of intervention. When increases in
prohibited drug use continue to escalate, policy makers respond,
not by reassessing the problem from different perspectives, but
rather by pressing for ever-more costly mechanisms of control;
costly both in terms of resources and important social values.
Drug policy can be, thus summed up: increased use of disapproved
drugs precipitates more spending, more programs, more arrests and
more penalties, all with little positive effect in reducing use
of these drugs. </p>

<p>Details of the present institutional response share the
confusion of purpose which characterizes the, entire social
response. We will sketch a few of the key features here although
these matters will be considered in some depth in Chapter Four.<br>
</p>

<p>Throughout this Report, consumption-related offenses will
refer to offenses such as use, possession for personal use,
presence in a place where prohibited drugs are being used. Unless
stated otherwise, &quot;possession&quot; means possession for
personal use.<br>
</p>

<p><i>Risk-Education</i> </p>

<p>An important operating assumption of the present response is
that if people are educated about the risks of drug taking, they
will not use drugs. It is presumed that presentation of
information regarding dangers and risks can quiet curiosity and
the desire for anticipated pleasant psychological sensations, the
factors which account for most individual drug experiences. </p>

<p>Society's experience in attempting to discourage use of
substances not labeled as drugs is instructive. Campaigns have
been mounted in the past, both through the mass media and the
schools, about the dangers of alcohol use and cigarette smoking.
Facts have been marshaled, scientific opinion has been mobilized,
and the adverse consequences of use of these drugs have been
amply demonstrated by the number of alcoholics within the United
States and the number of persons dying yearly from heart disease,
lung cancer and other respiratory ailments. Still the consumption
of alcohol continues and the number of persons smoking cigarettes
increases. </p>

<p>This same kind of educational effort has been directed at the
illicit drugs with no apparent impact on behavior. Little insight
has been gained as to why this approach has not worked with
alcohol and cigarettes, or as to whether risk-oriented curricula
may actually arouse interest rather than dampen it. Further,
assuming that such programs might be useful, little thought has
been given to how to transmit the information, the assumption
again being that the facts speak for themselves. This vast
expenditure of time, money and effort has apparently paid few
measurable social dividends, and those that have claimed success
have done so not on the basis of scientific proof, but on the
basis of impressions and anecdote. </p>

<p><b><i>Coercion</i></b> </p>

<p>If information about risks and moral suasion is insufficient
to convince many people not to use drugs, it is assumed that the
threat of a criminal sanction will do so. While a criminal
proscription does function as a deterrent to some degree for all
behavior, the strength of this factor varies according to the
nature of the offense, the, characteristics of the actor, the
probability of detection and the certainty of punishment. With
regard to drug consumption, all of these factors diminish the
utility of the criminal sanction. Drug consumption is an
expressive conduct which normally occurs in private among groups
which are least influenced by legal condensation. In addition,
the consumption-related offenses are no longer supported by the
strong social consensus which once existed, and the emerging
ambivalence is reflected in the dispositional decisions of
police, prosecutors and courts. </p>

<p>We note that drug consumption offenses have not been
remarkably successful in curtailing use in general. However, it
is important here, as elsewhere, to distinguish between different
patterns of drug taking behavior. On the one hand, the law may
deter indiscrete use and continued use of a prohibited drug. On
the other hand, experimental behavior, particularly by youth, is
unlikely to be deterred by the law alone. For those who are
dependent upon prohibited drugs, such as the heroin-dependent
person, the deterrence concept is functionally inapplicable. </p>

<p><b><i>Sickness</i></b> </p>

<p>Anyone choosing to use drugs, despite the enumerated risks,
moral suasion and threat of criminalization, is often considered
abnormal, emotionally ill and weak of character. The last decade
has seen the pendulum of legislative opinion swing toward the
belief that drug dependence and even drug use is a
&quot;medical&quot; problem, that it can be &quot;treated,&quot;
and that the user can be &quot;rehabilitated.&quot; Like many
ideas which aim to correct those previously in vogue, the medical
approach has itself become a runaway concept. Policy makers have
adopted policy guidewords such as &quot;treatment,&quot;
&quot;rehabilitation,&quot; &quot;contagion,&quot; and
&quot;epidemic,&quot; without regard to their utility in the
present context. </p>

<p>The &quot;sickness&quot; label has been attached to all users
of prohibited drugs without regard to their patterns of
drug-taking behavior. While very few question that persons
compulsively using drugs are in need of some form of therapeutic
assistance, the same is rarely true for the experimental and
recreational user. To label drug users in general as mentally ill
is to place a large segment of American society in need of formal
medical assistance. </p>

<p>With regard to drug dependence in particular, the public has
been led to believe that this condition is as definable and
treatable as ordinary illnesses of the body. In reality, there is
not, at the present time, any generally applicable cure for
drug-dependent persons let alone non-dependent users of drugs.
&quot;Success&quot; in treatment programs has been difficult to
define, reflecting the complex relationship between drug use,
social functioning and mental health. Even when measured against
their own criteria for evaluation, most treatment programs can
demonstrate only limited &quot;success.&quot; </p>

<p>Public policy is committed to the treatment and rehabilitation
of all drug-dependent persons. While thousands of persons have
been aided by treatment efforts in recent years, social
objectives continue to outstrip professional understanding of the
condition and official capacity to deliver the necessary
services. </p>

<p><i>Perpetuating the Problem</i> </p>

<p>Because of the intensity of the public concern and the
emotionalism surrounding the topic of drugs, all levels of
government have been pressured into action with little time for
planning. The political pressures involved in this governmental
effort have resulted in a concentration of public energy on the
most immediate aspects of drug use and a reaction along the paths
of least political resistance. The recent result has been the
creation of ever larger bureaucracies, ever increasing
expenditures of monies, and an outpouring of publicity so that
the public will know that &quot;something&quot; is being done. </p>

<p>Perhaps the major consequence of this <i>ad hoc </i>policy
planning hag been the creation, at the federal, state and
community levels, of a vested interest in the perpetuation of the
problem among those dispensing and receiving funds.
Infrastructures are created, job descriptions are standardized,
&quot;experts&quot; are created and ways of doing business
routinized and established along bureaucratic channels. During
the last several years, drug programming has become a
multi-billion dollar industry, one administering to its own needs
as well as to those of its drug-using clientele. In the course of
well-meaning efforts to do something about drug use, this society
may have inadvertently institutionalized it as a never-ending
project. </p>

<p>All of these responses stem from one fundamental flaw in
present drug policy: the problem is defined incorrectly. The
uneasiness which the Commission has encountered among thoughtful
observers and officials arises largely from their own perceptions
that the present response, although massive, has so far been
relatively ineffective. Yet, any challenge to the basic premises
of policy may be viewed by some as a disavowal of the entire
social response. The Commission does not believe the present
policy should be abandoned out of hand. Instead, we hope that
policy can be made more coherent and more flexible. In order to
do so, we must put aside preconceived notions, setting out afresh
to redefine the problem.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>DEFINING THE PROBLEM</b> </p>

<p><b>The Meaning of Drug Use </b></p>

<p>Throughout history man has used available psychoactive
substances to seek relief from cold, hunger, deprivation,
anxiety, pain and boredom. He also has used such substances to
receive pleasure or to achieve new experiences. Various cultures
have sought out and used naturally occurring plants for their
psychoactive ingredients, discovering their effects by trial and
error. Modern man has consciously created new chemical substances
and institutionalized their availability for similar uses. </p>

<p>Drugs have effects other than those which are sought; and all
drug effects vary with amount and frequency of use, the
characteristics of the user, and the set and setting in which
they are used. Consequently, different cultures have applied
different values to the presumed consequences of drug use,
whether beneficial or deleterious. Each society has decided which
needs are legitimate, which effects are valuable and which risks
are tolerable. These judgments are based on prevailing values
concerning specific drugs, their effects, the reasons for which
they are used, and the people who use them. </p>

<p>Man does not ordinarily continue to do something that does not
fulfill some real or imagined need. To persist, behavior must be
reinforced. To the extent that it does fulfill a need, it will
recur, often at some risk, unless it interferes with some more
important need. The need for a drug may be closely related to its
real or imagined effects or it may be grounded in social rather
than chemical elements. Use of specific substances may determine
group membership, or status within a group, or among groups. It
may function as either a symbol or symptom of rebellion,
alienation, independence or sophistication. </p>

<p>To better understand current self-defined drug use and to
determine the scope of social concern, one must go beyond the
cataloguing of substances (pharmacologically defined where
possible), the listing of effects, and the counting of users and
non-users of drugs. The inquiry must shift from drugs to people,
from pharmacological effects to the meaning and function of drug
use. </p>

<p><i>The Incidence of Drug Use </i></p>

<p>The nature and scope of society's drug problem at any given
time are generally perceived in terms of the incidence of
non-medical use of legal and illegal substances. Tables 1-4 and
1-5 present data, of this kind obtained in the
Commission-sponsored National Survey.<br>
</p>

<p><img src="pip10004.gif" align="bottom" width="439"
height="554"> </p>

<p>Such statistics may be useful for assessing in general terms
the relative success or failure of institutional efforts to
channel drug taking behavior into prescribed channels. However,
these figures, and similar ones, are often used to arouse public
concern, and do not explain either the meaning of such drug use
or the nature and scope of the social problem which it poses. </p>

<p>As an example, Table 1-5 illustrates that regular use of
alcohol is extremely widespread among Americans 18 years of age
and older (53%), and that large numbers of the nation's youth
(12-17) consume alcohol despite official blandishments (24%). Do
the respective legitimacy and illegitimacy of these behaviors
tell us anything about the nature of social concern about alcohol
use? </p>

<p>In comparison, Table 1-4 indicates that 16% of the adult
population and 14% of the youth have used marihuana despite the
legal proscriptions, and that 8 % of the adults and 7 % of the
youth continue to use the drug. Smaller percentages of the
populace have also violated the law by trying hallucinogens such
as LSD, cocaine or heroin. Does the illegitimacy and relative
incidence of such behavior bear directly on the dimensions of
social concern? Is marihuana use more or less of a social problem
than heroin use? Than alcohol use? </p>

<p>The data in Table 1-5 illustrate that over-the-counter
preparations are sometimes consumed for non-therapeutic reasons.
Does the permissibility of this behavior suggest that it is
without social consequence? Does the motivation for use make a
public policy difference? </p>

<p>Scientifically acceptable incidence data, together with
demographic analysis, can tell us who uses various drugs and bow
they are used in terms of frequency and duration. Such
information cannot, however, answer the crucial social policy
questions: why <i>and so what?<br>
</i></p>

<p><i>Drug-using Behavior</i> </p>

<p>The initial step in understanding the meaning of drug use and
its impact on the social order is to regard this phenomenon as we
would any other human behavior. In Chapter Two of the Report, the
Commission will place these incidence figures in perspective,
elaborating on the patterns of drug-using behavior and the
individual and social factors which seem to influence individual
decisions to initiate,<font size="1"> </font>continue or
terminate the use of drugs. In short, we will try to answer the <i>why
</i>of drug use. Because drug-using behavior is not a unitary
phenomenon, the social consequences of this behavior are tied
directly to the individual's reason for the drug use and in turn
to the frequency, duration, intensity, dose, set and setting of
use. The Commission has divided the entire spectrum of drug-using
behavior into five patterns reflecting essentially distinct
meanings for the individual users. </p>

<p>The most common type of drug-using behavior can be classified
as <i>experimental: </i>a short-term, non-patterned trial of one
or more drugs, motivated primarily by curiosity or a desire to
experience an altered mood state. Experimental use most often
occurs among young persons in the company of one or more
drug-experimenting friends or acquaintances. </p>

<p>Most non-experimental drug-using behavior can be classified as
<i>recreational, </i>which occurs in social settings among
friends or acquaintances who desire to share an experience which
they define as both acceptable and pleasurable. Generally,
recreational use is both voluntary and patterned and tends not to
escalate to more frequent or intense use patterns. This type of
behavior is not sustained by virtue of the dependence of the user
on the drug in any meaningful sense of that term. Reinforcement
for continued use is strengthened by non-drug factors. </p>

<p>A pattern of drug-using behavior which has grown significantly
during the last decade is <i>circumstantial </i>drug use. This
behavior is generally motivated by the user's perceived need or
desire to achieve a new and anticipated effect in order to cope
with a specific problem, situation or condition of a personal or
vocational nature. This classification would include students who
utilize stimulants during preparation for exams, long-distance
truckers who rely on similar substances to provide extended
endurance and alertness, military personnel who use drugs to cope
with stress in combat situations, athletes who attempt to improve
their performance and housewives who seek to relieve tension,
anxiety, boredom or other stresses through the use of sedatives
or stimulants. </p>

<p>A much smaller group of drug users may be regarded as having
escalated from recreational or circumstantial use patterns into
intensified drug-using behavior. Although this is the most
amorphous of the behavioral categories, the Commission refers in
general to drug use which occurs at least daily and is motivated
by an individual's perceived need to achieve relief from a
persistent problem or stressful situation, or his desire to
maintain a certain self-prescribed level of performance. This
category includes persons generally referred to as &quot;problem
drinkers&quot; or &quot;heavy social drinkers,&quot; housewives
who regularly consume barbiturates or other sedatives and
business executives who regularly consume tranquilizers. A very
different group of intensified users are those youths who have
turned to drugs as sources of excitement or meaning in otherwise
unsatisfying existences. The salient feature of this class of
behavior is that the individual still remains integrated within
the larger social and economic structure; however, the regular
use of one or more drugs may constitute dependence in a broad
sense and may threaten to impair individual or social
functioning. </p>

<p>The most disturbing pattern of drug-using behavior,
encompassing the smallest number of drug users, is compulsive use
which consists of a patterned behavior at a high frequency and
high level of intensity, characterized by a high degree of
psychological dependence and perhaps physical dependence as well.
The distinguishing feature of this behavior is that drug use
dominates the individual's existence, and preoccupation with drug
taking precludes other social functioning. Under current social
and legal conditions, compulsive drug use is most easily
recognized as occurring among chronic alcoholics and
heroin-dependent persons, although the incidence of compulsive
barbiturate use is probably significantly higher than the
essentially episodic nature of street use would suggest.<br>
</p>

<p><i>Drug-Related Risk<br>
</i></p>

<p>An understanding of the different types of drug-using behavior
is the starting point for problem definition. In these behavioral
classifications, the key element is the meaning of drug use to
the individual; the specific drug being used is subsumed within
this framework. In reaching the next step in the problem
definition process, we must focus on the individual and social
risks attending drug use and those factors which distinguish
drug-using behavior from other forms of experimental and
recreational activities and other forms of coping behavior. As an
aid to understanding, basic psychopharmacological principles
concerning drug-related risk must be kept in mind. </p>

<p>Drug-related risk, both individual and social, escalates with
increasing dose and higher frequency of administration. </p>

<p>Drug-related risk varies with the mode of drug administration,
generally being highest for intravenous administration and lowest
for oral ingestion. </p>

<p>Drug-related risk varies according to the setting in which use
occurs, particularly when low doses are used. </p>

<p>Drug-related risk varies according to the user's capacity to
control intake and detoxify the drug. The greatest risk occurs
when the rate of administration exceeds the capacity of the body
to detoxify the drug and in consequence the brain is never drug
free. </p>

<p>Drug-related risk varies according to the &quot;set&quot; of
the user, including the expected and desired outcome of the drug
experience, the user's personality, his ability to compensate for
drug effects on the basis of prior experience, and his ability to
limit intake according to a predetermined capacity. </p>

<p>Drug-related risk often increases significantly if more than
one drug is used concomitantly. </p>

<p>Further, many risks associated with drug use are a function of
social policy rather than of the drugs themselves. Unintentional
drug overdoses, whatever their precise pharmacological
characteristics, occur most often among those who have secured
drugs outside the legitimate channels which control quality and
potency. For example, the incidence of alcohol-induced blindness
was significantly higher during alcohol prohibition than it is
today mainly because users resorted to methyl alcohol. In
addition, the unsupervised intravenous use of illicitly obtained
substances increases the likelihood of pulmonary and circulatory
disorders and diseases which may result from use of unsterilized
equipment or from injection of insoluble material used on the
street to increase the bulk of the drug. Finally, much
drug-related crime, particularly that associated with dependence
on opiates such as heroin, is a function of a prohibitory social
policy toward availability rather than of the drugs themselves. </p>

<p>The above propositions apply to all drugs. However, an
additional axiom is crucial to formulation of social policy:
specific drugs are qualitatively different in terms of individual
and social risk. Drug using behavior is not a unitary phenomenon;
nor are all drugs the same. At lower levels of use, when non-drug
factors predominate in determining drug effect, the differences
among drugs in terms of relative risk may be relatively
unimportant. At other levels of use, particularly in large doses
or high frequencies, the characteristics of the drug may become
most important in determining risk. </p>

<p>With these psychopharmacological postulates in mind, we now
turn to an analysis of the type of risks which engender social
concern<b>. </b>The Commission has categorized drug-related risks
into those affecting individual health, those involving
drug-induced behavior as an acute consequence of the drug
experience, and those associated with the behavioral aspects of
chronic use or dependence.<br>
</p>

<p><i>Risks to individual health </i></p>

<p>The health risks arising from the acute effects of a drug
experience are related primarily to dose and the set and setting
of use. When drugs are consumed in small doses orally or by
sniffing, acute risks to health are usually slight; when they are
administered intravenously, however, even in small doses, the
acute health risks are multiplied, and fatalities have occurred,
often for obscure reasons. High doses, individual
predispositions, including those related to age, and uncertain
expectations increase the risk of overdoses and of physical and
psychological injury. Since the lethality and psychological
effects of individual drugs differ widely, the drug used is an
important determinant of health-related risks. </p>

<p>The major concern from the standpoint of<b> </b>individual
health is the effect of repeated administration of the drug over
a long term, rather than the acute effect of the drug experience.
The possibilities of organ damage as well as impairment of
psychological function increase with the frequency and intensity
of use; also, chronic use of tolerance producing drugs increases
the risk of overdose as well as the likelihood of physical or
psychological damage. Individual drugs vary widely in toxicity,
in tolerance and in psychological effect. </p>

<p>As we noted earlier, the special public policy considerations
posed by psychoactive drug use arise not from risks to individual
health per se but rather from the capacity of these drugs to
affect behavior. There is no correlation between the capacity of
a psychoactive drug to induce behavioral disorders and its
capacity to induce either brain or other somatic pathology.<br>
</p>

<p><i>Drug-Induced Behavior</i> </p>

<p>Whether a person under the influence of a drug will become
aggressive or passive, will have impaired psychomotor capacity or
will exhibit otherwise disordered behavior depends on the entire
range of variables determining drug effect. Set and setting play
a most important role, particularly when low doses are consumed.
However, drugs are qualitatively different in this connection and
can be compared. A regular user of psychoactive substances is
generally able to compensate for some of the acute behavioral
effects. Over the long term, however, additional risks may be
encountered; as a result of chronic use, a person may become
significantly more aggressive or passive, may become
significantly less adept at muscular control, or may deteriorate
mentally, becoming incapable of engaging in voluntary learning
efforts. Most important, the likelihood of adverse long term
effects on behavior is increased substantially if the person
becomes dependent upon the substance. It is for this reason that
we have isolated the dependence liability of various substances
as a separate risk factor. </p>

<p><i>Dependence Liability</i> </p>

<p>Whether a person who continues to use a psychoactive substance
will become dependent on the substance, escalating from
recreational or circumstantial patterns to intensified or
compulsive patterns, is an issue where the characteristics of the
drug and the individual play equally important roles. As we will
discuss in Chapter Three, drugs are qualitatively different in
terms of their potential for reinforcement. For example,
marihuana is significantly less reinforcing than heroin or
cocaine. The behavioral consequences of chronic use also differ
among drugs, as does the potential for behavioral disruption when
the dependent person's drug-taking is interrupted. From these
perspectives, chronic use of dependence-producing doses of
barbiturates pose significantly different problems from chronic
use of cocaine. </p>

<p>Because the health and behavioral risks of drug use increase
with frequency, intensity and duration of use, the likelihood of
dependence is a crucial determinant of social concern.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Evaluating the Social Consequences of Drug Use</b> </p>

<p>In order to translate the analyses of drug-using behavior and
risk potential of specific drugs into a meaningful framework for
policy making, a description and<b> </b>evaluation of the social
consequences which flow from drug-induced behavior or drug
dependence is necessary. Although these issues will be addressed
in Chapter Three, some general observations regarding the social
impact of various patterns of drug-using behavior and of the use
of individual drugs is useful so that a definition of the drug
problem as it is understood to exist in American society today
can be undertaken. </p>

<p>As we wrote in our first Report on marihuana, the social
impact of the use of a particular drug or of a specific pattern
of drug-using behavior involves three distinct considerations.
First is the impact on <i>public safety </i>of drug-induced
behavior or drug dependence. The major concerns from the
standpoint of drug-induced behavior are increased aggressiveness
or violent behavior, loss of psychomotor control or alteration of
judgment and perception which might result in dangerous conduct.
With regard to drug dependence, the public safety may be
threatened by persons who are dependent upon a drug which is not
legitimately available and who may commit crimes to finance
purchases in the illicit market. </p>

<p>The second general area of social consequence is the impact <i>on
the public health and public welfare </i>arising from drug use.
This is a quantitative concept pertaining to the health resources
and social services necessary to prevent, treat and compensate
for the adverse effects of drug use as well as the social loss,
in terms of productivity and social contribution, which occurs
whenever drug use interferes with normal social and economic
functioning. For example, unemployment, absenteeism, decreased
social performance levels and family disruption may all stem from
intensified or compulsive drug use, resulting in a measurable
social loss. </p>

<p>When drug use is approached from the public health and welfare
standpoint, it must be viewed as part of the larger health and
welfare system which deals with many related problems. This
system generally focuses on populations at risk, organizing the
necessary range of medical, human and social services for
delivery of services to the appropriate population. In the drug
area, health resources must be allocated and<b> </b>available to
deal with acute reactions, overdoses and diseases, such as
hepatitis, among predictable proportions of drug-using
populations. This may require a shift of limited medical services
from one health area to another. More important, medical and
social services must be organized for delivery to persons whose
intensified or compulsive drug use is correlated with impairment
of social functioning (treatment and rehabilitation), as well as
to populations who might develop these patterns of use
(prevention). </p>

<p>Finally, an understanding of the social impact of drug use
must also include the impact <i>on the normative social order. </i>Although
this concept is entirely qualitative, dealing with the prevailing
social values, it has always determined the manner in which the
drug problem has been defined and the nature of the social
response. In terms of establishing policy predicates, the
Commission believes strongly that considerations of morality do
influence the formulation of appropriate policy objectives.
However, the Commission believes that such considerations often
have been overemphasized in the process of defining the problem.
Only when the impact of drug use on the normative social order is
placed in proper perspective can we hope to dispel the climate of
crisis in which drug policy is now made.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Defining America's Drug Problem</b> </p>

<p>Theoretically, social concern about use of a particular
substance relative to another should correlate with the verified
social costs attending the use of each drug in that society. As
the incidence of intensified and compulsive use increases, so too
should the public's concern with the problem. However, the
current problem definition in the United States bears little
relationship to actual social cost. The intense public concern
regarding use of most drugs in large measure reflects anxiety for
the future rather than empirical considerations rooted in the
present. The result has been an overestimation of the nature of
the problem attending use of some drugs, such as marihuana, and
an underestimation of the problem attending use of other drugs,
such as barbiturates and alcohol. </p>

<p>In the Commission's view, problem definition should take into
account the relationship between the maximum potential social
cost of use of a particular drug under given conditions of
availability, compared with the verified social costs at a
particular point in time. In this context, the most serious
concern in contemporary America should attach to the use of
alcohol and heroin. Moderate social concern should attach to the
use of amphetamines, barbiturates, hallucinogens, methaqualone
and cocaine, the use of which is relatively well-controlled
within the present social policy framework. The use of marihuana
and the so-called minor tranquilizers appears to require
relatively minimum social concern at the present time. Present
trends do suggest, however, that the incidence of use of and
dependence on barbiturates and cocaine may be increasing and may
demand increased social attention. It is in this context that we
turn to a general overview of the means by which social control
should be achieved. <br>
</p>

<p><b>The Limits of Social Control </b></p>

<p>The Commission believes that the contemporary American drug
problem has emerged in part from our institutional response to
drug use. Since we have failed to appreciate the diverse nature
of drug using behavior, we have failed to weave policy into the
fabric of social institutions. Instead, policy has been imposed
from the top, often without regard to possible impact on the
institutional fabric itself, much less on drug use. It is
worthwhile, then, to consider the general requirements of social
control and the general guidelines upon which policy making
should be based. </p>

<p>Responsible observers agree that society has an interest in
controlling the individual's drug-taking behavior. The
potentially disruptive behavioral effects of the drug experience
and the potentially adverse social consequences of the chronic
use of most psychoactive drugs are matters of appropriate
concern. The policy maker's task in this area is not to choose
between social control or social disinterest; rather, it is to
determine if and when informal mechanisms of social control must
be supplemented with formal ones. </p>

<p>Drug use, in one form or another, has been a common feature of
most cultures throughout history. To the Commission's knowledge,
no society has successfully eliminated drug use altogether,
although all have attempted to set limits, and most heterogeneous
societies have contained distinct subgroups opposing all drug use
among their own members. The alcohol prohibition experience in
this country is best viewed as an attempt by one social group to
impose its abstentionist doctrine on the entire culture. Social
control generally stops short of elimination. </p>

<p>In its most basic sense, drug taking is socially controlled
when it is routinized, ritualized and structured in ways which
reduce to a minimum the occurrence of drug-induced behavior which
the culture considers undesirable. In small, primitive societies,
the social control over drug use tends to be most successful
since it is fully integrated with the overall institutional
control structure, generally dominated by kinship and religious
institutions. The well-controlled, ritualized use of
hallucinogenic substances by a number of tribal cultures, such as
the Indians <b>in </b>Central and North America and the
aborigines of Australia, has been amply demonstrated (deRios
1973). </p>

<p>In contemporary mass societies, however, responsibility for
social control over increasing spheres of human conduct has
tended to pass from the family and church to educational,
economic and governmental institutions. This reliance on formal
institutions, coupled with the impersonality and complexity of
industrial and post-industrial societies, has made the task of
social control of drug-taking behavior all the more difficult.
For this reason, together with the proliferation of available
substances, the problem appears far more pervasive in these
societies, especially when they are heterogeneous and
individualistic. </p>

<p>Western societies have routinely utilized their public
institutions, particularly the legal ones, in an effort to
contain undesirable drug use within tolerable limits. </p>

<p>The success of social control through law is always difficult
to measure. First, &quot;tolerable limits&quot; is a relative
concept. Many societies in the early stages of industrialization
have large populations of chronic drug users, but the importance
of enforcement of legal controls on drug taking behavior pales
beside the more pressing social needs of food, shelter, clothing
and national survival. In this sense, the United States is
comparatively fortunate to be able to be concerned about its drug
problem, and to have a surplus of national resources to devote to
its resolution. </p>

<p>A second factor which complicates heavy reliance on social
control through law are the values different societies place on
the rights of individuals. Application of criminal law must
conform to well-established limitations in the United States and
Great Britain, for example, and certain proscriptions thought
necessary to minimize a given drug using behavior may be more
intolerable to the general social fabric than the behavior
itself. But this is not true in all societies. Japan, which is a
more authoritarian society, was able to stem a large and growing
amphetamine problem during the mid 1950's and an incipient heroin
problem during the early 1960's by mobilizing a broadly based
social response centered on effective use of the criminal law and
an educational effort based in large measure on national pride.
It is doubtful that similar exhortations and enforcement
techniques could be as readily employed in this country. </p>

<p>These cross-cultural observations provide the backdrop against
which we must consider the current American response to its drug
problem. First, reliance on law is unlikely to be effective in
American society unless it is joined consciously and directly
with use of other institutions of social control. Second, drug
policy should not be made in a vacuum. A proposed policy must be
analyzed both in terms of its likely impact on drug-taking
behavior as well as its likely impact on other social values and
institutions. Third, the problems to which the society directs
its formal response must be those which exceed the level of
socially tolerable limits. For example, most drug use, even of
disapproved substances, is socially controlled to some degree by
informal institutions such as peer groups and families. Formal
social efforts should be directed to those behaviors which are
not adequately controlled by informal mechanisms of social
control, aiming primarily to support the informal control
mechanisms and intervening directly only as a last resort.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE COMMISSION'S ROLE</b> </p>

<p>The Commission believes that the first step toward resolving
the drug problem is to reconsider the present diagnosis of the
ailment. The social response is presently a large part of the
problem, one which is compounded with each unanticipated crisis.
To break this cycle, it is necessary to refocus our attention on
that behavior which carries the most serious social consequence.
Preoccupation with the drugs themselves must be replaced by an
understanding of the behavioral impact of drug use. We must deal
directly with the ambivalence of our attitudes with respect to
drugs, conforming our beliefs to reality and our conduct to our
ideals. Only then will a coherent policy emerge, one which can
withstand legitimate criticism, and one which will have a
beneficial impact on the problem. </p>

<p>Promises which cannot be kept must not be made. The public
must be apprised that disapproved drug use is part of a larger
social pattern, and that all the money and effort that the
American society can muster will never be able to deal
effectively with this behavior if the problem continues to be
defined as it is now. Drug policy making must take into account a
wide range of social phenomena of which drug use is a small part,
and institutional responses must be framed in the context of
broader social roles. Unless present policy is redirected, we
will perpetuate the same problems, tolerate the same social
costs, and find ourselves as we do now, no further along the road
to a more rational legal and social approach than we were in
1914. </p>

<p>The Commission has not attempted to devise utopian policy
recommendations. Instead we have attempted primarily to formulate
a policy-making process, one which includes all of the important
variables and which separates various crucial issues. We have
applied this process in order to provide a plan of action to be
implemented immediately. But we would be remiss if we were only
to propose recommendations for the present. The Commission feels
that a coherent social policy requires a fundamental alteration
of social attitudes toward drug use, and a willingness to embark
on new courses when previous actions have failed.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schduapip_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | </p>

<p><a href="pipmenu.htm">Drug Use in America, Problem in
Perspective</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61062" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>