
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B016-292</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/marinol1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051835 text/html 32260
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:18:28 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:34 GMT
Content-length: 32042
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Marinol Description and Data</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<h1>MARINOL</h1>

<p>(dronabinol*) </p>

<p>Capsules </p>

<p>(Warning: May be habit forming) </p>

<p>The USAN name for delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>Dronabinol is a cannabinoid designated chemically as
(6aR-trans)-6a,7,8,10a-tetrahydro-6,6,9-trimethyl-3-pentyl-6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-l-ol.
Dronabinol has the following empirical and structural formulas: <br>
</p>

<p><img src="structur.gif" width="330" height="159" [chemical
structure]><br>
</p>

<p>Dronabinol, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-THC), is
naturally-occurring and has been extracted from Cannabis saliva
L. (marijuana). </p>

<p>Dronabinol is also chemically synthesized and is a
light-yellow resinous oil that is sticky at room temperature and
hardens upon refrigeration. </p>

<p>Dronabinol is insoluble in water and is formulated in sesame
oil. It has a pKa of 10.6 and an octanol-water partition
coefficient: 6,000:1 at pH 7. </p>

<p>Capsules for oral administration: Marinol is supplied as
round, soft gelatin capsules containing either 2.5 mg, 5 mg, or 1
0 mg dronabinol. Each Marinol capsule is formulated with the
following inactive ingredients: </p>

<p>sesame oil, gelatin, glycerin, methylparaben, propylparaben,
and titanium dioxide.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY </p>

<p>Dronabinol is an orally active cannabinoid which, like other
cannabinoids, has complex effects on the central nervous system
(CNS), including central sympathomimetic activity. Cannabinoid
receptors have been discovered in neural tissues. These receptors
may play a role in mediating the effects of dronabinol and other
cannabinoids. <br>
</p>

<p>Pharmacodynamics: Dronabinol-induced sympathomimetic activity
may result in tachycardia and/or conjunctival injection. Its
effects on blood pressure are inconsistent, but occasional
subjects have experienced orthostatic hypotension and/or syncope
upon abrupt standing. </p>

<p>Dronabinol also demonstrates reversible effects on appetite,
mood, cognition, memory, and perception. These phenomena appear
to be dose-related, increasing in frequency with higher dosages,
and subject to great interpatient variability </p>

<p>After oral administration, dronabinol has an onset of action
of approximately 0.5 to 1 hours and peak effect at 2 to 4 hours.
Duration of action for psychoactive effects is 4 to 6 hours, but
the appetite stimulant effect of dronabinol may continue for 24
hours or longer after administration. </p>

<p>Tachyphylaxis and tolerance develop to some of the
pharmacologic effects of dronabinol and other cannabinoids wth
chronic use, suggesting an indirect effect on sympathetic
neurons. In a study of the pharmacodynamics of chronic dronabinol
exposure, healthy male volunteers (N = 12) received 210 mg/day
dronabinol, administered orally in divided doses, for 16 days. An
initial tachycardia induced by dronabinoi was replaced
successively by normal sinus rhythm and then bradycardia. A
decrease in supine blood pressure, made worse by standing, was
also observed initially. These volunteers developed tolerance to
the cardiovascular and subjective adverse CNS effects of
dronabinol within 12 days of treatment initiation. </p>

<p>Tachyphylaxis and tolerance do not, however, appear to develop
to the appetite stimulant effect of Marinol. In studies involving
patients with Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), the
appetite stimulant effect of Marinol has been sustained for up to
five months in clinical trials, at dosages ranging from 2.5
mg/day to 20 mg/day.<br>
</p>

<p>Pharmacokinetics: </p>

<p>Absorption and Distribution: Marinol (dronabinol) is almost
completely absorbed (90 to 95%) after single oral doses. Due to
the combined effects of first pass hepatic metabolism and high
lipid solubility, only 10 to 20% of the administered dose reaches
the systemic circulation. Dronabinol has a large apparent volume
of distribution, approximately 10 L/kg, because of its lipid
solubility. The plasma protein binding of dronabinol and its
metabolites is approximately 97%. </p>

<p>The elimination phase of dronabinol can be described using a
two compartment model with an initial (alpha) half-life of about
4 hours and a terminal (beta) half-life of 25 to 36 hours.
Because of its large volume of distribution, dronabinol and its
metabolites may be excreted at low levels for prolonged periods
of time.<br>
</p>

<p>Metabolism: Dronabinol undergoes extensive first-pass hepatic
metabolism, primarily by icrosomal hydroxylation, yielding both
active and inactive metabolites. Dronabinol and its principal
active metabolite, 11-OH-delta-9-THC, are present in
approximately equal concentrations in plasma. Concentrations of
both parent drug and metaboiite peak at approximately 2 to 4
hours after oral dosing and decline over several days. </p>

<p>Values to clearance average about 0.2 L/kg-hr, but are highly
variable due to the complexity of cannabinoid distribution. </p>

<p>Elimination: Dronabinol and its biotransformation products are
excreted in both feces and urine. Biliary excretion is the major
route of elimination with about half of a radiolabeled oral dose
being recovered from the feces within 72 hours as contrasted with
10 to 15% recovered from urine. Less than 5% of an oral dose is
recovered unchanged in the feces. </p>

<p>Following single dose administration, low levels of dronabinol
metabolites have been detected for more than 5 weeks in the urine
and feces. </p>

<p>In a study of Marinol involving AIDS patients, urinary
cannabinoid/creatinine concentration ratios were studied biweekly
over a six week period. The urinary cannabinoid/creatinine ratio
was closely correlated with dose. No increase in the
cannabinoid/creatinine ratio was observed after the first two
weeks of treatment, indicating that steady-state cannabinoid
levels had been reached. This conclusion is consistent with
predictions based on the observed terminal half-life of
dronabinol. </p>

<p>Special Populations: The pharmacokinetic profile of Marinol
has not been investigated in either pediatric or geriatric
patients. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>CLINICAL TRIALS </p>

<p>Appetite Stimulation: The appetite stimulant effect of Marinol
(dronabinol) in the treatment of AIDS-related anorexia associated
with weight loss was studied in a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study involving 139 patients. The initial
dosage of Marinol in all patients was 5 mg/day, administered in
doses of 2.5 mg one hour before lunch and one hour before supper.
In pilot studies, early morning administration of Marinol
appeared to have been associated with an increased frequency of
adverse experiences, as compared to dosing later in the day. The
effect of Marinol on appetite, weight, mood, and nausea was
measured at scheduled intervals during the six-week treatment
period. Side effects (feeling high, dizziness, confusion,
somnolence) occurred in 13 of 72 patients (18%) at this dosage
level and the dosage was reduced to 2.5 mg/day, administered as a
single dose at supper or bedtime. </p>

<p>As compared to placebo, Marinol treatment resulted in a
statistically significant improvement in appetite as measured by
visual analog scale (see figure). Trends toward improved body
weight and mood, and decreases in nausea were also seen. </p>

<p>After completing the 6-week study, patients were allowed to
continue treatment with Marinol in an open-label study, in which
there was a sustained improvement in appetite.<br>
</p>

<p><img src="figure.gif" width="368" height="247" [figure]><br>
</p>

<p>Antiemetic: Marinol (dronabinol) treatment
ofchemotherapy-induced emesis was evaluated in 454 patients with
cancer, who received a total of 750 courses of treatment of
various malignancies. The antiemetic efficacy of Marinol was
greatest in patients receiving cytotoxic therapy with MOPP for
Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Marinol dosages ranged
from 2.5 mg/day to 4O mg/day administered in equally divided
doses every four to six hours(four times daily). As indicated in
the following table, escalating the Marinol dose above 7 mg/m2
increased the frequency of adverse experiences, with no
additional antiemetic benefit. </p>

<p>Marinol Dose:Response Frequency and Adverse Experiences * </p>

<p>(N = 750 treatment courses) </p>

<p>Response Frequency (%) Adverse Events Frequency (%) </p>

<table border="0">
    <tr>
        <td width="85">Marinol Dose</td>
        <td width="85">Complete</td>
        <td width="66">Partial </td>
        <td width="66">Poor</td>
        <td width="66">None</td>
        <td width="66">Nondysphoric </td>
        <td width="84">Dysphoric</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="85">&lt;7 mg/m2</td>
        <td width="85">36</td>
        <td width="66">32 </td>
        <td width="66">32</td>
        <td width="66">23</td>
        <td width="66">65</td>
        <td width="84">12</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="85">&gt;7 mg/m2</td>
        <td width="85">33</td>
        <td width="66">31 </td>
        <td width="66">6</td>
        <td width="66">13</td>
        <td width="66">58</td>
        <td width="84">28</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>*Nondysphoric events consisted of drowsiness, tachycardia,
etc. <br>
</p>

<p>Combination antiemetic therapy with Marinol and a
phenothiazine (prochlorperazine) may result in synergistic or
additive antiemetic effects and attenuate the toxicities
associated with each of the agents.<br>
</p>

<p>INDIVIDUALIZATION OF DOSAGES </p>

<p>The pharmacologic effects of Marinol (dronabinol) are
dose-related and subject to considerable interpatient
variability. Therefore, dosage individualization is critical in
achieving the maximum benefit of Marinol treatment. </p>

<p>Appetite Stimulation: In the clinical trials, the majority of
patients were treated with 5 mg/day Marinol, although the dosages
ranged from 2.5 to 20 mg/day. For an adult:<br>
</p>

<p>1. Begin with 2.5 mg before lunch and 2.5 mg before supper. If
CNS symptoms (feeling high, dizziness, confusion, somnolence) do
occur, they usually resolve in 1 to 3 days with continued dosage.
</p>

<p>2. If CNS symptoms are severe or persistent, reduce the dose
to 2.5 mg before supper. if symptoms continue to be a problem,
taking the single dose in the evening or at bedtime may reduce
their severity. </p>

<p>3. When adverse effects are absent or minimal and further
therapeutic affect is desired, increase the dose to 2.5 mg before
lunch and 5 mg before supper or 5 and 5 mg. Although most
patients respond to 2.5 mg twice daily, 10 mg twice daily has
been tolerated in about half of the patients in appetite
stimulation studies. </p>

<p>The pharmacologic effects of Marinol are reversible upon
treatment cessation. </p>

<p>Antiemetic: Most patients respond to 5 mg three or four times
daily. Dosage may be escalated during a chemotherapy cycle or at
subsequent cycles, based upon initial results. Therapy should be
initiated at the lowest recommended dosage and titrated to
clinical response. Administration of Marinol with phenothiazines,
such as prochlorperazine, has resulted in improved efficacy as
compared to either drug alone, without additional toxicity. </p>

<p>Pediatrics: Marinol is not recommended for AIDS-related
anorexia in pediatric patients because it has not been studied in
this population. The pediatric dosage for the treatment of
chemotherapy-induced emesis is the same as in adults. Caution is
recommended in prescribing Marinol for children because of the
psychoactive effects. </p>

<p>Geriatrics: Caution is advised in prescribing Marinol in
elderly patients because they are generally more sensitive to the
psychoactive effects of drugs. In antiemetic studies, no
difference in tolerance or efficacy was apparent in patients &gt;
55 years old. </p>

<p>INDICATIONS AND USAGE<br>
</p>

<p>Marinol (dronabinol) is indicated for the treatment of: </p>

<ol>
    <li>anorexia associated with weight loss in patients with
        AIDS; and </li>
    <li>nausea and vomiting associated with cancer chemotherapy
        in patients who have failed to respond adequately to
        conventional antiemetic treatments.<br>
    </li>
</ol>

<p>CONTRAINDICATIONS </p>

<p>Marinol (dronabinol) is contraindicated in any patient who has
a history of hypersensitivity to any cannabinoid or sesame oil. </p>

<p>WARNINGS </p>

<p>Marinol (dronabinol) is a medication with a potential for
abuse. Physicians and pharmacists should use the same care in
prescribing and accounting for Marinol as they would with
morphine or other drugs controlled under Schedule II (CII) of the
Controlled Substances Act. </p>

<p>Because of the risk of diversion, it is recommended that
prescriptions be limited to the amount necessary for the period
between clinic visits. </p>

<p>Patients receiving treatment with Marinol should be
specifically warned not to drive, operate machinery, or engage in
any hazardous activity until it is established that they are able
to tolerate the drug and to perform such tasks safely.<br>
</p>

<p>PRECAUTIONS </p>

<p>General: The risk/benefit ratio of Marinol (dronabinol) use
should be carefully evaluated in patients with the following
medical conditions because of individual variation in response
and tolerance to the effects of Marinol. </p>

<p>Marinol should be used with caution in patients with cardiac
disorders because of occasional hypotension, possible
hypertension, syncope, or tachycardia (see CLINICAL
PNARMACOLOGY).<br>
</p>

<p>Marinol should be used with caution in patients with a history
of substance abuse, including alcohol abuse or dependence,
because they may be more prone to abuse Marinol as well. Multiple
substance abuse is common and marijuana, which contains the same
active compound, is a frequently abused substance. </p>

<p>Marinol should be used with caution and careful psychiatric
monitoring in patients with mania, depression, or schizophrenia
because Marinol may exacerbate these illnesses. </p>

<p>Marinol should be used with caution in patients receiving
concomitant therapy with sedatives, hypnotics or other
psychoactive drugs because of the potential for additive or
synergistic CNS effects. </p>

<p>Marinol should be used with caution in pregnant patients,
nursing mothers, or pediatric patients because it has not been
studied in these patient populations. </p>

<p>Marinol should be used with caution for treatment of anorexia
and weight loss in elderly patients with AIDS because they may be
more sensitive to the psychoactive effects and because its use in
these patients has not been studied. </p>

<p>Information for Patients: Patients receiving treatment with
Marinol (dronabinol) should be alerted to the potential for
additive central nervous system depression if Marinol is used
concomitantly with alcohol or other CNS depressants such as
benzodiazepines and barbiturates. </p>

<p>Patients receiving treatment with Marinol should be
specifically warned not to drive, operate machinery, or engage in
any hazardous activity until it is established that they are able
to tolerate the drug and to perform such tasks safely. </p>

<p>Patients using Marinol should be advised of possible changes
in mood and other adverse behavioral effects of the drug so as to
avoid panic in the event of such manifestations. Patients should
remain under the supervision of a responsible adult during
initial use of Marinol and following dosage adjustments. </p>

<p>Drug Interactions: In studies involving patients with AIDS
and/or cancer, Marinol (dronabinol) has been co-administered with
a variety of medications (e.g., cytotoxic agents, anti-infective
agents, sedatives, or opioid analgesics) without resulting in any
clinically significant drug/drug interactions. Although no
drug/drug interactions were discovered during the clinical trials
of Marinol, cannabinoids may interact with other medications
through both metabolic and pharmacodynamic mechanisms. </p>

<p>Dronabinol is highly protein bound to plasma proteins, and
therefore, might displace other protein-bound drugs. Although
this displacement has not been confirmed in vivo, practitioners
should monitor patients for a change in dosage requirements when
administering dronabinol to patients receiving other highly
protein-bound drugs. Published reports of drug/drug interactions
involving cannabinoids are summarized in the following table.<br>
<br>
<img src="table1.gif" width="464" height="158"> </p>

<p>CONCOMITANT DRUG CLINICAL EFFECT(S) </p>

<p>Amphetamines, cocaine, other sym- Additive hypertension,
tachycardia, pathomimetic agents possibly cardiotoxicity </p>

<p>Atropine, scopolamine, antihistamines, Additive or
super-additive tachycardia, other anticholinergic agents
drowsiness </p>

<p>Amitriptyline, amoxapine, desipramine, Additive tachycardia,
hypertension, other tricyclic antidepressants drowsiness </p>

<p>Barbiturates, benzodiazepines, ethanol, Additive drowsiness
and CNS lithium, opioids, buspirone, antihista- depression mines,
muscle relaxants, other CNS depressants </p>

<p>Disuffiram A reversible hypomanic reaction was reported in a
28 y/o man who smoked marijuana; confirmed by dechallenge and
rechallenge </p>

<p>Fluoxetine A 21 y/o female with depression and bulimia
receiving 20 mg/day fluoxetine X 4 wks became hypomanic after
smoking marijuana; symptoms resolved after 4 days </p>

<p>Antipyrine, barbiturates Decreased clearance of these agents,
presumably via competitive inhibition of metabolism </p>

<p>Theophylline Increased theophylline metabolism reported with
smoking of marijuana; effect similar to that following smoking
tobacco </p>

<p>Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility:
Carcinogenicity studies have not been performed with dronabinol.
Mutagenicity testing was negative in an Ames test. In a long-term
study (77 days) in rats, oral administration of dronabinol at
doses of 30 to 150 mg/m2 , equivalent to 0.3 to 1.5 times maximum
recommended human dose (MRHD) of 90 mg/m2/day in cancer patients
or 2 to 10 times MRHD of 15 mg/m2/day in AIDS patients, reduced
ventral prostate, seminal vesicle and epididymal weights and
caused a decrease in seminal fluid volume. Decreases in
spermatogenesis, number of developing germ cells, and number of
Leydig cells in the testis were also observed. However, sperm
count, mating success and testosterone levels were not affected.
The significance of these animal findings in humans is not known.
</p>

<p>Pregnancy: Pregnancy Category C. Reproduction studies with
dronabinol have been performed in mice at 15 to 450 mg/m2
equivalent to 0.2 to 5 times maximum recommended human dose
(MRHD) of 90 mg/m2/day in cancer patients or 1 to 30 times MRHD
of 15 mg/m2/day in AIDS patients, and in rats at 74 to 295 mg/m2
(equivalent to 0.8 to 3 times m of 90 mg/m2 in cancer patients or
5 to 20 times MRHD of 15 mg/m2/day in AIDS patients). These
studies have revealed no evidence of teratogenicity due to
dronabinol. At these dosages in mice and rats, dronabinol
decreased maternal weight gain and number of viable pups and
increased fetal mortality and early resorptions. Such effects
were dose dependent and less apparent at lower doses which
produced less maternal toxicity. There are no adequate and
well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Dronabinol should be
used only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk
to the fetus. </p>

<p>Nursing Mothers: Use of Marinol is not recommended in nursing
mothers since, in addition to the secretion of HIV virus in
breast milk, dronabinol is concentrated in and secreted in human
breast milk and is absorbed by the nursing baby. </p>

<p>ADVERSE REACTIONS </p>

<p>Adverse experiences information summarized in the tables below
was derived from well-controlled clinical trials conducted in the
US and US territories involving 474 patients exposed to Marinol
(dronabinol). Studies of AIDS-related weight loss included 157
patients receiving dronabinol at a dose of 2.5 mg twice daily and
67 receiving placebo. Studies of different durations were
combined by considering the first occurrence of events during the
first 28 days. Studies of nausea and vomiting related to cancer
chemotherapy included 317 patients receiving dronabinol and 68
receiving placebo. </p>

<p><img src="table2.gif" width="459" height="394"> </p>

<p>A cannabinoid dose-related &quot;high&quot; (easy laughing,
elation and heightened awareness) has been reported by patients
receiving Marinol in both the antiemetic (24%) and the lower dose
appetite stimulant clinical trials (8%) (see CLINICAL TRIALS). </p>

<p>The most frequently reported adverse experiences in patients
with AIDS during placebo-controlled clinical trials involved the
CNS and were reported by 33% of patients receiving Marinol. About
25% of patients reported a minor CNS adverse event during the
first 2 weeks and about 4% reported such an event each week for
the next 6 weeks thereafter. </p>

<p>PROBABLY CAUSALLY RELATED: Incidence greater than 1%. Rates
derived from clinical trials in AIDS-related anorexia (N = 157)
and chemotherapy-related nausea (N = 317). Rates were generally
higher in the antiemetic use (given in parentheses). </p>

<p>Body as a whole: Asthenia. </p>

<p>Cardiovascular: Palpitations, tachycardia, vasodilation/facial
flush. </p>

<p>Digestive: Abdominal pain*, nausea*, vomiting*. </p>

<p>Nervous system: (Amnesia), anxiety/nervousness, (ataxia),
confusion, depersonalization, dizziness*, euphoria*,
(hallucination), paranoid reaction*, somnolence*, thinking
abnormal*. </p>

<p>*Incidence of events 3% to 10% </p>

<p>PROBABLY CAUSALLY RELATED: Incidence less than 1%. </p>

<p>Event rates derived from clinical trials in AIDS-related
anorexia (N=157) and chemotherapy-related nausea (N = 317). </p>

<p>Cardiovascular: Conjunctivitis*, hypotension*. </p>

<p>Digestive: Diarrhea*, fecal incontinence. </p>

<p>Musculoskeletal: Myalgias. </p>

<p>Nervous system: Depression, nightmares, speech difficulties,
tinnitus. </p>

<p>Skin and Appendages: Flushing*. </p>

<p>Special senses: Vision difficulties. </p>

<p>*Incidence of events 0. 3% to 1 %. </p>

<p>CAUSAL RELATIONSHIP UNKNOWN: Incidence less than 1%. </p>

<p>The clinical significance of the association of these events
with Marinol treatment is unknown, but they are reported as
alerting information for the clinician. </p>

<p>Body as a whole: Chills, headache, malaise. </p>

<p>_Digestive: Anorexia, hepatic enzyme elevation </p>

<p>Respiratory: Cough, rhinitis, sinusitis. </p>

<p>Skin and Appendages: Sweating.<br>
</p>

<p>DRUG ABUSE AND DEPENDENCE </p>

<p>Marinol (dronabinol) is one of the psychoactive compounds
present in cannabis, and is abusable and controlled Schedule II
(CII) under the Controlled Substances Act. Both psychological and
physiological dependence have been noted in healthy individuals
receiving dronabinol, but addiction is uncommon and has only been
seen after prolonged high dose administration. </p>

<p>Chronic abuse of cannabis has been associated with decrements
in motivation, cognition, judgement, and perception. The etiology
of these impairments is unknown, but may be associated with the
complex process of addiction rather than an isolated effect of
the drug. No such decrements in psychological, social or
neurological status have been associated with the administration
of Marinol for therapeutic purposes. </p>

<p>In an open-label study in patients with AIDS who received
Marinol for up to five months, no abuse, diversion or systematic
change in personality or social functioning were observed despite
the inclusion of a substantial number of patients with a past
history of drug abuse. </p>

<p>An abstinence syndrome has been reported after the abrupt
discontinuation of dronabinol in volunteers receiving dosages of
210 mg/day for 12 to 16 consecutive days. Within 12 hours after
discontinuation, these volunteers manifested symptoms such as
irritability, insomnia, and restlessness. By approximately 24
hours post-dronabinol discontinuation, withdrawal symptoms
intensified to include &quot;hot flashes&quot;, sweating,
rhinorrhea, loose stools, hiccoughs and anorexia. </p>

<p>These withdrawal symptoms gradually dissipated over the next
48 hours. Electroencephalographic changes consistent with the
effects of drug withdrawal (hyperexcitation) were recorded in
patients after abrupt dechallenge. Patients also complained of
disturbed sleep for several weeks after discontinuing therapy
with high dosages of dronabinol. </p>

<p>OVERDOSAGE </p>

<p>Signs and symptoms following MILD Marinol (dronabinol)
intoxication include drowsiness, euphoria, heightened sensory
awareness, altered time perception, reddened conjunctiva, dry
mouth and tachycardia; following MODERATE intoxication include
memory impairment, depersonalization, mood alteration, urinary
retention, and reduced bowel motility; and following SEVERE
intoxication include decreased motor coordination, lethargy,
slurred speech, and postural hypotension. Apprehensive patients
may experience panic reactions and seizures may occur in patients
with existing seizure disorders. </p>

<p>The estimated lethal human dose of intravenous dronabinol is
30 mg/kg (2100 mg/70 kg). Significant CNS symptoms in antiemetic
studies followed oral doses of 0.4 mg/kg (28 mg/70 kg) of
Marinol. </p>

<p>Management: A potentially serious oral ingestion, if recent,
should be managed with gut decontamination. In unconscious
patients with a secure airway, instill activated charcoal (30 to
100 g in adults, 1 to 2 g/kg in infants) via a nasogastric tube.
A saline cathartic or sorbitol may be added to the first dose of
activated charcoal. Patients experiencing depressive,
hallucinatory or psychotic reactions should be placed in a quiet
area and offered reassurance. Benzodiazepines (5 to 10 mg
diazepam po) may be used for treatment of extreme agitation.
Hypotension usually responds to Trendelenburg position and IV
fluids. Pressors are rarely required.<br>
</p>

<p>DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION </p>

<p>Appetite stimulation: Initially, 2.5 mg Marinol (dronabinol)
should be administered orally twice daily (b.i.d.), before lunch
and supper. For patients unable to tolerate this 5 mg/day dosage
of Marinol, the dosage can be reduced to 2.5 mg/day, administered
as a single dose in the evening or at bedtime. If clinically
indicated and in the absence of significant adverse effects, the
dosage may be gradually increased to a maximum of 20 mg/day
Marinol, administered in divided oral doses. Caution should be
exercised in escalating the dosage of Marinol because of the
increased frequency of dose-related adverse experiences at higher
dosages (see PRECAUTIONS). </p>

<p>Antiemetic: Marinol is best administered at an initial dose of
5 mg/m2, given 1 to 3 hours prior to the administration of
chemotherapy, then every 2 to 4 hours after chemotherapy is
given, for a total of 4 to 6 doses/day. Should the 5 mg/m2 dose
prove to be ineffective, and in the absence of significant side
effects, the dose may be escalated by 2.5 mg/m2 increments to a
maximum of 15 mg/m2 per dose. Caution should be exercised in dose
escalation, however, as the incidence of disturbing psychiatric
symptoms increases significantly at maximum dose (see
PRECAUTIONS). <br>
</p>

<p>SAFETY AND HANDLING </p>

<p>Marinol (dronabinol) should be packaged in a well-closed
container and stored in a cool environment between 8' and 15'C
(46' and 59'F). Protect from freezing. No particular hazard to
health care workers handling the capsules has been identified. </p>

<p>Access to abusable drugs such as Marinol presents an
occupational hazard for addiction in the health care industry.
Routine procedures for handling controlled substances developed
to protect the public may not be adequate to protect health care
workers. Implementation of more effective accounting procedures
and measures to appropriately restrict access to drugs of this
class may minimize the risk of self-administration by health care
providers.<br>
</p>

<p>HOW SUPPLIED </p>

<p>MARINOL CAPSULES (dronabinol solution In sesame oil in soft
gelatin capsules) </p>

<p>2.5 mg white capsules (identified RL). </p>

<p>NDC 0054-2601-11: Bottles of 25 capsules. </p>

<p>NDC 0054-2601-21: Bottles of 60 capsules. </p>

<p>NDC 0054-2601-25: Bottles of 100 capsules. </p>

<p>5 mg dark brown capsules (identified RL). </p>

<p>NDC 0054-2602-11: Bottles of 25 capsules. </p>

<p>NDC 0054-2602-25: Bottles of 100 capsules. </p>

<p>10 mg orange capsules (Identified RL). </p>

<p>NDC 0054-2603-11: Bottles of 25 capsules. </p>

<p>MARINOL is a registered trademark of Unimed Pharmaceuticals,
Inc. and is marketed by Roxane Laboratories, Inc. under license
from Unimed Pharmaceuticals, Inc. </p>

<p>Manufactured by Banner Gelatin Products Corporation,
Chatsworth CA 91311<br>
</p>

<p>DEA ORDER FORM REQUIRED </p>

<p>Caution: Federal law prohibits dispensing without
prescription. </p>

<p>Roxane Laboratories, Inc. </p>

<p>Columbus, OH 43216 </p>

<p>Revised December 1994 </p>

<p>References: </p>

<p>1. Chlebowski RT, Grosvenor MB, Bernhard NH, et al: Am J
Gastroenterol </p>

<p>1989;84(10):1288-1293. </p>

<p>2. Ott M, Lembcke B, Fischer H, et al: Am J Clin Nutr
1993;57:15-19. </p>

<p>3. Kotler DP, Tierney AR, Wang J, et al: Am J Clin Nutr
1989;50:444-447. </p>

<p>4. Gorbach SL, Knox TA, Roubenoff R: Nutr Rev
1993;51(8):226-234. </p>

<p>5. Data on file, Roxane Laboratories, Inc.<br>
<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>