
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-48</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B018-229</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/analgesic.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052650 text/html 20556
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:26:39 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:38 GMT
Content-length: 20338
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Analgesic and Anti-Inflammatory Activity of Constituents
of Cannabis Sativa</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font><font size="5">ANALGESIC AND
ANTIINFLAMMATORY ACTIVITY OF CONSTITUENTS OF CANNABIS SATIVA
L.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">INFLAMMATION, Vol 12, No. 4, 1988&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">E.A. Formukong, A.T. Evans, and F.J. Evans</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Department of Pharmacognosy, The School of
Pharmacy University of London,</font></p>

<p><font size="3">29-39 Brunswick Square London, WC11N 1AX,
England&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Abstract---Two extracts of Cannabis sativa
herb, one being cannabinoid--free (ethanol) and the other
containing the cannabinoids (petroleum), were shown to inhibit
PBQ- induced writhing in mouse when given orally and also to
antagonize tetradecanoylphorbol acetate (TPA) -induced erythema
of mouse skin when applied topically. With the exception of
cannabinol (CBN) and delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-1-THC),
the cannabinoids and olivetol (their biosynthetic precursor)
demonstrated activity in the PBQ test exhibiting their maximal
effect at doses of about 100 mcg/kg. Delta-1-THC only became
maximally effective in doses of 10 mg/kg. This higher dose
corresponded to that which induced catalepsy and is indicative of
a central action. CBN produce a 40% inhibition of PBQ-induced
writhing. Cannabidiol (CBD) was the most effective of the
cannabinoids at doses of 100 mcg/kg. Doses of cannabinoids that
were effective in the analgesic test orally were used topically
to antagonize TPA-induced erythema of skin. The fact that
delta-1-THC and CBN were the least effective in this test
suggests a structural relationship between analgesic activity and
antiinflammatory activity among the cannabinoids related to their
peripheral actions and separate from the central effects of
delta-1-THC. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">INTRODUCTION &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Various preparations of Cannabis sativa have
been employed for their medicinal effects, including antipyretic,
antirheumatic, antiallergic, and analgesic purposes (1). Extracts
of Cannabis have been shown to possess analgesic activity (2, 3),
and delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-1-THC), the psychoactive
component of Cannabis has also been shown to possess this
activity in various models (4-6). In addition, cannabinol (CBN)
but not cannabidiol (CBD) was shown to exhibit analgesic activity
in vivo (7). </font></p>

<p><font size="3">It is possible that the antiinflammatory and
antiasthmatic properties of this herb are mediated through
effects on arachidonate metabolism. However, constituents of
Cannabis are known to stimulate (8,9) and inhibit (10-12)
prostaglandin (PG) release by influencing enzymes of this pathway
(13, 14). </font></p>

<p><font size="3">A cannabinoid or an extract of Cannabis with
little or no central effects could be of use therapeutically. In
this paper, we have examined the antiinflammatory potential of
two extracts of Cannabis, pure cannabinoids and olivetol (a
cannabinoid biosynthetic precursor) in two models of
inflammation, in an attempt to separate on a structural basis the
peripheral from the central action of these phenolic drugs.
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">MATERIALS AND METHODS &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The folowing were used: aspirin (Sigma Chemical
Co., Poole, Dorset.), tripotassium citrate (analytical grade),
all cannabinoids except CBG (Sigma), and CBG (Makor Chemicals,
Jerusalem, Israel). </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Preparation of Drugs: PBQ Test. Cannabinoids
and cannabis extracts were suspended in a 1% ethanolic solution
containing 2.5% w/v Tween. Aspirin was dissolved in a 40 mg/ml
solution of tripotassium citrate. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Phenyl Benzoquinone Writhing (PBQ) and
Preparation of PBQ Solution. A 0.04% solution of PBQ was prepared
immediately before use by dissolving PBQ in warm ethanol and
diluting with water at 40 degrees C ( 15) bringing the ethanolic
concentration to 5% (16). The bottle was stoppered, foil paper
wrapped around it, and the solution maintained at 34 degrees C.
Deterioration of the solution occurs if left exposed to light and
air (17).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Administration of Drugs. Male CDI male (Charles
River) weighing 18-20 g were starved overnight for the
experiment. Animals were placed in a thermostatically controlled
environment maintained at 34 degrees C. Mice were orally
administered test drug 20 min before the intraperitoneal
injection of PBQ (4 mg/kg). Five minutes after injection, a hand
tally counter was used to record the number of stretching
movements for each mouse in a 5-min period. Control animals were
only administered the vehicle. Note less than five animals were
used per dose. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Statistical Analysis. Results are expressed as
mean percentage inhibition of control (+SEM) in the case of PBQ
test. IC-50s were obtained from graphs relating probit percentage
inhibition (ordinate) against log dose (abscissa). The IC-50 is
that dose of drug which would inhibit PBQ-induced writhing by
50%. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Tetradecanoyl phorbol-acetate-induced (TPA)
Erythema of Mouse Ear. In order to exclude the possibility of a
central mechanism of action (see Discussion), compounds also were
tested for their ability to inhibit TPA-induced erythema on mouse
ears in 100% of the animals was chosen as the challenging dose
for inhibition studies, measured 4 h after application (18).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Test drugs were dissolved in ethanol and 5 ul
applied to the inner ear of the mouse 15 min before the
application of 1 mcg TPA in 5 ul acetone. Only one dose of test
dug was used for this experiment, 100 mcg/mcl ethanols, except
trifluoperazine at 1 mg/5 ul. The other ear acted as a control. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The results were expressed as percentage
inhibition, taken to mean the complete suppression of erythema in
the test animals, as described in reference 19.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">RESULTS&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">PBQ-Induced Writhing. CBD, CBG, olivetol,
ethanolic extract, and petroleum spirit extract produced
significant inhibition at doses up to 10 mg/kg (Figures 1-3). CBN
was only marginally active (Table 1.) </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Delta-1-THC was fully effective only at
concentrations above 10 mg/kg Figure 2).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The ethanolic and petroleum extract, CBD,
olivetol, CBG, and cannflavon were more potent than aspirin. The
petroleum spirit extract was about four times more potent than
the ethanolic extract, which was virtually equipotent with CBD.
Cannflavon, isolated from the ethanolic extract was 14 times less
potent than the ethanolic extract of the dried herb (Table 2).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">There was a decline in response following the
administration of doses greater than 0.1 mg/kg of some
substances. This is most evident in the bell shaped dose-response
curve of the petroleum spirit extract (Figure 1). The activity of
the ethanolic extract and CBD was also found to decrease slightly
at higher dose levels. (Figures 1 and 2)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">TPA-Induced Erythema. In general, the ability
of compounds to inhibit TPA-induced erythema correlated well with
their potency in the PBQ-writhing test. Thus, CBN and delta-1-THC
were the least active followed by CBG, CBD, and cannflavon.
Again, the extracts were the most active (Table 3). Twenty-four
hours after application, the ethanolic extract still produced 16%
inhibition of TPA-induced erythema of the animals. All other
substances were without activity after 24 h. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">All substances were more active than
trifluoperazine, 1 mg/5ul, a known phorbol ester antagonist both
in vivo (19) and in vitro (20). &nbsp;</font></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">DISCUSSION</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The PBQ-induced writhing response is believed
to be produced by the liberation of endogenous substance(s),
notably metabolites of the arachidonic cascade (21, 22). However,
the PBQ test is not specific for weak analgesics such as the
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, as it also detects centrally
active analgesics (16, 17). Therefore, in the elucidation of the
action of the cannabinoids as inflammatory drugs, it was
necessary to perform more than one test. In this case, peripheral
rather than central action was confirmed in the mouse ear
erythema assay. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">TPA-induced erythema was inhibited by the
extracts cannflavon, cannabinoids, and olivetol. The activity of
TPA has been shown to be dependent upon PG release in mouse
epidermis (23) and mouse peritoneal macrophages (24) possibly via
the initial stimulation of protein kinase C (for a review see
reference 25). It has also been shown that compounds that show
moderate to very potent antiinflammatory potential in standard in
vivo inflammation models will also inhibit TPA-induced edema of
the mouse ear (26), and phorbol-ester-induced erythema (19). </font></p>

<p><font size="3">It is possible that the cannabinoids and their
extracts are inhibiting both PBQ-induced writhing and TPA-induced
erythema by effects on arachidonate release and metabolism.
Cannabinoids and olivetol have been shown to inhibit PG
mobilization (11, 12) and synthesis (14). The noncannabinoid
constituents of Cannabis, for example, cannflavon, have been
shown to be mainly cyclooxygenase inhibitors (14). Cannabinoids,
however, stimulate and inhibit phospholipase A2 (PLA2) activity
(13), as well as inducing an inhibition of cyclooxygenase and
lipoxygenase (14). The activity of Cannabis herb or resin is
complex, in that activities can be demonstrated on at least three
major enzymes of the arachidonate cascade.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The mechanism by which delta-1-THC inhibits
PBQ-induced writhing may differ from that of the other
substances. At concentrations greater than 10 mg/kg, delta-1-THC
may be inhibiting PBQ-induced writhing by acting on central
rather than peripheral functions. It is possible that
prostaglandins modulate certain inhibitory pathways in the brain,
bringing about an increase in the pain threshold. This dose of
delta-1-THC is capable of bringing about the cataleptic effect
(27), which is a standard test for central involvement. Central
analgesics have higher efficacies than peripheral ones, and this
may explain the effectiveness of delta-1-THC (Figure 2). The
central involvement of delta-1-THC is perhaps the primary reason
why delta-1-THC was recognized as an analgesic before other
cannabinoids. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Our results suggest that the response of the
ethanolic extract cannot be solely due to cannflavon. Other
structurally related phenolic substances, known to be present in
this complex extract, may account for the higher activity seen
either due to cumulative or synergistic effects upon
cyclooxygenase. The activity of the petroleum ether extract is
likely to be largely due to the presence of CBD and CBN. GLC
analysis of the extract has shown that this extract contained
14.13% CBD, 9.08% CBN, and 6.68% delta-1-THC (27). On the basis
of our results, it is possible to separate the centrally active
cannabinoid delta-1-THC from peripherally active compounds of the
herbal extracts. An attempt has been made to differentiate them
structurally (Table 3). It can be seen that the olivetolic
nucleus together with a free C-5 hydroxyl group are structural
requirements for peripheral effects, involving both
cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase inhibition (14). Substances
possessing this structure possess antiinflammatory and analgesic
activities without central hallucinogenic effects. Delta-1-THC
and CBN, which are cyclized derivatives exhibiting no C-5
hydroxyl moiety, have little if any peripheral action. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The traditional use of Cannabis as an
analgesic, antiasthmatic, and antirheumatic drug is well
established. Our results would suggest that cultivation of
Cannabis plants rich in CBD and other phenolic substances would
be useful not only as fiber-producing plants but also for
medicinal purposes in the treatment of certain inflammatory
disorders.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Acknowledgments----We are grateful to the
Medicinal Research Council and the Government of Cameroon for
financial support. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">REFERENCES&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1. Pars, H.G., R.J. Razdan, and J.F. Howes.
1977. Potential therapeutic agents derived from the cannabinoid
nucleus. Adv. Drug. Res. 11. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2. O.L. Davies, J. Raventos, and A.L. Walpole,
1946. A method for evaluation of analgesic activity using rats.
Br. J. Pharmacol. 1: 255-264.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3. Gill, E.W., W.D.M. Paton, and R.G. Pertwee,
1970. Preliminary experiments on the chemistry and pharmacology
of Cannabis. Nature 228: 134-136.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">4. Dewey, W.L., L.S. Harris, and J.S. Kennedy,
1972. Some pharmacological and toxicological effects of
1-trans-delta-8- and 1-trans-delta-9-THC in laboratory rodents.
Arch. Int. Pharmacodyn. 196: 133-145. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">5. Chesher, G.B., C.J. Dahl, M. Everingham,
D.M. Jackson, H. Marchant-Williams, and G.A. Starmer, 1973. The
effect of cannabinoids on intestinal mobility and their
antinociceptive effect in mice. Br. J. Pharmacol. 49:
588-594.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">6. Buxbaum, D., E. Sanders-Bush, and D.H.
Efron. 1969. Analgesic activity of tetrahydrocannabinol in the
rat and mouse. Fed. Proc. 28: 735. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">7. Sanders, J., D.M. Jackson, and G.A. Starmer.
1979. Interactions among the cannabinoids in the antagonism of
abdominal constriction response in the mouse. Psychopharmacology
61: 281-285. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">8. White, H.L., and R.L. Tansik. 1980. Effects
of delta-9-THC and cannabidiol on phospholipase and other enzymes
regulating arachidonate metabolism. Prostaglandins Med. 4:
409-411, &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">9. Burstein, S., and S.A. Hunter. 1978.
Prostaglandins and Cannabis VI. Release of arachidonic acid from
HeLa cells by delta-1-THC and other cannabinoids. Biochem.
Pharmacol. 27: 1275-1280. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10. Burstein, S. and A. Raz. 1972. Inhibition
of prostaglandin E2 biosynthesis by delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol.
Prostaglandins 2: 369. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">11. Burstein, S.E., Levine, and C. Varanelli.
1973. Prostaglandins and Cannabis II. Inhibition of biosynthesis
by the naturally occurring cannabinoids. Biochem. Pharmacol. 22:
2905-2910.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;12. Barrett, M.L., D.Gordon, and F.J.
Evans. 1985. Isolation from Cannabis sativa L of cannflavin: A
novel inhibitor of prostaglandin production. Biochem. Pharmacol.
34: 2019-2024. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">13. Evans, A.T., E.A. Formukong, and F.J.
Evans. 1987. Activation of phospholipase A2 by cannabinoids. Lack
of correlation with CNS effects. FEBS Lett. 211: 119-122.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;14. Evans, A.T., E.A. Formukong, and F.J.
Evans. 1987. Actions of Cannabis constituents on enzymes of
prostaglandin synthesis: Antiinflammatory potential. Biochm.
Pharmacol. 36: 2035-2037. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">15. Parkes, M.W., and J.T. Pickens. 1965.
Conditions influencing the inhibition of analgesic drugs of the
response to intraperitoneal injections of phenylbenzoquine in
mice. Br. J. Pharmacol. 25: 81-87.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">16. Siegmund, E.A., R.A. Cadmus, and G. Lu.
1957. A method for evaluating both nonnarcotic and narcotic
analgesics. Proc Soc. Exp. Biol. 95: 729-731. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">17. Hendershot, L.C., and J. Forsaith. 1959.
Antagonism of the frequency of phenylbenzoquinone induced
writhing in the mouse by weak analgesics and nonanalgesics. J.
Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 125: 237-240. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">18. Kinghorn, A.D., and F.J. Evns. 1975. A
biological screen of selected species of the genus Euphorbia for
skin irritant effects. Planta Med. 28: 325.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;19. Williamson, E.M., and F.J. Evans.
1981. Inhibition of erythema induced by proinflammatory esters of
12-deoxyphorbol. Acta Pharmacol. Toxicol. 481: 47-52.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;20. Williamson, E.M., J. Westwick, V.V.
Kakkar, and F.J. Evans. 1981. Studies on the mechanism of action
of 12-DOPP, a potent platelet aggregating phorbol ester. Biochem.
Pharmacol. 30: 2691-2696. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">21. Collier, H.O.J., L.C. Dineen, C.A. Johnson,
and C. Schneider. 1968. Abdominal constriction response and its
suppression by analgesic drugs in the mouse. Br. J. Pharmacol.
Chemother. 32: 295-310. &nbsp; (22)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;23. Marks, F., G. Furstenberger, and E.
Kownatzki, 1981. Prostaglandin E-mediated mitogenic stimulatin of
mouse epidermis in vivo by divalent cation ionophore A23187 and
by tumor promoter 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate. Cancer
Res. 41: 696-702. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">24. Humes, J.L., S. Sadowski, M. Galavage, M.
Goldenberg, E. Bubers, R.J. Bonney, and F.A. Kuehl, 1982.
Evidence for two sources of arachidonic acid for oxidative
metabolism by mouse peritoneal macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 257:
1291-1594.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;25. Edwards, M.C., and F.J. Evans. 1987.
Activity correlations in the phorbol ester series. Bot. J. Linn.
Soc. 94: 231-246. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">26. Calson, R.P., L. O'Neill-David, J. Chary,
and A.J. Lewis. 1985. Modulation of mouse ear edema by
cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase inhibitors and other
pharmacological agents. Agents Actions 17: 197-204. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">27. Formukong, E.A., A.T. Evans, F.J. Evans.
1987. Inhibition of the cataleptic effect of
delta-1-tetrahydrocannabinol by noncataleptic constituents of
Cannabis sativa L. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. (in press). </font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>