
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B03-136</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA097-001038-B032-219</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.fintrend.com:80/Newsletters/Jan_96.htm 206.205.42.66 19970215063314 text/html 21385
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 06:33:36 GMT
Server: Apache/1.0.5
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>FTF January, 1996</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<!--webbot bot="Include" u-include="../_private/logo.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../images/FTFlogo.gif" width="414"
height="100"></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="4054" --><div
align="center"><center>

<table border="5" cellpadding="2" width="60%">
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><b><i>January 31, 1996</i></b></td>
        <td width="50%"><b><i>Timothy</i></b> <b><i>McMahon,</i></b> </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><b><i>Volume 1, Number 7</i></b></td>
        <td width="50%"><b><i>Editor</i></b> </td>
    </tr>
</table>
</center></div>

<hr>

<h3><a name="In This Issue . . ."><font color="#008000"><em>In
This Issue . . .</em></font></a></h3>

<table border="1" cellpadding="2" width="100%">
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a href="Jan_96.htm#Bonds">Bonds</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a href="Jan_96.htm#Fund Analysis">Fund
        Analysis</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="Jan_96.htm#Moore Inflation Predictor (MIP)">Moore
        Inflation Predictor (MIP)</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a href="Jan_96.htm#Corporate Bonds">Corporate
        Bonds</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a href="Jan_96.htm#Bond Fund Rankings">Bond
        Fund Rankings</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a href="Jan_96.htm#Charts">Charts</a></td>
    </tr>
</table>

<h1><a href="Jan_96.htm#In This Issue . . ." name="Bonds">Bonds</a></h1>

<p>It is time for us to look at Bonds as our investment vehicle
of choice for the next several months. There are two basic ways
for us to invest in bonds. </p>

<p>The first vehicle is bond mutual funds and the second is
individual bonds. Naturally, mutual funds diversify our risk by
buying many bonds and offering us the opportunity to purchase our
bonds in any dollar amount. But there are advantages to
purchasing individual bonds. </p>

<p>Individual bonds allow you to lock in a yield for a guaranteed
time period. They also eliminate management fees. The third
advantage is that you can tailor your portfolio to meet your own
specific needs. </p>

<p>A subdivision within both investment vehicles is corporate vs.
government bonds. This of course pertains to who issues the bond
and really has little effect upon the bond as an investment. In
recent years government bonds have yielded less than corporate
bonds. This is primarily because during this century governments
have been considered better risks than individual corporations. </p>

<p>This was not always the case. In the 1700's with revolutions
everywhere the French government (among others) actually had a
very difficult time getting anyone to loan them money at any
interest rate. In fact their credit was so bad the only way they
could raise money was to sell the Louisiana Territory to the
United States. </p>

<p>Before we go any further we should discuss the basics of
bonds. The first thing to consider when choosing a specific bond
is the current yield. Current yield is the amount of income (in
percent) that a bond generates. </p>

<p>The second most important factor is the yield to maturity
(YTM) <i>i.e.</i> the current yield plus any annualized capital
appreciation or depreciation until maturity. Other factors
include: Maturity (expiration) date; Face Value (generally $1000
but for some perverse reason it is listed as 100) and coupon rate
(face interest rate). </p>

<p>The original purchaser of a single bond with a coupon rate of
9.5% would have paid $1000 and received $95 interest in the first
year (probably paid semi-annually). What if at the end of the
year interest rates have fallen so that the market feels that
this bond should only be yielding 9%? Since the coupon rate is
fixed by contract the only way to decrease the yield is for the
owner to charge more than $1000 for the bond This is called a
premium. </p>

<p>To yield 9% this bond must sell for $1055.55, which is the
interest paid divided by the current yield ($95/.09). Put another
way Current Yield = Interest Paid divided by Current Price
($95/$1055.55). </p>

<p>In addition to trading at a premium, Bonds can trade at a
discount. This happens when current interest rates are higher
than they were when the bond was issued. In the previous example,
if the prevailing rate is now 10% but our bond is still paying
only $95 the current price would have to be ($95/.10) or $950. </p>

<p>Strictly speaking, if we don't hold our bond until maturity it
doesn't matter whether we buy it at a premium or a discount; upon
sale we will receive the current market value for that type and
grade of bond. </p>

<p>If an AAA bond is yielding 10% we will get 10% whether we end
up receiving $1055.55 for it or $950. The only time a discount is
beneficial is if we hold it to maturity. If we buy the bond for
$950 and two years later it matures and we get $1000 for it our
total yield is increased by $50. This is called yield to maturity
(YTM). To calculate YTM on relatively short bonds we can simply
divide the extra appreciation received by the number of years the
bond was held and come up with a close approximation for the true
YTM. </p>

<p>In this case we would divide the $50 by 2 and get an extra $25
per year. Therefore, our YTM would be ($95+$25)/$950 or 12.6%. If
our bond matured in four years, the YTM would be
[$95+($50/4)]/$950 or 11.31%. Naturally, the longer until
maturity the less difference between YTM and current yield. </p>

<p>If we bought our bond at a premium we simply change the plus
in the formula to a minus. If purchase price is $1055.55, the
coupon rate is 9.5%, and we have 5 years until maturity, we would
have a YTM of [$95-($55.55/5)]/$1055.55 or 7.95%. </p>

<p>We want to hold bonds when interest rates are falling, so in
addition to receiving the interest on them we can also sell them
for more than we paid for them (As we saw in the first example). </p>

<p>The risk that interest rates might go against us is called
&#147;market risk.&#148; The only other risk involved is that the
issuer might go bankrupt and not be able to pay off the bonds
(security risk). In normal economic environments, that risk is
very small even on very poorly rated bonds. But it does happen,
so we wouldn't want to put all our nest egg into a single
poorly-rated bond. Diversification is one of the benefits of a
fund. Holding bonds with a near maturity is another way of
limiting risk. </p>

<h2><a href="Jan_96.htm#In This Issue . . ."
name="Moore Inflation Predictor (MIP)">Moore Inflation Predictor
(MIP)</a></h2>

<p>We will not be able to present the MIP this month. </p>

<p>The CPI-U data or December is delayed this month due to the
partial government shut down. It is due to be released February
1st. However, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors is due to
meet again January 29th, and we are trying to get this issue to
you before that meeting. </p>

<p>Last month the MIP projected that December might be slightly
up but the first six months of 1996 would be down with the
projected Median ranging from about 2.75% in December down to
slightly above 2% in June of 1996. </p>

<p>The FED generally likes to keep the Discount Rate 2% above the
CPI-U rate. With the current discount rate at 5.25% and the
current CPI-U at between 2.5 and 2.75%, the FED could lower rates
as much as ¾ of a percent just to get it within the current
target range. </p>

<p>I don't necessarily expect that much all at once but I do
expect several lowerings between now and June! </p>

<p>Remember--by June the Discount rate should be between 4 and
4.25% or a total cut of between 1-1.5%. </p>

<p>This means bonds ought to soar between now and June. This
meteoric rise may begin with the January 29th meeting so be
prepared! </p>

<h2><a href="Jan_96.htm#In This Issue . . ."
name="Bond Fund Rankings">Bond Fund Rankings</a></h2>

<p><img src="../images/Jan_961.gif" width="707" height="374"> </p>

<p>The following table shows the best performing bond funds
during the last 12 months. (These are not the results for 1995, <i>per
se</i>, but for the 12 months prior to today. These results are
very similar to those of calendar 1995). As usual one of the most
volatile funds is Benham 2020 (BTTTX). With 48.6% appreciation it
has definitely done well-- but being comprised of zero coupon
bonds there is no current income. </p>

<p>The only fund performing better was Morgan Stanley Emerging
Market Debt Fund (MSIEX). Its annual appreciation was only
slightly better than BTTTX but because of the distributions of
15.6% it had a whopping 70% total return!!! </p>

<p>Unfortunately, the fund is designed primarily for institutions
and has a $500,000 minimum investment requirement. </p>

<p>On our January 12th Hotline we recommended closing our gold
and silver positions and buying Benham 2020 as of, Tuesday,
January 16th. The Hotline also recommended diversifying your
government bonds because of the uncertainty associated with the
federal government. </p>

<p>The treasury will be bumping into the debt ceiling again in
February but Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin still has quite a
few tricks up his sleeve. </p>

<p>Republicans had hoped to use the debt ceiling to pressure the
President but Rubin's sleight of hand tricks defused most of the
pressure last time around and he will probably do it again. </p>

<p>The Republicans have threatened Rubin's impeachment (which
triggered the last drop in T-bond prices) so at this time the
T-Bond market has more risk from his impeachment than from the
February ceiling. </p>

<h2><a href="Jan_96.htm#In This Issue . . ." name="Fund Analysis">Fund
Analysis</a></h2>

<p>GT Global (GHIBX) invests 65% in Bonds of Emerging Markets (<i>i.e.</i>
all countries except the U.S., Canada, Japan, Australia, New
Zealand and Western Europe). 35% may be allocated between stocks
of emerging markets. and/or debt and stocks of developed
countries. </p>

<p>Scudder Emerging Market Fund (SCEMX) invests 50% in Foreign
Government debt. 65% of all funds will be in Emerging Markets
debt, stocks and governments (some of which may overlap the 50%). </p>

<p>Loomis Bond Fund (LSBDX) is much more stable <i>i.e.</i> less
volatile than the other top performers and invests 65% in Bonds
which may be convertibles, Preferred Stock, etc., some of which
may be foreign. 35% may be in securities below investment grade. </p>

<p>These three funds all seem to provide a certain amount of
diversification for our portfolios. In normal circumstances all
three would be considered more risky than U.S. Government bonds
(security risk) but by being less volatile they may have less
market risk. Often diversification can lower overall risk even
though the individual issues included may be higher risk. </p>

<h2><a href="Jan_96.htm#In This Issue . . ."
name="Corporate Bonds">Corporate Bonds</a></h2>

<p>Although individual corporate bonds may carry a bit more risk,
they can be tailored more closely to your individual needs. By
carefully choosing maturity dates we can customize our portfolio
to our view of the future of interest rates. </p>

<p>Since the MIP gives us a good picture of the future of
interest rates we can carefully choose our maturities and even
lock in our profits. </p>

<p>For instance, if we see an increase in interest rates due
several months in the future, we can buy bonds that mature in two
or three years and lock in the current rate (by holding them to
maturity). Even though theoretically the price of the bonds
should decline because the prevailing interest rate is rising,
short term bonds are guaranteed to be worth 100 at maturity. </p>

<p>If we are willing to accept a bit more risk in our portfolio
we can often improve our performance dramatically. Standard &amp;
Poors considers any bond rated below BB to be speculative. Their
ratings are (from highest to lowest) AAA, AA, A, BBB, BB, B, CCC,
CC, and C. The letter &#147;D&#148; signifies that the bond is
currently in default. Each rating may be modified by the addition
of a + or -. </p>

<p>For our short term purposes I generally consider the following
factors. The first is Current Assets minus Current Liabilities.
If this number is positive the company can meet its current
obligations. If this number is negative we probably would not
want to hold these bonds to maturity. Often, though, even in
bonds rated &#147;C&#148; the remainder (of A minus L) is large
enough to pay off the entire bond issue (or at least a large
portion of it). These companies are not going to default any time
soon. </p>

<p>The next thing I look at is Total Debt as a percent of
Capitalization. In other words, what is the ratio of stock to
debt. A company with more debt than stock (<i>i.e.</i> the ratio
is 100 or above) may be high risk. </p>

<p>As long as the ratio is below 100 stockholders would have to
loose all their money before bond holders loose a cent. So
bondholders are very unlikely to loose if they hold the bond to
maturity. A low risk company might have 40% Debt while a high
risk company has over 100%. </p>

<p>So as far as we are concerned as long as the company can cover
current liabilities and a significant portion of the bond issue
out of current assets <b>and </b>cover all long term debt by
capitalization there is very little short term risk (if we buy
bonds that are going to mature in the next couple of years). </p>

<p>If we want to assume a bit more risk we can follow the above
rules but purchase bonds that mature further out. Naturally, the
bonds that should appreciate most from a decrease in market
interest rates are the longest term bonds. </p>

<p>The following list includes high yield bonds, some of which
are trading at their lows for the year and/or a significant
discount. As you can see some have had significant fluctuation
during 1995 offering the opportunity for significant appreciation
in addition to the current yield. </p>

<p>If Ann Taylor returns to 100 from its current 83 you make not
17% but 17/83 or 20.48% plus the interest of 10%. If you hold
Waxman till 1999 you are guaranteed 23% per year. Eagle is up
3.75% since December. In many ways if you do your homework
individual bond issues offer greater potential than individual
stocks. </p>

<p>Our Aggressive Portfolio &#147;B&#148; will sell the Gold
Stocks on January 29th and buy 50% Ann Taylor and 50% Hechinger. </p>

<p>Note: These bonds are simply samples please be sure they are
appropriate for your personal portfolio. Portfolio &#147;C&#148;
should short interest rates. </p>

<h2><a href="Jan_96.htm#In This Issue . . ." name="Charts">Charts</a></h2>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Fund Name</b></td>
        <td valign="top"><b>Symbol</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Invesco Strategic Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">FGLDX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Van Eck Gold Resources</td>
        <td valign="top">GRFRX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Fidelity Select Amer. Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">FSAGX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">USAA Investment Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">USAGX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">United Svcs. World Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">UNWPX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Oppenheimer Gold &amp; Spec Min</td>
        <td valign="top">OPGSX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Franklin Gold</td>
        <td valign="top">FKRCX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Keystone Precious Metals Hld</td>
        <td valign="top">KSPMX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Lexington Strategic Silver</td>
        <td valign="top">STSLX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Van Eck Int'l Invest Gold A</td>
        <td valign="top">INIVX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Benham Gold Equities Index</td>
        <td valign="top">BGEIX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Lexington Gold Fund</td>
        <td valign="top">LEXMX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Bull &amp; Bear Gold Investors</td>
        <td valign="top">BBGIX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Lexington Strategic Investments</td>
        <td valign="top">STIVX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Vanguard Spec Gold &amp; Prec Met</td>
        <td valign="top">VGPMX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Fidelity Sel Prec Metals &amp; Min</td>
        <td valign="top">FDPMX</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">United Svcs. Gold Shares</td>
        <td valign="top">USERX</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<h3><b>Conservative Portfolio</b> </h3>

<h4><b>(Mutual Funds)</b> </h4>

<p>Buy Benham 2020 on 7/5@ $21.59 </p>

<p>Sell 9/15 $22.20 +2.8% </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 FGLDX on 9/15 @ $5.78 </p>

<p>Hotline Sell on 1/16 @ $6.15 +6.4% </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 STSLX on 9/15 @ $4.44 </p>

<p>Hotline Sell on 1/16 @ $4.42 -<b>.</b>45% </p>

<p>Hotline Buy BTTTX @ $25.16 </p>

<p>Annualized Return 11.6% </p>

<h3><b>Aggressive</b> <b>Portfolio</b> </h3>

<h4><b>(Individual Stocks)</b> </h4>

<p>Buy 1/2 CDE on 9/15 @ 20 7/8 </p>

<p>Sell on 1/29/96 </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 ECO on 9/15 @ 11 1/8 </p>

<p>Sell on 1/29/96 </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 ANN.F on 1/29/96 </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 Hechinger 9.45's of 2012 </p>

<h3><b>Speculative Portfolio</b> </h3>

<h4><b>(Options)</b> </h4>

<p>Short Interest Rates </p>

<p><img src="../images/Jan_96a.gif" width="585" height="465"> </p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>CPI-U</b> <p><b>Data</b> </p>
        </td>
        <td valign="top"><b>1995</b> <p><b>Index</b> </p>
        </td>
        <td valign="top"><b>12 Mo.</b> <p><b>Chg.</b> </p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Jan</b></td>
        <td valign="top">150.5</td>
        <td valign="top">2.80%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Feb</b></td>
        <td valign="top">150.9</td>
        <td valign="top">2.86%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Mar</b></td>
        <td valign="top">151.4</td>
        <td valign="top">2.85%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Apr</b></td>
        <td valign="top">151.9</td>
        <td valign="top">3.05%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>May</b></td>
        <td valign="top">152.2</td>
        <td valign="top">3.19%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Jun</b></td>
        <td valign="top">152.5</td>
        <td valign="top">3.04%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Jul</b></td>
        <td valign="top">152.5</td>
        <td valign="top">2.76%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Aug</b></td>
        <td valign="top">152.9</td>
        <td valign="top">2.62%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Sep</b></td>
        <td valign="top">153.2</td>
        <td valign="top">2.54%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Oct</b></td>
        <td valign="top">153.7</td>
        <td valign="top">2.81%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Nov</b></td>
        <td valign="top">153.6</td>
        <td valign="top">2.61%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Dec</b></td>
        <td valign="top">Late</td>
        <td valign="top">&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p><img src="../images/Jan_962.gif" width="601" height="464"> </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include" u-include="../_private/navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center">[ <a href="../index.htm">HOME</a> | <a
href="../cpi-u/cpi-u.htm">CPI-U</a> | <a
href="../Charts/charts.htm">CHARTS</a> | <a href="newsltr.htm">NEWSLETTERS</a>
| <a href="../FTF_TOC.htm">TOC</a> ]<br>
[ <a href="../ftfsearch.htm">SEARCH</a> | <a
href="../ftforder.htm">SUBSCRIPTIONS</a> |<a
href="../feedback.htm"> FEEDBACK</a> ]</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="60891" -->

<address>
    Send Questions or Comments to <a
    href="mailto:FinTrend@aol.com"><!--webbot bot="Substitution"
    s-variable="companyemail" startspan -->FinTrend@aol.com<!--webbot
    bot="Substitution" endspan i-checksum="52814" --></a>. <br>
    Last Modified: <!--webbot bot="TimeStamp" s-type="EDITED"
    s-format="%B %d, %Y" startspan -->October 30, 1996<!--webbot
    bot="TimeStamp" endspan i-checksum="31568" -->. <br>
    Copyright © 1996 Bonanza Press. All rights reserved. 
</address>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>