
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B19-54</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B012-79</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/WAR/afraid.html 206.61.184.43 19970122090059 text/html 5459
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:00:52 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:41:19 GMT
Content-length: 5244
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Who will protect children from legalized drugs?</title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFFF">
<center><tt>

<p>The Des Moines Register, Wednesday, February 21, 1996, 9A</tt></center> <center><font
size="7"><strong>Essay/Comment</strong></font></center> <center><font
size="5"><em>Iowa View</em>/<strong>Karol Crosbie</strong></font></center></p>

<p> <font size="6">Who will protect children from legalized
drugs?</font></p>

<p> <img src="../images/afraid.gif"></p>

<p> <font size="4"><strong>What are</strong> the chances that we
can keep legal cocaine from fifth-graders?</font> </p>

<p> The date is 2001. The place is a fifth-grade health-science
class. The use of heroin, marijuana and cocaine is now legal for
adults. The teacher begins her lesson: </p>

<p> &quot;Today we will talk about what it feels like to be high
on cocaine. If you sniff or smoke, or shoot, your whole body
changes. Your heart beats faster. You feel hot - hotter than
you've ever felt with your worst fever. </p>

<p> &quot;But most important is how you feel inside your head.
Your mind seems to work better. You can give a speech better,
argue better, tell a joke better. Your thoughts come faster; you
can remember more things; your memories are sharper. You don't
feel discouraged like you usually do. You feel relaxed, and like
you're floating above everything. You feel powerful - and you
feel like talking about your power. You can do anything. You are
sure you are the best, the smartest, the fastest. </p>

<p> &quot;A lot of people can be high on cocaine without anyone
else knowing. But sometimes the brain's chemistry is so mixed up
that it plunges you into a kind of nightmare - called a cocaine
psychosis. You are terrified. You believe your friends are going
to hurt you. You hear voices. You feel things - roaches crawling
on your face. </p>

<p> &quot;A high will last about 30 minutes. When it is over you
will remember it. You can't forget it. It was wonderful. You want
it again. You are depressed until you have it again. It doesn't
matter that the inside of your nose has open sores from sniffing.
It doesn't matter that your best friend died from cocalne because
her heart beat too fast and then just quit. You want the
experience again. </p>

<p> &quot;So you've got to say 'no' to this drug. Believe me.
Just say 'no.'&quot;</p>

<p> <img src="../images/madness.gif"> </p>

<p> What are the chances that our imaginary students will say no?
At this point we can replace fiction with facts. The facts are
that kids are much more likely to say &quot;yes&quot; to legal
drugs and &quot;no&quot; to illegal drugs. Our current legal drug
- alcohol - will cause the intoxication of close to 40 percent of
high-school seniors as often as every two weeks. Illegal drugs
are used by 25 percent of seniors. </p>

<p> Despite problems with prohibition, the fact is that when
alcohol was against the law, usage declined to a third or fourth
of its former level. And it is no coincidence that incidence of
cirrhosis of the liver fell by half. Laws and sanctions do have
an effect on human behavior. In the decade before Prohibition
went into effect in 1920, alcohol consumption in the United
States averaged 2.6 gallons per person per year. It fell to O.173
gallons during the Prohibition decade, doubled to 1.5 gallons in
the decade after repeal and is back to 2.6 gallons. </p>

<p> If cocaine were legal, how avallable and affordable would it
be to a fifth-grader? A gram of cocaine sells for about $80 to
$100. Its cost of pruduction is less than $3. What's the least
the government could charge, including tax? The cost would have
to be low enough to make bootlegging unprofitable. If not, we
wouldn't have solved the crime problem, which is what brought us
to legalization in the first place. Let's say the government sets
the price at $20 per gram. </p>

<p> There are about 50 &quot;hits&quot; of cocaine in a gram, so
at $20 per gram a school-child can get a hit for only 40 cents. </p>

<p> What are the chances that we can keep legal cocaine from
fifth-graders? We need only look at our failure at keeping
alcohol from children for an answer. </p>

<p> According to Dr. David I. McDonald, who was the drug-abuse
policy advisor to former President Reagan, if legalization pushed
the number of drug addicts to only half the number of today's
alcoholics, 100,000 people every year will die. Dr. Robert
DuPont, former director of the National Institute of Drug Abuse,
placed the estimate much higher. If one considers the
debilitating effects of cocaine, the carcinogenic effects of
marijuana and the AIDS potential of injecting legalized heroin,
the number of deaths could go as high as 500,000 a year. </p>

<p> Is a society that requires seat belts, infant car seats and
immunizations for children actually considering legalizing a drug
that can kill our unborn, our children, our teens, our adults and
our aged? I can think of no bigger gamble. </p>

<p><font size><strong>KAROL CROSBIE</strong></font> <em>is
communications coordinator at Children and Families of Iowa in
Des Moines.</em> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>