
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-58</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B021-362</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/court_ruling.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103759 text/html 26190
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:37:44 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:04:24 GMT
Content-length: 25974
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>U.S. Court of Appeals Decision re Medical Cannabis</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p>15 F.3d 1131 printed in FULL format.</p>

<h3 align="center">ALLIANCE FOR CANNABIS THERAPEUTICS, PETITIONER
v. DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION, RESPONDENT PHYSICIANS
ASSOCIATION FOR AIDS CARE AND THE LYMPHOMA FOUNDATION OF AMERICA,
INTERVENORS; <br>
DRUG POLICY FOUNDATION AND THE NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR THE
REFORM OF MARIJUANA LAWS, PETITIONERS v. DRUG ENFORCEMENT
ADMINISTRATION, RESPONDENT</h3>

<p>No. 92-1168, No. 92-1179</p>

<p>UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
CIRCUIT</p>

<p>15 F.3d 1131; 1994 U.S. App. LEXIS 2684; 304 U.S. App. D.C.
400</p>

<p>October 1, 1993, Argued</p>

<p>February 18, 1994, Decided</p>

<p>PRIOR HISTORY: [**1] Petitions for Review of an Order of the
Drug Enforcement Administration.</p>

<p>COUNSEL: Steven K. Davidson argued the cause for petitioners.
With him on the briefs were Amy W. Lustig and Kevin B. Zeese.
Thomas C. Collier, Jr. entered an appearance for petitioner
Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics and intervenors in No.
92-1168. </p>

<p>Lena D. Mitchell, Attorney, U. S. Department of Justice,
argued the cause for respondent. With her on the brief was John
C. Keeney, Acting Assistant Attorney General. Eumi L. Choi
entered an appearance for respondent.</p>

<p>Steven K. Davidson and Amy W. Lustig were also on the brief
for intervenors.</p>

<p>JUDGES: Before MIKVA, Chief Judge, and BUCKLEY and GINSBURG,
Circuit Judges. Opinion for the court filed by Circuit Judge
BUCKLEY.</p>

<p>OPINION BY: BUCKLEY</p>

<p>OPINION:<b> [*1132]</b> BUCKLEY, Circuit Judge:</p>

<p>The Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics, the Drug Policy
Foundation, and the National Organization for the Reform of
Marijuana<b> [*1133]</b> Laws petition for review of a final
order of the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration
declining to reschedule marijuana from Schedule I to Schedule II
of the Controlled Substances Act. Rescheduling to Schedule II
would permit doctors to prescribe marijuana<b> [**2]</b> for
therapeutic purposes. Petitioners&#146; central claim is that the
Administrator&#146;s order rests on an unreasonable
interpretation of the statute. Because our previous disposition
of this matter in <i>Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics v. DEA,
289 U.S. app. D.C. 214, 930 F.2d 936 (D.C. Cir. 1991) </i>(&#147;ACT&#148;)
constitutes the law of the case, we decline to reconsider this
claim. We also find that the Administrator satisfied ACT&#146;s
mandate on remand and that petitioners&#146; other claims lack
merit.</p>

<p>I. BACKGROUND</p>

<p>A. Statutory Scheme</p>

<p>The Controlled Substances Act (&#147;CSA places hazardous
drugs in five categories, or schedules, which impose varying
restrictions on access to the drugs. See <i>21 U.S.C. § 812 </i>(1988).
Marijuana is assigned by statute to Schedule I, the most
restrictive of these. See id. Schedule I drugs may be obtained
and used lawfully only by doctors who submit a detailed research
protocol for approval by the Food and Drug Administration and who
agree to abide by strict record-keeping and storage rules. See
21C.F.R. §§ 1301.33, 1301.42.</p>

<p>The CSA allows the Attorney General to reschedule a drug if he
finds that it does not [**3] meet the criteria for the schedule
to which it has been assigned. <i>21 U.S.C. § 811(a). </i>The
Attorney General has delegated this authority to the
Administrator. See 28 C.F.R. § 0.100(b). In rescheduling a drug,
the Administrator must consider, inter alia, &#147;scientific
evidence of [the drug&#146;s] pharmacological effect, if
known,&#148; and &#147;the state of current scientific knowledge
regarding the drug or other substance&#148; in determining
whether to reschedule the drug. <i>21 U.S.C. § 811(c)(2), (3). </i></p>

<p>A drug is placed in Schedule I if (1) it &#147;has a high
potential for abuse,&#148; (2) it has &#147;no currently accepted
medical use in treatment in the United States,&#148; and (3)
&#147;there is a lack of accepted safety for use of the
drug...under medical supervision.&#148; <i>21 U.S.C. § 812(b)(f)</i>
(1988) (emphasis added). The Schedule II criteria are somewhat
different: (1) the drug &#147;has a high potential for
abuse.&#148; (2) it &#147;has a currently accepted medical use in
treatment in the United States or a currently accepted medical
use with severe restrictions,&#148; and (3) &#147;abuse of the
drug...may lead to severe psychological<b> [**4]</b> or physical
dependence.&#148; <i>21 U.S.C. § 812(b)(2)</i> (1988) (emphasis
added). Petitioners&#146; central claim is that the Administrator
misinterpreted the language italicized above.</p>

<p>B. Procedural History</p>

<p>This is the latest chapter in petitioners&#146; efforts to
move marijuana into a less restrictive CSA schedule. They claim
that marijuana is misclassified because it has been shown to
serve various medicinal purposes. Specifically, they content that
marijuana alleviates some side effects of chemotherapy in cancer
patients, aids in the treatment of glaucoma, an eye disease, and
reduces muscle spasticity in patients suffering from multiple
sclerosis and other maladies of the central nervous system. In
support of these contentions, they introduced affidavits and
testimony for a number of patients and practicing physicians who
insist that, in their experience, marijuana has proven safe and
effective.</p>

<p>The petition to reschedule marijuana was first filed in 1972
and has been before this court on four prior occasions--<i>National
Org. for the Reform of Marijuana Laws v. Ingersoll, 162 U.S. App.
D.C. 67, 497 F.2d 654 (D.C. Cir. 1974); National Org. for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws v. Drug Enforcement Admin., 182 U.S. App
D.C. 114, 559 F.2d 735 (D.C. Cir. 1977);</i><b><i> </i></b><b>[**5}</b>
National Org. for the Reform of Marijuana Laws v. Drug
Enforcement Admin. &amp; Dept. of Health, Education &amp;
Welfare, No. 79-1660 (D.C. Cir. Oct. 16, 1980); and most
recently, <i>ACT, 289 U.S. App. D.C. 214, 930 F.2d 936 (D.C. Cir.
1991). </i>ACT is the only part of this history we need recount.</p>

<p>In ACT, the Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics
(&#147;Alliance&#148;) and the National Organization for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws (&#147;NORML&#148;) argued that the
Administrator&#146;s refusal to reschedule marijuana rested on an
unreasonable interpretation of the statutory phase,
&#147;currently accepted medical use,&#148; <b>[*1134]</b> <i>930
F.2d at 939; see 21 U.S.C. §§ 812</i>(b)(l)(B), (2)(B). In a
scheduling proceeding involving another drug, the Administrator
determined that &#147;the characteristics of a drug or other
substance with an accepted medical use include:</p>

<p>(1) scientifically determined and accepted knowledge of its
chemistry;</p>

<p>(2) the toxicology and pharmacology of the substance in
animals;</p>

<p>(3) establishment of its effectiveness in humans through
scientifically designed clinical trials;</p>

<p>(4) general availability of the substance <b>[**6]</b> and
information regarding the substance and its use;</p>

<p>(5) recognition of its clinical use in generally accepted
pharmacopeia, medical references, journals or textbooks;</p>

<p>(6) specific indications for the treatment of recognized
disorders;</p>

<p>(7) recognition of the use of the substance by organizations
or associations of physicians; and</p>

<p>(8) recognition and use of the substance by a substantial
segment of the medical practitioners in the United States.</p>

<p><i>53 Fed. Reg. 5,156, 5,157-58 </i>(Feb. 22, 1988).</p>

<p>Applying these criteria to the petition to reschedule
marijuana, the Administrator found on December 29, 1989, that
marijuana had no currently accepted medical use and thus had to
remain in Schedule I. <i>54 Fed. Reg. 53,767, 53,768 (1989).</i>
The eight-factor test had been published in the Federal Register
on February 22, 1988, 17 days after the close of the evidence but
before the oral arguments to the administrative law judge in the
marijuana rescheduling proceedings.</p>

<p>On reviewing the Administrator&#146;s decision, we found the
eight-factor test for determining whether a drug had a
&#147;currently accepted medical use&#148; to be <b>[**7]</b>
&#147;in the main acceptable.&#148; <i>ACT, 930 F.2d at 937.</i>
We noted the ambiguity of the phrase and dearth of legislative
history on point and deferred to the Administrator&#146;s
interpretation as reasonable. Id, at 939 (citing <i>Chevron U.S.
A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 467 U.S. 387,
843-45, 81 L. Ed. 2d 694, 104 S. Ct. 2778 (</i>1984) (court may
not substitute its own construction of ambiguous statutory
provision for reasonable interpretation by agency of statute
entrusted to its administration)). We were troubled, however, by
three of the eight criteria and remanded the case &#147;for an
explanation as to how [these] had been utilized by the
Administrator in reaching his decision.&#148; <i>930 F.2d at 940.</i>
In particular, we were concerned over the apparent impossibility
of meeting the fourth, fifth, and eighth criteria, all of which
assumed an availability of marijuana for medical purposes that
was prohibited by </p>

<p>Schedule I.</p>

<p>On March 26, 1992, the current Administrator issued the order
that is the subject of this appeal. See <i>57 Fed. Reg. 10,499</i>
(Mar. 26, 1992) (&#147;Final Order&#148;). He concluded, on
remand, that <b>[**8]</b> his predecessor had not in fact relied
on two of the three &#147;impossible&#148; criteria; he explained
the third; and, after applying new criteria, he again denied the
petition to reschedule marijuana. <i>Id. at 10,508.</i></p>

<p>II. DISCUSSION</p>

<p>A. Law of the Case</p>

<p>We held, in ACT, that the Administrator&#146;s interpretation
of the CSA was reasonable. Under the &#147;law of the case&#148;
doctrine, appellate courts do not reconsider matters resolved on
a prior appeal in the same proceeding. </p>

<p>18 Wright &amp; Miller, Federal Practice &amp; Procedure 4478
at 788 (1981). The doctrine is not a jurisdictional limitation;
rather, it &#147;merely expresses the practice of courts
generally to refuse to reopen what has been decided....&#148;<i>Meseight
criteria and remanded the case &#147;for an explanation as to how
[these] had been utilized by the Administrator in reaching his
decision.&#148; 930 F.2d at 940.</i> In particular, we were
concerned over the apparent impossibility of meeting the fourth,
fifth, and eighth criteria, all of which assumed an availability
of marijuana for medical purposes that was prohibited by </p>

<p>Schedule I.</p>

<p>On March 26, 1992, the current Administrator issued the order
that is the subject of this appeal. See <i>57 Fed. Reg. 10,499</i>
(Mar. 26, 1992) (&#147;Final Order&#148;). He concluded, on
remand, that <b>[**8]</b> his predecessor had not in fact relied
on two of the three &#147;impossible&#148; criteria; he explained
the third; and, after applying new criteria, he again denied the
petition to reschedule marijuana. <i>Id. at 10,508.</i></p>

<p>II. DISCUSSION</p>

<p>A. Law of the Case</p>

<p>We held, in ACT, that the Administrator&#146;s interpretation
of the CSA was reasonable. Under the &#147;law of the case&#148;
doctrine, appellate courts do not reconsider matters resolved on
a prior appeal in the same proceeding. </p>

<p>18 Wright &amp; Miller, Federal Practice &amp; Procedure 4478
at 788 (1981). The doctrine is not a jurisdictional limitation;
rather, it &#147;merely expresses the practice of courts
generally to refuse to reopen what has been decided....&#148;<i>Messenger
v. Anderson, 225 U.S. 436, 444, 56 L. Ed. 1152, 32 S. Ct. 739
(1912).</i> Thus, courts will reconsider previously decided
questions in such exceptional cases as those in which there has
been an intervening change of controlling law, or new evidence
has surfaced, or the previous disposition has resulted in clear
error or manifest injustice. 18 Wright &amp; Miller, 4478 at 790.</p>

<p>Petitioners do not contend that any of these exceptions apply
here. Instead, they assert <b>[**9]</b> that in ACT we gave only
cursory attention the statutory interpretation argument whereas,
in their view, the law of the <b>[*1135]</b> case doctrine
applies only where the prior appeal has analyzed an issue at
length. We disagree on both counts. First, our treatment of the
statutory interpretation question was entirely adequate. Second,
even summarily treated issues become the law of the case. In <i>Christianson
v. Colt Industries Operating Corp., 486 U.S. 800, 817, 100 L. Ed.
2d 811, 108 S. Ct. 2166 (1988), </i>the Supreme Court noted:
&#147; That the Federal Circuit did not explicate its rationale
is irrelevant, for the law of the case turns on whether a court
previously &#146;decided upon a rule of law&#146;--which the
Federal Circuit necessarily did--not on whether, or how well, it
explained the decision.&#148; In ACT, we decided that it was not
&#148;an unreasonable application of the statutory phrase [for
the Administrator] to emphasize the lack of exact scientific
knowledge as to the chemical effects of the drug&#146;s
elements.&#148; <i>930 F.2d at 939.</i></p>

<p>As noted above, our only concern, in ACT, was with three of
the standards adopted by the Administrator and his possible
reliance on them. As a consequence, <b>[**10]</b> in remanding
the case, we asked him to explain how his decision had been
affected by those standards. In the Final Order, the present
Administrator found that two of these criteria--the &#147;general
availability of the substance&#148; and the &#147;use of the
substance by a substantial segment of ... medical
practitioners&#148;--played no role in his predecessor&#146;s
decision. See <i>57 Fed. Reg. at 10,507.</i></p>

<p>Further, the Administrator found that his predecessor&#146;s
conclusion that marijuana failed to meet the third of the
questioned criteria--&#148;recognition of [the drug&#146;s]
clinical use in generally accepted pharmacopeia&#148;--rested on
a determination that marijuana lacked a known, reproducible
chemistry. See id. We had objected to the &#147;recognition of
clinical use&#148; standard only because it seemed to require
widespread therapeutic use of the drug--an impossibility for
Schedule I substances. See <i>ACT, 930 F.2d at 940</i>. The
Administrator&#146;s interpretation of that criterion meets our
objection.</p>

<p>The Final Order discards the earlier formulation and applies a
new five-part test for determining whether a drug is in
&#147;currently accepted medical use&#148;:</p>

<p>(1) The <b>[**II]</b> drug&#146;s chemistry must be known and
reproducible</p>

<p>(2) there must be adequate safety studies;</p>

<p>(3) there must be adequate and well-controlled studies proving
efficacy;</p>

<p>(4) the drug must be accepted by qualified experts; and </p>

<p>(5) the scientific evidence must be widely available.</p>

<p><i>57 Fed. Reg. at 10,506.</i> None of these criteria is
impossible for a Schedule I drug to meet; in fact, petitioners
concede in their briefs that the new standard has corrected the
flaws we identified in ACT.</p>

<p>B. Petitioners&#146; Other Arguments</p>

<p>Petitioners make two additional arguments: (1) They assert
that they were deprived of the opportunity to confirm their
evidentiary submissions to the governing legal standard because
the previous Administrator had failed to publish the eight-factor
test on which he relied, as required by the Freedom of
Information Act (&#147;FOIA&#148;), <i>5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(I)(D)</i>,
until two weeks after the close of the evidence in the
rescheduling proceeding; and (2) they claim that the
Administrator&#146;s ruling was not the produce of reasoned
decisionmaking because he was biased and ignored the record.</p>

<p>While <b>[**12]</b> Alliance and NORML had apparently raised
these issues in ACT, we did not expressly address them; nor did
we decide them by necessary implication because our limited
remand in ACT could have reflected a decision to postpone
consideration of these remaining arguments. Accordingly, we
conclude that ACT did not establish the law of the case as to
these issues. See <i>Bouchet v. Nat&#146;l Urban League, 235 U.S.
App. D.C. 37, 730 F.2d 799, 806 (D.C. Cir. 1984)</i> (&#147; Only
when an issue not expressly addressed must have been decided by
&#146;necessary implication&#146; will the [law of the case]
doctrine be applied ...&#148;).</p>

<p>1. The FOIA Claim</p>

<p>Section 552(a)(1) of FOIA provides in relevant part:</p>

<p><b>[*1136]</b> Each agency shall separately state and
currently published in the Federal Register for the guidance of
the public--</p>

<p>...</p>

<p>(D) ... statements of general policy or interpretations of
general applicability formulated and adopted by the agency...</p>

<p>...</p>

<p>Except to the extent that a person has actual and timely
notice of the terms thereof, a person may not in any manner ...
be adversely affected by [] a matter required to be published in
the Federal Register and not so published. <b>[**13]</b></p>

<p><i>5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(1) </i>(emphasis added). This provision
requires agencies to set out in advance the legal standards that
will be<i> </i>applied so that &#147;actions can be guided, and
strategies planned.&#148; <i>Northern Calif. Pwr.Agency v.
Morton, 396 F. Supp. 1187, 1191 </i>(D.D.C.), aff&#146;d mem.
sub. nom. <i>Northern Calif. Pwr. Agency v. Kleppe, 176 U.S. App.
D.C. 241, 539 F.2d 243 (D.C. Cir. 1976).</i> To establish a claim
under the statute, however, the litigant must show that &#147;he
was adversely affected by a lack of publication or that he would
have been able to pursue an alterative course of conduct&#148;
had the information been published. <i>Zaharakis v. Heckler, 744
F.2d 711, 714 (9th Cir. 1984).</i></p>

<p>Petitioners argue that the Administrator violated the statute
by using the eight-factor test to evaluate the evidence presented
in the marijuana rescheduling petition. As the test was not
published until 17 days after the close of the evidence, they
contend that they were &#147;adversely affected&#148; by the
Administrator&#146;s reliance on the test because they had no
opportunity to tailor their evidence to meet its requirements. <b>[**14]</b>
Accordingly, they ask us to remand the case to the Administrator
with instructions to reopen the record for the submission of new
evidence.</p>

<p>We decline to do so because petitioners have failed to
demonstrate that they have in fact been adversely affected by the
lack of notice. During the nearly two years between the
publication of the eight-factor test on February 22, 1988, and
the Administrator&#146;s ruling on December 29, 1989, petitioners
never sought to reopen the record. As parties to an important
controversy, they had a responsibility to proffer any evidence
that was made newly relevant by the adoption of the criteria.
Their failure to do so suggests either that they were satisfied
that the evidence already presented would meet the test or that
they had no further evidence to offer. </p>

<p>Thus, we have no reason to believe that petitioners would have
pursued an &#147;alternative course of conduct&#148; had the test
been published earlier. <i>Zaharakis, 744 F.2d at 714.</i> </p>

<p>Furthermore, we do not agree that <i>McLouth Steel Products v.
Thomas, 267 U.S. App. D.C. 367, 838 F.2d 1317 (D.C. Cir. 1988) </i>supports
their position. That case is distinguishable. McLouth arose <b>[**15]</b>
in the context of a rulemaking in which an agency failed to
identify adequately a key standard in its notice of proposed
rulemaking in violation of <i>5 U.S.C. § 553</i>. Unlike
petitioners, the McLouth challengers knew the governing legal
standard by the time they were called on to submit evidence;
their complaint was that they had not had a chance to challenge
the standard at the time it was adopted. <i>838 F.2d at 1322-23</i>.
We held that the challengers were not required to demonstrate
that the failure of notice had caused &#147;specific
prejudice&#148; because &#147;we cannot say with certainty
whether petitioners&#146; comments would have had some effect [on
the adoption of the standard] if they had been considered when
the issue was open.&#148; Id, at 1323-24. Here, petitioners&#146;
challenge is not to the standard but to their claimed inability
to respond to it.</p>

<p>2. The Reasoned Decisionmaking Claim</p>

<p>In ACT, Alliance and NORMAL argued that the prior
Administrator had been biased and ignored the record. On this
appeal, petitioners repeat these claims and accuse his successor
of the same errors. We need not consider <b>[**16]</b> whether
the previous Administrator&#146;s ruling stemmed from reasoned
decisionmaking, however, because we remanded it to the agency. We
thus confine our review to the current Administrator&#146;s
treatment of the record in the Final Order.</p>

<p>In support of their bias claim, petitioners point to what they
describe as a long history of the Drug Enforcement
Administration&#146;s <b>[*1137]</b> anti-marijuana prejudice as
evidenced by this court&#146;s need to remand their petition on
four occasions and what they describe as the prior
Administrator&#146;s &#147;unusually strident decision&#148;
rejecting the administrative law judge&#146;s recommendation that
the drug be rescheduled. They also cite various statements by the
present Administrator in the Final Order as evidence of a lack of
objectivity. See, e.g., <i>57 Fed. Reg. at 10,502</i> (&#147;The
only favorable evidence that could be found by [petitioners]
consists of stories by marijuana users&#148;); id. (&#147;sick
people are not objective scientific observers, especially when it
comes to their own health.&#148;); <i>id. at 10,503</i>
(&#147;sick men, women, and children can be fooled by these
claims and experiment with the drug..<i>..</i>It is a cruel hoax
to offer <b>[**17] </b>false hope to desperately ill
people.&#148;)</p>

<p>We are not impressed. The need to remand a case several times
is not evidence per se of agency prejudice. Nor do we think the
statements cited by petitioners show that the Administrator was
unfair, especially when considered in the context of a reasonable
preference for rigorous scientific proof over anecdotal evidence,
even when reported by respected physicians. </p>

<p>Moreover, our review of the record convinces us that the
Administrator&#146;s findings are supported by substantial
evidence. See <i>21 U.S.C. § 877</i>(1988) (substantial evidence
standard applies to findings of fact in rescheduling
proceedings). The Final Order canvasses the record at length. It
recites the testimony of numerous experts that marijuana&#146;s
medicinal value has never been proven in sound scientific
studies. The Administrator reasonably accorded more weight to the
opinions of these experts than to the anecdotal testimony of
laymen and doctors on which petitioners relied. The Administrator
noted that with one exception, none of [these doctors] could
identify under oath the scientific studies they swore they relied
on. Only one had enough <b>[**18]</b> knowledge to discuss the
scientific technicalities involved. Eventually, each one admitted
he was basing his opinion on anecdotal evidence, on stories he
heard from patients and on his impression about the drug.</p>

<p>Final order, <i>57 Fed. Reg. at 10,502-03</i>. These findings
are consistent with the view that only rigorous scientific proof
can satisfy the CSA&#146;s &#147;currently accepted medical
use&#148; requirement. <i>Id at 10,500.</i></p>

<p>III. CONCLUSION</p>

<p>For the foregoing reasons, the petitions for review are </p>

<p>Denied.</p>

<p>S</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>