
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B20-263</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B015-191</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hempfuel.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043001 text/html 8990
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:29:54 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:30 GMT
Content-length: 8773
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp For Fuel</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<h2>HEMP FOR FUEL </h2>

<p><b>Excerpted from &quot;Energy Farming in America,&quot; by
Lynn Osburn</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>BIOMASS CONVERSION to fuel has proven economically feasible,
first in laboratory tests and by continuous operation of pilot
plants in field tests since 1973. When the energy crop is growing
it takes in C02 from the air, so when it is burned the C02 is
released, creating a balanced system. </p>

<p>Biomass is the term used to describe all biologically produced
matter. World production of biomass is estimated at 146 billion
metric tons a year, mostly wild plant growth. Some farm crops and
trees can produce up to 20 metric tons per acre of biomass a
year. </p>

<p>Types of algae and grasses may produce 50 metric tons per
year. This biomass has a heating value of 5000-8000 BTU/lb, with
virtually no ash or sulfur produced during combustion. About 6%
of contiguous United States land area put into cultivation for
biomass could supply all current demands for oil and gas. </p>

<p>The foundation upon which this will be achieved is the
emerging concept of &quot;energy farming,&quot; wherein farmers
grow and harvest crops for biomass conversion to fuels. </p>

<p>PYROLYSIS IS THE TECHNIQUE of applying high heat to organic
matter (ligno-cellulosic materials) in the absence of air or in
reduced air. The process can produce charcoal, condensable
organic liquids (pyrolytic fuel oil), non-condensable gasses,
acetic acid, acetone, and methanol. The process can be adjusted
to favor charcoal, pyrolytic oil, gas, or methanol production
with a 95.5% fuel-to-feed efficiency. </p>

<p>Pyrolysis has been used since the dawn of civilization.
Ancient Egyptians practiced wood distillation by collecting the
tars and pyroligneous acid for use in their embalming industry. </p>

<p>Methanol-powered automobiles and reduced emissions from
coal-fired power plants can be accomplished by biomass conversion
to fuel utilizing pyrolysis technology, and at the same time save
the American family farm while turning the American heartland
into a prosperous source of clean energy production. </p>

<p>Pyrolysis has the advantage of using the same technology now
used to process crude fossil fuel oil and coal. Coal and oil
conversion is more efficient in terms of fuel-to-feed ratio, but
biomass conversion by pyrolysis has many environmental and
economic advantages over coal and oil. </p>

<p>Pyrolysis facilities will run three shifts a day. Some 68% of
the energy of the raw biomass will be contained in the charcoal
and fuel oils made at the facility. This charcoal has nearly the
same heating value in BTU as coal, with virtually no sulfur. </p>

<p>Pyrolytic fuel oil has similar properties to no. 2 and no. 6
fuel oil. The charcoal can be transported economically by rail to
all urban area power plants generating electricity. The fuel oil
can be transported economically by trucking creating more jobs
for Americans. When these plants use charcoal instead of coal,
the problems of acid rain will begin to disappear. </p>

<p>When this energy system is on line producing a steady supply
of fuel for electrical power plants, it will be more feasible to
build the complex gasifying systems to produce methanol from the
cubed biomass, or make synthetic gasoline from the methanol by
the addition of the Mobil Co. process equipment to the gasifier. </p>

<p>FARMERS MUST BE ALLOWED TO GROW an energy crop capable of
producing 10 tons per acre in 90-120 days. This crop must be
woody in nature and high in lignocellulose. It must be able to
grow in all climactic zones in America. </p>

<p>And it should not compete with food crops for the most
productive land, but be grown in rotation with food crops or on
marginal land where food crop production isn't profitable. </p>

<p>When farmers can make a profit growing energy, it will not
take long to get 6% of continental American land mass into
cultivation of biomass fuel--enough to replace our economy's
dependence on fossil fuels. We will no longer be increasing the
C02 burden in the atmosphere. The threat of global greenhouse
warming and adverse climactic change will diminish. To keep costs
down, pyrolysis reactors need to be located within a 50 mile
radius of the energy farms. This necessity will bring life back
to our small towns by providing jobs locally. </p>

<p>HEMP IS THE NUMBER ONE biomass producer on planet earth: 10
tons per acre in approximately four months. It is a woody plant
containing 77% cellulose. Wood produces 60% cellulose. This
energy crop can be harvested with equipment readily available. It
can be &quot;cubed&quot; by modifying hay cubing equipment. This
method condenses the bulk, reducing trucking costs from the field
to the pyrolysis reactor. And the biomass cubes are ready for
conversion with no further treatment. </p>

<p>Hemp is drought resistant, making it an ideal crop in the dry
western regions of the country. Hemp is the only biomass resource
capable of making America energy independent. And our government
outlawed it in 1938. </p>

<p>Remember, in 10 years, by the year 2000, America will have
exhausted 80% of her petroleum reserves. Will we then go to war
with the Arabs for the privilege of driving our cars; will we
stripmine our land for coal, and poison our air so we can drive
our autos an extra 100 years; will we raze our forests for our
energy needs? </p>

<p>During World War II, our supply of hemp was cut off by the
Japanese. The federal government responded to the emergency by
suspending marijuana prohibition. Patriotic American farmers were
encouraged to apply for a license to cultivate hemp and responded
enthusiastically. Hundreds of thousands of acres of hemp were
grown. </p>

<p>The argument against hemp production does not hold up to
scrutiny: hemp grown for biomass makes very poor grade marijuana.
The 20 to 40 million Americans who smoke marijuana would loath to
smoke hemp grown for biomass, so a farmer's hemp biomass crop is
worthless as marijuana. </p>

<p>It is time the government once again respond to our economic
emergency as they did in WWII to permit our farmers to grow
American hemp so this mighty nation can once again become energy
independent and smog free. </p>

<p>For more information on the many uses of hemp, contact BACH,
the Business Alliance for Commerce in Hemp, Box 71093, LA, CA
90071-0093, 213/288-4152. </p>

<p>--excerpt from Herer, &quot;Emperor Wears No Clothes,&quot;
1991 edition, p. 136 </p>

<p>For an updated version of &quot;Energy Farming In
America,&quot; &quot;Books In Print&quot; lists &quot;Ecohemp:
Economy and Ecolgy with Hemp,&quot; Access Unlimited, Frazier
Park, CA, 805/632-2644. </p>

<p>[3] The device invented was named the decorticator and in the
mid 1930s it was poised to do for hemp what the cotton gin had
done for cotton: create a fast and economically feasible way of
&quot;removing the fiber- bearing cortex from the rest of the
stalk, making hemp fiber available for use without a prohibitive
amount of human labor.&quot; (&quot;Popular Mechanics,&quot;
February, 1938) <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>