
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-59</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B044-37</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/dwdsum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131302 text/html 140343
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:12:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:10:03 GMT
Content-length: 140124
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Dealing With Drug Abuse -- Summary and Recommendations</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->

<h1>Dealing with Drug Abuse </h1>

<p><b>A Report to the Ford Foundation</b> </p>

<p>THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT </p>

<h2>Summary of Findings, Conclusions, and Recommendations </h2>

<p>by Patricia M. Wald and Peter Barton Hutt </p>

<hr>

<p><b>The Present Problem and Efforts to Control It </b></p>

<p><b>A More Promising Approach to Drug Abuse </b></p>

<p><b>The Drug Abuse Council</b> </p>

<p>This report, which summarizes the results of the Drug Abuse
Survey Project, is based upon extensive reading and numerous
interviews with workers in the field throughout the country. </p>

<p>Part I describes the present drug-abuse problem in this
country and what is currently being done to control it. Part 11
summarizes the project's views on a more promising approach to
drug-abuse problems. Part III sets forth the project's
recommendations for private foundation activity in this field. </p>

<p>Two preliminary observations are essential to this discussion.
First, in many aspects of this field, important basic facts have
not yet been determined and perhaps cannot be determined in the
near future; conclusions, therefore, depend on fragmentary
information and primarily on judgment. Because of the emotional
and moral attitudes involved in drug issues, conclusions differ
widely among individuals and are strongly and deeply held.
Secondly, even where facts exist, experts in the field often
disagree on their meaning and significance. We have found few
areas in which there is not widespread disagreement. </p>

<p>As a result, in arriving at the project's conclusions and
recommendations, we have relied strongly on the judgment of the
Cochairmen and the Executive Director. It should be understood
that at least one recognized expert could readily be found to
challenge, perhaps vehemently, virtually any statement we make or
might make. It appears that there can be no such thing as
consensus or a noncontroversial report on drug abuse. </p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5"><b>THE PRESENT PROBLEM AND EFFORTS TO CONTROL
IT</b></font> </p>

<p><b>THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF DRUG ABUSE</b> </p>

<p>Staff Report I describes the characteristics of the most
common drugs of abuse. For purposes of this report, such socially
accepted and legal drugs as alcohol and nicotine have been
excluded, and &quot;drug abuse&quot; has been limited primarily
to heroin, marijuana, stimulant and depressant drugs, and
hallucinogens. </p>

<p>The effects of a drug, the pattern of drug use, the prognosis
for the user, and the bases of social concern all vary widely
depending on the drug used, the age and class of the user, and
the circumstances. No categorization, therefore, is totally
satisfactory. The four core problems, however, have been broadly
delineated by many commentators as: (1) the use of heroin in
urban poverty areas, (2) experimentation with a wide variety of
drugs by the young, (3) the use of drugs by middle-aged and older
persons as a form of quasi-self-medication, and (4) the use of
drugs as a behavior-control device. </p>

<p>Heroin in Urban Poverty Areas. According to our best
estimates, there were, as of November, 1970, approximately
150,000 to 250,000 active heroin addicts in the United States.'
(Some estimates run as high as 300,000 heroin addicts in New York
City and 600,000 nationally, but these figures have little
support.) The addicts are heavily concentrated in the poorest
areas of large metropolitan areas. Probably half live in New
York, and 60 to 70 per cent of them are black, Puerto Rican, or
Mexican-American. Almost 85 per cent are male. </p>

<p>These figures represent people who use heroin on a daily
basis, injecting a dose every six to eight hours as the effect of
the previous dose wears off. They may spend anywhere from $10 to
$100 per day on heroin, depending on their dosage and tolerance,
their economic ability to sustain the habit, the purity of the
drug bought, and the price level of the city in which they live. </p>

<p>There is an additional, though unknown, population that uses
heroin only occasionally, either alone or as part of a pattern of
multiple drug use. The size of this group is a matter of
conjecture and debate. Some experts believe that repetitive use
of heroin leads inexorably to addiction, whereas others believe
that there is a substantial number of intermittent users who do
not become addicted. </p>

<p>It is not possible to resolve this issue definitively. It
seems probable, however, that a large number of persons have
experimented with heroin a few times without becoming addicted.
Heroin is easily available in the slum areas of most major
cities. Although a large habit is expensive, a single dose is
cheap ($1 or less for a capsule containing about I mg. of heroin
in Washington, D.C.), and the unit of sale in many places is so
small that a neophyte can take it without much fear of an
overdose. It seems likely that a large percentage of the young
black males in any large urban lower-class area have tried
heroin. The majority who have experimented with it have not
become addicted. And, although the potency of heroin makes it
difficult to believe that large numbers of intermittent users
never become addicted, this possibility cannot be ruled out on
the basis of present information. </p>

<p>Although heroin is a primary drug for the addict, multiple
drug use is exceedingly common. According to some studies,
between 40 and 60 per cent of the addicts use one of the
amphetamines or barbiturates as a secondary drug on a regular
basis. Cocaine, a strong nonaddictive stimulant, is also used
widely. </p>

<p>The tremendous wave of concern about heroin that has swept the
country appears to be caused primarily by the fear of crime
associated with addiction. Heroin itself does not cause criminal
behavior in any physiological or psychological sense, but the
need to maintain an expensive habit often does. A heroin addict
will do almost anything to obtain money to buy the drug. There is
virtually no way in which a poor, black, unskilled youth can earn
legally the $30 per day that is required for the average habit.
To maintain his addiction, he can deal in drugs, engage in
consensual crime, or steal. It is reasonable to estimate that
addicts steal between $1 billion and $2 billion in merchandise
per year. Estimates of thefts in New York City alone range from a
low of $.25 billion to a high of $1.9 billion. There is some
evidence that up to 50 per cent of property crimes in the major
metropolitan areas with a serious heroin addiction problem are
committed by addicts. On the other hand, there is evidence that
most addicts engaged in crime before they became addicted.
Addiction, therefore, cannot necessarily be regarded as the cause
of a criminal life-style, although it unquestionably intensifies
criminal activity. </p>

<p>A secondary cause of the current concern about heroin is the
fear that it has, or will, spread throughout society. While
heroin is undoubtedly now available in the suburbs, there is
little evidence that it represents a substantial problem there.
It remains largely a lower-class drug. </p>

<p>A third cause commonly cited for the concern about heroin is
fear of the effects of the drug on the user. Actually, there is
no proof that heroin itself causes any organic damage to the body
or brain similar, for example, to the extensive damage caused by
alcohol. Death through overdose has been attributed by medical
experts to the fact that heroin is a powerful nervous-system
suppressant that may cause respiration to cease when the dosage
exceeds the individual's tolerance, or to the fact that some
individuals may experience a severe allergic reaction to heroin. </p>

<p>It seems possible that many addicts would function normally if
given a steady supply of good-quality drugs. The real harm to
users is that they presently tend to become social dropouts, in
that the illegal status of the drug causes them to spend all
their time obtaining and using it. There seems little doubt that,
if it were not for the fear of crime and the spread of heroin to
the suburbs, most of society would not be seriously worried about
heroin addiction. </p>

<p>Youthful Drug Experimentation. Within the last five years
there has been a substantial increase in the use of illicit
nonopiate drugs by the young, particularly among middle-class
college and high school students and young military personnel.
The prevalent drugs of abuse for this group are marijuana (and,
to some extent, the more potent cannabis product, hashish), oral
amphetamines and barbiturates, LSD, and other hallucinogens.
During 1971 the use of heroin by GI's in Vietnam became, for the
first time, a matter of grave public concern. </p>

<p>As of November, 1971, the best estimates are that 15 million
people in this country have experimented with marijuana. Possibly
30 per cent of these go on to become occasional users, and 5 per
cent become frequent users. While these estimates are very
uncertain, survey research supports the conclusion that marijuana
use has spread fantastically in the last few years. One survey of
200 colleges found that 47 per cent of those interviewed had
smoked it 34 per cent occasionally and 13 per cent frequently.
There are major differences among colleges, of course. Other
surveys found that 70 per cent of the student body at one medical
school were current users of marijuana, as compared with 44 per
cent and 5 per cent at two other medical schools. Extrapolating
from available statistics, it is likely that 20 per cent of all
Americans between the ages of. 15 and 35 have used marijuana at
least once -a crime for which they could have been imprisoned by
the federal government for up to ten years.' </p>

<p>There is currently little evidence that marijuana causes
physical harm. The federal government is now engaged in a crash
research program to find out the short- and long-term effects of
marijuana. Critics of this research program argue that it is
intended simply to justify current federal policy and is not a
sound independent scientific investigation. Even persons who are
sympathetic to marijuana use will be surprised, however, if it is
discovered that marijuana use in large amounts over a long period
of time is totally harmless. The real issue over marijuana
appears to be not whether it causes mild physical damage but
whether its use has already spread so widely that, as is true of
alcohol, the social costs of efforts to prohibit it exceed the
physical costs that would be incurred by eliminating criminal
penalties for, or even legalizing, its use.' </p>

<p>Experimentation with oral amphetamines and barbiturate drugs,
all of which have recognized medical uses and are therefore often
easily obtainable, is probably second only to the use of
marijuana. Some 18 per cent of the students in the 200-campus
survey had tried amphetamines, and 15 per cent had tried
barbiturates, but only 2 per cent and 1 per cent, respectively,
had used them frequently. There are no more reliable estimates
available. </p>

<p>A quite dangerous pattern of middle-class youthful amphetamine
drug use is the injectable methamphetamine (&quot;speed&quot;)
Culture. Intravenous injections of methamphetamine usually take
the form of continuous use of massive doses for several days.
Users may become psychotic while under its influence, and it is
probably the drug most likely to lead directly to violence. There
is some evidence that it causes serious organic damage. Speed
also tends to make the user lose interest in food, sleep, and
hygiene. Because of these extreme effects, a speed
&quot;run&quot; is hard to sustain over any length of time, and
the end of a period of heavy speed use-the
&quot;crash&quot;-produces serious depression. Users have learned
over time that they can make the crash smoother by taking
barbiturates or heroin. Reports from San Francisco, the first
city to have a sizable speed culture, are that heroin is becoming
the drug of choice for a large proportion of former speed users
because it is a more pleasant &quot;down&quot; than the
barbiturates. </p>

<p>The use of LSD originally peaked in about 1967, declined
briefly, and then started to increase again as the early reports
about genetic damage caused by the drug were discredited and as
use spread downward into the high schools. The survey that found
marijuana use among 47 per cent of college students on 200
campuses found that 11 per cent had used LSD, but only I per cent
used it frequently. The National Institute of Mental Health had
earlier reported surveys showing a 2 to 9 per cent range of LSD
use among college students, with an over-all average of 5 per
cent. While a ratio of one LSD experimenter to every five triers
of marijuana seems too high for the population at large, or even
for most colleges and high schools, it does illustrate a higher
rate of current usage than has been suspected. </p>

<p>There is general agreement that LSD is a powerful drug that
should be used with care. In clinical use, severe reactions are
rare. One study found that 25,000 administrations of LSD or
mescaline to 5,000 people resulted in serious complications in
only 0.08 per cent of experimental subjects and 0.34 per cent of
subjects who were undergoing therapy. There is no scientific
certainty concerning other types of reaction that have been
alleged, but not proved, to result from LSD use, such as
flashbacks and birth defects. The long-term effects are not
known. </p>

<p>Youthful . experimentation may also involve heroin, especially
in the ghetto. A recent survey of juvenile addicts in Washington,
D.C., showed that over half started directly by mainlining heroin
rather than first using other drugs. Among middle-class youth,
however, experimentation with marijuana predominates, and heroin
is probably the least used drug. </p>

<p>Youthful middle-class experimentation with heroin as part of a
pattern of multidrug use does appear to be increasing. This
phenomenon is too new, and information is too fragmentary, to
judge whether it represents the beginnings of significant growth
in middle-class addiction. Preliminary reports indicate that
people who become involved with heroin in this non-ghetto context
have less tendency toward heavy involvement. </p>

<p>The extent of penetration of drugs other than marijuana is
difficult to assess. Considerably fewer young people seem to have
tried oral doses of amphetamines and barbiturates than have tried
marijuana, but more appear to have tried them than have tried
LSD. The number of young people who become heavily involved with
amphetamines (especially injectable methamphetamine) and
barbiturates is unknown but is probably of about the same
magnitude as those heavily involved with LSD. </p>

<p>Society's current concern about youthful drug experimentation
is often attributed to the possible detrimental effect on the
health of drug users. Certainly, concern about the potential harm
from heroin experimentation in the ghetto is far more justified
than concern about marijuana experimentation in the suburbs. It
is our judgment, however, that physical harm is actually only a
partial cause of this public concern. There are, after all, up to
9 million alcoholics, whose alcohol abuse affects a total of well
over 30 million people in this country, a far larger number than
are affected by drug abuse; yet, this enormous health problem has
created relatively little public concern. </p>

<p>Rather, the principal force behind the present public concern
about youthful middle-class experimentation seems to relate to
differences in perceptions and life-styles between older and
younger generations. Older persons tend to accept the use of
drugs only for therapeutic purposes. They do not regard alcohol
and nicotine as &quot;drugs&quot; and believe that the substances
can be properly used for social and personal pleasure. But the
older generation regards the use of drugs, such as marijuana and
LSD, for social and personal pleasure as symptomatic of
disrespect for law and authority and as an attempt to escape
responsibility. In contrast, many in the younger generation tend
to regard the use of drugs for social and personal pleasure as
entirely proper. Use of such drugs as marijuana and LSD is
therefore viewed by them as an opportunity for enhancement of
personal experience, an act of social custom within a peer group,
or a mark of youthful rebellion and independence similar to
smoking weeds or sipping beer behind the barn fifty years ago. </p>

<p>Drug Use among the Middle-aged and Elderly. Millions of people
use psychoactive drugs as a way of coping with the tensions and
problems of everyday living. Current estimates are vague, but in
a 1967 survey 25 per cent of all persons over 18 reported use of
a psychoactive drug during the preceding year. The number of
persons reporting use of a tranquilizer at some time in their
lives rose from 7 per cent in 1957 to 27 per cent in 1967.
American industry apparently produces about 4 billion dosage
units of barbiturates (not including other major and minor
tranquilizers) and 8 billion dosage units of amphetamines each
year. It is charged that half of these are diverted to the
illegal market at some point, and an unknown proportion of the
rest are prescribed carelessly. Some of these drugs are used by
heroin addicts and youthful experimenters. Most are not so used,
however, and the problem of self-prescribed use of these drugs is
one that pervades all strata of society. (In addition, about 10
per cent of the 80 million people who use alcohol have a serious
problem of dependence.) </p>

<p>The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) is now
conducting a series of comprehensive drug-use surveys, which
should provide an accurate picture of the extent of middle-age
and elderly drug abuse with legal as well as illegal drugs. The
project includes research into the frequency and situational
aspects of this problem. </p>

<p>Why certain persons become dependent on these drugs is not
clear. As in the case of heroin addiction, there is considerable
debate as to what physiological and psychological factors are
involved. </p>

<p>The personal costs of this type of drug abuse can be very
high. Of all the potential drugs of abuse, alcohol is one of the
most damaging, since even relatively light consumption clearly
causes some damage to such organs as the brain and liver, and
heavy consumption causes serious damage and sometimes death.
Barbiturates cause damage very similar to that caused by alcohol,
and, in the formal literature, these two drugs are regarded as
essentially additive and interchangeable in chronic intoxication.
With barbiturates, as well as alcohol, there is a serious risk of
lethal overdose. The personal costs of steady amphetamine use are
not clear. Experts believe that large doses entail a high risk of
organic damage. There appears to be no clear evidence concerning
smaller doses. </p>

<p>The social costs of alcoholism are now fairly well known and
need not be detailed here, but the social costs of the abuse of
barbiturates and amphetamines are still largely unknown. The
social benefits attributable to these drugs are equally
uncertain. There is clearly a widely felt need for the particular
effects of the various drugs. It is far from clear that
elimination of this form of drug abuse would result in net
benefits to the society, because one cannot be sure that other
possible responses to life situations would be less harmful. It
is possible that reducing the use of tranquilizers would result
in a rise of the violent crime rate, or in the divorce rate, or
in child beating. It almost certainly would require greater
institutionalization of persons with borderline emotional
problems. </p>

<p>Drugs in Behavior Control. A fourth emerging problem is the
overprescription of drugs to control the behavior of captive
populations, such as overactive school children and nursing-home
residents, where other, nondrug methods of control should
properly be used instead. Recent information has revealed
significant use of amphetamines to calm down behavior in the
classrooms of urban public schools. At the other end of the age
spectrum, tranquilizers are reportedly being used far too
extensively on elderly patients in nursing homes to keep them
from clamoring for the attention of overworked attendants. </p>

<p>These drugs are properly used, within limits of sound medical
practice approved by the Food and Drug Administration, for
hyper-kinetic children and elderly patients with emotional
problems. There is a serious danger, however, that they may be
used as a simple method of managing school children,
institutionalized patients, and correctional inmates as a
substitute for a competent staff and the other resources needed
in dealing with those not able to care for themselves. And, as
the range of behavior-controlling drugs becomes wider, we can
anticipate even greater problems in their use in unwarranted
situations. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>BASIC RESEARCH ON DRUG ABUSE</b> </p>

<p>Existing Research. Most of the basic research now being done
on drugs of abuse is conducted by the NIMH Addiction Research
Center (ARC) at Lexington, Kentucky, or conducted or financed by
grant or contract through the NIMH Division of Narcotic Addiction
and Drug Abuse and the NIMH Division of Psycbopharmacology. </p>

<p>ARC is an interdisciplinary group doing basic research on the
physiological effects of a number of drugs of abuse, and one of
the very few to our knowledge that has recently conducted any
research with heroin. Its 1970 budget is about $.8 million. Its
principal functions are research on the abuse potential of drugs
and on opiate antagonists. ARC would need far more personnel,
ranging from senior research scientists to technicians and
paraprofessionals, and far more funds if it were to expand its
activities broadly to include basic research on the cause and
nature of all drug abuse and drug dependence. </p>

<p>NIMH funds for intramural and extramural research relating to
drug abuse have increased threefold in five years.' The figures
below include research in pharmacology, sociology, psychology, <br>
</p>

<p>Year Budget Authority </p>

<p>(1,000,000) </p>

<p>1966 6.4 </p>

<p>1967 10.6 </p>

<p>1968 13.3 </p>

<p>1969 14.1 </p>

<p>1970 16.3 </p>

<p>1971 18.3 </p>

<p>TOTAL: $79.0<br>
</p>

<p>and many other areas. They also apparently include at least
some of the research on psychoactive drugs sponsored by the NIMH
Division of Psychopharmacology, which is interested primarily in
the use of drugs in the treatment of mental disorders. </p>

<p>The research funds are dispersed among the various drugs of
abuse, not concentrated on one or two. For 1970, the only year
for which we now have information, the division by drugs was as
follows: </p>

<p>Drugs Allocation </p>

<p>000,000) </p>

<p>Opiates 3.8 </p>

<p>Marijuana 2.3 </p>

<p>Hallucinogens 1.8 </p>

<p>Barbiturates 5.3 </p>

<p>Amphetamines 2.8 </p>

<p>Other .3 </p>

<p>TOTAL: $16.3 </p>

<p>NIMH is unable to provide either a dollar breakdown on the
types of research represented (pharmacology, sociology, etc.) or
a breakdown by drug for previous years. In 1970, $1.3 million of
the money spent on marijuana research was dispersed through
special contracts. ARC received $.8 million of the money
designated for opiate research to operate its program. An
undeterminable amount is spent by the Division of
Psychopharmacology and other parts of NIMH.' The balance of
research expenditures represents about 50 grants to specific
individuals and institutions given on application. </p>

<p>The allocation of grant resources is determined primarily by
an advisory committee of physical and social scientists that
reviews all applications for funding and assigns them a priority
ranking on the basis of scientific merit. While NIMH
administrators have some authority to overrule the committee
(they can fund a low priority project instead of a high-priority
one, but they cannot fund a project if the committee refuses to
assign it any priority at all), we have been informed that this
happens rarely. </p>

<p>We have also been informed that little or no effort is made to
create a program of research. Applications are reviewed in a
vacuum. Consideration is not given to the importance or relevance
of the research to policy issues or to major scientific and
medical questions, or to alternative uses of the research budget.
The results of prior projects are reportedly not made available
to the committee for its consideration in reviewing current grant
applications. No significant effort is made to encourage grant
applications in areas of particular interest to scientists,
physicians, and the government. </p>

<p>The Justice Department's Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs (BNDD) has engaged in some research in the past and still
has some ongoing efforts on the abuse potential of drugs, the
sociology of drug use, the characteristics of dealers, and the
market structure of the drug traffic. The decision has recently
been made, however, that BNDD's research role is to be limited to
subjects related to law enforcement. </p>

<p>A major problem with basic research conducted or funded by the
federal government is that it is necessarily limited by
governmental policy. Thus, as might be expected, there are large
gaps in our basic knowledge about drugs of abuse. In particular,
basic experimentation with the effects of heroin on chronic
heroin addicts has been virtually ignored in view of the strong
federal policy against any such research. Until very recently,
federal policy also virtually precluded marijuana research in
humans. Federal regulations single out LSD and a handful of other
hallucinogens, from among all known drugs, as requiring specific
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of an Investigational
New Drug Plan (rather than just filing the plan, as is true for
all other drugs) before clinical investigation may begin. Under
the 1970 federal drug-abuse law, research with heroin, marijuana,
and LSD may be conducted only after the Secretary of HEW has
approved the researcher and the protocol. In short, current
governmental policy is a critical factor in determining the type
of research that may be done under federal auspices or approval. </p>

<p>Other possible sources of funding for basic research on drugs
of abuse are the states, the universities, and the pharmaceutical
industry. Thus far, the states have concentrated on applied
research, primarily in the area of treatment. The universities
appear to have no significant source of funds for basic research
other than the federal government. And the pharmaceutical
industry concentrates primarily on product-oriented applied
research. As a practical matter, therefore, most basic research
depends on federal funds. </p>

<p>The pharmaceutical industry's research efforts are not only
product-oriented but, indeed, have the goals of increasing the
number of psychoactive drugs, enhancing their effect, or
improving their activity in some other fashion. From the
standpoint of drug abuse, the pharmaceutical industry is working
night and day to create products that will intensify the problem.
Many of these drugs, of course, have enormous medical value that
far outweighs their abuse potential. </p>

<p>The Need for Additional Basic Research. It is apparent that
there is a serious lack of basic information about how drugs of
abuse work and their long-term effects on the body. Many examples
could be given, but a few will make the point: </p>

<p>Since World War 11, there have been over 3,000 technical
papers on LSD. But scientists still do not know why LSD causes a
psychoactive effect, or whether it is toxic, or whether it causes
birth defects, or whether the widely reported
&quot;flashback&quot; effect is real or imagined and, if real,
has an organic basis. In short, many of the most important
questions remain unanswered. </p>

<p>Morphine was first isolated in the early 1800's, and heroin
was synthesized in the late 1800's. Among the things we still do
not know about these drugs are the mechanisms by which tolerance
develops, or whether an addict can be stabilized on a given dose,
or whether the drugs cause any organic damage, or the mechanism
by which they alleviate pain, or even whether withdrawal can be
psychologically as well as physically induced. </p>

<p>While it is common knowledge that many drug users, including
those on methadone, use combinations of drugs, little is known
about the effects of these combinations. For example, mixtures of
heroin and cocaine, or of amphetamines and barbiturates, are
often taken, but we do not know how they interact. </p>

<p>We have been unable to discern agreement among researchers on
what is and is not known, or on the priority needs for research,
with respect to the drugs of abuse. </p>

<p>Basic research questions concerning psychoactive drugs can be
divided roughly into two groups: (1) toxicological and
pharmacological effects, and (2) psychological and perceptual
effects. </p>

<p>Scientists probably know most about the toxicology (organic
damage done to the human body) of drugs of abuse, yet even here
there are many unanswered questions. It is known, for example,
that excessive use of alcohol and barbiturates causes extreme
damage to the brain and liver. It is suspected that amphetamines
in massive doses also cause organic damage, but scientists are
not yet sure. There is insufficient toxicological information on
the opiates (e.g., heroin, morphine), the cannabinols (e.g.,
marijuana, hashish), and the hallucinogens (e.g., LSD,
mescaline), the three categories of drugs with which the country
is most concerned. </p>

<p>The organic damage caused by drugs is, of course, only one
aspect of the more general study of pharmacological effects that
is, on what cells does a drug operate, how does it operate, what
metabolites are triggered, and so forth. Nor are such questions
unique to drugs of abuse. There appears to be no general theory
of drug action based on the chemical structure of drugs into
which discrete studies of the pharmacology of the drugs of abuse
can be fitted. And there is a question whether psychoactive drugs
do or do not represent a separate class of pharmacological
compounds that can be studied at a theoretical level, independent
of the study of pharmacology generally. </p>

<p>Basic pharmacological research would undoubtedly provide
useful knowledge for basic researchers, from which they may some
day construct a general theory of psychoactive drug action. The
central-nervous-system effect of drugs is, however, a
particularly difficult area of study. Many of the drugs with
which we are concerned have effects that are apparently quite
subtle and difficult to delineate. Some of the major
tranquilizers, which exert immensely potent effects on the brain,
have been studied intensively by NIMH for almost twenty years,
and we still do not really know how they work. It is uncertain
whether more could be learned faster by studying LSD, marijuana,
or even heroin. In short, the road to a general understanding of
the pharmacological effects of psychoactive drugs is difficult,
and basic research in this area is not guaranteed to be
productive. </p>

<p>Brain functioning is, of course, one of the current frontiers
of science, and the complexities of studying the central nervous
system make it likely that this area will remain a frontier for
years, if not decades. Although drugs are simply one type of
instrument for the study of the broader questions, the drugs of
abuse may be a particularly interesting input because they
clearly have large effects on the brain. </p>

<p>There is a great deal of work to be done here, and much of it
will be important. As the pharmacologists study the physiological
correlates of drugs and the psychopharmacologists and
experimental psychologists study the psychic correlates, at some
point in time linkages will be made leading to a unified view of
the entire process. </p>

<p>The second category of potential research concerns the general
interaction between drug taking and psychological and perceptual
awareness. Such psychological variables as anxiety levels,
attitudes toward self, perceptions, attention span, and mental
ability are all affected by drug taking. Conversely, pre-existing
states of mind and attitude have a significant impact on whether
an individual will seek drugs in the first place and on the
actual effects of a drug once it is taken. </p>

<p>Historically, because drug abuse has been looked at primarily
from the standpoint of deviant behavior, the study of its
psychological and perceptual effects has been placed largely
under the heading of psychopathology. Interest in the role of
external stimuli, of which drugs are but one example, in altering
the individual's perception and awareness of his surroundings has
increased in recent years. There is, for example, greater
scientific interest in the subjective experiences and
descriptions, rather than simply objective phenomena, connected
with drug taking. As with basic pharmacology, there is much
important information yet to be obtained in this developing area,
all of which is fundamental to a better understanding of human
functioning; but the progress of such research will likely be
slow and uncertain. </p>

<p>This area of interest, also, is not discrete. There are
clearly physical correlates for different states of perception
and awareness, although the links have yet to be forged. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>DRUG EDUCATION AND PREVENTION</b> </p>

<p>There is substantial uncertainty and confusion in the area of
drug education and prevention. Although nearly all workers in the
field believe strongly that sensitive and accurate drug education
programs can play an important role in preventing harmful drug
experiences among youth, there is no real evidence that such
educational efforts are successful. Educators are cautious about
new programs because of concern in some quarters that too much
discussion about drugs of abuse could glamorize them and lead to
experimentation. There is also increasing concern about the use
of ex-addicts in schools. Although they are popular with students
for &quot;telling it like it is,&quot; there is justifiable fear
that providing them with an aura of prestige may lead significant
numbers of students to believe that they can and should try drugs
themselves. </p>

<p>Past efforts have generally been of the &quot;scare&quot;
type, emphasizing the moral and physical degradation of drug
abuse and generously sprinkled with blatant misinformation,
especially about marijuana. In schools, such lectures are usually
delivered by gym teachers or visiting law-enforcement officials.
Their aim has been one-dimensional-to stop young people from
trying any illegal drugs. </p>

<p>It is now widely recognized that drug education, to succeed
with increasingly sophisticated young audiences, must be
accurate, factual, and consistent with the listener's own
experiences or observations. Although a truly candid educational
program may reduce involvement with the more dangerous drugs,
such as heroin, it may also increase experimentation with the
less dangerous drugs, such as marijuana, and many educators are
reluctant to be drawn into an approach with such potentially
controversial consequences. The federal government spent $3.5
million during the summer of 1970 in an attempt to train 350
schoolteachers, administrators, and student leaders to conduct
workshops in their home communities dispensing information about
drugs. The ability to withstand attitudinal confrontations of
skeptical students was stressed. We have no indication whether
this program was successful. </p>

<p>Virtually none of the myriad drug-education programs swamping
the market from private companies, civic organizations, and even
the government itself has been evaluated. The only detailed
evaluation we have seen, involving a model-education program in a
high school, showed that students improved not only in their
factual knowledge but in their cautionary attitude toward drug
use. That evaluation showed that the students liked the personal
accounts of ex-addicts best but chose doctors to tell the facts.
The students wanted more emphasis on the particular drugs in
common use in their school and an approach that took the drugs up
one by one rather than all grouped together. </p>

<p>The current emphasis among educators is on a continuous
spectrum of education about drugs generally (legal and illegal),
from kindergarten through high school, and on the integration of
drug education into other social-problems curricula, which would
include alcohol, smoking, sex, family living, and so forth. Dr.
Norman Zinberg of Harvard has been evaluating such an
experimental course for senior and junior high schools outside of
Boston and expects to produce an effective and exportable
curriculum. Dr. William Soskin in California has a different kind
of program, for which school credit is given, that creates a
third force besides family and school in the youth's life-a
primary group with which he shares experiences all week,
including a heavy emphasis on inner exploration. </p>

<p>One intrinsic problem with any kind of school-based education
is that a large portion of serious student drug users have
already rejected school. The motivational exploration that
educators stress can be carried on only in a spirit of trust, and
too many schools still require teachers and counselors to report
all known or suspected users to the police. Only a few schools
have had the courage to experiment with the designation of one or
more teachers or counselors as official confidants to whom
students can turn for help without fear of exposure. Few schools
have close working alliances with treatment resources to which
they can refer students. Parental permission for such treatment
poses another legal obstacle to such desirable arrangements. It
is doubtful that the federal government's crash summer
teacher-training program can surmount these basic problems
without a more fundamental change in community attitudes. </p>

<p>The National Coordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education and
Information, composed of nearly one hundred government and
private agency members, has recently entered the drug education
field.' It conducts evaluations of the explosion of anti drug
films and literature and stresses rational, coordinated efforts
by city leaders to explore the basis and true extent of a
community's drug problems and how the community can best utilize
its resources for dealing with them. NCC's approach is that drug
education should not aim at suppression of all illicit drug use
but should teach children to make rational decisions based on
reliable information about which drugs they will use and how much
they will use them. </p>

<p>It can reasonably be expected that more federal money will be
channeled to the states and cities for drug education, with
little direction on how it should be spent. There are only the
most primitive notions of how to determine whether a
drug-education program has been successful. Even the goals of
such programs are hotly contested. And there is little emphasis
on evaluation techniques by the federal government. </p>

<p>At least in the immediate future, most schools will probably
be unable to alter their basic authoritarian structure to the
kind of open-minded approach to drug education that will help
early experimenters or drug-prone students. The mere presentation
of basic facts,, even if honestly set forth, can be expected to
have limited value in stopping the spread of youthful
experimentation, and a law-enforcement orientation that requires
school personnel to report all users will totally undermine
education efforts. </p>

<p>It is probably also true that adults, more than school
children, need accurate drug information to counter long-held
myths. An appalling number of well-educated parents, as well as
their children, still fail to understand the real differences
among drugs of abuse. This misunderstanding is perpetuated in the
1970 federal drug-abuse law, which provides a one-year maximum
prison sentence for possession of any illegal drug, regardless of
whether it is quite dangerous (like heroin) or less harmful (like
marijuana). </p>

<hr>

<p><b>TREATMENT</b> </p>

<p>With respect to treatment, two basic problems exist. First,
relatively few drug-dependent persons are currently in treatment
programs, largely because the programs do not have sufficient
facilities or staff. Second, existing treatment for drug abuse
and drug dependence has not produced impressive results (except
for some methadone programs), and, even if all drug abusers and
drug-dependent persons had treatment available to them, the
outcome would be uncertain. </p>

<p>There are three general types of treatment modalities for
users of drugs other than heroin. In many urban centers where
drug use flourishes, crisis clinics have been set up to offer
immediate emergency services to drug users and other troubled
youths. They are typically staffed by youths under volunteer
professional direction. They give out drug information, analyze
street samples, &quot;talk down&quot; people with bad reactions,
and see that those in genuine medical danger get to hospitals.
Some also refer persons to long term treatment programs or
themselves offer individual or group therapy to drug users. San
Francisco's Haight-Ashbury Free Medical Clinic is the best-known
example of such clinics now found in many cities. </p>

<p>Therapeutic communities, which operate on the basic assumption
that a character defect causes drug use, treat all drug users
with encounter-group therapy or a more gentle form of &quot;rap
session&quot; therapy. </p>

<p>Users of speed and LSD, and even heavy marijuana users, may
well have underlying psychiatric problems. The only treatment
available for them thus far is the kind of individual or group
therapy used with other mental-health patients. Its success
remains largely unevaluated. </p>

<p>Because heroin is regarded as the most serious drug threat to
society, there has been a much more concentrated effort at
treatment for heroin addicts. In New York City, where probably 50
to 60 per cent of the nation's heroin addicts reside, an
estimated 10 per cent are in some form of treatment. Washington,
D.C., has perhaps 15 per cent of its estimated 15,000 addicts
under treatment. As of October, 1970, there were about fifty
methadone projects throughout the United States serving a total
of about 9,00010,000 persons.' Nationally, it is safe to say that
well over 90 per cent of all heroin addicts are not in any
treatment program at all. </p>

<p>The two main treatment modalities for heroin addicts are (1)
abstinence, bolstered by outpatient or inpatient group therapy,
and (2) methadone maintenance, with or without supportive
services. (A possible third approach is longer-term
&quot;detoxification&quot; with methadone, which is given in
decreasing dosages until the subject is entirely drug-free.) In
New York City, nearly 4,000 heroin users are currently in fifty
residential therapeutic communities, and 5,000-7,000 are
reportedly on methadone. In Washington and Chicago, about half of
all persons in treatment programs are on methadone and half on
abstinence programs. There were, until recently, only a handful
of addicts on methadone in California because of a legal
restriction on its use outside institutions. Some legal
restrictions still exist today. Many other large cities still
have no methadone program at all. </p>

<p>Most methadone programs have long waiting lists. Almost all
treatment programs have selective admission criteria and thus are
probably skimming off the cream of the addict population. They do
not appear to handle the most criminally active and hard-core
addicts. </p>

<p>As compared to abstinence, methadone is clearly showing better
results. Depending upon the degree of prescreening and the amount
of supportive services built into the program, between 45 and 80
per cent of those admitted to methadone programs are successfully
treated, as measured by continuation in the program, decreased
arrests, job stability, and other social indicators.
Experimentation is being tried in a few places with
&quot;barebones&quot; methadone (without supportive services) to
see what portion of the addict population can make it on the
substitute drug alone, without concomitant social-adjustment
help. The most promising approach we have seen is putting both
methadone and nondrug treatment programs under the same
administrative roof. From a research standpoint, this permits
accumulation of a body of data from which a typology may be
developed to show which kind of addict succeeds in which kind of
program. There is some concern, however, that a multimodality
program, combining maintenance and abstinence alternatives, may
confuse patients and reduce the effectiveness of both approaches.
</p>

<p>The more comprehensive the methadone program, and the more
complete the data collection and evaluation, the more costly the
program will be and the fewer patients it will be able to serve.
Costs per patient per year may vary from a high of over $2,000
for a full service program to a low of $500 for a
&quot;barebones&quot; program. </p>

<p>Methadone has thus far been used primarily with older addicts
who have volunteered for treatment. Except in Washington, the
average age of persons in methadone programs has been over
thirty, close to the age when statistics indicate that a sizable
portion of both addicts and criminals tend to &quot;mature
out&quot; of their deviance. Whether methadone will do as well
with an involuntary population of younger age remains to be seen.
</p>

<p>There is a sizable problem of methadone acceptance, especially
in the black community, because of opposition from groups who
view it as a crutch indistinguishable from heroin and a source of
white enslavement of blacks. Detoxification from methadone
maintenance is being tried with a small number of patients. If
this proves successful, the cloud of lifelong dependence now
hanging over methadone will be removed and methadone should prove
more acceptable among blacks. </p>

<p>Another problem is the possibility of &quot;leakage&quot; in
the control system. Diversion of methadone poses a danger, as is
indicated by the death of several non-opiate users who had not
built up a tolerance and who ingested large doses. On the other
hand, methadone appears to be safe for use by addicts in
controlled maintenance programs. </p>

<p>Although all available evidence indicates that methadone is a
safe and effective method of treatment, the federal government
has nevertheless concluded, apparently for policy reasons, to
inhibit its use by giving it only investigational status. This
raises costs and staff requirements and limits the number of
addicts who can be treated. It is unclear what additional
information, if any, would persuade the Food and Drug
Administration to alter this decision.' </p>

<p>Until methadone leaves the research context in which it now
legally resides, its potential parameters will remain unclear.
And just how much federal money will be available in the future
to encourage methadone or multimodality programs in all major
cities is unknown. </p>

<p>Some work is also being done on the nonnarcotic antagonists,
primarily cyclazocine and naloxone, which block the euphoric
effect of heroin. Several hundred people have now used these
antagonist drugs. The chief problems in their use have been the
short duration of action of both drugs-four to eight hours for
naloxone, about the same as heroin, and 22 to 26 hours for
cyclazocine, about the same as methadone-and, until recently,
unpleasant side effects from cyclazocine. Work has been
undertaken on longer-acting antagonists and on an implant that
could discharge the drugs over a period of weeks. The
antagonists, however, apparently do not satisfy the drug craving
as methadone is said to do and have not proved as popular with
addicts. </p>

<p>Other, more conventional methods of treating heroin addiction
appear to have a substantially lower success rate than methadone,
although comparison is difficult because of the differences in
the types of drug users treated, the criteria for success, the
statistics kept, and so forth. </p>

<p>Therapeutic communities like Daytop Village, Odyssey House,
and Phoenix House purport to have up to a 75 per cent success
rate with those who stay in the program, but they do not include
in their figures the large number of addicts (estimated as high
as 50 per cent) who drop out within the first month or two. Dr.
Jerome Jaffee's work in Chicago, which to our knowledge
constitutes one of the few attempts to compare the effectiveness
of methadone and therapeutic communities with the same
population, shows a startlingly greater success with methadone
than with the therapeutic community. Of the 2,500 addicts who
have been treated in the New York City Addiction Services
Agency's Phoenix Houses since 1967, only 130 have graduated back
into community life (and 90 per cent of these work in addiction
programs). An inpatient in such a facility costs $3,000 to $5,000
per year compared to a cost of $500 to $2,000 for a methadone
patient, but methadone may require a longer, or even a permanent,
period of treatment. It seems highly unlikely, in any event, that
there could ever be a sufficient number of residential
therapeutic communities to have a major impact on the problem. </p>

<p>Black community organizations, such as Colonel Hassan's
Blackman's Development Fund and the Bonabond Agency in
Washington, also claim a special ability to keep black addicts
off heroin by abstinence therapy following detoxification with
methadone and appeal to racial pride. But thus far their claims
of success have received no objective evaluation. </p>

<p>NIMH is still committed to comprehensive community mental
health centers as the answer to the drug-treatment problem, but
recent federal legislation for the first time permits support of
drug-treatment programs unaffiliated with these centers. We have
been able to find only a few examples of success with the
community-mental-health-center approach and an equal number of
outright failures. The successful community-mental-health-center,
drug-treatment programs would appear to be just as successful if
they were not affiliated with the centers, and even in theory
there is reason to question the inclusion of drug treatment under
the umbrella of the centers. In any event, we are unable to find
statistics on the effectiveness of this approach. </p>

<p>Virtually everyone agrees that individual psychiatric therapy
not only is impractical because of the large number of addicts
but generally produces poor results with addicts. </p>

<p>There is one method of treatment that has not been attempted
in this country since the Bureau of Narcotics, with the support
of the American Medical Association, stamped it out in the early
1920's-heroin maintenance. At one time, there were some forty
heroin-maintenance clinics in several areas of the country,
unfortunately under rather loose procedures. The Bureau succeeded
in banning them by 1923 and has since done everything possible to
discredit this method of treatment. The suggestion by a
prestigious joint American Bar Association-American Medical
Association Committee in the late 1950's that experimentation
with a heroin clinic program again be undertaken was met with a
vicious attack by the Bureau of Narcotics. During the past five
years, the Bureau of Narcotics (now the Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs) and NIMH have argued that the British system of
narcotics maintenance has utterly failed and could not reasonably
be considered for use in this country. (Staff Paper 7 of this
report, prepared for the Project after an extensive on-site
inspection and investigation, concludes that the British system
of narcotics maintenance appears to have succeeded in containing
the narcotics problem there.) </p>

<p>One outstanding deficiency in the treatment field involves
evaluation. Several treatment programs, mostly
methadone-maintenance programs, have data-collection and
evaluation components. The Dole-Nyswander program in New York has
been intensively evaluated by a prestigious medical committee,
and indeed the evaluation of methadone in various programs
throughout the country has now reached the point where there can
no longer be serious question about the general usefulness of
this treatment approach. The vast majority of the treatment
programs, however, and particularly the non-methadone programs,
have relatively narrow or quite inadequate data-collection and
evaluation components, or no such components whatever. Moreover,
data collection and evaluation are not standardized, with the
result that comparison of programs or techniques for different
patients, taking into account the many possible variables, is
simply not possible at this time. </p>

<p>The Illinois Drug Abuse Rehabilitation Program, under Dr.
Jerome Jaffe, has an unusually sophisticated system of data
collection and analysis combined with a multimodality treatment
program, thus permitting direct comparison of the effectiveness
of different techniques. Similar programs with useful research
components include the Washington, D.C., Narcotics Treatment
Agency, under Dr. Robert Dupont, and the Connecticut Mental
Health Center in New Haven, under Dr. Herbert Kleber. But no such
program has the funds or time to standardize data collection for
all other programs or to persuade others to adopt a uniform
system, much less to attempt to standardize and persuade others
to adopt uniform evaluation criteria. </p>

<p>Without sufficient detailed data collected on a standardized
basis by a substantial number of different projects, there can be
no satisfactory comparative evaluation of various treatment
approaches for different types of drug users. Largely
unsubstantiated and disputed claims of success and failure will
continue to dominate the field until adequate evaluation is
accomplished. </p>

<p>A second deficiency apparent throughout the country is the
lack of enough trained administrators to run treatment programs.
The few outstanding treatment projects emphasize the need for
scholar-administrators with a medical and drug-abuse background
but also with management skills. The most able project directors
do not fall into the typical civil-servant mold but, rather, are
men willing to take gambles and basically to let themselves be
&quot;burned out&quot; in a few years. How to create a reserve of
people equipped with this unique combination of talents and bow
to provide incentives for them to enter the field are critical
questions in the future of treatment. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>LAW ENFORCEMENT</b> </p>

<p>Law enforcement has, of course, been the primary means by
which society has attempted to control drug abuse in the past and
at present appears to represent the principal effort for the
future also. Arrests for drug offenses have increased
dramatically during the past few years, from 31,752 in 1960 to
134,006 in 1968 and over 230,000 in 1969. Such arrests of persons
under eighteen rose from 1,688 in 1960 to 33,091 in 1968 and over
57,000 in 1969. </p>

<p>There is, however, an acknowledged lack of direction and of
trained manpower in state and city efforts, which results in
scant disruption of illicit traffic above the street level. Most
arrests are of users. The principal sellers arrested are
amateurish young softdrug peddlers and addict street dealers.
Studies show that almost all heroin addicts get arrested at least
once every two years of active addiction and spend an average of
15 per cent of their addicted life in jail. In New York City in
June, 1970, there were 4,000 drug arrests compared with 1,800 in
June, 1969. About 60 to 70 per cent of those arrests involved
heroin. In Washington, D.C., arrests doubled in the first six
months of 1970 and now run about four hundred per month; over 50
per cent involved heroin. California reportedly made 150,000 drug
arrests for use and possession in 1969, a 300-per-cent increase
over 1967, and it is unclear whether all of these are reflected
in the national statistics. </p>

<p>BNDD has recently announced that it will provide no more than
consultative services to local police in use, possession or small
trafficking cases, and it is increasingly shifting its resources
to the apprehension of large traffickers. In 1969, its agents
made or instigated 4,000 arrests; for 1971, this figure is
expected to fall to about 1,875. Basically, however, the
criminal-law approach appears to have had little impact on the
growth of the problem, as is demonstrated by the fact that
illegal drug use, by everyone's calculation, is increasing and
shows no signs of leveling off. </p>

<p>The federal government formerly took the position that illegal
drugs that are imported, such as heroin and marijuana, could be
stopped at the border if sufficient resources were allocated to
this effort. In spite of recent large increases in budget and
manpower, however, no significant impact has been made. Border
seizures of heroin amounted to less than 5 per cent of the
estimated imports in 1970. Indeed, the price of heroin has been
falling steadily and the quality increasing, which indicates a
failure to stem the supply. There is strong evidence that
Operation Intercept, the attempt to impede the flow of marijuana
from Mexico into the United States, has resulted in significant
substitution of other drugs for marijuana. </p>

<p>The illegality of heroin is, of course, the sole reason for
its high cost in this country. In England, the pharmacy cost of
heroin is $.04 per grain (60 mg.), or $.00067 per mg. In the
United States, the recent street price is $30-$90 per grain, or
$.50-$1.50 per mg., depending on the time and place of sale and
the quantity and quality of the drug. </p>

<p>As a result of the failure to stop heroin at the border,
recent federal government 'policy has concentrated on cooperation
with foreign governments, primarily Turkey, to reduce their opium
production. Since it is estimated that the United States requires
only 50,000 to 60,000 pounds of opium each year for illicit
heroin use, since this amount is about 1.5 per cent of the total
world production of opium, and since the entire U.S. demand could
probably be met by cultivation of about five square miles of
opium,' and since opium could readily be grown in other parts of
the world, a program based upon suppression of opium production
seems no more likely to succeed than the program based upon
prevention of importation. </p>

<p>Finally, the initial hypothesis that drugs were not
interchangeable-that, for example, a heroin addict would not be
likely to switch to a different drug (e.g., the barbiturates or
amphetamines) if heroin were unavailable-does not appear to be
true. There is evidence that users will freely substitute even
less potent drugs if their drug of choice is not immediately
available. There is a far greater pattern of multiple drug use
than was previously thought to exist. Suppression of one drug for
a period of time, whether long or short, appears, therefore, to
have a limited effect on drug abuse generally. </p>

<p>The law-enforcement approach to drug-abuse problems has been
ameliorated by legislation permitting civil commitment in lieu of
criminal punishment. Under present legislation, however, such
treatment is largely illusory, since it is almost wholly
institutionalized and often results in greater punishment than
would be imposed by a criminal sentence. It is doubtful that
institutionalization under these programs has been markedly more
successful in rehabilitation than criminal sentencing. </p>

<p>New York, California, and the federal government have civil
commitment treatment programs that take a relatively restricted
class of criminal defendants in lieu of prosecution or sentencing
(as well as persons committed voluntarily or by relatives and
others). The New York and California civil-commitment programs
have proved very expensive-$4,000 to $5,000 per patient per year
for care and treatment in New York, and a total of $12,000 for
all costs. About $250 million was spent by New York State in
1967-70, the major share for capital construction and custodial
salaries. Only one out of five patients successfully survives the
parole period in the California program, and less than 25 per
cent the New York program. The federal Narcotic Addict
Rehabilitation Act (NARA) program currently has under 1,000
persons in an outpatient status and 800 in an inpatient status.
Many addicts are ineligible for treatment because of the
restrictive admission criteria contained in the Act, and almost
half of the cases referred for evaluation are rejected because
they are found &quot;not likely to be rehabilitated.&quot; In
general, civil commitment programs have suffered from cumbersome
legal machinery, restrictive admission requirements, inflexible
terms of inpatient residence, expensive security consciousness,
lack of dynamic programs, and active resentment among inmates
because of the prison like climate and poor treatment efforts. </p>

<p>juvenile courts appear to offer one of the most flexible ways
of channeling youthful users into early treatment, yet they are
rarely used for this purpose. Almost all addicts are arrested
first while in their teens. Most juvenile courts already have the
power to divert drug users rapidly to a treatment agency, even
without a formal finding of law violation, and they can keep all
records confidential. Speedy urinalysis and a closer working
relationship between juvenile courts and community treatment
programs might have an impact on the problem. Ordinary juvenile
institutions are less useful. They are experiencing an increasing
problem with contraband drugs (we have been told that many youths
get their first drug experiences there), and few, if any, have
drug education or therapy programs, or indeed any urinalysis
surveillance, after inmates leave the institution. </p>

<p>The federal government (as well as local and state police
agencies) has been severely criticized for devoting its
law-enforcement efforts to drug users and addict pushers and
failing to prosecute large drug wholesalers. In New York and
Washington, and probably elsewhere as well, grassroots
organizations claim to know the identity of the larger
wholesalers and in some instances state that they have turned
information over to law-enforcement officials without results. </p>

<p>The short working life of undercover agents, the large amounts
of cash necessary to make substantial &quot;buys,&quot; and the
structure of the heroin market, which is designed to insulate
higher figures from contact with the drug, are the reasons most
commonly cited by law-enforcement and community officials for the
paucity of results in disrupting the heroin traffic. But the
factor more commonly cited by ghetto groups, and increasingly
also by such respected citizens as former Chief justice Earl
Warren, is corruption of narcotics agents. More than thirty
federal agents were reportedly indicted on bribery and
narcotics-sale charges during 1969 and 1970. The view is endemic
in ghetto areas-and apparently it is justified at least in
part-that the federal, state, and local police are not doing
their job, and that they should be able to arrest more dealers
and distributors than they do. Although it may be partly a
question of better training, direction at the top, and placement
of a higher priority in the area, there may also be widespread
corruption involving pay-offs at the lower levels between police
and pushers. </p>

<p>Both previous and present federal drug statutes make
possession of an illegal drug of abuse a crime. When the Drug
Abuse Control Amendments of 1965 were enacted to cover nonopiate
drugs, possession for personal use was not made a crime, but this
was changed in 1968 because of the LSD scare. The legislation
enacted by Congress in 1970 to recodify and modernize all the
federal drug-abuse laws continues the policy of making possession
a criminal offense, with a one-year maximum sentence for
possession of any illegal drug and twice this term for second and
subsequent offenses. Neither prior law nor new legislation
provides that an addict is not criminally liable for possession
of a drug to support his habit. Test cases are being litigated to
develop this defense as a matter of constitutional or common law,
and the staff of the National Commission on Reform of Federal
Criminal Laws has proposed that this should in any event be a
statutory defense. Congressional support for such a defense
would, however, appear difficult to obtain. </p>

<p>Regardless of judicial or legislative reform, it appears that
the law-enforcement process will remain a significant, and
probably by far the most important, intake unit for
drug-dependent people for many years to come. At present only a
few, crude attempts are being made to utilize this intake path to
channeling addicts into useful treatment programs outside the
civil commitment procedures. </p>

<p>Drug users are generally processed as ordinary criminals, and,
conversely, a large percentage of ordinary criminals, when tested
by urinalysis, are found to be drug users. Urinalysis tests in
the criminal courts and detention facilities of major urban
centers show that one-third to one-half of all criminal
defendants, including juveniles, are currently using drugs, and
some estimate that 80 per cent of the serious property crime in
Washington, D.C., is committed by drug users. The likelihood that
a criminally processed drug user will be given any specific
treatment during his incarceration is slight. But even more
basic, attempts at treatment programs in the prison setting have
been markedly unsuccessful. Indeed, there is evidence that many
nonusers or experimenters are first introduced to drug use or
have their habits reinforced while in prison. One survey showed
that 90 to 95 per cent of the heroin addicts who leave prison
without treatment follow-up lapse almost immediately into drug
use. Many of the major urban areas now have parole programs that
test for drug use through urinalysis, and a few offer parolees
methadone, group-therapy, and/or halfway-house programs.
Nonmethadone programs with probationers and parolees, however,
have not proved very successful. The majority of such
probationers and parolees have had to be returned to prisons or
court for drug violations. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>LEADERSHIP</b> </p>

<p>It is our belief that a major reason for the confusion and
division within the drug-abuse field and the country in general
is the lack of effective leadership, on both a governmental and a
nongovernmental level. Effective leadership, by our definition,
includes such functions as keeping the country informed about
drug abuse and the latest drug research and arranging an open
climate for medical and social research and for reasonable
experimentation with different models of control. Effective
leadership should, further, avoid eliciting emotional public
reaction to isolated incidents and attempt to remove the drug
problem from national politics. </p>

<p>Within the federal government, there are three organizations
substantially concerned with drug abuse: BNDD, NIMH, and the
Department of Defense.&quot; </p>

<p>BNDD has for years pursued a national approach to drug abuse
characterized by suppression of illegal drugs and the enforcement
of criminal penalties for drug abusers. Although Bureau officials
now emphasize the need for rehabilitation, the basic policy
position of BNDD has not been significantly altered. The
legislation recodifying federal drug-abuse laws, drafted by BNDD
and passed by Congress in October, 1970, represents little change
in fundamental narcotics policy and only reinforces and codifies
existing law (except for some modification of penalties). The
reason for the recodification, indeed, was not a desire for
reform but a need to repair legislative provisions voided by the
Supreme Court on constitutional grounds. </p>

<p>The new law still includes marijuana and heroin in the same
classification, provides a uniform penalty for possession of any
illegal drug, and contains such harsh sanctions as a thirty-year
maximum prison sentence for an eighteen-year-old with a prior
offense who sells marijuana to a twenty-year-old friend if there
is any profit involved in the transaction. Any change in the
basic BNDD approach of penalizing drug abuse seems highly
unlikely in the near future. </p>

<p>During the past two crucial years of public-policy
development, NIMH has been singularly impotent as an independent
voice in policy decisions and has seemingly been forced to accede
to the BNDD approach of relying almost exclusively upon law
enforcement. There is no reason to believe that NIMH will be
given substantially more leeway in putting forward policy
alternatives in the immediate future. Although there are a number
of NIMH personnel working on drug abuse who do favor a more
flexible and health-oriented approach toward drug users and who
would promote such an approach if allowed and encouraged to do
so, a significant change in federal policy is required before
they can be expected to speak out publicly on these matters. </p>

<p>Until mid-1970, the Department of Defense denied that there
was any drug-abuse problem at all in the military. It has now
admitted that drug abuse does indeed exist in the armed services
and is initiating a program for treating users as an alternative
to punishment and dishonorable discharge. </p>

<p>Legislation has been introduced in the U.S. Senate to
liberalize treatment under the Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation
Act, to revitalize the narcotics work of NIMH, and to authorize a
far more comprehensive health, welfare, and rehabilitation
approach to the problems of drug abuse by the federal government.
But even if such legislation is enacted, the present
administration's emphasis on the law-enforcement approach could
undermine its effective implementation. </p>

<p>The state government picture varies, of course, from state to
state. Suffice it to say that, thus far, few states have refused
to follow the lead of BNDD with respect to narcotics policy and
that of the U.S. Congress with respect to narcotics legislation.
As an example of the current climate, the August, 1970,
Conference of Uniform State Law Commissioners approved a draft of
a uniform state drug-abuse law, prepared by a BNDD attorney, with
the understanding that it could be revised before final
publication to reflect any appropriate changes in light of
federal legislation then pending in Congress. An earlier draft,
based upon what BNDD had hoped to have passed by Congress, was
enacted by two states before the final version was available. </p>

<p>The nongovernmental organizations interested in the field of
drug abuse have not exerted significant leadership during the
past two years. During this critical time of public-policy
determination, professional, medical, and scientific
organizations such as the American Bar Association, the American
Medical Association, the American Public Health Association, and
the National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council have
spoken out only on specific issues of interest to them and only
on isolated occasions. Because all these organizations deal only
tangentially with drug abuse and must rely for their efforts
primarily on busy professionals who have full-time jobs outside
the organization, none of them could be expected to exert the
effective leadership that is needed in this field. </p>

<p>There is no national voluntary citizens' organization in the
field of drug abuse comparable to the National Council of
Alcoholism (NCA), and NCA has recently decided that it will enter
this field only to consider problems in which drug abuse and
alcoholism interact. Both the North American Association of
Alcoholism Programs and the National Association of State Mental
Health Program Directors, which are organizations representing
state tax-supported agencies, also deal only tangentially with
drug abuse and have made no serious effort to become concerned
with the field in detail. </p>

<p>Largely because of this void, a paper organization, the
Committee for Effective Drug Abuse Legislation, was created to
represent the medical-scientific viewpoint before Congress during
the hearings on the new drug-abuse legislation. Since this
organization has been concerned almost exclusively with the
freedom to conduct research and is poorly funded, it has had to
ignore many other important public-policy issues. </p>

<p>Another new organization is the previously mentioned National
Coordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education and Information,
created in 1969 to bring together virtually all national
organizations, from the drug industry to consumer groups, and
from the PTA to the National Student Association, for the purpose
of developing an effective drug-abuse education program. Although
the Coordinating Council is financed to a significant extent by
the federal government and has governmental representatives on
its board of directors, it has shown independence and a reasoned
approach to education and community planning in the drug field.
The Coordinating Council's achievements are largely the work of a
very few people, however, and, because of its precarious
financial underpinnings, it is uncertain how long and how
vigorously it can continue its efforts. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>A MORE PROMISING APPROACH TO DRUG ABUSE</b> </p>

<p>The foregoing summary discloses a lack of leadership in the
field of drug abuse, a law-enforcement approach that is often
ineffective and even harmful, and a country deeply and even
bitterly divided over the proper approach to drug abuse. We
believe that an effective attack on drug abuse can be launched
only in a climate of reason and tolerance, allowing us to discern
the real evils of drug abuse while rejecting policies based on
confusion, misinformation, and emotion. </p>

<p>Before we can begin to cope adequately with drug-abuse
problems, therefore, we must begin to refine and clarify our
thinking about them. The world is full of drugs, large numbers of
which are psychoactive. The majority of adult Americans take
alcohol as a tension reliever or to facilitate social
intercourse, and the use of nonprescription and prescription
drugs for similar purposes is endemic. The availability and
variety of these drugs will probably not only continue but
increase. </p>

<p>Many of the drugs used have profound therapeutic benefits that
allow people to offset physical or mental pathology and function
more normally. Few of us would be willing to forego these
therapeutic benefits, and no one perceives the use of drugs to
achieve normal functioning as abuse. An increasingly large number
of people, however, are not willing to limit their drug taking to
medically supervised attempts to offset pathology. Some engage in
self-medication with drugs they have become acquainted with
through legitimate medical use. This pattern often occurs in the
case of tranquilizers. Some wish to escape an unwelcome reality
with heroin or barbiturates. Others desire the very acute
functioning associated with the amphetamines. Still others,
especially the young, seek the pleasurable effects of
hallucinogens or marijuana. </p>

<p>The basic philosophy underlying our present drug-control laws
is that all of these self-induced effects are to be shunned, or
at least are not to be sought through drugs other than alcohol.
This is a decision based partly on the fear of actual physical
damage caused by the drugs, but primarily on the belief that
drugs damage society because they contribute to crime and
alienation. </p>

<p>It seems inevitable to us that all segments of society will
continue to be exposed to a myriad of drugs in the future, and
that society must learn to cope with these chemicals as part of
everyday life. It is not possible at present to foresee exactly
how the necessary adjustments in social attitudes and policies
will be made. </p>

<p>We do feel, however, that current national policy-which
singles out particular drugs and makes their possession or use a
crime-should be changed for very important empirical reasons. We
believe that the individual and social harm caused by imposing
criminal sanctions on drug users far outstrips the benefits of
this approach. Handling drug users as criminals has created
widespread disrespect for the drug laws, has resulted in
selective enforcement, has possibly done more to encourage than
to discourage illegal drug use, has undercut bona fide efforts to
explain the important differences among various drugs in the
physical and mental damage they cause, and has deterred drug
abusers from seeking necessary help. We feel that, as a first
step in bringing the problem back into perspective, criminal
penalties for possession of illegal drugs for personal use only
should be abandoned in many jurisdictions. If this were done,
drug users but not drug traffickers-could then be handled on a
public health and social-welfare basis. Like the Canadian LeDain
Commission on Non-Medical Use of Drugs, which in its April, 1970,
Interim Report recommended retention of only a perfunctory $100
fine for illegal possession of drugs as an interim measure
pending issuance of its final report, we have seen no evidence
that eliminating the criminal penalties for possession of illegal
drugs for personal use would materially impede the effectiveness
of law-enforcement efforts against trafficking or remove an
incentive for drug users to seek treatment or have other
unfortunate consequences. </p>

<p>This conclusion in no way depends on a belief that chemicals
should be freely used to induce pleasure. Nor do we believe that
it is necessary to await final resolution of the currently
popular debate about whether alcohol or marijuana is the more
dangerous drug, a debate that has succeeded only in provoking
further generational confrontation about hypocrisy,
permissiveness, and life styles. Most of those who advocate a
public-health approach disapprove strongly of the unsupervised
use of dangerous drugs, especially by young people. Our
conclusion is based, rather, on a recognition that our present
methods of handling the drug abuser are at best ineffective and
at worst counterproductive, and that other approaches must be
tried. Eliminating criminal penalties for possession for personal
use would neither legalize a particular drug nor permit its use.
Law-enforcement efforts would, and in our opinion should,
continue, but they would be directed at illegal distribution. And
illegal drugs would remain subject to confiscation wherever
found. </p>

<p>If the confrontation over the role of the criminal law in
enforcing private moral judgments or choices of drugs were
eliminated, the country might be able to unite behind an
intensified approach to research, prevention, treatment, and law
enforcement directed against the upper echelons of the illegal
drug traffic. Restrictions on scientific research inquiries into
particular drugs might then be lifted and substantial public and
private funds more easily directed toward the understanding of
how drugs work on the mind and body and what effects, both short
and long term, they produce. Education of young people against
the reckless use of powerful substances that affect the mind
could proceed in a free and open climate more calculated to
influence their behavior. </p>

<p>As research discloses more about specific drugs, some might
eventually become candidates for limited legalization, in the
pattern now used for alcohol. In other cases, disclosure of
severe or permanent damage to the mind or body would require that
distribution controls remain under criminal penalty. With such
potentially harmful drugs, the user who refuses to accept
treatment, and who can be shown to constitute a danger to others,
might be committed civilly for appropriate treatment. </p>

<p>Voluntary treatment for harmful effects of drugs could
similarly be made more flexible and accessible under such a
system. Restrictions against any experimentation with heroin
maintenance and unjustified limitations on the use of methadone
maintenance could be reviewed and possibly removed. More public
funds would be devoted to current treatment efforts and to
searching out new treatment methods, to permit adequate handling
of all voluntary and involuntary patients. </p>

<p>Finally, law enforcement could continue to act as an intake
unit for treatment programs for those drug abusers accused of
minor trafficking or other crimes. Where the drug taking results
in dangerous antisocial acts, it is not unjust to require the
offender to undergo treatment as a condition of liberty or even
to offer it to him within the confines of the institution. But
law enforcement's main focus would be directed at illegal drug
wholesalers. In this endeavor, it would have the wholehearted
backing of vast numbers of Americans, young and old alike. </p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5"><b>THE DRUG ABUSE COUNCIL</b></font> </p>

<p>In the previous section, we outlined an alternative approach
to drug abuse that we believe is more promising than the present
national approach. Private foundations do not have the means
fully to implement such an alternative approach, nor could they
legally do all that would be required to bring it about. A
foundation cannot, for example, properly engage in efforts to
change legislation. On the other hand, pursuit of the public
welfare is a well-recognized task of all private foundations, and
an important aspect of the approach described above involves
education, research, and related activities that have long
concerned private foundations. The basic goal might be summarized
as one intended to make national drug-abuse policy responsive to
facts rather than emotion. This is clearly an area where
foundations could properly play a very large role. </p>

<p>Our primary recommendation is that an independent, nonprofit
Drug Abuse Council be established to fill the leadership void
that now exists in all areas of the drug-abuse field. This would
preferably be undertaken as a joint project by a number of
private foundations and organizations. The Council would strive
to become a vitally needed center of excellence for drug-abuse
information, basic research, education, and prevention,
evaluation of treatment and education programs, and related
activities. </p>

<p>The federal government is not equipped to perform this
function. Its activities in the drug-abuse field are fairly
narrowly circumscribed by political necessities, it relies
largely on recruitment of civil-service personnel even at the top
leadership levels, and its financial commitments are short term
and subject to the vagaries of Congressional and administration
decisions. Federal activities in the drug-abuse field tend to be
ad hoc reactions to current crises, such as the 1970 crash
drug-education program in response to the well-publicized death
of a twelve-year-old heroin addict, rather than well-considered,
long-term programs. </p>

<p>Assuming that drug abuse will exist for years to come, and
that the country's policies should be grounded on fact and reason
rather than on emotion and politics, a long-range investment in
education, research, and treatment is necessary. The Drug Abuse
Council would be a long-term (ten years at a minimum) effort to
obtain the factual information needed to provide a basis for
sound policy and to disseminate to the public and to persons in
key policy positions the best knowledge available in the field
and the best analysis of this knowledge as it pertains to current
programs. </p>

<p>The Council would have a board of 10 to 15 trustees. Working
under the board's direction would be an interdisciplinary staff
responsible for performing the Council's daily work, headed by a
full-time president. The president would be a member of the Board
of Trustees, but not its chairman. </p>

<p>The majority of the Board of Trustees should be professionals
knowledgeable in the field of drug abuse. A few might be
prestigious figures in the national scene, but persons who would
commit themselves to a heavy working schedule consisting at a
minimum of one formal meeting a month and substantial contact
with the staff between meetings. </p>

<p>The Board of Trustees should include representatives of
medicine, psychiatry, pharmacology, education, community
leadership, law, and sociology. Board members would be
appropriately compensated for their time and efforts. The
chairman of the board should probably be located in, or
accessible to, the city where the Council's headquarters are
located-preferably Washington, D.C.-and he should be
appropriately compensated for his additional work. </p>

<p>The president would initially work out with the board the
direction for the Council's first efforts. He would then recruit
his staff and proceed to implement those directives by drawing up
a detailed set of proposals for Council action. </p>

<p>The initial core of the Council staff might consist of a
medically trained person (probably a psychiatrist), a basic
researcher in the biochemical field, a social scientist, a
lawyer, and an editor writer schooled in simplifying technical
writing. This small nucleus could, of course, be expanded as the
Council's president and board define priorities and activities. </p>

<p>It is obvious that the President must be a key personality,
with proved administrative ability, and soundly grounded in the
drug abuse field, its politics, personalities, and peculiar
history. He would be responsible for proposing projects to the
board, arranging for their financing or administration, preparing
draft reports for board consideration, and so forth. Successful
implementation of the Council's objectives would depend to a
degree on the president's capabilities. </p>

<p>The relationship of the staff to the Board of Trustees also
deserves comment. Basically, there seem to be three types of
staff-board working relationships. First, a board of trustees may
operate as a figurehead, exercising minimal influence over the
activities of the staff. Secondly, it may have broad policy- and
priority-setting powers but leave most operating decisions to the
working group. This requires a far greater commitment of time by
the members of the board than the first relationship. Finally,
the board may directly run the organization through a staff
having little or no independent decision-making capabilities. In
essence, this third type of relationship would require the
melding of the board of trustees with the working group. </p>

<p>In the case of the Council, it appears that the most
productive staff-board relationship would be the second type-a
Board of Trustees with policy authority over the working group
but not actively involved in the actual day-to-day operations of
the group. Such a board would have an important role. Because of
the controversial nature of the drug field, board members must be
prepared personally to back Council projects and policy
statements and to withstand the inevitable attacks almost from
the day they convene. If the Council's pronouncements and work
are to carry weight in professional and governmental circles and
among the general public, the board must stand solidly behind
them. </p>

<p>Once under way, the Council should explore the potential for
action in many different areas. The following representative
list, which reflects areas of current immediate concern, is not
intended to exhaust the possibilities. Additional matters will be
uncovered, and priorities will change, as developments occur in
the field that cannot be predicted at this time. </p>

<p>Finally, it should be noted that the Council may carry out its
objectives either by persuading others to undertake and finance
the work or by underwriting the work itself. Whenever possible,
the Council should encourage federal, state, and local
governments to increase their roles in drug-abuse programs. In
this respect, the Council should act as a watchdog, to make
certain that public agencies fulfill their intended
responsibilities. In many instances, however, private action,
either funded or undertaken directly by the Council, will also be
necessary and appropriate. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>SPONSORSHIP OF BASIC RESEARCH</b> </p>

<p>Although not nearly enough is known about the effects of drugs
on the mind and body, the investment of new research funds must
be carefully directed toward specific objectives, rather than
merely toward supplementing federal funds. Some knowledgeable
people are dubious about what could be accomplished by the
contribution of a few million dollars in private research funds.
Nevertheless, we believe that there are finite areas of basic
research that the Council could profitably explore. </p>

<p>Encouragement of Interdisciplinary Research. Universities,
where most basic research is done, tend to be structured along
departmental lines. The incentive structures for researchers and,
even more important, for graduate students tend to force the
researcher to stay within his area and not become part of an
interdisciplinary group. The Council might usefully promote
centers of interdisciplinarianism in this field. </p>

<p>There are cogent reasons for encouraging interdisciplinary
research. The question of why the same amount of drug ingested by
the same person produces dramatically different effects in
different settings puzzles scientists and must be studied outside
the laboratory as well as within, by psychologists and social
scientists as well as by pharmacologists. Many of the basic
pharmacological studies on the effects of heroin or methadone
should be attached to treatment programs, so that the subjects
could be studied and tested in the environment and under the
conditions in which they become and remain drug-dependent. Some
of the most creative hypotheses for basic research come from the
cross-fertilization of different disciplines thinking about the
same problem from different approaches. This is the kind of
innovative exposure that the federal government's research
program, based on the funding of finite projects to explore
already articulated hypotheses, does not at present have the
capacity to encourage. </p>

<p>One way of supporting this type of work would be to establish
a new in-house center for the scientific study of drug abuse on
an interdisciplinary basis. Another would be to put money into
the best existing university centers, on the condition that they
make some effort to study drugs of abuse in the context of their
over-all work. </p>

<p>Of these two courses, the second seems preferable. A number of
first-class researchers in a relevant field may not regard drug
abuse as their primary area of interest or as an area on which
they would wish to concentrate their full time, and in any event
they might not wish to move. The best researchers in the field
might be more willing to study drug abuse, either separately or
along with other matters of interest to them scientifically, if
permitted to remain at their present location. To a large extent,
this means funding interdisciplinary efforts in universities,
because that is where the best researchers are currently found. </p>

<p>In addition to multidisciplinary research in universities, it
might also be productive to fund a narcotics-research section in
an existing institution or simply to fund individual projects
wherever the best researchers exist. Finally, the Council might
wish to participate in an ongoing treatment program for the
unique information that the program might provide with a
reasonable additional investment in a research component. Such
questions as why heroin addicts stabilize at different levels of
methadone dosage and whether long-term tissue changes are caused
by a variety of drugs are often researched best with a large
treatment population at hand. Each of these possibilities must be
explored in greater detail by the Council staff before final
recommendations can be made. </p>

<p>Detection of Drugs in the Body. Pharmacologists have informed
us that the basic problem of drug detection in the body where
drugs go, how long they stay, what metabolites they produce, and
what happens to them-is not being studied in the way present
methodology would permit if research funds were available to
perfect it. The technology of drug detection is an area that is
very important to research but is not a high-priority item for
any single researcher or university because the benefits are
largely external to any particular project. This type of
technological development would be of value to all researchers
working in basic pharmacology. It would also enable the accurate
identification of drugs in cases of acute toxic reaction and thus
the development of better methods of treating or preventing such
toxic reaction. </p>

<p>Research in this area could also be directed toward
development of more accurate, rapid, and inexpensive equipment
for a variety of purposes. Of particular importance for both
law-enforcement and treatment programs is the chemical analysis
of urine specimens to detect heroin and other illegal drugs.
Urinalysis is used in broad surveillance programs in determining
whether bail should be set for criminals, in probation and parole
surveillance, in methadone-maintenance programs, and indeed in
virtually all types of drug-treatment programs. It is essential
to any evaluation of the success of these programs. Yet, in many
burgeoning methadone programs, such as that in Minneapolis, no
prompt and cheap urine testing is available, and samples must be
mailed hundreds of miles for analysis. </p>

<p>There is substantial doubt whether surveillance programs are
in all instances lawful, and even whether their use is productive
or counterproductive with respect to treatment results. It will
be some time before final answers can be obtained to these
questions. Meanwhile, it is clear that urinalysis surveillance is
increasing and will continue to increase (particularly if it is
made mandatory for all methadone programs, as has been proposed).
The problem is that urinalysis detection techniques can be
costly, inaccurate, and very time-consuming. They may therefore
limit the number of patients who can be admitted to treatment
programs because of the cost involved in continuous urinalysis
surveillance, wrong decisions may be made because of the
erroneous results obtained, and persons may be deprived of
liberty, placed under suspicion, or not given adequate treatment
for long periods of time while awaiting results. </p>

<p>BNDD and a few private companies reportedly are interested in
improving technology and methodology in this area, and there are
some indications of progress. One company has apparently produced
a marketable electronic device that would improve the speed and
reliability of urinalysis but not reduce the cost. We have been
assured that the technology for cheaper, reliable urinalysis is
available but requires an initial investment to produce the
models. Reducing the cost per unit from $1 to $2 to $.50 or less
could mean a savings of $.25 million for large-scale projects and
more for a city offering centralized urinalysis for all its
programs. Hopefully, the Council could persuade the federal
government to make the initial investment of a few hundred
thousand dollars to conduct this work, if the need is not
otherwise met in the near future. </p>

<p>Interaction of Different Drugs Taken in Combination. Large
numbers of drug abusers use several drugs, some legal and some
illegal, together or in substitution for another. The net effect
of their interaction may be quite different from that of either
one used alone. (There is some indication, for example, that
heavy barbiturate use may neutralize the effect of birth-control
pills used simultaneously.) Research on drug interaction could
lead to knowledge that might prevent toxic fatalities. </p>

<p>Research with Heroin and Heroin Maintenance. We are unaware of
any significant experimentation with heroin in this country,
either in animals or in humans. Such research would be
potentially very valuable in determining such questions as how an
addict stabilizes on any given dose of heroin, how well he
functions in society when consistently maintained on his drug,
how wide a range of variation in dosage can be given without
withdrawal, whether some people can use heroin indefinitely
without becoming addicted, and how long a person must use a given
dosage of heroin in order to become addicted. The usage patterns
of different types of heroin addict also remain a mystery and
have important research implications for treatment and education.
Research on such issues as these might well have to combine field
investigation and medical diagnosis. </p>

<p>One of the first problems the Council would face if it decided
such research was desirable would be obtaining the necessary
federal and state government permission, setting up the research
in a way that would satisfy medical ethics, and justifying the
need for the work to the public. </p>

<p>Miscellaneous. Another vital area not now being adequately
researched is the effect of drugs, including marijuana and
methadone, taken by pregnant women on the behavior and physical
characteristics of the child. </p>

<p>A high-priority question is whether there is either an inborn
physiological predilection to opiate addiction (as Dr. Dole
suggests) or a drug-induced physiological readdiction
vulnerability (as Dr. Martin suggests) or a learned response to
external stimuli (as Dr. Wickler suggests) or none of these.
Although we are not certain how this can be made the subject of a
directed research project, it is a question of the greatest
importance to the direction of treatment efforts, drug education,
and even legal responsibility for addictive behavior. An attempt
should be made to devise a series of experiments to advance this
kind of research. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>FUNDING PROGRAMS RELATING TO TREATMENT AND RESEARCH WITH
RESPECT TO TREATMENT</b> </p>

<p>We recommend that the Council should not, as a general rule,
fund ongoing treatment programs, except insofar as they make
possible unique research efforts not otherwise available. The
Council's efforts in this area should instead be directed
primarily toward providing the public climate necessary to assure
appropriate public financing of any drug-abuse or drug-dependence
treatment programs that are found worthy of support. As a
practical matter, Council funds could not begin to match the
amount of funding available from federal and state sources, if
those sources could be persuaded to allocate appropriate amounts
for treatment. </p>

<p>The failure of the Council to support ongoing treatment
programs will undoubtedly subject it to criticism from community
action leaders. We feel, however, that the Council should have
the more fundamental role of generating public support for drug
abuse programs and supporting and conducting research and
evaluation that will begin to establish criteria by which the
effectiveness of these programs can be measured. The Council
should, further, disseminate information throughout the country
with respect to programs that have proved to be worthwhile and
that, therefore, will have a broad and long-range national
impact. </p>

<p>The Council should, however, be on the lookout for truly
experimental and research-oriented treatment programs that,
absent nongovernmental support, will not be undertaken. Areas
that deserve careful consideration include the following: </p>

<p>Basic Field Work in Programs for juveniles and Hard-Core
Addicts. The populations least successfully treated are juvenile
drug abusers and hard-core addicts for whom all known treatment
methods have repeatedly failed. In our present state of almost
total ignorance as to what kind of prevention or treatment
programs will work with these populations, it may be necessary to
send people out into the field to study the problem for six
months to a year and then to come back and design operational
program models. There is to our knowledge no present source of
funding for any such basic field approach in new prevention or
treatment techniques. Prototype projects designed to test
specific hypotheses resulting from such field investigations
might then be recommended for operation by federal, state, or
local governments. </p>

<p>Heroin Maintenance. A related area that definitely seems worth
exploring would be an experiment with heroin maintenance. A
detailed study of heroin maintenance in the United States before
it was stamped out by the Bureau of Narcotics and of the
heroin-maintenance techniques that have been utilized in England
should undoubtedly precede initiation of such experimentation in
this country. </p>

<p>Research with respect to heroin maintenance-its possible use
as a bait to get young addicts into other forms of treatment, its
possible use as long-term maintenance for addicts who have
repeatedly failed with other treatment methods, and other
potential uses-might be a high-priority item for the Council. </p>

<p>As already noted, a substantial driving force behind the
present public concern about heroin addiction is the fear of
drug-related crime. Assuming that not all addicts can be
rehabilitated, and indeed that the addiction problem will remain
at least as great for some years to come, the hypothesis that
drug addiction leads to crime and that a major portion of our
crime wave is attributable to the high price of heroin must be
put to the test. Such a controlled experiment could determine
whether, using a heroin maintenance system, crime is indeed
reduced. The superiority of methadone over heroin, or vice versa,
in maintenance programs could also be explored for the first
time. </p>

<p>Management Assistance to Ongoing Programs. The Council might
also consider providing ongoing or nascent treatment programs
with desperately needed managerial assistance. A team of
management consultants who could look at local programs and
persuade their administrators to adopt proven techniques and
perhaps to create a data-acquisition and digestion system where
appropriate would be a major contribution to good treatment. The
few successful project administrators we have seen are working
full time in their own projects and cannot spend the necessary
months advising other projects. Many methadone programs are
subject to justified criticism, and a resultant loss of money,
because of sloppy or uninformed management practices or failure
to keep and record their data accurately. The kind of service we
propose could reduce such needless problems. </p>

<p>Regional Networks. Finally, the Council might work with states
and cities to help treatment centers from regional networks to
share knowledge and experience, and even to cross-refer patients
for specialized attention. This kind of regional network could
also make cross-comparisons of variable techniques easier and
allow interchange of personnel and pooling of funds for
urinalysis, data collection, and training programs for personnel.
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>EVALUATION OF TREATMENT APPROACHES</b> </p>

<p>Several different treatment approaches are in use today. There
is also massive distrust among these programs, misinformation as
to what is and is not being done, and a lack of any reliable
means to separate truth from fiction. Evaluation approaches and
criteria for the various programs are not standardized, and basic
data often are not kept. Even when it exists, useful material is
often not organized or published. It is therefore virtually
impossible at this time to compare the effectiveness of any one
approach with any other, or to study the effectiveness of a given
approach for different types of patients. Because of lack of
evaluative data, we do not know, for example, whether and to what
degree the concurrent use of social services increases the
effectiveness of methadone, or the per them cost of patient
treatment under different programs correlated with the rate of
rehabilitation, or the dropout rate under various treatment
programs, or the type of person (age, pattern of drug use, race,
economic background) who volunteers for and is best handled under
various treatment programs. There is a great need for an
impartial body to attempt standardization of evaluation criteria
and techniques nationally and to disseminate the results of
objective evaluation of ongoing programs in order to promote the
most useful components of these approaches and discourage
ineffective and unproductive efforts. </p>

<p>One approach that the Council might consider in attacking the
information gap is to develop a uniform data-processing system
for drug-abuse projects and to provide several of the programs
with the necessary software and consultative services to install
such a system. Local treatment programs must participate actively
in working out a good data-evaluation system if they are to be
persuaded to cooperate. The results of the data collection might
be fed to a central receiving station where Council experts could
analyze it and interpret its meaning to the individual programs
as well as to other interested parties. </p>

<p>The decision as to what criteria should be used to evaluate
any treatment program, however, involves not merely data analysis
but basic value judgments based on experience. The Council should
be involved in setting these criteria. Major methadone programs,
for example, have been attacked because some of the participants
continue to use drugs intermittently. This raises the question of
whether eschewing all illegal drugs should be the sole or even
the primary goal for a treatment program, or whether enhanced
social functioning and cessation of antisocial acts, such as
stealing, are sufficient criteria for success. If the Council
could contribute toward formulating uniform criteria that reflect
a realistic and flexible perspective on what treatment programs
can be expected to accomplish and in what period of time, and on
the immediate and long-term nature of some of the goals of
treatment, it would be doing a tremendously worthwhile job. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>INFORMATION DISSEMINATION</b> </p>

<p>Technical Information. Technical personnel in the field,
researchers, treatment project personnel, and educators need a
comprehensive and accessible service that they can tap for
complete, accurate, and up-to-date information on specific
aspects of drug abuse, such as treatment proj ects, ongoing or
past research, model school curricula, or film listings. There
are at present several fragmented attempts to provide this kind
of informational coverage. On request, NIMH will supply, through
its National Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, selected
material on drug-abuse problems. Within about six months, it is
hoped that the Clearinghouse will be able to provide a computer
printout of abstracts of all publications on any subject
requested, concentrating on publications appearing within the
last decade, and without evaluation of content. Because the NIMH
Clearinghouse is a government service, it feels that it cannot
exercise any discrimination in the articles it abstracts, and
hence it often abstracts worthless material or several virtually
identical publications of the same author in different
periodicals. NIMH also sends periodically, to certain persons,
the protocols of research grants in progress. The National
Coordinating Council on Drug Abuse Education and Information is
planning a looseleaf service to include information on treatment
projects, legislation, films, and what is known about the nature
and effect of individual drugs of abuse, but is not sure how
complete it can be because of budget problems. </p>

<p>Ideally, there should be one comprehensive index and digest of
all this material, perhaps in several looseleaf volumes, and
preferably one that is not prepared by the federal government. It
should encompass virtually all information pertinent to the
field, including a reasonably selective cross-indexed review or
abstract of past and present books, articles, reports, and
scientific papers, reprints from nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century literature on experiences with drug abuse that
are otherwise not generally available, descriptions of current
treatment and research projects, public-opinion polls and drug
surveys, evaluated lists of educational materials, digests of
laws, court decisions, and legislative proposals, and other
material. The compilation of such a digest and its periodic
updating would be an enormous undertaking, and one that might be
best accomplished by subsidizing another organization to do the
actual work. The relationship between the Council and the
editorial board of such a publication would have to be resolved. </p>

<p>Another important way of disseminating and highlighting the
best of current research findings is through a technical journal,
circulated largely to physicians, scientists, and other
specialists in the field. The Institute for the Study of Drug
Addiction, in New York, currently publishes the International
journal of the Addictions, which covers both alcoholism and drug
abuse. We have found this journal a very useful source of basic
information. The publishers state that the very limited number of
papers and abstracts, and the very small circulation, are due to
a lack of funds. </p>

<p>There seems to be no reason to set up a second journal of this
type. Subject to further exploration of this matter, we believe
that the Council should give serious consideration to working
with the Institute for the Study of Drug Addiction to expand the
articles and abstracts in their journal in order to cover the
field adequately (excluding alcoholism, which is covered well
enough in a separate journal), to make the journal a monthly
publication, and to increase its circulation. This would provide
the field with the detailed results of all significant research
on a current basis. </p>

<p>School Drug-Education Programs. The role of the Council in the
race to the schoolhouse must be approached with care. The
consensus is that private and public organizations are now
generating too many drug-education programs without sufficient
knowledge of basic educational techniques, pretesting, or
evaluation of results. </p>

<p>There are not enough professional educators sufficiently
schooled in drug abuse to teach teachers about drugs. Very often
we have found that those who teach counselors and others
responsible for drug education in the schools have themselves had
no training except for a few lectures. It may be that the Council
can affect this vacuum through support of university
interdisciplinary research that can train a cadre of experts to
teach the teachers in the universities and surrounding
communities. </p>

<p>Another contribution of the Council might be to help subsidize
the evaluation of drug films, literature, and curricula offered
to the schools. It might also design or commission methods of
evaluation by which school programs would be able to assess their
own results. </p>

<p>Perhaps the most critical problem of most school
drug-education programs is their passivity. The Council might
support and disseminate information about some less traditional
approaches, such as active engagement using drugs in behavior
experiments with animals, discussion of nondrug inducement of
altered states of consciousness, or extended discussions of
values and what youngsters hope to get out of drugs. These
represent a few of the more promising (but scarce) approaches we
have encountered. </p>

<p>The attraction of television for the young child makes it a
logical educational device on drugs. Consideration should be
given to working with a group skilled in educational motivational
techniques, such as Children's Television Workshop, on films for
use in elementary school or over national television. </p>

<p>General Public Information. Perhaps the single most important
service of the Council would be to act as an independent source
of relevant information for the public about drug-abuse problems.
There is a need for a new and wholly independent perspective on
such fundamental issues as the nature and scope of the drug
problem, the effects of present law-enforcement policies at all
levels, the real dangers of youthful marijuana use, the treatment
or recovery potential of different kinds of drug abusers, how
much crime can really be accounted for by drug abusers, how the
English system of heroin maintenance works and with what results,
the federal government's activity in terms of dollars, and the
allocation of those dollars among enforcement, treatment,
research, and education, the foreign experience with marijuana
users, and how a school-or a parent-should best react to the
presence of drugs. </p>

<p>These are the issues that are troubling Americans. Two New
York State public-opinion surveys showed that drug use was
considered a major neighborhood problem by 23 per cent of those
interviewed, surpassed only by burglary, vandalism, and unsafe
streets. A New York Times survey of 463 New York voters, reported
on October 4, 1970, placed drugs as the fourth most prominent
problem facing the nation and the foremost problem facing the
voter's immediate community. At present, the public receives its
information on these matters primarily from government sources. </p>

<p>Many methods must be used to inform the public of key
developments in the field and explore key policy issues in drug
abuse control. The Council could commission its own public
opinion surveys on key issues to guide the direction of its
information efforts. State-of-the-art papers might be published,
containing accurate but readable technical material on the nature
and effects of drugs. Accounts of comparative experiences of
different jurisdictions with varying law-enforcement, treatment,
and education approaches could be prepared and disseminated. </p>

<p>Whether such material is widely read will depend in large part
on its readability and press coverage. The Council will need a
good editor, with a sound basic understanding of the sciences and
able to write simply but accurately. It will also need a library
capacity to collect and analyze information of all kinds; it may
in time want to become a national information center, publishing
attractively packaged periodicals for the lay audience containing
such analyses. It may use radio and TV for forums in which
outstanding experts in the field can discuss key concepts and
thus dispel some of the myths that abound. Different media, of
course, would be targeted to different audiences-parents, youths,
inner-city residents, and the suburban middle class. </p>

<p>Consultative Services for Key Officials and Organizations. The
Council might wish to provide counseling services on a selective
basis for key figures and organizations in the drug-abuse field,
such as major professional organizations and leagues of city or
state officials. Such persons might wish to utilize the expertise
of Council staff in many areas before undertaking major policy
commitments or advising their members. Meetings and symposia
could be designed by the Council staff to facilitate
communication between key professionals and policy-making
officials and to disseminate its own findings. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>LAW-ENFORCEMENT EFFORTS</b> </p>

<p>Basic law enforcement is, of course, a federal, state, and
local governmental function, and we would recommend that the
Council not enter this field in any substantial way. </p>

<p>Although the federal government is now engaged in
international negotiations to reduce the supply of opium and its
foreign manufacture into heroin, as well as to increase border
surveillance to reduce its importation, we cannot be optimistic
about their efforts. Previous attempts by the United States to
stop foreign cultivation and manufacture have proved
frustratingly unsuccessful, and the number of world sources of
opium and the ease with which foreign production quotas can be
circumvented give no cause for belief that future efforts will be
any more successful. There is also a widely held belief among
experts in the drug field that, if any one drug of abuse were
eliminated, a new one would almost certainly be available to
displace it. Thus, even assuming that all heroin and marijuana
were stopped at the border, marijuana could be grown in this
country, synthetic hallucinogens (probably more toxic) could
readily displace marijuana, and synthetic opiates and other drugs
could readily be available for use in place of heroin. Although
better border control or reduction of supply might tighten the
market somewhat, thus forcing the price up, it seems unlikely
that it would have a substantial long-range impact on the
underlying causes and effects of drug abuse, or even on its
prevalence. In sum, this appears to be an area of limited
potential, wishful thinking to the contrary, and one in which the
federal government is already investing heavily. </p>

<p>We do recommend, however, that some exploration be made into
the reasons that law-enforcement officials at present seem unable
to prosecute more of the high-volume drug pushers once the drugs
get into the country, even though they profess to know who the
pushers are, where they engage in their operations, and a great
deal of other information about them. Prosecution of important
nonaddict drug pushers can have a temporary effect on total drug
availability at the street level and force some addicts into
treatment. It would, in addition, have a substantial
psychological effect in many ghetto communities, where it is
often thought that the police purposely do not prosecute drug
pushers because they have made deals with the illicit trader or
because they wish minority groups to remain enslaved to drugs. We
believe that exerting pressure on the commercial sellers of
illegal drugs is a desirable objective and should be done in the
most efficient way possible. For that reason, we recommend the
exploration with federal and local authorities of ways to
increase arrests at the top levels of the drug traffic. If the
Council enters this area at all, it should work closely with the
staff of the Police Foundation to encourage innovative strategies
by state or local police departments. The active utilization of
antidrug community groups to help in policing and exerting formal
sanctions in their own neighborhoods against pushers is one area
of potential. </p>

<p>The Council might also want to study the effect of various
laws and law-enforcement policies on the actual use of drugs and
the treatment of drug abusers. This area is badly in need of
careful study. The results of such a study might then become the
subject of a &quot;white paper&quot; by the Council for
consideration by local officials, budgetmakers, and the public at
large. It might also help to create a more open climate for
experimentation in different control strategies. The current push
from the federal government is for all the states to commit
themselves legislatively to a single model of law enforcement. It
would seem, however, that states should be as laboratories to try
out different approaches and to evaluate the results stemming
from those variations. </p>

<p>There also appears to be a real need for educational programs
specifically aimed at law-enforcement and court personnel, who
will probably continue to be the largest intake process for
illegal drug users. Although BNDD runs a law-enforcement training
program for state and local police officers with respect to
narcotics laws, it does not appear to emphasize the medical and
social aspects of drug abuse, its causes and effects, the
community resources that can be utilized in combating it from a
public-health and social standpoint rather than from a law
enforcement standpoint, the importance of not ruining the lives
of young children as a result of unfortunate experimentation with
drug abuse, and similar aspects of this problem. The Council
might fruitfully direct its efforts to helping police and court
personnel, both juvenile and adults, to develop informal
mechanisms for rapidly screening and diverting serious drug users
into treatment programs in lieu of legal processing. Conferences
might be sponsored for law-enforcement and judicial personnel to
focus on the best of these diversion programs. An effective
juvenile court treatment project along these lines is, in our
opinion, one of the greatest unmet needs in the entire field. </p>

<p>Finally, many improvements in the present law-enforcement
approach toward drug abuse may have to come from the courts.
There will be increasing attacks upon the irrationality of
present drug laws, centering upon the right to privacy involved
in the personal use of drugs, and the extension of the ruling in
Robinson v. California that a person may not be criminally
punished for addiction to include possession, use, and presence
in illegal establishments or association with other addicts. The
question of the right to treatment for an addict can be expected
to be raised not only in civil commitment programs, where
treatment is minimal, but also in communities without methadone
programs, or where methadone dispensation is severely restricted
by law, or even ultimately where doctors are not allowed to
prescribe it for addict patients. </p>

<p>In the juvenile field, a long-standing and perhaps legally
vulnerable impediment to treatment is the legal requirement for
paternal permission. Addicts can also be expected to raise their
eligibility for welfare as &quot;disabled persons&quot; or as
&quot;medically needy&quot; under Medicaid laws. Treatment
programs all over the country have encountered difficulties in
locating facilities in highaddiction areas because of outmoded
zoning laws. The right of &quot;gatekeepers,&quot; such as
teachers and nurses, to withhold from law-enforcement authorities
confidential information received from students may have to be
tested in the courts. Limitations of treatment programs to
selected kinds of addicts will probably also be legally attacked.
The adjustment of our now-primitive body of drug-abuse laws to
new medical developments in research and treatment may well have
to come about through a series of court cases as well as, and
even in the absence of, legislative changes. The Council staff
should keep abreast of such legal developments and, where
appropriate, lend financial assistance to legal groups seeking
such adjustments. The D.C. Lawyers Committee project on training
a corps of addict specialists and the comments filed on the
methadone regulations by the Center for Law and Social Policy are
examples of such worthy efforts. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE LEADERSHIP ROLE<br>
</b></p>

<p>We have suggested that the most critical reason for
establishing a Drug Abuse Council is to create independent
leadership in the field. That leadership must inevitably be
earned through professional and public credibility, and through
excellence of staff and product. The Council must lead in
formulating and disseminating sound ways of thinking and acting
toward drug use. It must, in short, become a center for policy
study in the drug field, to which researchers, legislators,
educators, policy-making officials, and the lay public will turn
for nonpartisan analysis and information. </p>

<p>This role can be accomplished primarily by using the best
thinkers in many different fields to find out what is actually
happening to drug users-not just the young experimenters or
mainliners, but the older pill-takers as well-why they are taking
drugs, and what other ways can be found to satisfy their
underlying urges and needs. The &quot;drug-abuse problem&quot;
needs to be perceived in a less rigid and emotional way by the
public at large. The nation has to understand how our present
system of drug controls really operates, and with what
consequences to what people. It must be given a realistic notion,
rather than palliatives, of what we can expect to accomplish
through education, treatment, and law enforcement, and what part
of the problem must be approached in even more complex and subtle
ways. </p>

<p>At the same time, there must be a sense of urgency about the
Council's work. As soon as it is organized, the Council must
consider such matters of immediate importance as </p>

<p>The work of the Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse
established under the 1970 federal drug-abuse law </p>

<p>The authority of the Secretary of HEW to authorize researchers
to protect the privacy of research subjects under the 1970
federal law </p>

<p>The obligation of the Secretary of HEW under the 1970 federal
law to report to Congress on the proper methods of medical
treatment of narcotic addiction </p>

<p>The authority of the Department of justice to establish quotas
for drugs, like heroin, that have no accepted medical use but are
needed for research purposes </p>

<p>The proposed new International Protocol on Psychotropic
Substances being considered by the U.N. Commission on Narcotic
Drugs </p>

<p>Implementation of the proposed new methadone regulations The
proposals to conform state law to the 1970 federal law and the
proposed new Uniform State Act </p>

<p>The proposed new federal Rules of Evidence that affect the
confidentiality of the doctor-patient relationship </p>

<p>Of equal importance, priorities must be established with
respect to the broad work of the Council and work begun on its
long range objectives. The projects that should be given prompt .
consideration include the following information: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Analysis of the 1970 federal drug-abuse law for youth,
        researchers, physicians, and others </li>
    <li>A publication on the nature and extent of drug abuse in
        the United States today-what drugs are being used, by
        whom, the number of users, the relative harm of various
        drugs, what happens to users, the impact of drug use on
        crime, and so forth </li>
    <li>Evaluation of the English system of narcotic
        dispensationhow it works, the problems it has
        encountered, and whether it has controlled the spread of
        opiate addiction-perhaps coupled with an evaluation of
        U.S. clinics of the 1920's </li>
    <li>An evaluative synthesis of information about the effects
        of marijuana, with an explanation for the layman of the
        implications (or lack thereof) of animal experiments </li>
    <li>Examination of the legal alternatives to current policy
        regarding marijuana, how they would work in operation,
        and their implications </li>
    <li>An explanation of appropriate criteria for judging a
        treatment program (especially methadone), analyzing such
        factors as the expectation that many patients will
        continue to use drugs, and the importance of recognizing
        the value of different types and degrees of success </li>
    <li>A review of the experiences of secondary schools with
        handling drugs-including the use of confidentiality
        guarantees, the designation of one or a few teachers as
        confidential advisers, expulsion or suspension, liaison
        with community treatment programs, and relations with
        law-enforcement officials </li>
    <li>Analysis of the legitimate expectations of curtailing the
        supply of drugs through border surveillance, Turkish crop
        subsidies, and similar techniques </li>
    <li>An examination of the amount of federal resources (and
        those of a few major states) being spent on the drug
        problem and their allocation </li>
</ul>

<p>Research and Field Investigation </p>

<ul>
    <li>Careful study of the reasons young people use drugs, what
        they want to get out of them, and how many have left
        drugs and are trying for the same effects in other ways </li>
    <li>A field study of peer pressure as a factor in youthful
        drug experimentation </li>
    <li>Categorization and review of the major characteristics of
        the drug-education programs in operation-how many have
        been evaluated, with what results, and how the children
        and teachers feel about them </li>
    <li>A study of the optimal role of the pharmaceutical
        industry in the prevention of abuse-including
        consideration of proper production quotas for particular
        drugs, diversion into illegal channels, needed research
        on abuse potential, and legitimate advertising to the
        public and to doctors </li>
    <li>A state-of-the-art conference on current research on the
        nature of heroin addiction-including the meaning of
        animal and human research, hypotheses being worked on,
        important issues, and productive lines of inquiry </li>
    <li>A study of the effects of heroin on users, in conjunction
        with a treatment experiment, to learn such basic facts as
        immediate effects on users, how to stabilize on heroin,
        the feasibility of simultaneous use of methadone and
        heroin, and whether a heroin user can function normally </li>
    <li>Analysis of the substitution of different drugs with
        different effects for the original drug of choice </li>
</ul>

<p>Treatment </p>

<ul>
    <li>A synthesis of what is and is not known about the
        treatment of juvenile users of the various
        drugs-including hypotheses on how to treat this key group
        and the treatment resources a community should have for
        experimenters and chronic users, for hard and soft drugs,
        and for older and younger juveniles </li>
    <li>A paper on the state of treatment generally, pulling
        together the record of methadone, antagonists,
        therapeutic communities, and community mental-health
        centers, with evaluations where they exist, and
        consideration of such issues as public or private
        facilities, professional or indigenous staff, outpatient
        or inpatient, and voluntary or compulsory treatment </li>
    <li>A study of the employment of ex-addicts in treatment-the
        kinds of jobs available, the legal and community
        barriers, what job-training programs work for this group,
        and whether persons on heroin or methadone can do
        everything normal people can </li>
    <li>Assemble management consultants and material for
        dataprocessing systems for fledgling treatment programs. </li>
</ul>

<p>Law Enforcement </p>

<ul>
    <li>Monitor how the new 1970 federal drug-abuse law works in
        a few major jurisdictions-how it is enforced, against
        whom, the penalties given out, and what happens to the
        classification sections </li>
    <li>Compare the experience in states with high (e.g.,
        Missouri) and low (e.g., Nebraska) marijuana penalties to
        see the effect, if any, over a period of time on drug
        use, attitudes toward drugs, and drug education </li>
    <li>An analysis of the difficulties facing law-enforcement
        officials in the enforcement of drug laws against
        wholesale and retail traffickers </li>
</ul>

<p>It is not possible to lay down a step-by-step program for
changing the present climate surrounding drug abuse in the
country. How to get the country to focus on the real evils of
drug abuse and to attack them rationally without contributing to
the creation of even greater ones is a monumental task.
Hopefully, the Council will not be alone in working toward such
an end and will be able to enlist the support of state and city
governments, such branches of the federal government as NIMH, and
other private and professional organizations. Hopefully, too,
much of its work will affect the related problem of alcoholism
and will help to end the fragmented approach toward different
kinds of drug-taking. The pace of the work and the priorities
must obviously be decided by the Council board and staff itself,
guided by a realistic notion of the magnitude of the tasks facing
them and the opportunity to do something constructive about them.
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>CONCLUSION</b> </p>

<p>It is of fundamental importance that man has and. will
inevitably continue to have potentially dangerous drugs at his
disposal, which he may either use properly or abuse, and that
neither the availability of these drugs nor the temptation to
abuse them can be eliminated. Therefore, the fundamental
objective of a modern drug-abuse program must be to help the
public learn to understand these drugs and how to cope with their
use in the context of everyday life. An approach emphasizing
suppression of all drugs or repression of all drug users will
only contribute to national problems. </p>

<p>There is an urgent need for effective nongovernmental
leadership toward a more reasoned approach to drug abuse in this
country. A void exists that we believe can be filled by the
creation of a new Drug Abuse Council. In our best judgment, the
Council could successfully exert this leadership and could have a
substantial and beneficial impact on drug abuse in this country. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>NOTES</b> </p>

<p>1. Evidence obtained during 1971 indicates that the number of
active heroin addicts as of December, 1971, was probably between
250,000 and 300,000. 2. The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention
and Control Act of 1970 reduced these penalties to imprisonment
for up to one year for a first offense and two years for each
subsequent offense. </p>

<p>3. The 1970 Act established a Commission on Marijuana and Drug
Abuse to review existing laws and policy and recommend necessary
legislation and administrative action. </p>

<p>4. See Staff Paper 5 for the most recent figures. </p>

<p>5. This information has become available and is presented in
Staff Paper 5. </p>

<p>6. In 1971 this organization changed its name to the National
Coordinating Council on Drug Use Education. </p>

<p>7. By December, 1971, there were over 300 methadone projects
and a large number of persons receiving methadone by prescription
outside of these projects. An estimated 50,000 patients are now
using this drug for maintenance. See Staff Paper 3. </p>

<p>8. In November, 1971, the Food and Drug Administration
announced it intention to propose broader approval of methadone
under a closely con trolled distribution system. </p>

<p>9. These estimates are based on an addict population of about
100,000 During 1971, official estimates of the number of addicts
were raised. It i now estimated that 100,000 to 120,000 pounds of
opium are needed annually to supply the U.S. market. </p>

<p>10. In June, 1971, the President proposed a Special Action
Office for Drug Abuse Prevention to coordinate federal drug-abuse
efforts in treatment, education, and research. Regulation and law
enforcement, and military and veterans' problems are not
included.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>