
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B11-54</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA062-000357-B014-196</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.monito.com:80/wankel/annotated.html 206.86.185.198 19970116014214 text/html 16900
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Thu, 16 Jan 1997 01:42:21 GMT
Server: BESTWWWD/1.0
MIME-version: 1.0
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 16717
Last-modified: Sat, 29 Jun 1996 21:01:46 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>

<HEAD>

<TITLE>   Wankel Rotary Engines: Annotated List   </TITLE>

<META Name="description" Content="Annotated list of sites regarding
Wankel rotary combustion engines.">

<META Name="keywords" Content="Wankel rotary combustion engine,
enthusiasts, alternative, merchandise">

</HEAD>

<BODY background="../Textures/monito-logo-bkgd.gif" bgcolor="#F0F0F0"
	text="#000000" link="#0000FF" alink="#00FF00" vlink="#00B000">

<A HREF = "wankel.html"> Wankel Home </A> |
<A HREF = "glossary.html"> => Glossary </A>

<HR>

<H1> Annotated List of Wankel Rotary Engine Web Pages </H1>

<P> There are many pages referenced throughout the other pages at this
site, in addition to those here.  Categories are <A HREF =
"#misc">Miscellaneous</A> (mostly RX-7), <A HREF =
"#AltAlt">Alternatives to the Alternative</A>, <A HREF = "#time">Time
Limited</A>, <A HREF = "#enthus">Enthusiasts</A>, <A HREF =
"#non-eng">Non-English</A>, <A HREF = "#broken">Broken Links</A>, and <A
HREF = "#merch">merchandise</A>.

<H2> <A NAME = "misc"> Miscellaneous (Mostly RX-7) </H2>

<P> <EM> In no particular order. </EM>

<P> <A HREF = "http://www.mazda.co.jp/">Greeting Mazda</A> is the name
of the pages from Mazda Motor Corporation itself in Japan.  As of this
writing, the pages are in Japanese, but English is promised soon.

<P> One of the best sites I have found is the San Francisco <A HREF =
"http://members.aol.com/barx7club/">Bay Area RX-7 Club</A>'s page.  This
page includes the best vendor list I've seen so far.

<P> Australia gives us the <A HREF =
"http://www.vision.net.au/~hirpm/index.html">HiRPM site</A>, which is
one of the more complete available.  Included is valuable information on
<A HREF =
"http://www.vision.net.au/~hirpm/wankel/porting.html">porting</A> Mazda
engines.  Gerhard Geiling, a contributor in German here, wrote for HiRPM
some English language material about <A HREF =
"http://www.vision.net.au/~hirpm/nsu/index.html">NSU Ro80</A>.

<P> Brooks Weisblat has an innovative page that uses image-maps to
explain features of the <A HREF =
"http://bio.fsu.edu/~weisblat/index.html">third generation RX-7</A>.
It was recently updated with action autocross pictures.

<P> Information is available from Michael Boulanger on his <a
HREF = "http://www.iii.net/users/mboulang/mazdarx7/mazdarx7.htm"> Mazda
RX-7 page</a>.

<P> Kane has an extensive gallery that is worth a visit.  Pictures on
view include RX-01s from an Australian perspective, one of which is the <A
HREF = "http://www.hawkesbury.uws.edu.au/~kanef/pictures.htm">Best Curve
in the Road Image</A> I've seen in a while, as well as a good shot that
shows the aerodynamic slot in the front.  You can find early RXs and
a sharp boat.

<P> High in the stakes for best slogan is <A HREF =
"http://www.canuck.com/~dwiles/">No Rotor, No Motor</A>.  There I found
the most extensive continent wide list of <A HREF =
"http://www.canuck.com/~dwiles/classifieds/ads.html">classified ads</A>
of RX-7s for sale and wanted.

<P> More information should be available from the <A HREF =
"ftp://ftp.att.com/pub/rx7/index.html"> RX7Net Home Page </A> but was
not available at this writing.  A correspondent has said new pages
are under construction.

<P> Norway has a page on the <A HREF =
"http://www.stud.his.no/~hegle/mazda.html">Mazda Cosmo RX-5</A> which
consists mostly of specifications.

<P> Dave Disney has a page with images and information on <A HREF =
"http://funnelweb.utcc.utk.edu/~disney/">headers and presilencers</A>.

<P> <A HREF = "http://aruba.ccit.arizona.edu/~rockd/">Dave Rock</A> has
an interesting page with some great photos.  He also has a good page on
the <A HREF = "http://aruba.ccit.arizona.edu/~rockd/brochure.html">79
RX-7</A> featuring the brochure.  It is 1.7 to 2 MB, which is a lot of
data that is worth visiting.  The brochure pages are skillfully scanned.
They are full of detailed cutaway drawings, photos, slogans, and
explanatory copy.  A classic product introduction for their time, I'd
say.

<P> <A HREF = "http://206.99.236.10/~klong/rx7.html">Second Generation
RX-7</A> issues are discussed in this very long page, with particular
attention to fixes for technical problems and performance modifications.
There is a summary list of Technical Service Bulletins.

<P> Theron Muller writes about <A HREF =
"http://www.engg.ksu.edu/KSE/rotary/rotary2.html">Re-Engineering the
Wankel</A>.  It is a reasonable summary of the Wankel, but has a couple
of factual errors such as claiming a compression ratio of 4.  At the end
there is a claim that the rotary engine is prone to dieseling, something
I have not read anywhere else and which is contrary to my own
experience.  One can see the <A HREF =
"http://www.engg.ksu.edu/KSE/rotary/rotframe.html">article formatted by
HTML</A> with a diagram that has gears that don't mesh and a housing
shape that is not epitrochoidal.  The re-engineering reference is to the
RandCam engine, which is not a Wankel.  The RandCam diagram has several
spelling errors.  This appears to have appeared in the "Kansas State
Engineer", V. 81, N. 3, Spring 1996.

<P> <A HREF = "http://www.engin.umd.umich.edu/~maxc/rx7home.html">Max
Cooper</A> discusses the Rotary Combustion cycle and lists some
vendors and other sites.  I especially like the use of the rotor for
the background.

<P> <A HREF =
"http://woodruffn121.residence.gatech.edu/users/Yossarian/WebPages/car.html">Derrick
Whittle</A> has some images including an exploded view of the engine.

<P> <A HREF = "http://www.wieckphoto.com/Auto/MAZDA/">Wieck</A> has some
good photos.

<P> <A HREF = "http://www.primenet.com/~shafted/mazda.htm">Aric Shen</A>
provides a look at a serious enthusiast and an amusing study of frat-boy
attitudes.

<P> There is information about
<A HREF = "http://www.worldtel.com/cajad/manufact/mazda/mazinfo.htm">
Mazda Motor Corporation</A>.

<P> Doug Fortune has a page about experimental <A HREF =
"http://www.cuug.ab.ca:8001/~fortuned/homeop.html">Rotary Engines for
Homebuilt Aircraft</A>.

<P> A Wankel <A HREF =
"http://ed1.eng.ohio-state.edu/Bestof92/WankelEngineStack.sea.hqx">animation
using a HyperCard stack</A> is one of the ITEA Technology Education
Software Bank's Best of 92.

<P> Kevin Wyum has a page with many interesting <A HREF =
"http://www.servtech.com/public/hsm/rx7.html">third generation
pictures</A>.  There is also a page of pictures of <A HREF =
"http://www.servtech.com/public/hsm/KTW.html">modifications</A> to his
car, but he warns that they are not current.  His car was mentioned in
<A HREF = "http://www.turbomagazine.com/march/isra.html">Turbo
Magazine's</A> March 1996 and May 1995 issues as the "World's Fastest
new-generation RX-7".  This car is <A HREF = "http://www.canuck.com/~dwiles/classifieds/ads.html">for sale</A>.

<P> Jeff Littrell sounds a note of <A HREF =
"http://www.bhs.com/fca/mazda/"> caution</A> about 3rd gen. RX-7s,
especially 1993.

<P> RotaryRckt@aol.com has a site with an original title:  <A HREF =
"http://users.aol.com/RotaryRckt/Peri.html">Peritrochoid</A>.  It is
partly constructed.  There is information about a non-standard turbo
and 13B combination.

<H2> <A NAME = "merch"> Merchandise </H2>

<P> Superchips has modifications available for second generation RX-7s
that are <A HREF = "http://www.superchips.com/rx7asp.htm">normally
aspirated</A> and <A HREF =
"http://www.superchips.com/rx7turbo.htm">turbo</A>.

<P> <A HREF = "http://www.precision-mazda.com/~precmaz/precis.htm">Precision
Imports</A> are Mazda rotary engine specialists.

<P> <A HREF =
"http://www.capint.aust.com/sumnats/Merchandise.html">Stickers</A> are
available for $2.00 Australian: "Mazda rotary", "Rotary rocket", "Rotary
power" and $1.00: "Going to hell in a rotary".

<H2> <A NAME = "non-eng"> Non-English Pages </H2>

<P> Japanese readers will find extensive pages from <A
HREF="http://www.bekkoame.or.jp/~asmic/">Asmic (Kazu Kogure)</A>, updated
in early June 1996.

<P> Finnish readers might enjoy <A HREF =
"http://www.adfin.fi/adfin/fin/maahantuonti/inchcape/mazda-950809.html">Mazda
Motor Finland</A> by Inchcape Motors.

<P> <A HREF = "http://www.mazda.co.jp/">Greeting Mazda</A> is the name
of the pages from Mazda Motor Corporation itself in Japan.  As of this
writing, the pages are in Japanese, but English is promised soon.

<P> Two pages from S.S. Box in Japan discuss the Mazda <A HREF =
"http://ax252.rikkyo.ac.jp:8080/www/jugyou/jos95/vdb114t/passengers/mazda/rx7.html">RX-7
(3rd gen.)</A> and <A HREF =
"http://ax252.rikkyo.ac.jp:8080/www/jugyou/jos95/vdb114t/passengers/mazda/cosmo.html">Eunos
Cosmo</A>.

<H2> <A NAME = "enthus"> Enthusiasts </H2>

<P> <A HREF = "http://condor.stcloud.msus.edu/~shangk01/rx7.html">Alan
Khoo Shang Hui</A>, <A HREF = "http://grove.ufl.edu/~bdclary/">Brian
Clary</A>, <A HREF =
"http://splavc.spjc.cc.fl.us/hooks/ew/Noble.real/MAZDA.HTM">Adam
Noble</A>, <A HREF =
"http://watt.seas.virginia.edu/~rwr4a/cars.html">Rodney Rudd</A>, <A
HREF = "http://hubcap.clemson.edu/~bburton/rx7.html">Ben Burton</A>, <A
HREF = "http://www.umr.edu/~kes/">Kevin Stevenson</A>, <A HREF =
"http://192.154.67.6/life/student/rx7.html">Robert Cassell</A>, <A HREF =
"http://www.cs.utas.edu.au/css/slarnold/">Steve Arnold</A>.

<H2> <A NAME = "time"> Time Limited? Pages </H2>

<P> <A HREF =
"http://teleparc.infoweb.or.jp/tms/hall/profile/mazuda-e.htm"> Mazda
Motor Corporation</A> is profiled.  Follow the link to the passenger car
page for minimal info on the new <A
HREF="http://teleparc.infoweb.or.jp/tms/hall/center/mazda-p/mazda-p-e.htm">
RX-01</A>.  These pages are related to the Tokyo Motor Show, so they may
not last.

<P> Some messages regarding <A HREF =
"http://www.imsaracing.com/cgi-bin/imsa.forum/imsarace/a/3-3.1"> 3-rotor
and 4-rotor racing in IMSA</A> were posted on an IMSA forum.


<H2> <A NAME = "AltAlt"> Alternatives to the Alternative Engine </A> </H2>

<P> The Wankel rotary combustion engine can be considered as the
alternative four phase engine.  Here are some rotary engines other than
Wankels that can be grouped as the <A HREF = "#RandCam">Rand Cam</A> and
<A HREF = "#miscellaneous">miscellaneous</A>.

<P> <STRONG> <A NAME = "RandCam"> Rand Cam </STRONG>

<P> The <A HREF = "http://www.worldtel.com/regtec/">Rand Cam Rotary
Diesel</A> engine is perhaps the main alternative to the Wankel type
RCE.  It uses sliding vanes, but manages to avoid valves.  <A HREF =
"http://www.newswire.ca/releases/April1996/03/c0494.html">Testing begins
in April</A>.  Evaluation and improvements have been contributed by <A
HREF = "http://www.cira.wvu.edu/cur_proj.html">CIRA, W. Virginia
University</A>.  A technical article is referenced through one of the <A
HREF = "http://www.osti.gov/html/eren/3301.html">EREN search pages</A>.

<P> Lockheed Martin is developing a rotary powered <A HREF =
"http://jefferson.vf.mmc.com/extest/ASD_unmanned.html">Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle</A> for tactical reconnaisance.  The page linked in the next
paragraph indicates this might be a Rand-Cam.  The engine will have two
rotors, "large displacement", stratified charge, oil cooling, and will
take heavy fuel (JPG-5 and 8).  The advantages needed are high power to
weight ratio, low vibration at 6000 rpm, and low parts count for
logistic simplicity.

<P> Rand-Cam and Alliant TechSystems propose to power a UAV with <A HREF
= "http://popularmechanics.com/popmech/tech/U095L.html">this engine</A>.

<P> <STRONG> <A NAME = "miscellaneous"> Miscellaneous (alternatives to
the alternative to the alternative engine) </STRONG>

<P> <A NAME = "Thalo"> The site for Thalo is an example of what all
alternative technology sites should be: <A HREF =
"http://www.cerfnet.com/~thalo/">clear and informative</A>.  They do not
attempt to be mysterious like so many other sites.  There are clear
diagrams, detailed explanations, and an animation showing the principle
of operation.  The design uses a four-stroke cycle to drive five pairs
of opposed pistons in an air-cooled frame that rotates.  As of June 1996
they have yet to produce an engine.  The design is also to be applied
to pumps.

<P> <A NAME = "Cir-Com"> The Cir-Com <A HREF = "http://www.circom.com/">
Goodman Circular Rotary Engine</A> was invented by William A. Goodman
who was awarded patent 5,036,809 on Aug. 6, 1991, which he assigned to
Cir-Com Development Corporation.  It seems there is a full scale model
in existence to simulate the engine, and several proposed designs.  The
site does not explain the principles of operation but has several
interesting pictures.  It appears to be a multi-bladed design.  You are
invited to send them money to find out the specifications.  They are
seeking investors.

<P> Oldrich Nos mentions his <A HREF =
"http://www.photobyte.on.ca/photobyte/onos/invent.htm#AUTOMOTIVE">Continuous
Combustion Rotary Engine</A> invention.

<P> Stefan Bakos has invented what he calls the <A HREF =
"http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/invent/engine3.htm">Compulsory
Rotary Engine</A>.  It has US Patent 3,863,611.  He claims it is free
from pollution, its filtered output being water, air and oxygen.
Neither the page nor the image give a clear explanation, so it can't be
determined how it relates to the Wankel engine.  There appear to be four
rotors with three lobes, but the apexes are greatly rounded.  The
picture shows an air intake system reminiscent of the RX-7 Turbo II
intercooler.  It has writing that appears to say 1782 cc.

<P> The <A HREF = "http://zim.com/bmp/rvice">RVICE</A> Rotary Vane
Internal Combustion Engine (RVICE) does not have a working model in
existence, nor even a name of a person on the page to take credit for
the design, though the keywords "Dana Michael Inman" do appear in very
fine print.  By the anonymous inventor's own evaluation it appears to be
similar to an earlier Bancroft design, who did build some prototypes.

<P> <A HREF =  "http://personalwebs.myriad.net/tgunn/engine-2.htm"> Perlex
Inc. Rotary Power Engine</A>.  This is not a Wankel rotary engine but is
instead a variation, rooted in the Ramelli device from Italy, 1588.
This page is simply text, probably a press release about a test on
Nov. 1, 1985.

<P> The Newbold powerplant is said to be a turbo reciprocating
rotating-block engine.  I found out by starting at one of the <A HREF =
"http://www.osti.gov/html/eren/3301.html">EREN search pages</A>.

<P> Koichi Hirata has invented a <A HREF =
"http://www.mech.saitama-u.ac.jp/kiriki/rotary.html">Rotary Displacer
Stirling Engine</A>.

<P> Pangman has invented a rotating vane engine.  I found a reference at
one of the <A HREF = "http://www.osti.gov/html/eren/3301.html">EREN
search pages</A>.

<P> The "something for nothing" folks are at it again.  Hartmann has
resuscitated an article from Popular Mechanics June 1979 that describes
a mis-named "<A HREF = "http://www.overunity.de/wankel.htm">magnetic
wankel motor</A>".  The inspiration for the wankel designation is the
stator that has an air gap that varies from 0.1 mm to 5 mm away from the
circular rotor.  It is claimed to use less current than conventional
motors.  It has no connection to Wankel shapes or principles.

<H2> Marginal or Related Interest </H2>

<P> William Chui has written a few pages about <A HREF =
"http://commando.me.berkeley.edu/~willchui/reuleaux.html">Franz
Reuleaux</A> which are mildly interesting to those with a geometrical
bent, though there is a slight confusion about what constitutes a Wankel
rotary engine (RVICE creeps in).  Also, according to my reading of
Ansdale, the Wankel rotor is not a Reuleaux triangle.

<P>"<A HREF =
"http://www.wri.com/mathematica/books/bookcalcproj.html">Calculus </A>
Projects Using <em>Mathematica</em>", Revised Edition.  Just the table
of contents.  Apparently has a chapter on the Wankel Rotary Engine.

<H2> <A NAME = "broken"> Broken Links </H2>

<P> There was a good rotary power page from <A HREF =
"http://www.usyd.edu.au/~ykho/rx.html">Australia</A>.  It had
information about Mercedes, racing, model engines, and more than a dozen
photos.

<P> <A HREF = "mailto:jcaisse@wsu.edu">Joey Caisse</A> would like to
know about installing Mazda engines into <A HREF =
"http://www.wsu.edu/~jcaisse/bug.html">VW 1600 bugs</A>.  He discusses
Kennedy Conversions.

<HR>

<A HREF = "wankel.html"> Wankel Home </A> |
<A HREF = "glossary.html"> => Glossary </A>

<P> <A HREF="../disclaim.html">Copyright</A> &#169; 1996 <A HREF =
"../index.html">Alan Marr</A>.  This update notice was last updated
June 13, 1996.  Do you <A HREF = "../version.html">not see the
monkey</A> in the rotor background?  <A HREF = "submit.html">You can
help</A>.  You may send your comments or questions to <A HREF =
"mailto:rce@monito.com"> <KBD>rce@monito.com</KBD></A>.

</BODY>

</HTML>
</DOC>