
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B30-30</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B004-119</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134057 text/html 46267
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:40:46 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:18 GMT
Content-length: 46049
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Enforcement, Policy, and Reducing Drug Demand</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter V Drug Enforcement, Policy, and Reducing Drug Demand </h2>

<p>Introduction </p>

<p>The preceding chapter of this report discusses the historical
development of Federal drug policy and demonstrates that the
Federal response to the problems of drug abuse and drug
trafficking has become more complex over time. A good indicator
of the present complexity of the Federal response is the fact
that 32 Federal agencies are now involved in the multifaceted
effort to reduce the supply of and demand for drugs. In this
chapter, the Commission describes the current anti-drug efforts
of the principal Federal agencies and their roles in the national
strategy. The agencies are grouped by function, beginning with
those with central policy roles, followed by international
efforts, interdiction, domestic enforcement, data gathering,
intelligence, and United Nations efforts. </p>

<p>Overall Policy </p>

<p>The National Drug Enforcement Policy Board </p>

<p>The National Narcotics Act of 1984 created the National Drug
Enforcement Policy Board (the Board). This Cabinet-level Board
consists of the Attorney General as Chairman and the Secretaries
of State, Treasury, Defense, Transportation, and Health and Human
Services, as well as the Directors of Central Intelligence and
the Office of Management and Budget, as members. It is the latest
manifestation in the persistent effort to achieve singularity of
purpose in the fight against drug abuse, despite the diversity of
Federal agencies involved. This fact is explicitly recognized in
the pertinent statutory language, found at 1302(b) of the Act, in
which Congress expresses its intent to: </p>

<p>(1) Maintain a national and international effort against
illegal drugs; </p>

<p>(2) Coordinate fully the activities of the Federal agencies
involved; and (3) Charge a single, competent, and responsible
high-level Board of the United States Government, chaired by the
Attorney General, with responsibility for coordinating United
States policy with respect to national and international drug law
enforcement. </p>

<p>This intent is based upon sweeping Congressional findings set
forth in Section 1302(a) of the Act: </p>

<p>(1) The flow of illegal narcotics into the United States is a
major and growing problem. </p>

<p>(2) The problem of illegal drug activity falls across the
entire spectrum of Federal activities both nationally and
internationally. </p>

<p>(3) Illegal drug trafficking is estimated by the General
Accounting office to be an $80 billion per annum industry in the
United States. </p>

<p>(4) The annual consumption of drugs has reached epidemic
proportions. </p>

<p>(5) Despite the efforts of the United States Government and
other nations, the mechanisms for smuggling opium and other hard
drugs into the United States remain virtually intact, and United
States agencies estimate that they are able to interdict no more
than 5 to 15 percent of all hard drugs flowing into the country. </p>

<p>(6) Such significant indicators of the drug problem as
drug-related deaths, emergency room visits, hospital admissions
due to drug-related incidents, and addiction rates are soaring. </p>

<p>(7) Increased drug trafficking is strongly linked to violent
addiction-related crime, and recent studies have shown that over
90 percent of heroin users rely upon criminal activity as a means
of income. </p>

<p>(8) Much of the drug trafficking is handled by syndicates, a
situation that results in increased violence and criminal
activity because of the competitive struggle for control of the
domestic drug market. </p>

<p>(9) Controlling the supply of illicit drugs is a key to
reducing the crime epidemic confronting every region of the
country. </p>

<p>(10) The magnitude and scope of the problem requires the
establishment of a National Drug Enforcement Policy Board,
chaired by the Attorney General, to facilitate coordination of
all Federal efforts by relevant agencies. </p>

<p>(11) Such a Board must have responsibility for coordinating
the operations of Federal agencies involved in attacking the
problem through the development of policy and resources, so that
a unified and efficient effort can be undertaken. </p>

<p>To accomplish the statutory purpose, S. 1304 of the Act
specifically empowers the Board to improve policy development and
coordination among Federal agencies by: </p>

<p>(1) reviewing, evaluating, and developing U.S. government
policy, strategy, and resources with respect to drug law
enforcement efforts, including the setting of budgetary
priorities and development of a national and international drug
enforcement strategy; </p>

<p>(2) facilitating coordination of all U.S. government efforts
to halt national and international trafficking in illegal drugs; </p>

<p>(3) coordinating the collection and evaluation of information
necessary to implement U.S. policy with respect to drug law
enforcement. </p>

<p>In furtherance of these aims S. 1306 of the Act directs the
Director of the Drug Abuse Policy Office to serve as an advisor
to the Board on matters related to health issues in the drug
abuse field. As a principal figure in the area of interdiction,
the Vice President is included as an ex officio member. </p>

<p>Under this scheme the Attorney General as Board Chairman, in
consultation with the other members, supervises the preparation
of initiatives for consideration by the Board. The Board, under
the direction of the Chairman, then determines which items to
include on its agenda and what priority each is to receive. Such
items are then referred to the Coordinating Group, chaired by the
Deputy Attorney General and consisting of senior officials from
the member agencies. </p>

<p>The Coordinating Group in turn is to submit to the Board
practical recommendations, based on consultation with the
agencies involved, for resolving drug law enforcement issues and
developing appropriate Federal policy. Both the Board and the
Coordinating Group are supported in their efforts by a full-time
professional staff charged with performing necessary research,
analysis, and writing. This staff is composed of individuals
drawn from various principal agencies. The intent of this
multi-agency composition at all levels, Board, Coordinating
Group, and staff, is a reflection of the Board's intent, as
expressed in its 1985 Interim Act to Congress: </p>

<p>This structure reflects the need for interagency participation
at every level of Policy Board activity. The underlying principle
is that there is a practical advantage to resolving differences
at the lowest level possible. Disagreements on issues will
inevitably occur among various agency participants, but if all
points of view are represented at each level, many differences
can be worked out by the Staff or Coordinating Group rather than
being elevated to the Policy Board. </p>

<p>Section 1304(a) of the Act specifically directs the Board to
focus its work on two parts of the five-point National Strategy
on Drug Abuse: drug law enforcement and international
cooperation. In the area of drug enforcement, the Board pursues
four principal strategies: 1) illegal drugs are to be destroyed
at their source; 2) drug contraband is to be intercepted and
seized en route to or at the borders of the United States; 3)
drug trafficking organizations are to be identified, investigated
and prosecuted, and drug related assets seized and forfeited; and
4) regulatory means are to be exercised to stem diverted drug
abuse. </p>

<p>The Board commenced its activities on April 24, 1985, almost a
year after its creation. In its first meeting, it adopted the
organizational structure described above. In the months between
April 1985 and the end of that year, the Board met five times and
the Coordinating Group, five times. Issues referred to the
Coordinating Group during that time include &quot;designer&quot;
drugs, efforts to improve government-wide drug seizure
statistics, and drug crisis management. Its agenda includes a
report in January 1986, required by the Narcotics Act of 1984, on
the Board's achievements and the effectiveness of its policies to
combat national and international drug trafficking. It is also to
publish a 1986 strategy report. Items under consideration for
inclusion in the Boards agenda are: </p>

<p>Budget Review. The Government has increased substantially the
amount of resources devoted to drug law enforcement. Because of
the numerous agencies and departments now involved in combatting
drug trafficking, the Policy Board is an ideal forum for
considering the Government's overall drug law enforcement budget.
The Board may undertake budget reviews to determine whether
resources are appropriately allocated. Consideration will also be
given to insuring proper interagency balance and the optimal use
of tax dollars and resources in the drug war. </p>

<p>Memoranda of Understanding. The Board may review the numerous
jurisdictional Memoranda of Understanding between Federal
agencies to determine the effectiveness of these mechanisms for
interagency cooperation. </p>

<p>Interdiction. The Board may examine all of the interdiction
programs currently in place. Since, in the last few years, the
Federal Government has made an increased effort to prevent
illegal drugs from entering the United States, the Board may
propose to analyze the effectiveness of interdiction as an
overall law enforcement strategy. The Board will also consider
the experience gained from the 1981 exception to the Posse
Comitatus Act to determine whether additional legislative action
is needed. </p>

<p>Eradication. The Board proposes to assess the efficacy of all
eradication strategies and the cost-effectiveness of eradication
as a drug law enforcement strategy. In addition, it will address
how eradication relates to other elements of our enforcement
strategy. Because domestic marijuana reduction involves a number
of agencies, this issue is well suited to a study by the Policy
Board and its staff. </p>

<p>Other Issues. The Board may also refer other issues for
additional staff analysis. These might include: money laundering;
financial investigative techniques, including asset forfeiture;
the relationship of supply and demand reduction strategies; and
the collection and sharing of drug intelligence. </p>

<p>The Board's vision of its role is summed up in its Interim
Report: </p>

<p>The Board is assuming the task of coordinating all drug
related programs. To do this, the Board may develop a planning
and management process for policy development and evaluation of
the nation's narcotics law enforcement programs. </p>

<p>White House Drug Abuse Policy Office </p>

<p>Created within the White House by Executive Order 12368, the
Drug Policy Abuse Office was established to ensure that the
President is provided with a center for coordination and
oversight of both national and international drug abuse functions
of all executive branch agencies. The role of this office has
been expanded to include drug trafficking issues as well. The
office publishes a regular report on both drug abuse and drug
trafficking, the National Strategy, which provides policy
direction for all agencies involved in anti-drug efforts. As part
of the White House Office of Policy Development, the White House
Drug Abuse Policy Office provides the President with a direct
advisor on drug abuse policy matters. </p>

<p>International Efforts </p>

<p>Bureau of International Narcotics Matters </p>

<p>As the Federal agency responsible for coordinating the United
States' drug control efforts overseas, the Department of State's
Bureau of International Narcotics Matters (BINM) is pivotal in
implementing U.S. anti-drug policy on the international level.
BINM attempts to encourage foreign coordination for joint illicit
drug control activities; bilateral assistance for crop control
and interdiction programs in the form of equipment, training and
technical advisory services; participation in international
organizations to increase drug control efforts in licit and
illicit drug production countries; training programs for foreign
personnel in illicit drug control functions to strengthen
interdiction and enforcement efforts; guidance, coordination and
support of the work abroad of all U.S. government agencies
involved in drug control; and technical assistance for
international demand reduction. BINM currently provides support
for drug eradication efforts in 14 countries and is in large part
responsible for much of the world's crop control and eradication
efforts, described elsewhere in this report. </p>

<p>Agency for International Development </p>

<p>Section 126 of the Foreign Assistance Act instructs the Agency
for International Development (AID) to &quot;give priority
consideration to programs which would help reduce illicit
narcotics cultivation by stimulating broader development
opportunities.&quot; Given this mandate, AID issued Policy
Determination No. 1 on drugs in 1982, encouraging the design of
projects that provide economic alternatives to farmers in drug
growing areas. Overseas, AID coordinates with the State
Department's Bureau of International Narcotics Matters. </p>

<p>AID drug control efforts include finding a suitable mix of
substitute crops, assuring free market incentives, and
encouraging appropriate host country pricing and marketing
policies. AID attempts to develop and implement development
projects that facilitate the host government's enforcement of
existing bans on drug production. </p>

<p>Department of Agriculture </p>

<p>The United States Department of Agriculture through the
Agricultural Research Service (ARS) assists in the control of
illicit drug plants by providing technical information pertaining
to eradication and substitute crops. Scientists in the ARS
conduct research on the use of herbicides and other techniques
for eradication, as well as the use of substitute crops for
farmers presently producing drugs. ARS scientists also provide
expert advice to the State Department and cooperating foreign
countries regarding proposed eradication programs. Potential
adverse environmental impacts are assessed prior to the
recommendation of control measures, whether it be chemical,
mechanical, fire, biological, or through genetic manipulation or
a combination of two or more of these techniques. Scientists from
ARS have been involved in drug research since 1972 and have
assisted control authorities in several drug producing countries
in the Americas and the Near and Far East. </p>

<p>Interdiction </p>

<p>National Narcotics Border Interdiction System </p>

<p>The National Narcotics Border Interdiction System (NNBIS)
attempts to accomplish comprehensive planning in the limited area
of interdiction at or approaching U.S. borders. NNBIS was created
by the President on March 23, 1983, and is directed by the Vice
President. </p>

<p>NNBIS' mission is to improve border interdiction by
accomplishing a threefold goal: to continue to improve
interagency coordination among law enforcement agencies; to
maximize the participation of the military services and Federal
agencies involved in drug interdiction; and to increase and
provide interaction for intelligence community involvement in
interdiction efforts. Participating agencies include the U.S.
Customs Service, the U.S. Coast Guard, the Drug Enforcement
Administration (of particular importance is the contribution of
DEA's El Paso Intelligence Center - EPIC) the Border Patrol, the
Department of Defense, the Central Intelligence Agency, the
Federal Aviation Administration, the National oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, the Federal Communications
Commission, and the Department of State. NNBIS itself consists of
a headquarters staff in Washington, D.C. and six regional
offices: Miami, New Orleans, El Paso, New York, Chicago and Long
Beach, California. </p>

<p>Actual interdiction at or approaching U.S. borders is
accomplished by individual agencies during single agency or
multi-agency special operations. The role of NNBIS is to provide
necessary equipment, intelligence, detection and trend analysis
support. Specific NNBIS contributions to drug seizures consist of
direct support, such as the passing of &quot;real-time&quot;
information, general information, or regional analysis. NNBIS
staffs, consisting of agency-contributed personnel in both
Washington and the regional centers, coordinate with contributing
agency staffs to lay the groundwork for special initiatives,
which then can proceed in a timely fashion to enhance drug law
enforcement efforts. Of critical importance in understanding
NNBIS' role is the fact that the activity has no funding of its
own. It is entirely dependent upon agency contributions of
manpower and intelligence and does not have a direct operational
authority. It can only inform and advise its constituent agencies
concerning opportunities for coordinated or expanded operations.
Thus, criticisms of NNBIS, alleging that many seizures would have
occurred anyway, even if NNBIS did not exist, miss the point.
Individual agencies are intended, indeed mandated, to carry out
their missions, including contraband seizures. NNBIS is intended
to supplement, not replace, those efforts. It has a steadily
improving record of doing so, a fact recognized even by some
critics. </p>

<p>Operation Hat Trick I </p>

<p>In the fall of 1984 Hat Trick I, the first major coordination
effort attempted under the NNBIS management mechanism, was
undertaken. Hat Trick I was designed to disrupt the transshipment
of the fall harvest of marijuana from Colombia, while
simultaneously intercepting any cocaine shipped during the
operation. </p>

<p>During the 60-day operation, an intercept line of Coast Guard
and Navy ships was formed in the Caribbean to halt smuggling
vessels. The Department of Defense supplemented the operation
with electronic equipment capable of detecting both aircraft
which flew over the ships and vessels which slipped through the
net. Additionally, the Customs Service and Border Patrol
increased their efforts at and between the ports of entry to the
United States, and the intelligence community added previously
unprecedented support to the effort. This multi-agency approach
emphasized the critical need for compatible communications
capabilities. This lesson is being carried forward in current
operational planning. </p>

<p>The anticipated reaction to this operation was an attempt by
the smugglers in Colombia to stockpile shipments. To counter
this, multi-agency teams, headed by the Department of State,
visited Colombia and neighboring countries to brief officials
there about the operation and to elicit their support. The
Colombian government, which had declared a &quot;war without
quarter&quot; against drugs the previous year, seized the
opportunity to step up efforts to destroy the marijuana in that
country. Colombian officials were also placed aboard U.S. Coast
Guard cutters, operating off the Colombian coast to coordinate
with Colombian enforcement units. </p>

<p>Operation Hat Trick I proceeded as expected, with massive
maritime seizures, and a significant reduction of maritime drug
shipments. According to NNBIS, over 600,000 pounds of marijuana
and 6,000 pounds of cocaine were seized by U.S. agencies during
the operation. Simultaneously, the Colombian government, through
eradication and destruction of stockpiled contraband, removed
over 50 percent of the fall marijuana crop from possible export. </p>

<p>Operation Hat Trick II </p>

<p>Operation Hat Trick I has come to be viewed as a prototype
effort in it initiated improvements in planning, communications
security, in-country efforts, air operations, intelligence and
resource support. Hat Trick II, a much more ambitious operation
begun in November 1985 and still under way, is the logical
follow-on, drawing carefully on lessons learned from Hat Trick I.
</p>

<p>Coordinated by NNBIS and consisting of the combined forces of
U.S. civilian drug enforcement agencies and all branches of the
military, Hat Trick II involves increased land and air patrols to
disrupt drug traffic into the United States. The long-term goal
of the operation is to affect the worldwide availability of drugs
by increasing international pressure on trafficking
organizations. It is a complex operation that tightens
surveillance along our border with Mexico and along the known air
and ocean supply routes from South America and other Caribbean
countries. </p>

<p>The United States Navy and the Coast Guard, working together,
provide the primary maritime surveillance and interdiction forces
for Hat Trick II, while the U.S. Customs Service works as the
lead agency with the Navy, Air Force, Army and Marines in
directing air operations. The Customs Service and the Immigration
and Naturalization Service Border Patrol are conducting
intensified operations all along U.S. land and sea borders.
Through Department of State and DEA initiatives, the U.S. is
working to provide the maximum coordination of anti-drug efforts
in foreign countries. </p>

<p>Hat Trick II employs military surveillance aircraft to
identify and track smugglers and to exploit the known routes
traffickers use from their source countries to their ultimate
destination. If the smugglers attempt to hide and wait in a
source or transit country, the drug enforcement authorities in
those countries are prepared to seize drugs and make arrests. An
important key to Hat Trick II lies in the ability of source and
transit countries to take advantage of the disruption the United
States has caused in normal drug trafficking. Colombia, Panama,
Venezuela, Jamaica and other countries throughout the region are
cooperating in this international effort. </p>

<p>Hat Trick II has contributed significantly to institutional
change among involved agencies. For example, as a result of
planning initiatives for Hat Trick II, the U.S. Navy has changed
its policies, and Navy ships have served as platforms for a
significantly increased number of Coast Guard interdictions.
Further, military radars have become a much more significant
factor in aircraft seizures. The diversions in smuggling routes
and methods caused by the operation have made drug trafficking a
more costly enterprise for smugglers, and secure communications
enhancements have kept operational information away from them.
Major cocaine seizures have resulted from U.S. Bahamian
cooperation. The intelligence community has greatly increased its
collection and dissemination of tactical intelligence. Each law
enforcement agency has, in essence, developed specialized
intra-agency operations in support of the overall Hat Trick II
effort. </p>

<p>Operation Blue Lightning </p>

<p>To test the effectiveness of conducting an operation with
Federal, State and local participation, as well as exercising the
growing U.S.-Bahamian partnership against drug smuggling, a major
special operation, entitled &quot;Blue Lightning,&quot; was
devised and coordinated from the NNBIS Regional Center in Miami. </p>

<p>Blue Lightning concentrated on two geographical areas, the
Bahamian Archipelago and the area West of the Bahamas up to and
including the coast of Florida. In the Bahamas islands were
targeted as &quot;stash sites,&quot; or drug holding areas, and
unannounced sweep teams were flown in to search for contraband.
The sweep teams were composed of Bahamian Police, transported by
U.S. military helicopters. Efforts were coordinated by the DEA
and U.S. Embassy in Nassau. The effort outside the Bahamas
included coordinated, augmented air and sea detection capability
up to the Florida coast. As a primary participant in the NNBIS
coordinated operation, the U.S. Customs Service was requested to
assume lead agency status for the portion of the operation
outside the Bahamas. Overall Blue Lightning participants included
16 State, county and city law enforcement agencies, the Customs
Service, Department of Defense, Coast Guard, and National Park
Service in addition to the DEA and the Government of the Bahamas.
Additionally, Bahamian personnel were assigned to South Florida
for the duration of the operation to fly law enforcement missions
with U.S. Customs. </p>

<p>The raids by Bahamian authorities forced smugglers to move
their drugs to the U.S. immediately, where law enforcement units
were positioned to intercept them. Over 6,000 pounds of cocaine,
33,000 pounds of marijuana, and over $1.5 million worth of
vessels, aircraft, trailers and cash were seized. Additionally,
interdiction techniques were tested and refined, heightening the
ability to conduct coordinated international and interagency
operations. </p>

<p>U.S. Coast Guard </p>

<p>Responsible in large part for U.S. drug interdiction efforts,
the Coast Guard's strategy has been mainly directed toward
intercepting motherships as they transit the major passes of the
Caribbean. To effect this &quot;choke point&quot; strategy, the
Coast Guard conducts both continuous surface patrols and frequent
surveillance flights over the waters of interest, and boards and
inspects suspect vessels at sea. In the past major Coast Guard
resources have been concentrated in the &quot;choke points&quot;
traditionally transversed by traffickers. Cutters now more
frequently patrol the Bahamas, the eastern passes of the
Caribbean, and the Gulf, Atlantic and Pacific coastal areas. </p>

<p>During the past several years the Coast Guard has increased
the number of cutter patrol days and aircraft operating hours
devoted to drug interdiction, increasing their ability to respond
quickly to sightings and other intelligence. In addition, the
Coast Guard is deploying leased Sea Based Aerostats (SBAs), which
are small tethered balloons equipped with surface search radar,
tethered offshore at sufficient altitude to greatly increase its
range. As part of a coordinated operation, surface target
information is paused to a command and control cutter for
evaluation and deployment of other assigned units, both surface
and air. </p>

<p>Better intelligence remains an important factor in increasing
the Coast Guard's overall interdiction effectiveness. The most
critical need is timely and accurate information on the number,
identity, location and destination of vessels and aircraft
carrying contraband which are bound for the United States. During
the past two years improvements have been made in the collection,
evaluation, and dissemination of intelligence. A new intelligence
coordination center in Washington, D.C. maintains a 24-hour
all-source watch to exploit all intelligence systems available to
the Coast Guard, and produces intelligence tailored to the needs
of operational commanders. The Coast Guard is also continuing
liaison with the law enforcement community's intelligence
network. </p>

<p>U.S. Customs Service </p>

<p>The U.S. Customs Service participates in several multiagency
investigative programs, including the Florida Joint Task Group
and the President's Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force.
The efforts of these two programs alone resulted in 1,194 arrests
and drug seizures of 35,702 pounds of cocaine, 132 pounds of
heroin, and 3,848,293 pounds of marijuana from FY 1952 to FY
1985. </p>

<p>Prompted by the increasing sophistication of violators of
critical technology and trade laws, including individuals in
drug-related activities, the Customs Service established an
Office of Intelligence in 1981. Customs-acquired intelligence of
national security interest is, for the first time, actively being
disseminated to community agencies, and the intelligence
community is currently developing information useful for drug
enforcement. The development of secure communications facilities
within the Customs Service, currently underway, will further
enhance this capability. </p>

<p>The Customs Aviation and Marine Programs are consistently
changed and upgraded to reflect new technologies and equipment
and improved tactics and strategy. Drug smugglers have responded
to these programs by adjusting their routes to elude the
increased effectiveness of enforcement officials. </p>

<p>The Customs Service has developed teams of inspectors and
canine enforcement officers to more thoroughly examine persons,
conveyances, and cargo determined to be high risk. These mobile
teams, which use highly trained dogs to detect drugs, allow
Customs to release cargo and passengers deemed to be low risk
without examination, thus speeding the entry of most people and
cargo. The teams comprise 12 percent of the inspectional
workforce, but have accounted for the greater proportion of the
drug seizures. During the first 9 months of FY 1985, they have
been responsible for 66 percent (10,269 pounds) of the hashish,
87 percent (876 pounds) of the cocaine, and 40 percent (243
pounds) of the heroin that has been seized by inspectors. </p>

<p>During the past three years, the Customs Service has attempted
to convince the commercial air and sea carriers of their
responsibilities in the effort to halt drug trafficking. As part
of this initiative Customs contacted the major carriers and
signed cooperative agreements with a number of them. These set
out specific measures designed to prevent and detect the use of
commercial vessels and aircraft that smuggle drugs and other
contraband. Customs works closely with carriers, to apprise them
of their vulnerabilities through regular meetings; to provide a
training program on cargo, aircraft, and facility security; to
perform security surveys; and to compile threat assessments. This
cooperation between Customs and commercial carriers has led to
the detection of drugs and the transmittal of valuable
intelligence to local customs officials. </p>

<p>Department of Defense </p>

<p>In 1981 Congress passed legislation clarifying statutory
restrictions on the use of Department of Defense (DOD) resources
for law enforcement purposes. As a result, the Department of
Defense now has greater freedom to support Federal law
enforcement agencies. DOD resources play an important role in the
Federal drug interdiction program by providing surveillance and
support services, such as using aircraft to search for smugglers
and Navy ships to tow or escort vessels seized by the Coast Guard
to the nearest U.S. port. As of the end of September 1985, the
DOD has been involved in 38 vessel seizures, and their assistance
has been invaluable during NNBIS-directed joint operations. </p>

<p>DOD's increased involvement in drug law enforcement as a
result of amendments to the Posse Comitatus Act, has proved
pivotal in many instances. In fact, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
recommended unanimously in early 1985 that the U.S. military be
engaged to an unprecedented extent in fighting drug trafficking
and production. It called for the implementation of a massive new
program in which military forces would expand their present
supportive role by becoming involved in drug interdiction, in
training Central American nation's anti-drug forces, and in
providing needed weapons and equipment. </p>

<p>Domestic Enforcement </p>

<p>Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program </p>

<p>The Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program
(OCDETF), comprised of 13 Task Forces nationwide, brings all
Federal agencies with drug enforcement responsibilities together
into a coordinated effort against the largest and most important
national and international drug trafficking rings. Justice
Department agencies involved in the effort include the FBI, the
DEA, and the Marshals Service; Treasury Department agencies
include the U.S. Customs Service, the Bureau of Tobacco, Alcohol,
and Firearms, and the International Revenue Service. The Coast
Guard has a major role in the program as well, and the Department
of Defense offers intelligence and information on sightings of
suspected drug traffickers heading for the U.S. by sea and air. </p>

<p>In slightly more than two and one-half years, the Task Force
has produced 1,721 indictments against 6,545 defendants. The Task
Force emphasis is on prosecuting and imprisoning drug kingpins,
money launderers, and financiers. There is also strong focus on
seizing cash and drug-related assets. In fact, the assets seized
may soon exceed the cost of the Task Force program. </p>

<p>The Task force Program relies largely on the Continuing
Criminal Enterprise Statutory provision and the Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) statute. The
conviction rate in cases reaching disposition is approximately 95
percent. State and local officers participate in nearly one-half
of the Task Force investigations. </p>

<p>New international law enforcement cooperation also has been
achieved, since nearly one-half of Task Force cases target
organizations international in scope. These efforts have received
substantial support from foreign law enforcement agencies, as
indicated by the fact that five percent of Task Force cases now
involve direct participation by foreign police. This has created
a new focal point for international drug investigations. </p>

<p>Drug Enforcement Administration </p>

<p>As the lead Federal drug agency the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) is charged with enforcing the controlled
substance laws and regulations of the United States. DEA also
participates in non-enforcement programs to reduce the demand for
drugs. Part of the Department of Justice, DEA comprises 2,400
special agents in 121 domestic field offices and 61 offices in
over 40 foreign countries. </p>

<p>DEA's primary objectives are: </p>

<p>- To bring to bear all the Federal resources on the arrest,
prosecution, and immobilization of major drug trafficking
organizations via continued coordination with other Federal
agencies and the use of financial and legal tools, emerging
technology, and sophisticated investigative techniques. </p>

<p>- To reduce the supply of illicit drugs from source countries,
thereby reducing the availability of illicit drugs in the United
States and abroad via source country initiatives, assistance to
foreign government, training for foreign law enforcement
authorities, and public support for successful foreign government
endeavors. </p>

<p>- To significantly reduce the diversion of controlled
substances from the legitimate channels in which they are
manufactured, distributed, and dispensed through a vigorous
program of investigations and State, local, and international
cooperation. </p>

<p>- To enlist the active participation of State and local
governments and law enforcement agencies in the national drug
eradication program, clandestine laboratory task forces, State
and local task forces, and other multi-state coordinative
efforts. </p>

<p>- To participate actively and aggressively in the Federal,
State, and local effort to mobilize public support for the drug
enforcement and abuse prevention program by implementing
strategies and educational programs that stimulate cooperation
among State and local criminal justice agencies, school,
businesses, civic, and parent groups. </p>

<p>- To improve the effectiveness and efficiency of DEA
operations through the implementation of specific programs
designed to enhance employee performance. </p>

<p>Domestic Eradication Programs </p>

<p>The DEA's Domestic Eradication/Suppression Program has
expanded significantly since the Drug Enforcement Administration
first provided eradication assistance to Hawaii in 1979, and
currently all 50 States participate in this venture. DEA
encourages State and local eradication and provides training,
equipment, funding and investigative and aircraft resources. In
1984, with 48 States participating, approximately 3.8 million
marijuana plants were eradicated. The Secretary of the Interior
has also been authorized by a recent Executive Order to conduct
an extensive eradication program targeting marijuana plants on
Federal lands. Spraying commenced on October 6, 1985. </p>

<p>El Paso Intelligence Center </p>

<p>The El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC) is the Drug Enforcement
Administration's national drug information center, with
intelligence systems located at DEA headquarters, and in DEA's
foreign and domestic offices. EPIC's strategic intelligence
program furnishes geographic assessments, estimates, and warnings
of drug availability, production, trafficking trends and routes.
It distributes information to foreign, Federal, State and local
agencies through numerous publications. Its operational
intelligence program directly supports investigations underway
against top-level traffickers and supplies information on
specific organizations and their financial assets to support
investigations worldwide. As appropriate, this intelligence is
shared with other Federal, State and local agencies to ensure its
maximum utilization against drug traffickers. EPIC serves as a
clearinghouse for drug information collected 24 hours a day. With
DEA as its lead agency, EPIC is staffed by special agents and
intelligence analysts working with personnel from the FBI,
Internal Revenue Service, U.S. Marshals Service, Federal Aviation
Administration, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Customs
Service, Coast Guard, the Immigration and Naturalization Service,
the Departments of Defense and State, and members of the Federal
intelligence community. Today all States participate in EPIC
through chartered arrangements made between DEA and the
individual States. </p>

<p>Federal Bureau of Investigation </p>

<p>Although DEA is nominally the lead Drug Enforcement Agency,
its Director reports to the Director of the FBI. In granting the
FBI concurrent jurisdiction with DEA, the Attorney General has
mandated that the FBI assume a significant drug enforcement role.
He has also directed that FBI expertise in such areas as
organized crime financial investigations and white-collar crime
investigations be fully used in drug enforcement work. </p>

<p>Both DEA and the FBI place strong emphasis on major
distributors and organizations involved in the manufacturing,
importing, distributing and financing of illicit controlled
substances. Conspiracy investigations (particularly the
Continuing Criminal Enterprise and Racketeer Influenced and
Corrupt Organizations Statutes) are the focal point of
investigation efforts. </p>

<p>Internal Revenue Service </p>

<p>Within the Department of the Treasury, the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) plays a critical role in U.S. drug control efforts
by targeting drug traffickers' profits. IRS Financial
Investigative Task Forces rely on the reports of financial
transactions, filed by banks and other institutions, to identify
financiers of criminal activities and money laundering
specialists. These reports include Currency Transaction Reports
and Foreign Bank Accounts Reports. Through these Task Forces
trace the transferrals of large sums of cash and identify the
proceeds of drug trafficking. </p>

<p>Data Gathering </p>

<p>National Institute on Drug Abuse </p>

<p>The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) is the principal
source for current information about the effects of drug abuse.
NIDA was established in 1972 as part of the Department of Health,
Education and Welfare, and for its first nine years, operated
under a broad mandate that included providing direct financial
assistance for drug abuse education, training, treatment, and
rehabilitation, as well as conducting research programs. With the
passage of The Alcohol and Drug Abuse and Mental Health Services
Block Grant in 1981, full responsibility for carrying out
treatment and prevention service functions was transferred from
NIDA to the States. </p>

<p>Now a part of the Department of Health and Human Service,
NIDA's current role in reducing demand, as set forth both in the
National Strategy and the Alcohol and Drug Abuse Amendments of
1983, is to develop and disseminate new knowledge about drug
abuse, its prevention and treatment, and to exercise national
leadership in encouraging and assisting the private sector, the
States, and local governments to implement and support drug abuse
prevention and treatment programs in their communities. </p>

<p>The NIDA research program has several important components.
Through its epidemiological research program NIDA assesses the
nature and extent of the nation's drug abuse problem and its
trends. NIDA supports two ongoing epidemiological surveys, the
National Household Survey on Drug Abuse and the High School
Senior Survey. NIDA's Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) monitors
information on the health consequences of drug use through
emergency room visit statistics and through medical examiner
reports. In addition to these major efforts, NIDA provides grants
for a number of special epidemiological studies. </p>

<p>National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers Committee </p>

<p>The 11-agency National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers
Committee consists of the U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Customs Service,
the Departments of Defense, State and Treasury, Drug Enforcement
Administration, Immigration and Naturalization Service, National
Institute on Drug Abuse, White House Drug Abuse Policy Office,
Federal Bureau of Investigation and Internal Revenue Service.
This Committee was created as the primary vehicle at the national
level for review and dissemination of strategic intelligence. It
publishes an annual report, the &quot;Narcotics Intelligence
Estimate,&quot; which details the supply of drugs to the U.S.
illicit market from foreign and domestic sources, and their
patterns and rates of use. </p>

<p>Intelligence </p>

<p>Central Intelligence Agency </p>

<p>Since the signing of Executive Order 12333 in December 1981,
the Central Intelligence Agency has provided assistance to drug
law enforcement efforts through the collection, analysis, and
dissemination of information regarding foreign narcotics
production. The CIA plans to upgrade its capabilities to gather
and assess drug-related intelligence over the next five years,
and is currently coordinating research to develop technologies
which can be used to better detect drug trafficking. </p>

<p>United Nations </p>

<p>United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control </p>

<p>As the drug control arm of the United Nations, the United
Nations for Drug Abuse Control was established in 1979 to assist
governments by helping finance projects aimed at reducing the
illicit supply of and demand for drugs. Projects undertaken by
the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control include replacing
illicit opium cultivation, treating and rehabilitating drug
addicts, strengthening control measures, or organizing
information and education programs. The Fund relies entirely on
voluntary contributions, mainly from governments but also from
private sources. The United States has long been the primary
contributor to the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control. In
early 1983, however, the Fund obtained a $40 million pledge,
extending over a five year period, from the government of Italy
for coca control projects in South America. In early 1984 major
donors to the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control agreed
that development assistance to narcotics growing regions should
be linked to government commitments to control illicit drug
production.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>