
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B03-127</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA097-001038-B031-36</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.fintrend.com:80/Newsletters/ftfjuly96.htm 206.205.42.66 19970215062804 text/html 28297
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 15 Feb 1997 06:28:23 GMT
Server: Apache/1.0.5
Content-type: text/html
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>FTF July, 1996</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF">
<!--webbot bot="Include" u-include="../_private/logo.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../images/FTFlogo.gif" width="414"
height="100"></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="4054" --><div
align="center"><center>

<table border="5" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="4">
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><i>July 31, 1996</i> </td>
        <td width="50%"><em>Timothy McMahon</em></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><i>Volume 2, Number 1</i> </td>
        <td width="50%"><i>Editor</i> </td>
    </tr>
</table>
</center></div>

<p>In this Issue . . .</p>

<table border="0" width="100%">
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="ftfjuly96.htm#Advanced Relative Strength">Advanced
        Relative Strength</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="ftfjuly96.htm#Moore Inflation Predictor (MIP)">Moore
        Inflation Predictor© (MIP)</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="ftfjuly96.htm#Gold Relative Strength">Gold Relative
        Strength</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="ftfjuly96.htm#Gold vs. Bond Ratio">Gold vs. Bond
        Ratio</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a href="ftfjuly96.htm#NYSE (RSI)">NYSE
        (RSI)</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="ftfjuly96.htm#NYSE Moving Average">NYSE Moving
        Average</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a href="ftfjuly96.htm#U.S. Dollar (RSI)">US
        Dollar (RSI)</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="ftfjuly96.htm#The Beginning Investor ">The
        Beginning Investor</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="ftfjuly96.htm#Franklin Global Health (FKGHX)">Franklin
        Global Health (FXGHX)</a></td>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="ftfjuly96.htm#CPI-U Inflation Rate Data ">CPI-U
        Inflation Rate Data</a></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="50%"><a
        href="ftfjuly96.htm#Fidelity Electronics (FSELX)">Fidelity
        Electronics (FSELX)</a></td>
        <td width="50%">&nbsp;</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<h1><a name="Advanced Relative Strength"><b>Advanced Relative
Strength</b></a> <img src="../images/ftfjul2.gif"
alt="Benham 2020 RSI" width="565" height="488"> </h1>

<p>Several months ago I covered the basics of using the Relative
Strength Index. Since this is such an important tool in analyzing
the future movements of a stock or fund. This month we'll cover
some of the more advanced uses of Relative Strength. </p>

<p>Relative Strength is charted on three lines&#151;the top line
is at the 70% mark and signifies being over bought (<i>i.e.,</i>
too high) the middle line is at the 50% point and signifies
moderate valuation and the bottom line is at the 30% mark and
signifies oversold. </p>

<p>This Benham 2020 Bond Chart shows several typical patterns.
Point &#147;A&#148;, however, is a very unusual formation. It is
a series of peaks well above the overbought line. Normally, when
a market is strong it takes several succeedingly lower peaks to
work out the strength as we see in points &#147;H&#148; &amp;
&#147;I&#148;. In addition, it would usually take quite a bit of
time to work out the strength involved in the &#147;A&#148;
formation. So the drop to &#147;D&#148; is actually quite a
surprise. Some may theorize that the drop to &#147;D&#148; was
necessary to counteract the extreme overbought condition of so
many peaks above the line. In hindsight we can see that the RSI
peaks &#147;B&#148; and &#147;C&#148; were signaling the drop
ahead because although the RSI was making lower peaks the price
peaks were level. During the period of &#147;B-D&#148; we were
bullish on the Bond market and were severely reprimanded by
several subscribers for our bullish stance. As we can see it
actually took more than the point &#147;D&#148; low to work out
the strength of point &#147;A&#148;. In actuality, points
&#147;F-I&#148; were the &#147;Lower Highs&#148; leading to the
end of the cycle. </p>

<p>The RSI peaks contained in line &#147;H&#148; are lower highs
while the Price peaks are Higher Highs. This negative divergence
between them signifies the beginning of the end. The true end
comes as the peaks of &#147;I&#148; do not even reach the
overbought line as we saw in &#147;B&#148; and &#147;C&#148;. </p>

<p>The reverse of &#147;H&#148; and &#147;I&#148; is
&#147;J&#148; with a &#147;positive&#148; divergence between the
RSI and Price valleys. This type of divergence is referred to as
positive since they indicate an upturn is at hand, while a
&#147;negative&#148; divergence indicates a downturn is coming.
Some authors refer to both as negative simply indicating a lack
of correlation between the two lines. </p>

<p>Looking back at the RSI valleys I would have expected the
mid-April valley to have been the final downmove because it
didn't cross the oversold line. But in true contrary fashion the
market gave us one more low before bottoming. As we can see, both
the Price and RSI lows in June and July have been higher lows. </p>

<p>The final confirmation that the Price is beginning to rise is
the RSI peaks at &#147;K.&#148; Each is a higher peak signaling
building strength which should culminate with a peak or peaks
above the overbought line and then a peak or peaks not quite
reaching the overbought line as in &#147;B-C&#148;. </p>

<p>Although we have spent almost four months now in base
building, at this point, unless the situation changes
drastically, I do not see the strength necessary to move us above
the December highs. But we can easily regain 1/3 to 2/3 of the
loss giving us a 5%-10% gain from here in the next couple of
months. </p>

<p>At that point we must begin watching the Gold vs. Bond Ratio
for the proper point to return to holding Gold. </p>

<h2><a name="Gold Relative Strength">Gold Relative Strength</a></h2>

<p><img src="../images/ftfjul3.gif" alt="Benham Gold RSI"
width="600" height="473"></p>

<p>The Gold RSI has shown many of the same patterns as those of
the Bond RSI. Peak &#147;1&#148; is similar to Peak &#147;A&#148;
although not as strong. Peak &#147;2&#148; contains both &#147;B
&amp; C&#148; and is the &#147;lower highs&#148; signaling a
decline. Valley &#147;3&#148; is a poor signal (since it never
reached the oversold line) but it does indicate strength since it
was only a small decline with a quick rebound. </p>

<p>Peaks &#147;4&#148; and &#147;5&#148; are another example of
&#147;negative&#148; divergence and lower highs. Peaks
&#147;6&#148; and &#147;7&#148; simply confirm the weakening of
the price but show the weakness much more clearly than the price
itself. </p>

<p>Point &#147;8&#148; is obviously indicating a bottom but was
even stronger than &#147;D&#148; since the RSI never returned to
the oversold line. The converse of this may be true for the
current situation in bonds. Since the rise is bouncing along and
rising very slowly we will probably have a relatively anemic rise
in Bonds. </p>

<p>Line &#147;9&#148; is another negative divergence with line
&#147;10&#148; confirming the decline. Line &#147;11&#148; is a
positive divergence indicating we are on the verge of another
rise. The depth of the pullback to come will indicate the
strength of the coming rise. </p>

<p>The advantage of RSI is that it gives us an early indicator of
turning points. The weakness of RSI is that it often indicates a
coming turn way too early. For instance &#147;G&#148; could have
been interpreted as a sell signal and the whole length of
&#147;J&#148; could be a buy signal. This is why we combine RSI
with our Gold vs. Bond Ratio and moving average. This way RSI and
the MIP gives us the early warning and the confirmation comes
from the moving average and the Gold vs. Bond ratio. </p>

<h2><a name="NYSE (RSI)">NYSE (RSI)</a></h2>

<p><img src="../images/ftfjul4.gif" alt="NYSE RSI" width="571"
height="463"></p>

<p>The New York Stock Exchange gives us a good look at the
overall stock market </p>

<p>January through May showed us a negative divergence with a
severe deterioration since May. In last month's issue we warned
that if the coming peak remained below the overbought line we
could be in for a correction. Coincidentally, that peak was
occurring just as you received that issue around July 1st and as
we can see it peaked around 60% and the market has dropped 6.37%
since then. </p>

<h2><a name="U.S. Dollar (RSI)">U.S. Dollar (RSI)</a></h2>

<p><img src="../images/ftfjul5.gif" alt="US Dollar RSI"
width="640" height="526"></p>

<p>The Dollar RSI chart shows a series of divergences. In early
1995 we had a positive divergence at &#147;a&#148; then a
negative divergence and accompanying fall at &#147;b&#148;,
positive at &#147;c&#148; with a long rise and negative at
&#147;d&#148; and we are currently showing weakness. Historically
speaking the Dollar is at about mid-point of its value over the
last ten years so it is neither over nor under priced but at this
point based upon RSI. I would prefer to be in Swiss Francs rather
than in Dollars. </p>

<h2><a name="Franklin Global Health (FKGHX)">Franklin Global
Health (FKGHX)</a></h2>

<p>Franklin Global Health can be considered a proxy for the
entire Health industry and as we can see, although the price
continued to make higher highs this year the RSI was making lower
peaks signaling weakness in the market. As this is being written
the market is in the midst of a rout&#151;falling 17.3% from the
peak two months ago. </p>

<p><img src="../images/ftfjul7.gif"
alt="Franklin Global Health RSI" width="624" height="471"> </p>

<p>At this point Health has given up almost all of this years
gains. This is exactly why it is important to time the market.
The Hotline has been covering the RSI for various markets
including Health, Energy, Electronics, NASDAQ, NYSE in addition
to Gold and Bonds. For the last month or so I have been saying
over and again that all of the above markets with the exception
of Bonds has been showing signs of extreme weakness! I hope you
have taken that advice to heart and lightened up on stocks over
these months. </p>

<p>With Health in extreme oversold territory this is not the time
to sell. It is quite possible that because of the depth of the
recent plunge in RSI that the price will continue down for a bit
longer while RSI makes higher lows. When the RSI bounces up and
the valley does not cross below the 30% line we will have a short
term buy signal in Health. This is projected in the
circle&#151;this is not actual and it may take some time to
occur! </p>

<h2><a name="Fidelity Electronics (FSELX)">Fidelity Electronics
(FSELX)</a></h2>

<p><img src="../images/ftfjul6.gif"
alt="Fidelity Select Electronics RSI" width="567" height="468"></p>

<p>Electronics is also very oversold. We may see a peak above
midpoint then a pullback to just above oversold in the RSI. This
would be a good buy point. Several months ago the establishment
was gung-ho on Internet Stocks. They became so extremely over
bought that when reality sunk in and most of the new stocks
started trading below their IPO's (Initial Public Offerings)
initial prices. Now the market has sold off not only the new
issues (without current earnings) but also the established
electronics giants. An interesting stock is Advanced Micro
Devices (AMD). It competes with Intel as a computer chip
manufacturer. AMD, however, does not advertise. (The computer
manufacturers know who AMD is so why advertise?) AMD simply
produces good chips less expensively. They were late coming out
with a Pentium class chip which has depressed their price even
more than the average Electronics stock. But AMD has released one
now along with a top-of-the-line sound chip. AMD is now trading
at around $11 with a 52 week high of $36 and a P/E of 11.7 . When
the earnings from the new chips come on line <b>I wouldn't be
surprised to see it back up to $30! This is a possible triple
within 18 months.</b> </p>

<p>Another stock that has been extremely depressed from pure hype
is ValuJet. Sure they had a crash, all airlines do, and if you
watch their stock it always bounces back. Just look at US Air
after its crash. It fell to a low of $4. Less than two years
later it reached $20! 500% in two years isn't bad! Remember at $4
the establishment was talking about it going to zero! ValuJet
also fell to about $4 but has already returned to about $11.
(Watch TWA.) </p>

<h2><a name="Moore Inflation Predictor (MIP)">Moore Inflation
Predictor (MIP)</a></h2>

<p>This month we have made some minor cosmetic changes to the MIP
chart.. We have changed the word &#147;Median&#148; to &#147;Most
Likely&#148; showing its significance. We have also removed the
&#147;you are here&#148; arrow and replaced it with a vertical
line to separate the actual data from the projected. </p>

<p><img src="../images/ftfjul8.gif" alt="July 1996 MIP"
width="640" height="437"> </p>

<p>The government stated that this month's CPI-U rate was 2.8%
actually it was 2.75% but the Bureau of Labor Statistics rounds
to one decimal place. This month's increase was a slim .06% if we
Annualize this number (<i>i.e.,</i> assume the same rate of
increase for 11 more months). We would have annual inflation of
less than one percent (.77%)! Last year around this time we had a
month of zero inflation. As we can see from the MIP chart,
inflation has really been pretty flat even with all the inflation
hype in the news. This explains why our Gold vs. Bond Ratio has
been favoring Bonds. Based upon the new data we have postponed
the expected rise in Gold to October although we may have a
slight rise in the numbers next month. The rise actually is a
mere statistical anomaly with the zero falling out of the
calculation next month. If we have anything greater than zero
inflation this month the rate has to go up. If next month is the
same as this month (.06%) we will follow the extreme low line. </p>

<h2><a name="Gold vs. Bond Ratio">Gold vs. Bond Ratio</a></h2>

<p><img src="../images/ftfjul10.gif" alt="Gold vs Bonds Ratio"
width="640" height="437"></p>

<p>This months ratio chart includes two lines: one at .55 and the
other at .60. This zone is a key target zone for bottoms. Over
the last six years (since 1990) there have been 15 significant
bottoms in the ratio. </p>

<p>About half (7) of these were minor corrections and they ended
above or at the 60% line. While five ended within this zone and
only three ended below the zone. </p>

<p>The significance of this is that we are currently well within
the possible range for the end of this down move so we must be
cautious and watch our moving average carefully for signs of the
end of the down move. The last low was actually one of the
deepest lows. </p>

<p>At this point we really aren't showing signs of leveling off
yet and the other signs, <i>i.e.,</i> the MIP and RSI, still
allow for a couple of months favoring Bonds. So we will still
hang tight but we need to begin watching carefully </p>

<h2><a name="NYSE Moving Average">NYSE Moving Average</a></h2>

<p><img src="../images/ftfjul9.gif" alt="NYSE Moving Average"
width="640" height="437"> </p>

<p>Last month I included a big article about the advantages of
using the moving average on the overall stock market.
Unfortunately, the moving average line did not show up on the
printed copy. The lower line on the chart entitled &#147;The
Advantages of Switching&#148; was only the NYSE, the average line
did not print. Little did I know how timely that article would
be! </p>

<p>The NYSE has just crossed below its six month moving average
for the first time since February 1995! As you can see in the
chart below we have had five signals since January 1994. Over the
last 30 years the average was 1 ½ switches per year or
approximately 1 every nine months. Since we have not had a switch
signal since February 1995 we were over due for one. </p>

<p>The first signal on this chart would have kept us out of the
market about 6 months and although the market was relatively flat
by being out we would have been ahead by earning interest during
that period. </p>

<p>The second signal was a poor signal and would have had us in
the market for about 3 months with little or no gain (although
well selected stocks may have out performed the market). The
third signal would have had us out during another level period
safely earning interest. The fourth signal would have had us in
the market for all of &#147;one of the biggest Bull markets
ever&#148;. Now as we can see the signal is saying we are in for
another level or dropping period. The six month moving average
has done quite well over time and we must ignore it at our own
risk. If we want to take a bit more risk and wait, the final
confirmation will be when the one month moving average crosses
down through the 6 month average. </p>

<p><b><i>Once again we must be very cautious only hold stocks
that are extremely undervalued!</i></b> </p>

<p>Extreme Caution is still warranted with the RSI indicating
short term weakness and the Moving average showing long term
weakness. </p>

<p>Timothy McMahon </p>

<p>Editor </p>

<h1><a href="ftfjuly96.htm#The Beginning Investor "
name="The Beginning Investor "><b>The Beginning Investor</b> </a></h1>

<h3><b>An Introduction to FTF</b> </h3>

<h2>Reading The MIP Chart</h2>

<p>The Moore Inflation Predictor (MIP) Chart is an extremely
accurate predictor of inflation. It accurately forecasts
direction changes a year in advance. </p>

<p>The vertical axis is the inflation rate (in percent) while the
horizontal axis is the date. </p>

<p>The left side of the chart is the historical Consumer Price
Index (CPI). The right side is the predicted CPI. </p>

<p>The right side consists of several diverging lines starting at
the vertical line. The lines are labeled as to likeliness of
predicting the future of the CPI with likely highs and lows
diverging from the most likely and extreme highs and lows further
out. </p>

<p><b>By focusing on the most likely line you can easily see
changes in the direction of the CPI index.</b> </p>

<p>An increase in the CPI usually translates into an increase in
Gold and Gold Stocks. A decrease in the CPI index usually
indicates a decrease in Gold and an increase in Bonds, Utilities
and other interest sensitive instruments. </p>

<p><b>CPI UP = GOLD UP</b> </p>

<p><b>CPI DOWN=BONDS UP</b> </p>

<h2>CPI Data-</h2>

<p>By annualizing the CPI Data from various time spans we can get
an idea of the likely range over the next year's time frame. Keep
in mind that 1 and 2 month rates have very little long-term
significance. </p>

<h2>The Basic Portfolio</h2>

<p>The simplest portfolio uses the Benham Family. We chose Benham
for 3 reasons. </p>

<ol>
    <li>It has a good Gold Fund. </li>
    <li>It has a long-term Bond Fund that moves rapidly and
        provides the greatest upside potential during up moves. </li>
    <li>It has several alternatives for parking funds during
        periods of uncertainty. </li>
</ol>

<p>Use Benham 2020 when we recommend a Bond Fund and Benham Gold
Equity Index Fund for periods when Gold Funds are recommended. </p>

<h2>Volatility</h2>

<p>Our greatest ally and biggest foe is volatility. We rely upon
large changes in the prices of our funds during relatively short
periods of time. This can result in short term losses if we
switch directions too early. This is referred to as &quot;draw
down&quot; <i>i.e.,</i> in the long run we made money but in the
mean time our account showed a temporary paper loss. Some
investors have difficulty handling large draw downs. They should
follow the conservative approach. </p>

<h2>Diversification</h2>

<p>All investors should diversify by investing a portion of their
portfolio using several other investment approaches including
well selected individual securities, mutual funds and other
appropriate investments. Our goal is to maximize overall
portfolio performance with a minimum of risk. </p>

<h2>New Money</h2>

<p>Any funds recently freed up should follow the &quot;New
Money&quot; indicator. </p>

<h2>Insurance Gold</h2>

<p>Every investor should have a portion (usually 10-15% or 1
years living expenses) of their assets in Gold and/or Silver
(coins and/or bullion). This should be considered insurance
against market chaos and is not an investment. The cost of this
insurance is the missed interest. </p>

<h2>Relative Strength</h2>

<p>Relative Strength Indices (RSI) provide advance warning of
prices that are very overbought (too high) or very oversold (too
low). Certain patterns also indicate a coming increase or
decrease in prices. Relative Strength is very sensitive and often
provides very early signals (sometimes too early). </p>

<h2>Ratios</h2>

<p>A ratio is simply one item divided by another. By tracking a
Ratio we can watch both items of the Ratio simultaneously. When
the ratio is rising Item 1 is outperforming Item 2. By switching
between the items we can profit continuously. It doesn't matter
whether one item is rising, or both items are rising or falling.
as long as we increase the number of shares we hold with each
switch. In the long run we will multiply our wealth </p>

<h3>Moving Averages</h3>

<p>A crossing of an average is a significant event. By definition
it always signifies a change in the overall direction of the base
index. By following its signals we can avoid most protracted down
periods and significantly increase our overall return. </p>

<h3><b>Aggressive Portfolio</b> </h3>

<p><b>(Stocks Based on RSI)</b> </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 CDE on 9/15 @ 20 7/8 </p>

<p>Sell on 1/29/96 @ $22.75 </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 ECO on 9/15 @ 11 1/8 </p>

<p>Sell on 1/29/96 @ $12.75 </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 AAN.F on 1/29/96 @$83 </p>

<p>Buy 1/2 Hechinger 9.45's of 2012 @ $71 </p>

<h3><b>Current Positioning</b> </h3>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Interest/Inflation Direction</td>
        <td valign="top">Bottoming</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Gold and Gold Coins <p>Gold
        Stocks/Mutual Funds </p>
        </td>
        <td valign="top">Hold emergency insurance portion Wait
        for Buy Signal</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Bonds/Bond Mutual Funds</td>
        <td valign="top">Up </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Utilities/Util. Mutual Funds</td>
        <td valign="top">Up</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">New Money</td>
        <td valign="top">Buy Benham 2020 or Hold in Money Market
        Fund until Gold Buy Signal </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Projected Reversal Point</td>
        <td valign="top">October</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">Stock Market</td>
        <td valign="top">Caution is Advised!</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<h3><b>Conservative Portfolio</b> </h3>

<p><b>(Mutual Funds Based on Moving Average)</b> </p>

<p><b>Buy Benham 2020 May 1 @ $21.10</b>. </p>

<h3><a name="CPI-U Inflation Rate Data "><b>CPI-U Inflation Rate
Data</b> </a></h3>

<p>Through June 1996 </p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>CPI-U</b> <p><b>Data</b> </p>
        </td>
        <td valign="top"><b>Index</b></td>
        <td valign="top"><b>12 Mo.</b> <p><b>Chg.</b> </p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Aug</b></td>
        <td valign="top">152.9</td>
        <td valign="top">2.62%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Sep</b></td>
        <td valign="top">153.2</td>
        <td valign="top">2.54%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Oct</b></td>
        <td valign="top">153.7</td>
        <td valign="top">2.81%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Nov</b></td>
        <td valign="top">153.6</td>
        <td valign="top">2.61%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Dec</b></td>
        <td valign="top">153.5</td>
        <td valign="top">2.54%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Jan 96</b></td>
        <td valign="top">154.4</td>
        <td valign="top">2.73%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Feb 96</b></td>
        <td valign="top">154.9</td>
        <td valign="top">2.65%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Mar96</b></td>
        <td valign="top">155.7</td>
        <td valign="top">2.84%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Apr 96</b></td>
        <td valign="top">156.3</td>
        <td valign="top">2.90%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>May96</b></td>
        <td valign="top">156.6</td>
        <td valign="top">2.89%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top"><b>Jun 96</b></td>
        <td valign="top">156.7</td>
        <td valign="top">2.75%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">SPAN</td>
        <td valign="top">RATE</td>
        <td valign="top">ANNUAL</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">12 Mo. </td>
        <td valign="top">2.75%</td>
        <td valign="top">2.75%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">10 Mo.</td>
        <td valign="top">2.49%</td>
        <td valign="top">2.98%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">8 Mo. </td>
        <td valign="top">1.95%</td>
        <td valign="top">2.93%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">6 Mo. </td>
        <td valign="top">2.08%</td>
        <td valign="top">4.17%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">4 Mo. </td>
        <td valign="top">1.16%</td>
        <td valign="top">3.49%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">2 Mo. </td>
        <td valign="top">.26%</td>
        <td valign="top">1.54%</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td valign="top">1 Mo. </td>
        <td valign="top">.06%</td>
        <td valign="top">.77%</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<h3><b>Gold &amp; Silver Moving Average</b> </h3>

<p>Gold and Silver have both crossed below their moving Averages
Signaling a down turn. </p>

<p><b>*Notice the Low one month numbers.</b> </p>

<p><img src="../images/ftfjul11.gif"
alt="Gold and Silver Moving Averages" width="640" height="437"></p>

<p>He is no wise man that will quit a </p>

<p>certainty for an </p>

<p>uncertainty. </p>

<p>Samuel Johnson 1709-1784 </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include" u-include="../_private/navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center">[ <a href="../index.htm">HOME</a> | <a
href="../cpi-u/cpi-u.htm">CPI-U</a> | <a
href="../Charts/charts.htm">CHARTS</a> | <a href="newsltr.htm">NEWSLETTERS</a>
| <a href="../FTF_TOC.htm">TOC</a> ]<br>
[ <a href="../ftfsearch.htm">SEARCH</a> | <a
href="../ftforder.htm">SUBSCRIPTIONS</a> |<a
href="../feedback.htm"> FEEDBACK</a> ]</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="60891" -->

<p>Send Questions or Comments to <a
href="mailto:FinTrend@aol.com"><!--webbot bot="Substitution"
s-variable="companyemail" startspan -->FinTrend@aol.com<!--webbot
bot="Substitution" endspan i-checksum="52814" --></a><br>
Copyright © 1996 Bonanza Press. All rights reserved.<br>
Revised: <!--webbot bot="Timestamp" s-type="EDITED"
s-format="%B %d, %Y" startspan -->October 30, 1996<!--webbot
bot="Timestamp" endspan i-checksum="31568" --></p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>