
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B018-15</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/om/om3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122006 text/html 11024
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:19:56 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:06 GMT
Content-length: 10806
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Japan as an Opium Distributor</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM MONOPOLY </h1>

<p><b>BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE</b> </p>

<p>III -- JAPAN AS AN OPIUM DISTRIBUTOR </p>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </p>

<p><font size="1">IN </font>an article which appeared in the <i>New
York Times, </i>under date of February 14, 1919<b>, </b>we read:
&quot;A charge that the Japanese Government secretly fosters the
morphia traffic in China and other countries in the Far East is
made by a correspondent in the <i>North China Herald </i>in its
issue of December 21st<b> </b>last. The correspondent asserts
that the traffic has the financial support of the Bank of Japan,
and that the Japanese postal service in China aids, although
'Japan is a signatory to the agreement which forbids the import
into China of morphia or of any appliances used in its
manufacture or application.' </p>

<p>&quot;Morphia no longer can be purchased in Europe, the
correspondent writes. The seat of industry has been transferred
to Japan, and morphia is now manufactured by the Japanese
themselves. Literally, tens of millions of yen are transferred
annually from China to Japan for the payment of Japanese morphia.
. . . </p>

<p>&quot;In South China, morphia is sold by Chinese peddlers,
each of whom carries a passport certifying that he is a native of
Formosa, and therefore entitled to Japanese protection. Japanese
drug stores throughout China carry large stocks of morphia.
Japanese medicine vendors look to morphia for their largest
profits. Wherever Japanese are predominant, there the trade
flourishes. Through Dairen, morphia circulates throughout
Manchuria and the province adjoining; through Tsingtao, morphia
is distributed over Shantung province, Anhui, and Kiangsu, while
from Formosa morphia is carried with opium and other contraband
by motor-driven fishing boats to some point on the mainland, from
which it is distributed throughout the province of Fukien and the
north of Kuangtung. Everywhere it is sold by Japanese under
extra-territorial protection.&quot; </p>

<p>The article is rather long, and proves beyond doubt the
existence of a well-organized and tremendous smuggling business,
by means of which China is being deluged with morphia. In the
body of the article we find this paragraph: </p>

<p>&quot;While the morphia traffic is large, there is every
reason to believe that the opium traffic upon which Japan is
embarking with enthusiasm, is likely to prove even more
lucrative. In <i>the Calcutta opium sales, Japan has become one
of the considerable purchasers of Indian </i>opium. . . . <i>Sold
by the Government of India, this opium is exported under permits
applied for by the Japanese Government, </i>is shipped to Kobe,
and from Kobe is transshipped to Tsingtao. Large profits are made
in this trade, in which are interested some of the leading firms
of Japan.&quot; </p>

<p>This article appears to be largely anti-Japanese. In fact,
more anti-Japanese than anti-opium. Anti Japanese sentiment in
America is played upon by showing up the Japanese as smugglers of
opium. The part the British Government plays in this traffic is
not emphasized. &quot;In the Calcutta opium sales, Japan has
become one of the considerable purchasers of Indian opium . . .
sold by the Government of India.&quot; We are asked to condemn
the Japanese, who purchase their stocks of opium as individuals,
and who distribute it in the capacity of smugglers. We are not
asked to censure the British Government which produces,
manufactures and sells this opium as a State monopoly. We are
asked to denounce the Japanese and their nefarious smuggling and
shameful traffic, but the source of supply, which depends upon
these smugglers as customers at the monthly auctions, is above
reproach. A delicate ethical distinction. </p>

<p>However, there is no doubt that the Japanese are ardent
smugglers. In an article in the March, 1919<b>, </b>number of
&quot;Asia&quot; by Putnam Weale, we find the following bit: *
&quot;At all ports where Japanese commissioners of Maritime
Customs (in China) hold office, it is undeniable that centres of
contraband trade have been established, opium and its derivatives
being so openly smuggled that the annual net import of Japanese
morphia (although this trade is forbidden by International
Convention) is now said to be something like 20<b> </b>tons a
year-sufficient to poison a whole nation.&quot; </p>

<p><font size="1">* &quot; A Fair Chance for Asia,&quot; by
Putnam Weale, page 227.</font> </p>

<p>Mr. Weale is an Englishman, therefore more anti-Japanese than
anti-opium. We do not recall any of his writings in which he
protests against the opium trade as conducted by his Government,
nor the part his Government plays in fostering and encouraging
it. </p>

<p>However, there are other Englishmen who see the situation in a
more impartial light, and who are equally critical of both Great
Britain and Japan. In his book, Trade Politics and Christianity
in Africa and the East,&quot; by A. J. Macdonald, M. A., formerly
of Trinity College, Cambridge, we find the facts presented with
more balance. Thus, on page 229: &quot;. . . In the north of
China another evil is springing up. The eradication of the opium
habit is being followed by the development of the morphia
traffic. . . . The morphia habit in northern China, especially
Manchuria, is already widespread. The Chinese Government is alert
to the evil, but their efforts to repress it are hampered by the
action of traders, mainly Japanese, who elude the restrictions
imposed by the Chinese and Japanese Governments. . . . China is
being drenched with morphia. It is incredible that anything
approaching the amount could possibly be devoted to legitimate
purposes. It is said that in certain areas coolies are to be seen
covered all over with needle punctures.' An injection of the drug
can be obtained for three or four cents. In Newchang 2,000<b> </b>Victims
of the morphia habit died in the winter of 1914-15. Morphia
carries off its victims far more rapidly than opium. . . .
Morphia is not yet manufactured in any appreciable quantities in
the East, and certainly even Japan cannot yet manufacture the
hypodermic injectors by means of which the drug is received. The
bulk of the manufacture takes place in England, Germany and
Austria. . . . In this traffic, two firms in Edinburgh and one in
London are engaged. The trade is carried on through Japanese
agents. The Board of Trade returns show that the export of
morphia from Great Britain to the East has risen enormously
during the last few years. </p>

<p>1911 - 5.5 tons </p>

<p>1912 - 7.5 tons </p>

<p>1913 - 11.25 </p>

<p>1914 -- 14 </p>

<p>The freedom which allows three British firms to supply China
with morphia for illicit purposes is a condemnation of English
Christianity. </p>

<p>This book of Mr. Macdonald's was published in 1916<b>. </b>Mr.
Weale's article was published in 1919<b>, </b>in which he speaks
of an importation of about twenty tons of morphia. Apparently the
three British firms which manufacture morphia, two in Edinburgh
and one in London are still going strong. Japan, however, appears
to be growing impatient with all this opprobrium cast upon her as
the distributor of drugs, especially since much of the outcry
against this comes from America. Our own country seems to be
assisting in this traffic in a most extensive manner. The Japan
Society Bulletin No. 60 calls attention to this:<br>
</p>

<p>NEW TURN IN MORPHIA TRAFFIC </p>

<p>The morphia traffic in China has taken a new turn, according
to the <i>Japan Advertiser. </i>It quotes Putnam Weale to the
effect that whilst in recent years the main distributors have
been Japanese, the main manufacturers have been British. The
morphia has been exported in large quantities from Edinburgh to
Japan, but as the result of licensing the exports of this drug
from Great Britain, the shipments to Japan dropped from <font
size="1">6oo,229 </font>ounces in 1917 to one-fourth that amount
in 1918<b>. </b><i>The Japan Chronicle, </i>speaking from
&quot;absolutely authentic information,&quot; states that 113,000
ounces of morphia arrived in Kobe from the United States in the
first five months of 1919<b>. </b>These figures are not given as
the total shipments received in Kobe, but merely as the quantity
of which <i>The Chronicle </i>has actual knowledge. It states
further that this morphia is being transhipped in Kobe harbor to
vessels bound for China. Dr. Paul S. Reinsch, who has resigned
his post as Minister to China, has stated that he will use every
resource in his power to stop the shipment from America of
morphia intended for distribution in China, in defiance of the
international convention which prohibits the sale of the drug in
that country. </p>

<p>If sufficient publicity is cast upon the distributors,
Japanese, English and American, public sentiment may in time take
cognizance of the source of all this mischief, namely, the
producer.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>