
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-16</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B028-201</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/szasz1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095853 text/html 7317
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:58:42 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:33 GMT
Content-length: 7100
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Are The Drug Laws Constitutional? </h1>

<p> <b>A Historical Perspective</b> </p>

<p> From _Our Right To Drugs_ by Thomas Szasz, Praeger
Publishers, NY (1992): </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>*The Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906* </h2>

<p> Before 1907, all drugs could be sold and bought like any
other consumer good. The manufacturer did not even have to
disclose the contents of his concoction. Hence the name patent
medicine, the adjective alluding to the fact that the composition
was a trade secret, protected by a patented name. </p>

<p> Although there is no evidence that the American consumer ever
complained about the free market in drugs, there is plenty of
evidence that his self appointed protectors complained bitterly
and loudly. The first landmark event in the federal regulation of
drugs (and foods) was the Food and Drugs Act of 1906. What did
Congress intend to achieve with this seemingly laudable
legislation? To protect people from the sale of
&quot;adulterated&quot; or &quot;misbranded&quot; foods or drugs,
that is, &quot;assur[ing] the customer of the identity of the
article purchased, not of its usefulness.&quot; </p>

<p> I say Congress's aim in enacting this legislation was
seemingly laudable because, while it is desirable that people
know what drugs they buy, forcing manufacturers by law to list
the ingredients of their products is an unnecessary infringement
on the free market -- the foot in the door of
paternalistic-statist protectionism. If Great American Drugs,
Inc., wants to market a mystery product, there is no reason why
the government should prevent it from doing so. And if I want to
buy such a pig in a poke, why should the government prevent me
from making that choice? People who want to be informed about the
drugs they buy and use would abstain from purchasing mystery
products, and market forces would then create a supply of
truthfully labeled drugs. In short, there would be no need to
prohibit the non-disclosure of the contents of medicinal (or
other) products. It is enough to prohibit false disclosure and to
punish it, as fraud, by both criminal and civil penalities. As
for nondisclosure, it would be &quot;punished&quot; by the
invisible hand of the market. The truth is that behind Congress's
ostensible aim of combating drug misbranding lay its growing
antagonism to the habit of pharmacological self-pleasuring,
manifested by the act's specifically mandating the listing on the
label of what were then the main ingredients of Americans'
favorite nostrums: alcohol, hypnotics, and sedatives. The
relevant lines of the Food and Drugs Act read as follows: </p>

<p> That for purposes of this Act an article shall also be deemed
misbranded: ... if the package fails to bear a statement on the
label of the quantity or proportion of any alcohol, morphine,
opium, cocaine, heroin, alpha or beta eucaine, chloroform,
cannabis, chloral hydrate, or acetanilide. </p>

<p> It is implicit in this sentence that, back then, Congress
took for granted the legality of a free market in drugs,
including cannabis, cocaine, heroin, and morphine. </p>

<p> [...] </p>

<h2>*The Harrison Act (1914) and It's Aftermath* </h2>

<p> In 1914, Congress enacted another landmark piece of anti-drug
legislation: the Harrison Narcotic Act. Originally passed as a
record-keeping law, it quickly became a prohibition statute. In
the course of the next seven years, by a curious coincidence of
history -- if, indeed, it is a coincidence -- in Russia the
Soviet Union replaced the czarist empire, while in the United
States the free market in drugs was replaced by federal drug
prohibition possessing unchallengeable authority. Excerpts from
two key Supreme Court decisions quickly tell the story. </p>

<p> In 1915, in a test of the Harrision Act, the Court upheld it
but expressed doubts about its constitutionality: &quot;While the
Opium Registration Act of December 17, 1914, may have a moral
end, as well as revenue, in view, this court, in view of the
grave doubt as to its constitutionality except as a revenue
measure, construes it as such.&quot; </p>

<p> Yet, only six years later the Court considered objection to
federal drug prohibition a taboo. In Whipple v. Martinson the
justices declared, </p>

<p> &quot;There can be no question of the authority of the State
in the exercise of its police power to regulate the
administration, sale, prescription, and use of dangerous and
habit-forming drugs.... </p>

<p> The right to exercise this power is so manifest in the
interest of public health and welfare, that it is unnecessary to
enter upon a discussion of it beyond saying that it is too firmly
established to be successfully called in question. </p>

<p> In 1914, trading in and using drugs was a right. In 1915,
limited federal drug controls were a constitutionally
questionable tax revenue measure. By 1921, the federal government
had gained not only complete control over so-called dangerous
drugs, but also a quasi-papal immunity to legal challenge of its
authority. Thus has the rejection of one of our most basic
constitutional rights become transformed into reverence for one
of our most baneful therapeutic-religious dogmas. Once ignited,
the fire of &quot;progressive&quot; drug protectionism spread and
soon enveloped the whole contry, transforming the Harrison Act
into the legislative embodiment of the &quot;moral principle that
taking narcotics for other than medicinal purposes was harmful
and should be prevented.&quot; That threw the monkey wrench
medicinal purpose into the machinery of the trade in drugs; this
undefined and undefinable concept has haunted us ever since. In
1920, drug prohibitionists won another major victory: America
was, at last, alcohol-free -- if not de facto, then at least de
jure. Since 1924, when Congress made it illegal to manufacture,
possess, or sell heroin, America has been free from heroin as
well -- if not in practice, then at least in theory. </p>

<p> [...] </p>

<p> In retelling this tale, it is impossible to overemphasize
that, although initially the drug laws were intended to protect
people from being &quot;abused&quot; by drugs others wanted to
sell them, this aim was soon replaced by that of protecting them
from &quot;abusing&quot; drugs they wanted to buy. The government
thus succeeded in depriving us not only of our basic right to
ingest whatever we choose, but also of our right to grow,
manufacture, sell, and buy agricultural products used by man
since antiquity. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>