
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B016-144</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf11_20.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043356 text/html 15344
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:33:46 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:30 GMT
Content-length: 15126
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp Facts 11-20</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>Hemp FACT of the Day #11 </p>

<p>Date: 95-01-21 11:10:30 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>More Misc. Med. Stuff.... Coming soon--How Hemp Saved
George Bush</b> </p>

<p>The recreational smoking of marijuana may have started in this
country in New Orleans in about 1910, and continued on a small
scale there until 1926, when a newspaper ran a six-part series on
the use of the drug.[44] The fad subsequently spread up the
Mississippi and throughout the United States, faster than local
and state laws could be passed to discourage it. The use of
&quot;tea&quot; or &quot;muggles&quot; blossomed into a minor
&quot;psychedelic revolution&quot; of the 1920s. Narcotics
officers encouraged the enactment of local prohibitory laws and
eventually succeeded in bringing about restrictive Federal
legislation. In 1937 Congress passed the Marihuana Tax Act, the
finale to a series of prohibitory acts in the individual states.
Under the new laws, the already dwindling use of cannabis as a
therapeutic substance in medicine was brought to a virtual halt.
In 1941, cannabis was dropped from the &quot;National Formulary
and Pharmacopoeia.&quot; </p>

<p>Around the time of the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act,
Walton postulated sites of action for cannabis drugs. Cortical
areas, he found, are affected at low dosage, while at high dosage
there seems to be a depressant effect on the thalamo-cortical
pathways. Hyperemia of the brain appears to be a local
phenomenon, unless centers controlling vasodilation might be
located in the thalamo-cortical region. Similar possible
mechanisms are suggested for the phenomenon of mild hypoglycemia,
usual hunger and thirst and occasional lacrimation and
nausea.[44] </p>

<p>Despite restrictive legislation, a few medical researchers
have had the opportunity to continue the investigation of the
therapeutic applications of cannabis in recent years. In his
study of the medical applications of cannabis for Mayor La
Guardia's committee, Dr. Samuel Allentuck reported, among other
findings, favorable results in treating withdrawal of opiate
addicts with tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a powerful purified
product of the hemp plant.[1, 24] An article in 1949, buried in a
journal of chemical abstracts, reported that a substance related
to THC controlled epileptic seizures in a group of children more
effectively than diphenylhydantoin (Dilantin_ref ), a most
commonly p </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #12-Marijuana Myths 1 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-01-24 10:51:59 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Marijuana MYTH # 1 Marijuana causes brain damage</b> </p>

<p>The most celebrated study that claims to show brain damage is
the rhesus monkey study of Dr. Robert Heath, done in the late
1970s. This study was reviewed by a distinguished panel of
scientists sponsored by the Institute of Medicine and the
National Academy of Sciences. Their results were published under
the title, Marijuana and Health in 1982. Heath's work was sharply
criticized for its insufficient sample size (only four monkeys),
its failure to control experimental bias, and the
misidentification of normal monkey brain structure as
&quot;damaged&quot;. Actual studies of human populations of
marijuana users have shown no evidence of brain damage. For
example, two studies from 1977, published in the Journal of the
American Medical Association (JAMA) showed no evidence of brain
damage in heavy users of marijuana. That same year, the American
Medical Association (AMA) officially came out in favor of
decriminalizing marijuana. That's not the sort of thing you'd
expect if the AMA thought marijuana damaged the brain. </p>

<h3>There was a numbering problem. There are no FACTS 13 &amp; 14
</h3>

<h3>Hemp FACT #15-Marijuana Myths </h3>

<p>Date: 95-01-25 11:19:11 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Poster's Note: I DO NOT endorse the use of any drugs during
pregnancy including aspirin. </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth #2. Marijuana damages the reproductive
system</b> </p>

<p>This claim is based chiefly on the work of Dr. Gabriel Nahas,
who experimented with tissue (cells) isolated in petri dishes,
and the work of researchers who dosed animals with near-lethal
amounts of cannabinoids (i.e., the intoxicating part of
marijuana). Nahas' generalizations from his petri dishes to human
beings have been rejected by the scientific community as being
invalid. In the case of the animal experiments, the animals that
survived their ordeal returned to normal within 30 days of the
end of the experiment. Studies of actual human populations have
failed to demonstrate that marijuana adversely affects the
reproductive system. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT#16-Marijuana Myths </h3>

<p>Date: 95-01-26 12:00:41 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth # 3.Marijuana is a &quot;gateway&quot; drug
it leads to hard drugs.</b> </p>

<p>This is one of the more persistent myths. A real world example
of what happens when marijuana is readily available can be found
in Holland. The Dutch partially legalized marijuana in the 1970s.
Since then, hard drug use heroin and cocaine have DECLINED
substantially. If marijuana really were a gateway drug, one would
have expected use of hard drugs to have gone up, not down. This
apparent &quot;negative gateway&quot; effect has also been
observed in the United States. Studies done in the early 1970s
showed a negative correlation between use of marijuana and use of
alcohol. A 1993 Rand Corporation study that compared drug use in
states that had decriminalized marijuana versus those that had
not, found that where marijuana was more available the states
that had decriminalized hard drug abuse as measured by emergency
room episodes decreased. In short, what science and actual
experience tell us is that marijuana tends to substitute for the
much more dangerous hard drugs like alcohol, cocaine, and heroin.
</p>

<p>SOURCES </p>

<p>3) The Dutch experience is written up in &quot;The Economics
of Legalizing Drugs&quot;, by Richard J. Dennis, The Atlantic
Monthly, Vol 266, No. 5, Nov 1990, p. 130. See &quot;A Comparison
of Marijuana Users and Non-users&quot; by Norman Zinberg and
Andrew Weil (1971) for the negative correlation between use of
marijuana and use of alcohol. The 1993 Rand Corporation study is
&quot;The Effect of Marijuana Decriminalization on Hospital
Emergency Room Episodes: 1975 - 1978&quot; by Karyn E. Model. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #17-Marijuana Myths </h3>

<p>Date: 95-01-27 11:03:48 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth #4. Marijuana suppresses the immune system.</b>
</p>

<p>Like the studies claiming to show damage to the reproductive
system, this myth is based on studies where animals were given
extremely high in many cases, near-lethal doses of cannabinoids.
These results have never been duplicated in human beings.
Interestingly, two studies done in 1978 and one done in 1988
showed that hashish and marijuana may have actually stimulated
the immune system in the people studied. </p>

<p>References: </p>

<p>4) See a review of studies and their methodology in
&quot;Marijuana and Immunity&quot;, Journal of Psychoactive
Drugs, Vol 20(1), Jan-Mar 1988. Studies showing stimulation of
the immune system: Kaklamani, et al., &quot;Hashish smoking and
T-lymphocytes&quot;, 1978; Kalofoutis et al., &quot;The
significance of lymphocyte lipid changes after smoking
hashish&quot;, 1978. The 1988 study: Wallace, J.M., Tashkin,
D.P., Oishi, J.S., Barbers, R.G., &quot;Peripheral Blood
Lymphocyte Subpopulations and Mitogen Responsiveness in Tobacco
and Marijuana Smokers&quot;, 1988, Journal of Psychoactive Drugs,
ibid. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #18-Marijuana Myths </h3>

<p>Date: 95-01-28 10:58:20 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth #5. - Marijuana is much more dangerous than
tobacco.</b> </p>

<p>Smoked marijuana contains about the same amount of carcinogens
as does an equivalent amount of tobacco. It should be remembered,
however, that a heavy tobacco smoker consumes much more tobacco
than a heavy marijuana smoker consumes marijuana. This is because
smoked tobacco, with a 90% addiction rate, is the most addictive
of all drugs while marijuana is less addictive than caffeine. Two
other factors are important. The first is that paraphernalia laws
directed against marijuana users make it difficult to smoke
safely. These laws make water pipes and bongs, which filter some
of the carcinogens out of the smoke, illegal and, hence,
unavailable. The second is that, if marijuana were legal, it
would be more economical to have cannabis drinks like bhang (a
traditional drink in the Middle East) or tea which are totally
non-carcinogenic. This is in stark contrast with
&quot;smokeless&quot; tobacco products like snuff which can cause
cancer of the mouth and throat. When all of these facts are taken
together, it can be clearly </p>

<p>seen that the reverse is true: marijuana is much SAFER than
tobacco. </p>

<p>References: </p>

<p>5) The 90% figure comes from Health Consequences of Smoking:
Nicotine Addiction, Surgeon General's Report, 1988. In Health
magazine in an article entitled, &quot;Hooked, Not Hooked&quot;
by Deborah Franklin (pp. 39-52), compares the additiveness of
various drugs and ranks marijuana below caffeine. For current
information on cannabis drinks see Working Men and Ganja:
Marijuana Use in Rural Jamaica by M. C. Dreher, Institute for the
Study of Human Issues, 1982, ISBN 0-89727-025-8. For information
on cannabis and actual cancer risk, see Marijuana and Health,
ibid. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #19-Marijuana Myths </h3>

<p>Date: 95-01-30 11:04:40 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth #6. Legal marijuana would cause carnage on
the highways.</b> </p>

<p>Although marijuana, when used to intoxication, does impair
performance in a manner similar to alcohol, actual studies of the
effect of marijuana on the automobile accident rate suggest that
it poses LESS of a hazard than alcohol. When a random sample of
fatal accident victims was studied, it was initially found that
marijuana was associated with RELATIVELY as many accidents as
alcohol. In other words, the number of accident victims
intoxicated on marijuana relative to the number of marijuana
users in society gave a ratio similar to that for accident
victims intoxicated on alcohol relative to the total number of
alcohol users. However, a closer examination of the victims
revealed that around 85% of the people intoxicated on marijuana
WERE ALSO INTOXICATED ON ALCOHOL. For people only intoxicated on
marijuana, the rate was much lower than for alcohol alone. This
finding has been supported by other research using completely
different methods. For example, an economic analysis of the
effects of decriminalization on marijuana usage found that states
that had reduced penalties for marijuana possession experienced a
rise in marijuana use and a decline in alcohol use with the
result that fatal highway accidents decreased. This would suggest
that, far from causing &quot;carnage&quot;, legal marijuana might
actually save lives. </p>

<p>References: </p>

<p>6) For a survey of studies relating to cannabis and highway
accidents see &quot;Marijuana, Driving and Accident Safety&quot;,
by Dale Gieringer, Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, ibid. The
effect of decriminalization on highway accidents is analyzed in
&quot;Do Youths Substitute Alcohol and Marijuana? Some
Econometric Evidence&quot; by Frank J. Chaloupka and Adit
Laixuthai, Nov. 1992, University of Illinois at Chicago. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #20-Marijuana Myths </h3>

<p>Date: 95-01-31 10:33:31 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth # 7. Marijuana &quot;flattens&quot; human
brainwaves</b> </p>

<p>This is an out-and-out lie perpetrated by the Partnership for
a Drug-Free America. A few years ago, they ran a TV ad that
purported to show, first, a normal human brainwave, and second, a
flat brainwave from a 14-year-old &quot;on marijuana&quot;. When
researchers called up the TV networks to complain about this
commercial, the Partnership had to pull it from the air. It seems
that the Partnership faked the flat &quot;marijuana
brainwave&quot;. In reality, marijuana has the effect of slightly
INCREASING alpha wave activity. Alpha waves are associated with
meditative and relaxed states which are, in turn, often
associated with human creativity. </p>

<p>References </p>

<ol>
    <li>For information about the Partnership ad, see Jack
        Herer's book, The Emperor Wears No Clothes, 1990, p. 74.
        See also &quot;Hard Sell in the Drug War&quot;, The
        Nation, March 9, 1992, by Cynthia Cotts, which reveals
        that the Partnership receives a large percentage of its
        advertising budget from alcohol, tobacco, and
        pharmaceutical companies and is thus disposed toward
        exaggerating the risks of marijuana while downplaying the
        risks of legal drugs. For information on memory and the
        alpha brainwave enhancement effect, see &quot;Marijuana,
        Memory, and Perception&quot;, by R. L. Dornbush, M.D., M.
        Fink, M.D., and A. M. Freedman, M.D., presented at the
        124th annual meeting of the American Psychiatric
        Association, May 3-7, 1971. </li>
</ol>

<hr>

<ol>
    <li><!--webbot bot="Include"
        u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
        startspan --><p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
        href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
        href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>
        <p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
        href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
        href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
        <!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38240" --></li>
</ol>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>