
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-9</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B043-323</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/denf90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114255 text/html 42040
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:42:44 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:58 GMT
Content-length: 41822
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Enforcement by Police, 1990</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<h1></h1>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Drug Enforcement by Police, 1990</h1>

<p> U.S. Department of Justice </p>

<p> Office of Justice Programs </p>

<p> Bureau of Justice Statistics </p>

<h1><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> <br>
</h1>

<p> Special Report </p>

<p> Drug Enforcement by Police </p>

<p> and Sheriffs' Department, 1990: </p>

<p> A LEMAS Report </p>

<p> May 1992 </p>

<p> NCJ-134505 </p>

<p> Full text with tables available from: </p>

<p> BJS Justice Statistics Clearinghouse </p>

<p> 1-800-732-3277 </p>

<p> Box 6000 </p>

<p> Rockville, MD 10850 </p>

<p> Few issues are as important in law enforcement today as how
governments at </p>

<p> all levels respond to the challenge to rid our society of
illicit drugs. </p>

<p> This report is drawn from the second triennial survey
conducted by the Law </p>

<p> Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics program.
The survey </p>

<p> included new questions about drugs seized, drug enforcement
techniques, and </p>

<p> testing of arrestees and employees. State and local law
enforcement </p>

<p> agencies have provided a national understanding of the
innovations in the </p>

<p> fight against drugs-special drug enforcement units,
interagency task </p>

<p> forces, and drug asset forfeiture programs. We salute the
departments in </p>

<p> their cooperation with LEMAS and trust that this profile will
prove </p>

<p> valuable in their assessments and planning. </p>

<p> Steven D. Dillingham, Ph.D. </p>

<p> Director </p>

<p> Drug Enforcement by Police </p>

<p> and Sheriffs' Department, 1990: </p>

<p> A LEMAS Report </p>

<p> By Brian A. Reaves, Ph.D. </p>

<p> BJS Statistician </p>

<p> In 1990, about 9,300 local police departments and 2,500
sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments had primary responsibility for the enforcement of
drug laws. </p>

<p> Collectively, these agencies employed 466,000 full-time
officers, 92% of </p>

<p> all local police and sheriffs' officers nationwide. In
addition, 34 State </p>

<p> police departments, employing 43,000 officers, had primary
drug enforcement </p>

<p> responsibilities. </p>

<p> This report presents information collected from State and
local law </p>

<p> enforcement agencies with primary drug enforcement
responsibilities. It </p>

<p> includes information on types of illegal drugs seized,
operation of special </p>

<p> drug units, multi-agency task force participation, and
receipts from drug </p>

<p> asset forfeiture programs. </p>

<p> For all agencies the report also summarizes how drug testing
policies apply </p>

<p> to arrestees, applicants for sworn positions, and employees. </p>

<p> Major findings include the following: </p>

<p> *Among agencies with primary drug enforcement
responsibilities that served </p>

<p> 50,000 or more residents, over 90% of the police departments
and over 80% </p>

<p> of the sheriffs' departments operated special drug
enforcement units. </p>

<p> *Nationwide, more than 16,000 local police and sheriffs'
officers, and over </p>

<p> 2,000 State police officers were assigned full time to
special drug units. </p>

<p> *Half of local police and sheriffs' departments with primary
drug </p>

<p> enforcement responsibilities were participating in a
multi-agency drug </p>

<p> enforcement task force. These 6,500 agencies had assigned
nearly 10,000 </p>

<p> officers full time to such task forces. </p>

<p> *Among departments with primary drug enforcement
responsibilities, over 90% </p>

<p> of the police departments serving a population of 50,000 or
more, and over </p>

<p> 90% of the sheriffs' departments serving 250,000 or more
residents, </p>

<p> received money or goods from a drug asset forfeiture program.
</p>

<p> *Among the State police departments with primary drug
enforcement </p>

<p> responsibilities, 85% operated a special drug unit, 91%
participated in a </p>

<p> multi-agency drug enforcement task force, and 94% received
money or goods </p>

<p> from drug asset forfeitures. </p>

<p> *About 2 in 3 State police departments and 2 in 5 local
police and </p>

<p> sheriffs' departments reported that at least some of the
persons they </p>

<p> arrested were required to take a test for illegal drugs. </p>

<p> *A majority of State police departments and local police
departments </p>

<p> serving a population of 25,000 or more required that all
applicants for </p>

<p> sworn positions take a test for illegal drugs. </p>

<p> *About 3% of local law enforcement officers worked for
agencies that had a </p>

<p> mandatory drug testing program for regular field officers;
17% were </p>

<p> employed by agencies that had a random selection testing
program for </p>

<p> officers. </p>

<p> *Nonprobationary officers could be dismissed after one
positive test in </p>

<p> about two-thirds of local police and sheriffs' departments
and in about </p>

<p> three-fourths of State police departments. Nearly all
departments had a </p>

<p> policy specifying dismissal for two positive drug tests. </p>

<p> *Treatment alternatives were a part of the drug testing
policy for </p>

<p> employees in about half of State and local police departments
and two- </p>

<p> fifths of sheriffs' departments. Such alternatives were
generally limited </p>

<p> to the first positive test results only. </p>

<p> THE LEMAS SURVEY </p>

<p> The 1990 Law Enforcement Management and Administrative
Statistics (LEMAS) </p>

<p> survey questionnaire was mailed to all 780 State and local
law enforcement </p>

<p> agencies with 100 or more sworn officers and to a sample of
2,338 agencies </p>

<p> with fewer than 100 officers. Of the 3,118 agencies receiving
the LEMAS </p>

<p> questionnaire, 2,945 (94.5%) responded. The survey used a
sampling frame </p>

<p> based on personnel data from the 1986 Directory Survey of Law
Enforcement </p>

<p> Agencies. (See Methodology for further discussion of
sampling.) </p>

<p> The local police departments included in this report are
general purpose </p>

<p> agencies operated by municipal or county governments. The
State police </p>

<p> departments included in this report are the primary general
purpose </p>

<p> agencies in all States except Hawaii, which does not have a
State police </p>

<p> department. </p>

<p> This report presents only data collected on drug-related
policies. The BJS </p>

<p> Bulletins State and Local Police Departments, 1990
(NCJ-133284) and </p>

<p> Sheriffs' Departments, 1990 (NCJ-133283) present other data
collected in </p>

<p> the LEMAS survey. </p>

<p> The first section of this report, on drug enforcement
activities, includes </p>

<p> only agencies with primary drug enforcement responsibilities.
Agencies </p>

<p> involved in drug enforcement only in a backup capacity, or
those whose </p>

<p> responsibilities are limited to traffic enforcement, jail
operation, court </p>

<p> operations or other such duties are not included. The second
section, on </p>

<p> drug testing policies, includes all local police, sheriffs',
and State </p>

<p> police departments. </p>

<p> Drug enforcement activities </p>

<p> State and local law enforcement agencies made an estimated
1.1 million </p>

<p> arrests for drug law violations during 1990, according to the
Uniform Crime </p>

<p> Reports (UCR) of the FBI. Excluding traffic violations, 1 in
every 13 </p>

<p> arrests made during the year was for a drug-related offense. </p>

<p> Local police and sheriffs' departments </p>

<p> During 1990, 77% of the Nation's local police and sheriffs'
departments </p>

<p> reported they had primary responsibility for the enforcement
of drug laws </p>

<p> in areas under their jurisdiction. These 11,800 agencies
employed 466,000 </p>

<p> full-time officers, 92% of all local officers nationwide. </p>

<p> Over 9,000 local police departments, employing 96% of all
local police </p>

<p> officers, reported they had primary drug enforcement
responsibilities. </p>

<p> Nearly all of the police departments in jurisdictions of
10,000 or more in </p>

<p> population had such responsibilities. These 2,800 departments
employed </p>

<p> approximately 300,000 full-time officers. Departments in
towns with a </p>

<p> population of 2,500 to 9,999 (83%), or a population less than
2,500 (60%), </p>

<p> were less likely to have primary drug enforcement
responsibilities. These </p>

<p> 6,500 departments in smaller communities employed about
46,000 officers. </p>

<p> About 2,500 (81%) of the sheriffs' departments nationwide
reported having </p>

<p> primary drug enforcement responsibilities in 1990. Sheriffs'
departments </p>

<p> located in jurisdictions with a population of under 100,000
were somewhat </p>

<p> more likely to have drug enforcement responsibilities than
those in larger </p>

<p> jurisdictions (83% versus 65%); however, the departments
serving a </p>

<p> population of 100,000 or more employed more officers than
those in smaller </p>

<p> jurisdictions (77,000 versus 42,000). </p>

<p> Local police and sheriffs' departments with primary drug
enforcement </p>

<p> responsibilities seized numerous types of illegal drugs
during the 12-month </p>

<p> period ending on June 30, 1990. Across all categories,
departments in </p>

<p> larger jurisdictions were more likely to have seized each
type of drug than </p>

<p> those in smaller jurisdictions. </p>

<p> Most of the police and sheriffs' departments serving a
population of 50,000 </p>

<p> or more seized nearly all of the types of drugs asked about
in the survey. </p>

<p> In the smallest jurisdictions, marijuana and cocaine were the
only drugs </p>

<p> seized by more than a third of all departments, and only
marijuana was </p>

<p> seized by more than half. </p>

<p> Eighty-six percent of local police depart-ments and 94% of
sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments made seizures of marijuana--higher percentages
than for any </p>

<p> other drug. The percentage of departments making marijuana
seizures was </p>

<p> 94% or higher for departments in all population categories,
except for </p>

<p> sheriffs' departments serving a population of 10,000 or less
(88%) and </p>

<p> police departments serving a population of 2,500 or less
(70%). </p>

<p> According to UCR data for 1990, 30% of all arrests for drug
law violations </p>

<p> were marijuana-related. About 4 in 5 marijuana arrests were
for </p>

<p> possession, and the remainder, for offenses related to
trafficking. </p>

<p> Cocaine was seized by 72% of local police and sheriffs'
departments, the </p>

<p> second highest total percentage for any drug type. All police
departments </p>

<p> serving a population of 100,000 or more, and over 90% of
those serving </p>

<p> 10,000 to 99,999 residents, reported making seizures of
cocaine. Over 95% </p>

<p> of the sheriffs' departments serving 50,000 or more residents
reported </p>

<p> making seizures of cocaine. Only among police departments
serving under </p>

<p> 2,500 residents (39%), and sheriffs' departments serving
under 10,000 </p>

<p> residents (50%) did less than 75% of the departments in a
population </p>

<p> category report making cocaine seizures. Among police and
sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments that did seize cocaine, nearly all of them
reported seizing the </p>

<p> powdered form of the drug, and a majority of them also seized
crack </p>

<p> cocaine. </p>

<p> A majority of the police departments serving a population of
25,000 or more </p>

<p> made heroin seizures, including all of those serving 500,000
or more </p>

<p> residents. More than two-thirds of the sheriffs' departments
in </p>

<p> jurisdictions with a population of 250,000 or more also
reported seizing </p>

<p> heroin. </p>

<p> Amphetamine seizures were made by 40% of all police and
sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments, including more than 70% of those serving a
population of </p>

<p> 50,000 or more. More than half of the departments serving a
population of </p>

<p> 50,000 or more also reported making seizures of barbiturates,
methampheta- </p>

<p> mines, and LSD. PCP was seized by most of the police
departments serving a </p>

<p> population of 250,000 or more and the sheriffs' departments
serving 500,000 </p>

<p> or more. An aspect of the drug enforcement effort in many
jurisdictions </p>

<p> involves the operation of special drug enforcement units.
Where they </p>

<p> exist, such units are an integral part of the law enforcement
response to </p>

<p> drug trafficking and use. Since they focus directly on
conducting </p>

<p> sophisticated investigations of drug traffickers, these
special units </p>

<p> accumulate substantial knowledge about drugs in general and
about drug- </p>

<p> related activity in the community. </p>

<p> Nationwide, an estimated 3,270 local police and sheriffs'
departments were </p>

<p> operating a special drug unit during the 12-month period
ending on June 30, </p>

<p> 1990 (table 3). Overall, these agencies had over 16,000
officers assigned </p>

<p> to special drug units on a full-time basis. Included in this
total were an </p>

<p> estimated 12,715 police officers and 3,805 sheriffs'
officers. </p>

<p> Over 90% of local police departments serving 50,000 or more
residents were </p>

<p> operating a special drug unit, and 75% of all local police
officers </p>

<p> assigned to a drug unit nationwide were in one of these
departments. </p>

<p> Police departments serving 1 million or more residents had
the largest </p>

<p> special drug units, an average of 240 full-time officers
each. These 13 </p>

<p> departments accounted for a fourth of the local police
officers assigned to </p>

<p> drug units nationwide. </p>

<p> A majority (62%) of the police departments in jurisdictions
with 25,000 to </p>

<p> 49,999 residents also operated a special drug unit. Local
police </p>

<p> departments in small towns were the least likely to operate a
special drug </p>

<p> unit. About 19% of those serving a population of 2,500 to
9,999 and 5% of </p>

<p> those serving a population of under 2,500 had such a unit. </p>

<p> Among sheriffs' departments, over 90% of those serving a
population of </p>

<p> 500,000 or more and over 75% of those serving a population of
50,000 to </p>

<p> 499,999 operated a special drug unit. About 44% of the
sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments serving a population of 25,000 to 49,999 operated
a drug unit. </p>

<p> In the smallest jurisdictions (under 10,000 residents), 11%
of the </p>

<p> sheriffs' departments had a drug unit. </p>

<p> The average size of special drug units in sheriffs'
departments ranged from </p>

<p> 34 full-time officers in departments serving a population of
1 million or </p>

<p> more to 1 officer in jurisdictions with fewer than 10,000
residents. </p>

<p> Many local police and sheriffs' departments operated other
types of special </p>

<p> units that were important to their drug control effort. Over
90% of large </p>

<p> police and sheriffs' departments (100 or more officers) with
primary drug </p>

<p> enforcement responsibilities operated a special unit for drug
education in </p>

<p> schools during 1990, and nearly 60% were operating a special
unit on gangs. </p>

<p> Law enforcement agencies recognize the value of coordinating
their efforts </p>

<p> to reduce drug abuse. For many police and sheriffs'
departments, this </p>

<p> coordination involves participating in a multiagency drug
enforcement task </p>

<p> force. Organizationally, such task forces often involve the
cooperation of </p>

<p> law enforcement agencies across jurisdictional boundaries and
governmental </p>

<p> levels. </p>

<p> The police and sheriffs' departments in multiagency task
forces develop </p>

<p> coordinated enforcement strategies aimed at accumulating the
evidence </p>

<p> needed to arrest, prosecute, and convict known drug
distributors. </p>

<p> Typically, these strategies involve the use of informants,
surveillance, </p>

<p> and undercover operations. They may also include complex
financial </p>

<p> investigations designed to trace drug distribution networks.
The resources </p>

<p> of special drug units often play an important role in
implementing task </p>

<p> force strategies. Multiagency drug task forces may also
attempt to reduce </p>

<p> problems associated with the illegal drug trade by including
not only law </p>

<p> enforcement agencies but also other types of government
agencies, nonprofit </p>

<p> organizations, business firms, and community groups. By
coordinating </p>

<p> education and health initiatives these task forces attempt to
reduce the </p>

<p> harm that illegal drugs do to the community. </p>

<p> Among agencies with drug enforcement responsibilities, about
half of the </p>

<p> local police departments and two-thirds of the sheriffs'
departments </p>

<p> participated in a task force during the 12-month period
ending on June 30, </p>

<p> 1990. Overall, an estimated 6,500 local police and sheriffs'
departments </p>

<p> participated in multiagency drug enforcement task forces
during this time </p>

<p> period. </p>

<p> Over 85% of the police and sheriffs' departments in each
population </p>

<p> category of 100,000 or more participated in a task force,
including over </p>

<p> 95% of the departments serving a population of 500,000 or
more. </p>

<p> Approximately 80% of the police and sheriffs' departments
serving a </p>

<p> population of 25,000 to 99,999, 65% of those serving a
population of 10,000 </p>

<p> to 24,999, and over 40% of those serving fewer than 10,000
residents </p>

<p> participated in a task force. </p>

<p> During the 12-month period ending June 30, 1990,
approximately 6,100 local </p>

<p> police officers were assigned to a multiagency drug task
force full time. </p>

<p> Although police departments serving a million or more
residents had the </p>

<p> most officers assigned to a task force on average (29), over
half of all </p>

<p> local police officers assigned to task forces nationwide were
employed by </p>

<p> departments serving a population of under 25,000. </p>

<p> Sheriffs' departments had about 3,500 officers assigned full
time to drug </p>

<p> task forces, ranging from an average of 10 officers per
department in </p>

<p> jurisdictions with 1 million or more residents, to an average
of 1 officer </p>

<p> per department in jurisdictions with fewer than 50,000
residents. </p>

<p> In addition to multiagency task forces, another innovation
for drug </p>

<p> enforcement in many jurisdictions is the use of drug asset
forfeiture </p>

<p> sanctions. Most States have laws that allow the government to
seize </p>

<p> convicted drug traffickers' cash, bank accounts, planes,
boats, cars, </p>

<p> homes, and other items purchased with proceeds from the
illicit drug trade. </p>

<p> State laws vary regarding the disposition of forfeited
assets. Most State </p>

<p> statutes require that outstanding liens be paid first, and
many States </p>

<p> require that all forfeited drug assets go to the State and/or
local </p>

<p> treasury. In some States, law enforcement agencies may keep
property such </p>

<p> as cars, planes, and boats for official use. In other States,
the agencies </p>

<p> can keep all property, cash, and proceeds from sales of what
is forfeited. </p>

<p> About 4,700 local police and sheriffs' departments reported
the receipt of </p>

<p> money or goods from a drug asset forfeiture program during
fiscal 1990. </p>

<p> This represented 41% of all local law enforcement agencies
with primary </p>

<p> drug enforcement responsibilities. A higher percentage of
sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments (51%) than police departments (38%) had such
receipts. </p>

<p> The percentage of local police departments with asset
forfeiture receipts </p>

<p> was over 95% in jurisdictions with 50,000 to 999,999
residents. Among </p>

<p> departments serving 1 million or more residents and those
serving 25,000 to </p>

<p> 49,999 residents, about 85% received money or goods from an
asset </p>

<p> forfeiture program. Receiving money or goods from an asset
forfeiture </p>

<p> program was least likely for police departments serving a
population of </p>

<p> under 2,500 (11%). </p>

<p> About 95% of sheriffs' departments in jurisdictions with
250,000 or more </p>

<p> residents, and about 85% of those serving 50,000 to 249,999
residents had </p>

<p> asset forfeiture pro-gram receipts during fiscal 1990. In the
smallest </p>

<p> jurisdictions (under 10,000 residents), an estimated 27% of
the sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments received money or goods from an asset forfeiture
program. </p>

<p> State police departments </p>

<p> Thirty-four State police departments, employing approximately
43,000 full- </p>

<p> time officers, reported they had primary responsibility for
the enforcement </p>

<p> of drug laws. </p>

<p> Number of Full-time </p>

<p> State police sworn officers </p>

<p> departments employed </p>

<p> Total 49 52,372 </p>

<p> Departments with </p>

<p> primary responsibility </p>

<p> for drug enforcement 34 43,118 </p>

<p> All 34 of these departments reported they made marijuana and
cocaine </p>

<p> seizures during the 12-month period ending June 30, 1990
(table 6). A </p>

<p> large majority of them also seized amphetamines (94%), heroin
(91%), LSD </p>

<p> (88%), methamphetamines (88%), barbiturates (85%), and PCP
(74%). </p>

<p> Like those of local law enforcement agencies, State police
drug enforcement </p>

<p> strategies often involve the operation of special units,
participation in </p>

<p> multiagency drug enforcement task forces, and participation
in a drug asset </p>

<p> forfeiture program. </p>

<p> Twenty-nine (85%) of the State police departments that had
responsibility </p>

<p> for enforcing drug laws were operating special drug
enforcement units. </p>

<p> These 29 departments had assigned a total of 2,138 officers
to these units </p>

<p> on a full-time basis--an average of 74 officers per
department. </p>

<p> Most of these departments (82%) also operated special units
for drug </p>

<p> education in schools, and 29% of them had special units for
gangs. </p>

<p> Thirty-one of the departments (91%) participated in a
multiagency drug </p>

<p> enforcement task force during fiscal 1990. These departments
had 900 </p>

<p> officers assigned to drug task forces, an average of 29 per
department. </p>

<p> All but two of the departments (94%) responsible for drug
enforcement </p>

<p> reported they received money or goods from a drug asset
forfeiture program </p>

<p> during the year. </p>

<p> Drug testing policies </p>

<p> Local police and sheriffs' departments </p>

<p> Nearly 40% of local police and sheriffs' departments reported
that at least </p>

<p> some of their arrestees were tested for illegal drugs. Drug
testing of </p>

<p> arrestees was most likely to exist in police departments
serving a </p>

<p> population of 500,000 or more (56%) and in sheriffs'
departments serving a </p>

<p> population of 1 million or more (60%). </p>

<p> Among local police departments that reported testing of
arrestees, about 1 </p>

<p> in 8 were responsible for operation of the testing program.
In sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments with arrestee testing, about 1 in 4 operated the
testing </p>

<p> program. </p>

<p> About a fourth of both local police and sheriffs' departments
required all </p>

<p> applicants for sworn positions to submit to a drug test. The
prevalence of </p>

<p> drug testing of applicants increased with the size of the
population </p>

<p> served. Among local police departments, 80% of those serving
a population </p>

<p> of 250,000 or more required all applicants for sworn
positions to be tested </p>

<p> for illegal drugs. About 70% of those serving a population of
50,000 to </p>

<p> 249,999 and just under 50% of those serving a population of
10,000 to </p>

<p> 49,999 had such a requirement. The percentage of police
departments with a </p>

<p> mandatory drug testing policy for applicants was smallest
among those </p>

<p> serving 2,500 to 9,999 residents (25%) and those serving
fewer than 2,500 </p>

<p> residents (14%). </p>

<p> Slightly more than 40% of sheriffs' departments serving a
population of </p>

<p> 100,000 or more had a policy requiring drug testing of all
applicants for </p>

<p> sworn positions. About 30% of departments serving from 25,000
to 100,000 </p>

<p> residents had such a policy. Sheriffs' departments serving a
population of </p>

<p> less than 25,000 (15%) were the least likely to require all
applicants for </p>

<p> sworn positions to undergo tests for illegal drugs. </p>

<p> Small percentages of all local police and sheriffs'
departments had a </p>

<p> mandatory drug testing requirement for probationary officers,
regular field </p>

<p> officers, candidates for promotion, officers in drug-related
positions, or </p>

<p> civilian personnel. In every population category, less than
25% of the </p>

<p> police and sheriffs' departments had mandatory drug testing
for the above </p>

<p> personnel types, except the following: Probationary officers
and officers </p>

<p> in drug-related positions in police departments serving a
population of </p>

<p> 500,000 or more. </p>

<p> Small percentages of local police and sheriff's departments
were also using </p>

<p> random selection to test applicants or employees for illegal
drugs. An </p>

<p> estimated 2% of all departments tested applicants through
this method, and </p>

<p> the percentage of departments with random drug testing was no
more than 5% </p>

<p> for any personnel position. Random selection testing was most
common for </p>

<p> officers in drug-related positions employed by police
departments serving a </p>

<p> population of 1 million or more (36%). </p>

<p> About 10% of all local police and sheriffs' departments
required regular </p>

<p> field officers suspected of using illegal drugs to take a
drug test. The </p>

<p> percentage of departments with suspicion-based testing was
similar for </p>

<p> other types of employees. About 2% of the departments had
such a policy </p>

<p> for applicants. </p>

<p> Departments in larger jurisdictions were more likely than
those in smaller </p>

<p> jurisdictions to have a suspicion-based drug testing program.
For example, </p>

<p> among local police departments, about two-thirds of local
police </p>

<p> departments serving 250,000 or more residents authorized
testing of regular </p>

<p> field officers suspected of drug use, compared to about half
of those </p>

<p> serving a population of 50,000 to 249,999, about a third of
those serving a </p>

<p> population of 25,000 to 49,999, and a ninth of those serving
population of </p>

<p> 2,500 to 9,999. In police departments serving a population of
under 2,500, </p>

<p> roughly 1 in 30 authorized testing of regular field officers
suspected of </p>

<p> illegal drug use. </p>

<p> About 40% of the sheriffs' departments serving a population
of 1 million or </p>

<p> more had a policy authorizing testing of regular field
officers suspected </p>

<p> of illegal drug use. About 30% of the departments serving a
population of </p>

<p> 500,000 to 999,999, and 20% of those serving a population of
100,000 to </p>

<p> 499,999 had such a policy. Less than 10% of the sheriffs'
departments </p>

<p> located in jurisdictions with fewer than 100,000 residents
had a policy </p>

<p> that authorized drug testing of officers suspected of drug
use. </p>

<p> Nationwide, the local police departments that had a
suspicion-based drug </p>

<p> testing program for regular field officers employed 50% of
all local police </p>

<p> officers. The sheriffs' departments with such a testing
program employed </p>

<p> 31% of all sheriff's officers. An estimated 17% of all local
police </p>

<p> officers and 12% of sheriffs' officers worked for departments
that had a </p>

<p> random selection program for regular field officers. About 3%
of local </p>

<p> police officers and 4% of sheriffs' officers were employed by
departments </p>

<p> that had a mandatory drug testing requirement for field
officers. </p>

<p> Local police departments that tested civilian employees
suspected of drug </p>

<p> use employed 45% of all such employees nationwide. About 30%
of civilian </p>

<p> employees in sheriffs' departments worked in department with
a suspicion- </p>

<p> based testing program for civilians. </p>

<p> Civilian employees in sheriffs' departments were more likely
to be a part </p>

<p> of a random selection drug testing program than their
counterparts in local </p>

<p> police departments (9% versus 3%). About 5% of the civilian
employees in </p>

<p> local police and sheriffs' departments were subject to a
mandatory drug </p>

<p> testing requirement. </p>

<p> For comparison, the results of a 1988 survey conducted by the
Department of </p>

<p> Labor showed that 3% of private nonagricultural businesses
had a drug </p>

<p> testing program of some type, including 43% of those with
1,000 or more </p>

<p> employees. Overall, about 20% of private sector employees
worked for a </p>

<p> company with a drug testing program. (Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Survey </p>

<p> of Employer Anti-drug Programs, Report 760, January 1990.) </p>

<p> Among local law enforcement agencies with an employee drug
testing program, </p>

<p> an estimated 61% of the police departments and 69% of the
sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments specified dismissal as a possible disciplinary
sanction against </p>

<p> nonprobationary officers after one positive drug test. </p>

<p> Local police officers testing positive for the first time
were most likely </p>

<p> to face dismissal as a possible sanction in larger
jurisdictions. All </p>

<p> police departments serving a population of 1 million or more
had a policy </p>

<p> specifying dismissal as a possible sanction after one
positive drug test, </p>

<p> and 83% of those serving a population of 250,000 to 999,999
had such a </p>

<p> policy. </p>

<p> Suspension was the most serious disciplinary sanction
specified for an </p>

<p> initial positive drug test in 14% of the police and sheriffs'
departments </p>

<p> that tested employees for illegal drugs. </p>

<p> After a second positive drug test by a nonprobationary
officer, the </p>

<p> percentage of local law enforcement agencies specifying
dismissal as the </p>

<p> most serious disciplinary sanction increased to 93% for
police departments </p>

<p> and to 98% for sheriffs' departments. </p>

<p> Treatment was specified as a possible alternative for
nonprobationary </p>

<p> officers with positive drug test results in almost half of
the local police </p>

<p> and sheriffs' departments with a testing program. The drug
testing </p>

<p> policies of local police departments specified treatment
alternatives more </p>

<p> often than those of sheriffs' departments (49% versus 39%).
Treatment </p>

<p> alternatives were generally limited to the first offense. </p>

<p> Among police departments, treatment alternatives were most
likely to exist </p>

<p> in jurisdictions with a population of 50,000 to 249,999,
where two-thirds </p>

<p> of them had such a policy. Among sheriffs' departments, those
serving </p>

<p> 500,000 to 999,999 residents (62%) were the most likely to
have treatment </p>

<p> alternatives specified in their drug testing policy. </p>

<p> Police departments serving a population of 1 million or more
(20%) were the </p>

<p> least likely of all local law enforcement agencies to specify
treatment as </p>

<p> a possible alternative for officers who test positive for
drugs. </p>

<p> State police departments </p>

<p> Thirty-three (67%) of the 49 primary State police departments
reported that </p>

<p> at least some of the persons they arrested were being tested
for illegal </p>

<p> drugs. Four (8%) of the departments reported that they had
primary </p>

<p> responsibility for operation of the testing program. </p>

<p> Percent of departments </p>

<p> in which at least some </p>

<p> arrestees are tested </p>

<p> Total 67% </p>

<p> Agency-operated </p>

<p> program 8 </p>

<p> Not agency-operated 59 </p>

<p> Just over half (55%) of State police departments reported
they required </p>

<p> drug tests of all applicants for sworn positions. Two (4%) of
the </p>

<p> departments reported they required all regular field officers
to undergo </p>

<p> tests for illegal drugs, and five (10%) tested all officers
working in </p>

<p> drug-related positions. None of the State police departments
reported </p>

<p> having a mandatory drug testing policy for civilian
personnel. </p>

<p> Some State police departments used a random selection process
to test </p>

<p> probationary officers (12%), regular field officers (8%),
candidates for </p>

<p> promotion (8%), and officers working in drug-related
positions (10%). One </p>

<p> department (2%) had a random selection drug testing program
for applicants, </p>

<p> and two departments (4%) required civilian personnel to be
included in a </p>

<p> random selection drug testing program. </p>

<p> Although no State police departments had a mandatory drug
testing </p>

<p> requirement for civilian employees, nearly half (45%) of all
civilian State </p>

<p> police employees worked in departments that tested civilian
employees </p>

<p> suspected of using illegal drugs. A similar proportion of
sworn State </p>

<p> police employees (53%) were subject to suspicion-based drug
testing. About </p>

<p> 7% of State police officers were employed by departments with
random </p>

<p> selection testing for regular field officers and an equal
percentage worked </p>

<p> in departments with a mandatory drug testing requirement for
such officers. </p>

<p> About three-fourths (77%) of the State police departments
with a drug </p>

<p> testing program specified dismissal as a possible sanction
against </p>

<p> probationary officers after one positive drug test. After a
second </p>

<p> offense, dismissal was a possible sanction specified by 91%
of the </p>

<p> departments. </p>

<p> Half of the departments with employee drug testing specified
treatment as a </p>

<p> possible alternative after the first offense. As in local law
enforcement </p>

<p> agencies, treatment alternatives were generally not available
to State </p>

<p> police officers who tested positive for drugs a second time. </p>

<p> Methodology </p>

<p> The Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics
(LEMAS) survey </p>

<p> collects data from a nationally representative sample of the
nearly 17,000 </p>

<p> publicly funded State and local law enforcement agencies in
the United </p>

<p> States. </p>

<p> All 780 State and local law enforcement agencies in the
United States with </p>

<p> 100 or more sworn officers (as reported in the 1986 Directory
Survey of Law </p>

<p> Enforcement Agencies) received the full-length LEMAS
questionnaire. The </p>

<p> 780 self-representing (SR) agencies were supplemented by a
nationally </p>

<p> representative sample of all agencies with fewer than 100
sworn officers. </p>

<p> These nonself-representing (NSR) agencies were chosen using a
stratified </p>

<p> random sample with cells based on the type of agency (local
police, </p>

<p> sheriff, or special police), size of population served, and
number of sworn </p>

<p> officers. The 2,338 NSR agencies received a slightly
abbreviated LEMAS </p>

<p> questionnaire, which did not contain items about job
classifications, </p>

<p> residency requirements, special pay, collective bargaining,
police </p>

<p> membership organizations, special units, or written policy
directives. </p>

<p> The initial mailing of the survey questionnaire was conducted
in July 1990. </p>

<p> The pay period containing June 15, 1990, was used as the
reference date for </p>

<p> personnel-related questions and June 30, 1990, for other
questions. The </p>

<p> data were collected by the Bureau of the Census for the
Bureau of Justice </p>

<p> Statistics. </p>

<p> After two followup mailings and additional telephone calls as
needed, a </p>

<p> final total of 2,945 agencies responded to the LEMAS
questionnaire, </p>

<p> including 738 SR agencies and 2,207 NSR agencies. The overall
response </p>

<p> rate was 94.5%. The final data-base includes responses from
1,830 local </p>

<p> police departments, 840 sheriffs' departments, 226 special
police </p>

<p> departments, and the 49 primary State police departments. </p>

<p> The base weight for all SR agencies is 1. For NSR local and
special police </p>

<p> departments, the base weight is 8.128, and for NSR sheriffs'
departments it </p>

<p> is 4.09857. The final weight associated with every agency,
both SR and </p>

<p> NSR, is the product of the base weight and a factor that
adjusted for any </p>

<p> nonresponding agencies in each sample cell. This agency
nonresponse factor </p>

<p> was based on number of sworn officers for SR agencies and on
number of </p>

<p> agencies for NSR agencies. </p>

<p> Some responding agencies did not completely answer the LEMAS
questionnaire. </p>

<p> When an agency did not supply a response to an item, a donor
agency was </p>

<p> randomly selected from responding agencies in the same sample
cell. The </p>

<p> donor agency's value for the item was placed into the
nonresponding </p>

<p> agency's response field with an indicator that the value had
been imputed. </p>

<p> Complete documentation regarding sampling procedures and
non-response </p>

<p> adjustments is available upon request. </p>

<p> Because the data from agencies with fewer than 100 sworn
personnel were </p>

<p> collected from a sample, the results are subject to sampling
error. All </p>

<p> statements of comparison in this report have been tested to
ensure that </p>

<p> observed differences between values are significant at 2
standard errors </p>

<p> (the 95-percent confidence level) or higher. </p>

<p> References </p>

<p> Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime </p>

<p> in the United States, 1990. </p>

<p> National Institute of Justice, Local-level drug enforcement:
New drug </p>

<p> strategies, March 1989. </p>

<p> National Institute of Justice, Multijurisdictional drug law
enforcement </p>

<p> strategies: Reducing supply and demand, December 1990. </p>

<p> National Institute of Justice, The police and drugs,
September 1989. </p>

<p> How to order the data set </p>

<p> Data utilized in this report are available from the National
Archive of </p>

<p> Criminal Justice Data at the University of Michigan, P.O. Box
1248, Ann </p>

<p> Arbor, MI 481 106; 1-800-999-0960. The dataset is archived as
Law </p>

<p> Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics, 1990
(ICPSR 9749). </p>

<p> Brian Reaves, BJS Statistician, wrote this report. Tom Hester
edited it. </p>

<p> Pheny Z. Smith provided statistical review. Lawrence A.
Greenfeld and </p>

<p> Richard W. Dodge reviewed the publication. It was produced by
Marilyn </p>

<p> Marbrook, Priscilla Middleton, Betty Sherman, and Jayne Pugh.
The data </p>

<p> were collected by the Governments Division, Bureau of the
Census. </p>

<p> May 1992, NCJ-134505 </p>

<p> The Assistant Attorney General is responsible for matters of
administration </p>

<p> and management with respect to the OJP agencies: Bureau of
Justice </p>

<p> Assistance, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Institute
of Justice, </p>

<p> Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, and
Office for </p>

<p> Victims of Crime. The Assistant Attorney General establishes
polices and </p>

<p> priorities consistent with statutory purposes of the OJP
agencies and the </p>

<p> priorities of the Department of Justice. </p>

<p> . <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>