
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-51</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B020-316</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/amot1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045742 text/html 7994
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:56:56 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:51 GMT
Content-length: 7777
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Notes on Marijuana and the Amotivational Syndrome </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general/general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="41429" -->

<h2>Notes on Marijuana and the Amotivational Syndrome </h2>

<p><b>Copied from p.229-230 of 'Drugs and Behavior' by William A.
McKim. All portions copyright the author.</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><b>Amotivational Syndrome</b> </p>

<p>It has sometimes been observed that when a young person starts
smoking marijuana there are systematic changes in that person's
lifestyle, ambitions, motivation, and possibly personality. These
changes have been collectively referred to as the _amotivational
syndrome_, whose symptoms are: </p>

<p>&quot;... apathy, loss of effectiveness, and diminished
capacity or willingness to carry out complex, long-term plans,
endure frustration, concentrate for long periods, follow
routines, or successfully master new material. Verbal facility is
often impaired both in speaking and writing. Some individuals
exhibit greater introversion, become totally involved with the
present at the expense of future goals and demonstrate a strong
tendency toward regressive, childlike, magical thinking[1].&quot;
</p>

<p>There is no doubt that many young individuals have changed
from clean, aggressive, upwardly mobile achievers into the sort
of person just described at about the same time as they started
smoking marijuana. What is not clear, however, is a causal
relationship between the loss of middle class motivations and
cannabis. Which comes first, the marijuana or the loss of
motivations? This is not easy to answer. In fact, there may be no
clearcut answer. To begin with, all we know about the
amotivational syndrome is a result of a few case histories. These
data cannot answer questions about: a) how common the syndrome
is; b) whether the marijuana actually caused the change in
behavior; or c) if the change is caused by marijuana, if it is
best described as a change in all motivations, specific
motivations, or something other than motivation, like ability or
personality. </p>

<p>It does not appear as though the amotivational syndrome is all
that common among marijuana smokers. In one survey[2] a sample of
almost 2000 college students was studied. There was no difference
in grade point average and achievement between marijuana users
and nonusers, but the users had more difficulty deciding on
career goals, and a smaller number were seeking advanced
professional degrees. On the other hand, other studies have shown
lower school averages and higher dropout rates among users than
nonusers. In any case these differences are not great. If there
is such a thing as amotivational syndrome, its affects appear to
be restricted to a few individuals, probably the small percentage
who become heavy users. </p>

<p>Laboratory studies provide additional information on the
causal relationship between motivation and marijuana. The
Mendelson[3] experiment, where hospitalised volunteers worked on
an operant task to earn money and marijuana for 26 days, found
that the dose of marijuana smoked did not influence the amount of
work done by either the casual-user group or the heavy-user
group; all remained motivated to earn and take home a significant
amount of money in addition to the work they did for the
marijuana. It seems clear that marijuana does not cause a loss of
motivation. </p>

<p>While marijuana does not specifically diminish motivation, it
is clear that cannabis affects attention and memory, and these
are intellectual capacities usually considered necessary for
success in educational institutions. We know that a significant
tolerance develops to these effects and they can be suppressed
voluntarily at low doses, but consistent smoking of high doses of
marijuana must impede a successful academic career. In fact,
achievement motivation must be high indeed in any individual who
combines high levels of cannabis use with a successful academic
career. </p>

<p>Since most reports of the amotivational syndrome originated in
the sixties in North America, what they seem to describe is a
tendency for college students to 'drop out' and assume a
lifestyle that rejects traditional achievement motivations of
their parents' generation. In an effort to understand this
rejection it was very easy to believe that it was pharmacological
and to dismiss it as 'amotivational syndrome.' </p>

<p>[1] McGlothin, W.H., &amp; West, L.J. (1968). The marihuana
problem: An overview. _American Journal of Psychiatry_, vol. 125,
370-378. </p>

<p>[2] Brill, N.Q., &amp; Christie, R.L. (1974).Marihuana and
psychosocial adjustment. _Archives of General Psychiatry_, 31,
713-719. </p>

<p>[3] Mendelson, H.H., Kuehnle, J.C., Greenberg, I., &amp;
Mello, N.K. (1976). The effects of marihuana use on human operant
behavior: Individual data. In M.C. Broude &amp; S. Szara (eds.),
_Pharmacology of marihuana_, vol. 2(pp. 643-653). New York:
Academic Press. </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h2>From: THE NATURAL MIND by Andrew Weil. </h2>

<p><b>p. 60:</b> </p>

<p>When I was a freshman at Harvard, long before many people
thought of smoking marihuana, there was plenty of amotivation. It
took such forms as sleeping till dinner time and then playing
Monopoly all night instead of working and was indistinguishable
from amotivation now associated with heavy marihuana use. Heavy
marihuana use is a convenient symptom for an amotivated person to
add to his list: it is fun, can be done with other people, angers
grownups, and so on. If it is not too late to find a rural
college where marihuana is still unknown, I would predict that
the amotivated people there would become the heavy marihuana
smokers once the drug appeared on campus. If marihuana were the
cause of amotivation, one would expect that amotivation could be
cured by taking away the marihuana, but this is not the case.
Therefore, it makes more sense to see amotivation as a cause of
heavy marihuana smoking rather than the reverse. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general/general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="41429" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>