
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-45</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B020-216</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hempfaq1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045532 text/html 32116
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:55:20 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:03 GMT
Content-length: 31898
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Frequently Asked Questions about Cannabis Hemp </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general/general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="41429" -->

<h2>Frequently Asked Questions about Cannabis Hemp </h2>

<p>This document contains straight answers to tough questions
about hemp and marijuana. Every effort has been made to ensure
their accuracy, and sources, if not provided, are available by
request. BE WARNED -- this text has changed minds. The author and
contributers do not take responsibility for any change in
outlook, new ideas, or re-evaluation of one's relationship with
current political parties which may result from allowing photons
to travel into your eyeballs, even when said photons originate
from a cathode ray tube, backlit LCD screen, microfiche reader or
illuminated sheet of paper on which this document is being
displayed. Unless of course you feel like showering us with fan
mail and candy-grams. In that case we'll take the blame. </p>

<p>Copyright (c) 1994 by Brian S. Julin </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<p>The following persons have contributed to this document at
some point in it's evolution: Laura Kriho
&lt;cohip@darkstar.cygnus.com&gt; (original list of questions), </p>

<p>Marc Anderson (fact finding), Paul L. Allen (LaTeX formatting)
,plus some others who haven't said they want their name put in. </p>

<p>This material is maintained and written by Brian S. Julin,
with help from several other individuals. It is copyrighted
material. The copyright is only there to prevent anyone from
editing or selling this material. Feel free to redistribute the
material in any form as long as it is unaltered in content, and
no credit or money is taken for the contents themselves.
Comments, questions, contributions or ideas should be mailed to
verdant@twain.ucs.umass.edu or c/o Brian S. Julin at UMACRC,
S.A.O. Mailbox #2, Student Union Building, UMASS, 01003 </p>

<p>More information on the document is at the end -- wouldn't
want to bore you... So without further ado: </p>

<p>---------------------- </p>

<p>C O N T E N T S </p>

<p>---------------------- </p>

<p>Part1: What's all this fuss about hemp? </p>

<p>1a) What is hemp? </p>

<p>1b) What is cannabis? </p>

<p>1c) Where did the word `marijuana' come from? </p>

<p>2a) How can hemp be used as a food? </p>

<p>2b) What are the benefits of hemp compared to other food
crops? </p>

<p>2c) How about soy? </p>

<p>Is hemp competitive as a world source of protein? </p>

<p>3a) How can hemp be used for cloth? </p>

<p>3b) Why is it better than cotton? </p>

<p>4a) How can hemp be used to make paper? </p>

<p>4b) Why can't we just keep using trees? </p>

<p>5a) How can hemp be used as a fuel? </p>

<p>5b) Why is it better than petroleum? </p>

<p>6a) How can hemp be used as a medicine? </p>

<p>6b) What's wrong with all the prescription drugs we have? </p>

<p>7) What other uses for hemp are there? </p>

<p>Part 2: So why aren't we using hemp, then? </p>

<p>1) How and why was hemp made illegal? </p>

<p>2) OK, so what the heck does all this other stuff have to do
with hemp? </p>

<p>3) Now wait, just hold on. You expect me to believe that they
wouldn't have thought to pass a better law, one that banned
marijuana and allowed commercial hemp, instead of throwing the
baby out with the bath water? </p>

<p>4) Is there a lesson to be learned from all this? </p>

<p>Part 3: Does it? Doesn't it? Is it true that? </p>

<p>1) Doesn't marijuana stay in your fat cells and keep you </p>

<p>high for months? </p>

<p>2) But ... isn't today's marijuana much more potent than it </p>

<p>was in the Sixties? </p>

<p>(Or, more often ... Marijuana is 10 times more powerful than </p>

<p>it was in the Sixties!) </p>

<p>3a) Doesn't Marijuana cause brain damage? </p>

<p>3b) If it doesn't kill brain cells, how does it get you
`high'? </p>

<p>4) Don't people die from smoking pot? </p>

<p>5) I forgot, does marijuana cause short-term memory
impairment? </p>

<p>6a) Is marijuana going to make my boyfriend go psycho? </p>

<p>6b) Don't users of marijuana withdraw from society? </p>

<p>7) Is it true that marijuana makes you lazy and unmotivated? </p>

<p>8) Isn't marijuana a gateway drug? </p>

<p>Doesn't it lead to use of harder drugs? </p>

<p>9a) I don't want children (minors) to be able to smoke
marijuana. </p>

<p>How can I stop this? </p>

<p>9b) Won't children be able to steal marijuana plants that </p>

<p>people are growing? </p>

<p>10a) Hey, don't you know that marijuana drops testosterone </p>

<p>levels in teenage boys causing [various physical and </p>

<p>developmental problems]? </p>

<p>10b) Doesn't heavy marijuana use lower the sperm count in
males? </p>

<p>10c) I heard marijuana use by teenage girls may impair hormone
</p>

<p>production, menstrual cycles, and fertility. Is this true? </p>

<p>11) Go away. </p>

<p>12) Isn't smoking marijuana worse for you than smoking
cigarettes? </p>

<p>13) Don't children born to pot-smoking mothers suffer from </p>

<p>``Fetal Marijuana Syndrome?'' </p>

<p>14) Doesn't marijuana cause a lot of automobile accidents? </p>

<p>15) Aren't you afraid everyone will get hooked? </p>

<p>16a) Is urine testing for marijuana use as a terms of </p>

<p>employment a good idea? </p>

<p>I want to make sure my business is run safely. </p>

<p>16b) Isn't all this worth the trouble, though, in order to </p>

<p>reduce accident risks and health care costs? </p>

<p>17) Wouldn't it be best to just lock the users all up? </p>

<p>18) I heard that there are over 400 chemicals in marijuana... </p>

<p>Wellllll...? </p>

<p>19) Doesn't that stuff mess up your immune system and make </p>

<p>it easier for you catch colds? </p>

<p>Part 4: Why is it still illegal? </p>

<p>1) Why is it STILL illegal?: </p>

<p>2) What can I do to bring some sense into our marijuana laws? </p>

<p>3a) Where can I get more information? </p>

<p>3b) Umm, I'm computer illiterate, so that just went way over </p>

<p>my head. Are there any good books I could go get instead? </p>

<p>4) Do you have any advice for people who want to organize </p>

<p>their own group? </p>

<p>Part 5: Sources by question number </p>

<p>Part 6: About the alt.hemp FAQ. </p>

<p>---------------------- </p>

<p>P A R T O N E </p>

<p>---------------------- </p>

<p>WHAT'S ALL THIS FUSS ABOUT HEMP? </p>

<p>1a) What is hemp? </p>

<p>For our purposes, hemp is the plant called `cannabis sativa.'
There are other plants that are called hemp, but cannabis hemp is
the most useful of these plants. In fact, `cannabis sativa' means
`useful (sativa) hemp (cannabis)'. </p>

<p>`Hemp' is any durable plant that has been used since
pre-history for many purposes. Fiber is the most well known
product, and the word `hemp' can mean the rope or twine which is
made from the hemp plant, as well as just the stalk of the plant
which produced it. </p>

<p>1b) What is cannabis? </p>

<p>Cannabis is the most durable of the hemp plants, and it
produces the toughest cloth, called `canvass.' (Canvass was
widely used as sails in the early shipping industry, as it was
the only cloth which would not rot on contact with sea spray.)
The cannabis plant also produces three other very important
products which the other hemp plants do not (in usable form, that
is): seed, pulp, and medicine. </p>

<p>The pulp is used as fuel, and to make paper. The seed is
suitable for both human and animal foods. The oil from the seed
can be used in as a base for paints and varnishes. The medicine
is a tincture or admixture of the sticky resin in the blossoms
and leaves of the hemp plant, and is used for a variety of
purposes. </p>

<p>1c) Where did the word `marijuana' come from? </p>

<p>The word `marijuana' is a Mexican slang term which became
popular in the late 1930's in America, during a series of media
and government programs which we now refer to as the `Reefer
Madness Movement.' It refers specifically to the medicine part of
cannabis, which Mexican soldiers used to smoke. </p>

<p>Today in the U.S., hemp (meaning the roots, stalk, and stems
of the cannabis plant) is legal to possess. No one can arrest you
for wearing a hemp shirt, or using hemp paper. </p>

<p>Marijuana (The flowers, buds, or leaves of the cannabis plant)
is not legal to possess, and there are stiff fines and possible
jail terms for having any marijuana in your possession. The seeds
are legal to possess and eat, but only if they are sterilized
(will not grow to maturity.) </p>

<p>Since it is not possible to grow the hemp plant without being
in possession of marijuana, the United States does not produce
any industrial hemp products, and must import them or, more
often, substitute others. (There is a way to grow hemp legally,
but it involves filing an application with the Drug Enforcement
Administration and the DEA very rarely ever gives its
permission.) This does not seem to have stopped people from
producing and using marijuana, though. In many of the United
States, marijuana is the number one cash crop, mostly because it
fetches a very high price on the black market. </p>

<p>2a) How can hemp be used as a food? </p>

<p>Hemp seed is a highly nutritious source of protein and
essential fatty oils. Many populations have grown hemp for its
seed -- most of them eat it as `gruel' which is a lot like
oatmeal. The leaves can be used as roughage, but not without
slight psycho-active side-effects. Hemp seeds do not contain any
marijuana and they do not get you `high.' </p>

<p>Hemp seed protein closely resembles protein as it is found in
the human blood. It is fantastically easy to digest, and many
patients who have trouble digesting food are given hemp seed by
their doctors. Hemp seed was once called `edestine' and was used
by scientists as the model for vegetable protein. </p>

<p>Hemp seed oil provides the human body with essential fatty
acids. Hemp seed is the only seed which contains these oils with
almost no saturated fat. As a supplement to the diet, these oils
can reduce the risk of heart disease. It is because of these oils
that birds will live much longer if they eat hemp seed. </p>

<p>With hemp seed, a vegan or vegetarian can survive and eat
virtually no saturated fats. One handful of hemp seed per day
will supply adequate protein and essential oils for an adult. </p>

<p>2b) What are the benefits of hemp compared to other food
crops? </p>

<p>Hemp requires little fertilizer, and grows well almost
everywhere. It also resists pests, so it uses little pesticides.
Hemp puts down deep roots, which is good for the soil, and when
the leaves drop off the hemp plant, minerals and nitrogen are
returned to the soil. Hemp has been grown on the same soil for
twenty years in a row without any noticeable depletion of the
soil. </p>

<p>Using less fertilizer and agricultural chemicals is good for
two reasons. First, it costs less and requires less effort. </p>

<p>Second, many agricultural chemicals are dangerous and
contaminate the environment -- the less we have to use, the
better. </p>

<p>2c) How about soy? </p>

<p>Is hemp competitive as a world source of protein? </p>

<p>Hemp does not produce quite as much protein as soy, but hemp
seed protein is of a higher quality than soy. Agricultural
considerations may make hemp the food crop of the future. In
addition to the fact that hemp is an easy crop to grow, it also
resists UV-B light, which is a kind of sunlight blocked by the
ozone layer. Soy beans do not take UV-B light very well. If the
ozone layer were to deplete by 16%, which by some estimates is
very possible, soy production would fall by 25-30%. </p>

<p>We may have to grow hemp or starve -- and it won't be the
first time that this has happened. Hemp has been used to `bail
out' many populations in time of famine. </p>

<p>Unfortunately, because of various political factors, starving
people in today's underdeveloped countries are not taking
advantage of this crop. In some places, this is because
government officials would call it `marijuana' and pull up the
crop. In other countries, it is because the farmers are busy
growing coca and poppies to produce cocaine and heroin for the
local Drug Lord. This is truly a sad state of affairs. Hopefully
someday the Peace Corps will be able to teach modern hemp seed
farming techniques and end the world's protein shortage. </p>

<p>3a) How can hemp be used for cloth? </p>

<p>The stalk of the hemp plant has two parts, called the bast and
the hurd. The fiber (bast) of the hemp plant can be woven into
almost any kind of cloth. It is very durable. </p>

<p>In fact, the first Levi's blue jeans were made out of hemp for
just this reason. Compared to all the other natural fibers
available, hemp is more suitable for a large number of
applications. </p>

<p>Here is how hemp is harvested for fiber: A field of closely
spaced hemp is allowed to grow until the leaves fall off. The
hemp is then cut down and it lies in the field for some time
washed by the rain. It is turned over once to expose both sides
of the stalk evenly. During this time, the hurd softens up and
many minerals are returned to the soil. This is called `retting,'
and after this step is complete, the stalks are brought to a
machine which separates the bast and the hurd. We are lucky to
have machines today -- men used to do this last part by hand with
hours of back-breaking labor. </p>

<p>3b) Why is it better than cotton? </p>

<p>The cloth that hemp makes may be a little less soft than
cotton, (though there are also special kinds of hemp, or ways to
grow or treat hemp, that can produce a soft cloth) but it is much
stronger and longer lasting. (It does not stretch out.)
Environmentally, hemp is a better crop to grow than cotton,
especially the way cotton is grown nowadays. In the United
States, the cotton crop uses half of the total pesticides. (Yes,
you heard right, one half of the pesticides used in the entire
U.S. are used on cotton.) </p>

<p>Cotton is a soil damaging crop and needs a lot of fertilizer. </p>

<p>4a) How can hemp be used to make paper? </p>

<p>Both the fiber (bast) and pulp (hurd) of the hemp plant can be
used to make paper. Fiber paper was the first kind of paper, and
the first batch was made out of hemp in ancient China. Fiber
paper is thin, tough, brittle, and a bit rough. Pulp paper is not
as strong as fiber paper, but it is easier to make, softer,
thicker, and preferable for most everyday purposes. The paper we
use most today is a `chemical pulp' paper made from trees. Hemp
pulp paper can be made without chemicals from the hemp hurd. Most
hemp paper made today uses the entire hemp stalk, bast and hurd.
High-strength fiber paper can be made from the hemp baste, also
without chemicals. </p>

<p>The problem with today's paper is that so many chemicals are
used to make it. High strength acids are needed to make quality
(smooth, strong, and white) paper out of trees. These acids
produce chemicals which are very dangerous to the environment.
Paper companies do their best to clean these chemicals up (we
hope.) Hemp offers us an opportunity to make affordable and
environmentally safe paper for all of our needs, since it does
not need much chemical treatment. </p>

<p>It is up to consumers, though, to make the right choice --
these dangerous chemicals can also be used on hemp to make a
slightly more attractive product. Instead of buying the whiter,
brighter role of toilet paper, we will need to think about what
we are doing to the planet. </p>

<p>Because of the chemicals in today's paper, it will turn yellow
and fall apart as acids eat away at the pulp. This takes several
decades, but because of this publishers, libraries and archives
have to order specially processed acid free paper, which is much
more expensive, in order to keep records. Paper made naturally
from hemp is acid free and will last for centuries. </p>

<p>4b) Why can't we just keep using trees? </p>

<p>The chemicals used to make wood chemical pulp paper today
could cause us a lot of trouble tomorrow. Environmentalists have
long been concerned about the effects of dioxin and other
compounds on wildlife and even people. Beyond the chemical
pollution, there are agricultural reasons why we should use
cannabis hemp instead. When trees are harvested, minerals are
taken with them. Hemp is much less damaging to the land where it
is grown because it leaves these minerals behind. </p>

<p>A simpler answer to the above question is: Because we are
running out! It was once said that a squirrel could climb from
New England to the banks of the Mississippi River without
touching the ground once. The European settler's appetite for
firewood and farmland put an end to this. When the first wood
paper became a huge industry, the United States Department of
Agriculture began to worry about the `tree supply.' That is why
they went in search of plant pulp to replace wood. Today some
`conservatives' argue that there are more forests now than there
ever were. This is neither true, realistic nor conservative:
these statistics do not reflect the real world. Once trees have
been removed from a plot of land, it takes many decades before
biological diversity and natural cycles return to the forest, and
commercial tree farms simply do not count as forest -- they are
farm land. As just mentioned, many plant fibers were investigated
by the USDA -- some, like kenaf, were even better suited than
cannabis hemp for making some qualities of paper, but hemp had
one huge advantage: robust vitality. Hemp generates immense
amounts of plant matter in a three month growing season. When it
came down to producing the deluge of paper used by Americans,
only hemp could compete with trees. In fact, according to the
1916 calculations of the USDA, one acre of hemp would replace an
entire four acres of forest. And, at the same time, this acre
would be producing textiles and rope. </p>

<p>Today, only 4% of America's old-growth forest remains standing
-- and there is talk about building roads into that for logging
purposes! Will our policy makers realize in time how easy it
would be to save them? </p>

<p>5a) How can hemp be used as a fuel? </p>

<p>The pulp (hurd) of the hemp plant can be burned as is or
processed into charcoal, methanol, methane, or gasoline. The
process for doing this is called destructive distillation, or
`pyrolysis.' Fuels made out of plants like this are called
`biomass' fuels. This charcoal may be burned in today's
coal-powered electric generators. </p>

<p>Methanol makes a good automobile fuel, in fact it is used in
professional automobile races. It may someday replace gasoline. </p>

<p>Hemp may also be used to produce ethanol (grain alcohol.) The
United States government has developed a way to make this
automobile fuel additive from cellulosic biomass. Hemp is an
excellent source of high quality cellulosic biomass. </p>

<p>One other way to use hemp as fuel is to use the oil from the
hemp seed -- some diesel engines can run on pure pressed hemp
seed oil. However, the oil is more useful for other purposes,
even if we could produce and press enough hemp seed to power many
millions of cars. </p>

<p>5b) Why is it better than petroleum? </p>

<p>Biomass fuels are clean and virtually free from metals and
sulfur, so they do not cause nearly as much air pollution as
fossil fuels. Even more importantly, burning biomass fuels does
not increase the total amount of carbon dioxide in the Earth's
atmosphere. When petroleum products are burned, carbon that has
been stored underground for millions of years is added to the
air; this may contribute to global warming through the
`Greenhouse Effect', (a popular theory which says that certain
gases will act like a wool blanket over the entire Earth,
preventing heat from escaping into space.) In order to make
biomass fuels, this carbon dioxide has to be taken out of the air
to begin with -- when they are burned it is just being put back
where it started. </p>

<p>Another advantage over fossil fuels is that biomass fuels can
be made right here in the United States, instead of buying them
from other countries. Instead of paying oil drillers,
super-tanker captains, and soldiers to get our fuel to us, we
could pay local farmers and delivery drivers instead. Of course,
it is possible to chop down trees and use them as biomass. This
would not be as beneficial to the environment as using hemp,
especially since trees that are cut down for burning are `whole
tree harvested.' This means the entire tree is ripped up and
burned, not just the wood. </p>

<p>Since most of the minerals which trees use are in the leaves,
this practice could ruin the soil where the trees are grown. In
several places in the United States, power companies are starting
to do this -- burning the trees in order to produce electricity,
because that is cheaper than using coal. They should be using
hemp, like researchers in Australia started doing a few years
ago. (Besides, hemp provides a higher quality and quantity of
biomass than trees do.) </p>

<p>6a) How can hemp be used as a medicine? </p>

<p>Marijuana has thousands of possible uses in medicine.
Marijuana (actually cannabis extract) was available as a medicine
legally in this country until 1937, and was sold as a nerve tonic
-- but mankind has been using cannabis medicines much longer than
that. Marijuana appears in almost every known book of medicine
written by ancient scholars and wise men. It is usually ranked
among the top medicines, called `panaceas', a word which means
`cure-all'. </p>

<p>The list of diseases which cannabis can be used for includes:
multiple sclerosis, cancer treatment, AIDS (and AIDS treatment),
glaucoma, depression, epilepsy, migraine headaches, asthma,
pruritis, sclerodoma, severe pain, and dystonia. This list does
not even consider the other medicines which can be made out of
marijuana -- these are just some of the illnesses for which
people smoke or eat whole marijuana today. </p>

<p>There are over 60 chemicals in marijuana which may have
medical uses. It is relatively easy to extract these into food or
beverage, or into some sort of lotion, using butter, fat, oil, or
alcohol. One chemical, cannabinol, may be useful to help people
who cannot sleep. Another is taken from premature buds and is
called cannabidiolic acid. It is a powerful disinfectant.
Marijuana dissolved in rubbing alcohol helps people with the skin
disease herpes control their sores, and a salve like this was one
of the earliest medical uses for cannabis. The leaves were once
used in bandages and a relaxing non-psychoactive herbal tea can
be made from small cannabis stems. </p>

<p>The most well known use of marijuana today is to control
nausea and vomiting. One of the most important things when
treating cancer with chemotherapy or when treating AIDS with AZT
or Foscavir, being able to eat well, makes the difference between
life or death. Patients have found marijuana to be extremely
effective in fighting nausea; in fact so many patients use it for
this purpose even though it is illegal that they have formed
`buyers clubs' to help them find a steady supply. In California,
some city governments have decided to look the other way and
allow these clubs to operate openly. </p>

<p>Marijuana is also useful for fighting two other very serious
and wide-spread disabilities. Glaucoma is the second leading
cause of blindness, caused by uncontrollable eye pressure.
Marijuana can control the eye pressure and keep glaucoma from
causing blindness. Multiple Sclerosis is a disease where the
body's immune system attacks nerve cells. </p>

<p>Spasms and many other problems result from this. Marijuana not
only helps stop these spasms, but it may also keep multiple
sclerosis from getting worse. </p>

<p>6b) What's wrong with all the prescription drugs we have? </p>

<p>They cost money and are hard to make. In many cases, they do
not work as well, either. Some prescription drugs which marijuana
can replace have very bad, even downright dangerous,
side-effects. Cannabis medicines are cheap, safe, and easy to
make. </p>

<p>Many people think that the drug dronabinol should be used
instead of marijuana. Dronabinol is an exact imitation of one of
the chemicals found in marijuana, and it may actually work on a
lot of the above diseases, but there are some big problems with
dronabinol, and most patients who have used both dronabinol and
marijuana say that marijuana works better. </p>

<p>The first problem with Dronabinol is that it is even harder to
get than marijuana. Many doctors do not like to prescribe
dronabinol, and many drug stores do not want to supply it,
because a lot of paperwork has to be filed with the Drug
Enforcement Administration. Secondly, dronabinol comes in pills
which are virtually useless to anyone who is throwing up, and it
is hard to take just the right amount of dronabinol since it
cannot be smoked. Finally, because dronabinol is only one of the
many chemicals in cannabis, it just does not work for some
diseases. Many patients do not like the effects of dronabinol
because it does not contain some of the more calming chemicals
which are present in marijuana. </p>

<p>7) What other uses for hemp are there? </p>

<p>One of the newest uses of hemp is in construction materials.
Hemp can be used in the manufacture of `press board' or
`composite board.' This involves gluing fibrous hemp stalks
together under pressure to produce a board which is many times
more elastic and durable than hardwood. Because hemp produces a
long, tough fiber it is the perfect source for press-board.
Another interesting application of hemp in industry is making
plastic. Many plastics can be made from the high-cellulose hemp
hurd. Hemp seed oil has a multitude of uses in products such as
varnishes and lubricants. </p>

<p>Using hemp to build is by no means a new idea. French
archeologists have discovered bridges built with a process that
mineralizes hemp stalks into a long-lasting cement. </p>

<p>The process involves no synthetic chemicals and produces a
material which works as a filler in building construction. Called
Isochanvre, it is gaining popularity in France. Isochanvre can be
used as drywall, insulates against heat and noise, and is very
long lasting. `Bio-plastics' are not a new idea, either -- way
back in the 1930's Henry Ford had already made a whole car body
out of them -- but the processes for making them do need more
research and development. Bio-plastics can be made without much
pollution. Unfortunately, companies are not likely to explore
bio-plastics if they have to either import the raw materials or
break the law. (Not to mention compete with the already
established petrochemical products.) </p>

<p>----------------------- </p>

<p>P A R T T W O </p>

<p>----------------------- </p>

<p>WELL WHY AREN'T WE USING HEMP, THEN? </p>

<p>1) How and why was hemp made illegal? </p>

<p>Tough question! In order to explain why hemp, the most useful
plant known to mankind, became illegal, we have to understand the
reasons why marijuana, the drug, became illegal. In fact, it
helps to go way back to the beginning of the century and talk
about two other drugs, opium (the grandfather of heroin) and
cocaine. </p>

<p>Opium, a very addictive drug (but relatively harmless by
today's standards) was once widely used by the Chinese. The
reasons for this are a whole other story, but suffice to say that
when Chinese started to immigrate to the United States, they
brought opium with them. Chinese workers used opium to induce a
trance-like state which helped make boring, repetitive tasks more
interesting. It also numbs the mind to pain and exhaustion. By
using opium, the Chinese were able to pull very long hours in the
sweat shops of the Industrial Revolution. During this period of
time, there was no such thing as fair wages, and the only way a
worker could make a living was to produce as much as humanly
possible. </p>

<p>Since they were such good workers, the Chinese held a lot of
jobs in the highly competitive industrial work-place. Even before
the Great Depression, when millions of jobs disappeared
overnight, the White Americans began to resent this, and Chinese
became hated among the White working class. Even more than today,
White Americans had a very big political advantage over the
Chinese -- they spoke English and had a few relatives in the
government, so it was easy for them to come up with a plan to
force Chinese immigrants to leave the country (or at least keep
them from inviting all their relatives to come and live in
America.) This plan depended on stirring up racist feelings, and
one of the easiest things to focus these feelings on was the
foreign and mysterious practice of using opium. </p>

<p>We can see this pattern again with cocaine, except with
cocaine it was Black Americans who were the target. Cocaine
probably was not especially useful in the work-place, but the
strategy against Chinese immigrants (picking on their drug of
choice) had been so successful that it was used again. In the
case of Blacks, though, the racist feelings ran deeper, and the
main thrust of the propaganda campaign was to control the Black
community and keep Blacks from becoming successful. Articles
appeared in newspapers which blamed cocaine for violent crime by
Blacks. Black Americans were painted as savage, uncontrollable
beasts when under the influence of cocaine -- it was said to make
a single Black man as strong as four or five police officers. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general/general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="41429" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>