
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-91</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B002-322</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032307 text/html 72993
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:22:49 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:18:16 GMT
Content-length: 72775
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to Address
Drug-Relat </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Drug Courts: Information on a New Approach to Address
Drug-Related Crime </h1>

<p> (Briefing Report, 05/22/95, GAO/GGD-95-159BR) </p>

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> GAO provided information on drug courts, a new approach used
to monitor defendants' drug use, treatment, and behavior </p>

<p> GAO found that: in exchange for reduced charges, drug using
defendants can be diverted to drug courts where judges monitor
their progress through frequent status hearings; drug court
programs vary in length, participant eligibility, funding, and
other practices; as of March 1995, there were at least 37 drug
courts operating nationwide; 33 drug courts have accepted over
20,000 defendants; most drug courts do not accept violent
offenders; drug courts have not been operating long enough to
determine their overall effectiveness; and although the 1994
Crime Act authorized $1 billion to support drug court programs
from fiscal year (FY) 1995 through FY 2000, Congress has proposed
repealing the drug court grant program </p>

<p> LETTER B-260301 May 22, 1995 The Honorable Orrin G. Hatch
Chairman The Honorable Joseph R. Biden, Jr </p>

<p> Ranking Minority Member Committee on the Judiciary United
States Senate The Honorable Henry J. Hyde Chairman The Honorable
John Conyers, Jr </p>

<p> Ranking Minority Member Committee on the Judiciary House of
Representatives This briefing report provides information on drug
courts,\1 a new approach used by state and local governments to
address drug-related crime. These courts monitor the treatment
and behavior of drug-using defendants </p>

<p> Title V of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act
of 1994 (the 1994 Crime Act) authorizes the award of federal
grants for drug courts. The act requires that we assess the
effectiveness and impact of these grants and report to Congress
by January 1, 1997. To assist Congress in its deliberations on
whether to fund drug courts, we developed this preliminary
report. Specifically, we gathered information on drug courts in
existence prior to the awarding of grants under the 1994 Crime
Act, assessed evaluations of these courts, and reviewed the
Department of Justice's (DOJ) responsibilities and plans for
implementing the federal drug court grant program </p>

<p> During April and on May 11, 1995, we briefed the Committees
on the results of our work </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \1 Throughout this briefing report, we use the terms drug
courts and drug court programs interchangeably </p>

<p> RESULTS </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------ </p>

<p> Letter :1 </p>

<p> In response to the deluge of drug cases since the late 1980s
and the cycle of recidivism (rearrest rates) common to drug
offenders, some state and local jurisdictions created drug
courts, the majority of which have been operating since 1993. The
main purpose of drug courts is to use the authority of the court
to reduce crime by changing defendants' drug-using behavior. In
exchange for the possibility of dismissed charges or reduced
sentences, defendants are diverted to drug courts. Judges preside
over drug court proceedings, monitor the progress of defendants
through frequent status hearings, and prescribe sanctions and
rewards as appropriate in collaboration with prosecutors, defense
attorneys, treatment providers, and others. Although there are
basic elements common to many drug court programs, they vary in
terms of participant eligibility, length of the program,
penalties and rewards, and other practices. The courts are
supported by a variety of local, state, federal, and private
funds and participant fees, according to the Drug Court Resource
Center.\2 As of March 1995, there were at least 37 drug courts
operating nationwide, most of which had been fully operational
for at least 9 months. Thirty-three drug courts responding to our
questionnaire reported having accepted over 20,000 defendants, of
whom a third had completed their programs. According to the
Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center, none of the
drug courts accept defendants currently charged with a violent
offense, and most do not accept defendants with prior violent
convictions. However, at least one drug court accepts defendants
regardless of prior offenses. (See sect. I for more general
information on drug courts.) We assessed six evaluations of five
drug courts completed as of March 1995. Although some evaluation
results indicated that drug courts may have some beneficial
effects, limitations in their designs and methodologies, as well
as the relative newness of drug courts, precluded firm
conclusions about the overall impact of these programs. The
evaluations showed mixed results in recidivism and other
defendant outcomes. For example, two evaluations showed less
recidivism by drug court defendants. However, three other
evaluations showed no significant differences in recidivism.
Additionally, two evaluations of the same drug court showed
contrasting recidivism results. (See sect. II and app. III for
more information on the evaluations we assessed.) The 1994 Crime
Act authorized the Attorney General to award and administer
discretionary grants for drug court programs. A key requirement
of the act is that violent offenders are prohibited as drug court
participants. The act authorized $1 billion from fiscal years
1995 through 2000 to support drug court programs. For fiscal year
1995, $29 million was appropriated. However, Congress has
proposed fiscal year 1995 budget cuts in a pending rescission
bill </p>

<p> In addition, the House has passed legislation repealing the
drug court grant program authorized in the 1994 Crime Act </p>

<p> DOJ expects to award grants beginning in the summer of 1995.
The 1994 Crime Act also authorizes the Attorney General to
provide for a national evaluation of drug courts supported by
federal grants. DOJ expects to complete the evaluation to assess
the impact and effectiveness of drug court grants in about 2
years. (See sect. III for more information.) </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \2 The Bureau of Justice Assistance funds the Drug Court
Resource Center. The Resource Center began operating October 1,
1994, under the direction of The American University in
partnership with the National Center for State Courts and the
National Consortium of Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime
Programs. The Resource Center assists state and local justice
system officials in planning, implementing, managing, and
evaluating drug courts. It also acts as a clearinghouse and
provides technical assistance and other services to jurisdictions
interested in developing or expanding drug courts </p>

<p> OBJECTIVES, SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------ </p>

<p> Letter : </p>

<p> 2 In preparation for our 1997 mandated study, we initiated a
preliminary review of drug court programs. Our objectives were to
determine the number, location, and key elements of drug courts;
the results and validity of evaluations of drug courts; and DOJ's
responsibilities and plans for implementing statutory
requirements for the federal drug court grant program </p>

<p> The Drug Court Resource Center, which is based at The
American University, Washington, D.C., provided us with general
information on drug courts. To obtain more current information,
we sent a questionnaire to 37 drug courts. We received responses
from 33 drug courts as of March 31, 1995. We did not verify the
accuracy of the data provided to us by the Drug Court Resource
Center and drug courts. In addition, we attended a January 1995
national training conference for drug court professionals in Las
Vegas, NV, and visited drug courts in Las Vegas and Washington,
D.C </p>

<p> To determine the results and assess the validity of
evaluations of drug courts, we obtained 11 drug court evaluations
completed as of March 1, 1995, from the Drug Court Resource
Center. These evaluations were done by a variety of sources,
including independent researchers, county officials, and court
representatives. We reviewed them and assessed the evaluative
methodology used and the validity of reported findings. We did
not analyze the reported results of three of them because they
reported outcome data for drug court defendants without any
reference to comparison or control groups. We were unable to
assess the validity of one because it did not include a
description of the methodology used. Two dealt with one drug
court and were assessed as one evaluation because one was a
follow-up to the other and contained the same methodology and
findings </p>

<p> To determine DOJ's responsibilities and plans for
implementing the federal grant program, we met with
representatives of the Office of Justice Programs, DOJ. We held
discussions and reviewed documents regarding their
responsibilities and plans for implementing the federally
supported drug court program. We also obtained drug court funding
information from the Department of Health and Human Services'
Center for Substance Abuse Treatment </p>

<p> Our review was done from January 1995 to April 1995 in
accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards </p>

<p> AGENCY COMMENTS
------------------------------------------------------------ </p>

<p> Letter :3 </p>

<p> In April 1995, we provided a draft of this report for comment
to the Attorney General and the Project Director of the Drug
Court Resource Center </p>

<p> On April 21, 1995, we discussed the report with the Project
Director of the Drug Court Resource Center. On May 5, 1995, we
also discussed the report with the Deputy Assistant Attorney
General and other officials from DOJ's Office of Justice
Programs. These officials generally agreed with the information
presented in the report and provided comments that we
incorporated as appropriate </p>

<p> DOJ officials said the report was positive, informative, and
will be helpful to drug court professionals. They explained that
there is no universal model for drug courts, and as a result,
each drug court operates differently due to local needs and
conditions. Similarly, the Project Director of the Drug Court
Resource Center said that the information presented in the report
was comprehensive, accurate, and objective </p>

<p> ---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :3.1 We are sending copies of this briefing report to
other interested congressional committees and Members and the
Attorney General </p>

<p> Copies will also be made available to others upon request </p>

<p> The major contributors to this briefing report are listed in
appendix IV. If you have any questions about this report, please
call me on (202) 512-8777 </p>

<p> Norman J. Rabkin Director, Administration of Justice Issues
Briefing Section I DRUG COURTS
==============================================================
Letter TYPES OF DRUG COURTS
------------------------------------------------------------
Letter :4 </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> In the late 1980s, state and local criminal courts were
inundated with drug cases. One response to this challenge was the
creation of drug courts, a relatively recent grassroots movement
to deal with drug-related crime and drug-using defendants </p>

<p> According to DOJ, two main types of drug courts have evolved,
those that (1) expedite the processing of drug cases and (2) use
court-monitored drug treatment to attempt to achieve changes in
defendants' drug-using behavior. In addition, some drug courts
combine these two types </p>

<p> The 1994 Crime Act authorizes grants for those drug courts
that have programs offering court supervised drug treatment. The
act does not authorize grants for courts designed solely to
expedite the processing of drug cases. This briefing report
provides information on drug treatment courts </p>

<p> Courts offering court-monitored drug treatment are referred
to as &quot;drug treatment courts&quot; or simply &quot;drug
courts.&quot; Although there is no standard definition applicable
to drug treatment courts, the National Association of Drug Court
Professionals\3 defines them as follows: &quot;A Drug Court is a
special court given the responsibility to handle cases involving
less serious drug using-offenders through a supervision and
treatment program. These programs include frequent drug testing,
judicial and probation supervision, drug counseling, treatment,
educational opportunities, and the use of sanctions and
incentives.&quot; One of the first drug courts to employ drug
treatment as an integral part of the processing of drug felonies
is located in Dade County (Miami), FL, and began operations in
June 1989. This court became a model for other jurisdictions that
implemented drug courts </p>

<p> Although drug courts share certain common elements such as
court-monitored treatment, the courts are uniquely designed to
meet local needs and can vary considerably in the way they
operate </p>

<p> Organizationally, drug courts generally are distinct parts of
trial courts </p>

<p> -------------------- \3 </p>

<p> This is the principal organization of professionals involved
in the development of treatment-oriented drug courts. Its members
include judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, treatment service
providers, educators, researchers, and community leaders </p>

<p> DRUG COURT APPROACHES
------------------------------------------------------------
Letter :5 </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> DRUG COURT APPROACHES </p>

<p> ---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :5.1 </p>

<p> According to a report provided by the Drug Court Resource
Center, drug courts have generally taken two approaches to
processing cases: (1) deferred prosecution and (2)
postadjudication. In the deferred prosecution approach, shortly
after being charged, defendants waive their right to a speedy
trial and enter a treatment program </p>

<p> Defendants who fail to complete the treatment program have
their charges adjudicated. Defendants who complete the treatment
program are not prosecuted further or have their charges
dismissed. This approach is intended to capitalize on the trauma
of arrest and offers defendants the opportunity to obtain
treatment and avoid the possibility of a felony conviction </p>

<p> In the postadjudication approach, defendants are tried and
convicted, but their sentences are deferred or pronounced and
incarceration is suspended until they complete or withdraw from
the treatment program </p>

<p> This approach provides an incentive for the defendant to
rehabilitate because progress toward rehabilitation is factored
into the sentencing determination </p>

<p> Appendix I presents examples of how cases are processed under
the two drug court approaches </p>

<p> PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------ </p>

<p> Letter :6 </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA
---------------------------------------------------------- Letter
:6. </p>

<p> 1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, drug courts
generally accept defendants with substance abuse problems who are
currently charged with drug possession and/or other nonviolent
offenses such as property crimes. Some drug courts accept
defendants who have prior convictions, and others do not </p>

<p> The Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center also
pointed out that drug courts do not accept defendants currently
charged with a violent offense. The Project Director further
commented that most drug courts do not accept defendants with
prior violent offenses </p>

<p> However, at least one drug court accepts defendants
regardless of prior offenses possibly including defendants with
prior convictions for violent crimes. Under the 1994 Crime Act,
federal grants cannot be awarded to any drug court that allows
either current or past violent offenders to participate in its
program </p>

<p> DRUG COURT PLAYERS </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------ </p>

<p> Letter :7 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> DRUG COURT PLAYERS </p>

<p> ---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :7.1 </p>

<p> According to a DOJ-funded report on the first national drug
court conference,\4 judicial leadership is the foundation on
which the overall drug court approach is most often built. A
jurisdiction's trial court provides the leadership, authority,
and management capacity to enable the drug court to operate. The
drug court is headed by a judge whose role is generally expanded
beyond normal court duties to include active involvement in
monitoring the status of defendants in the treatment program. The
judge's duties may include conducting hearings, reviewing
treatment progress reports, issuing bench warrants, and deciding
who may enter the program and who should be terminated
considering recommendations of prosecutors, public defenders, and
treatment providers </p>

<p> The judiciary alone, however, cannot successfully implement
and operate a drug court, according to the conference report.
Rather, a drug court requires a special collaborative effort
among judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and related
criminal justice agencies along with treatment providers and
other social services and community organizations. This
collaborative effort is based on local needs and the targeted
population being served and may differ considerably among drug
courts </p>

<p> Specifically, drug courts create new and different roles for
prosecutors and defense attorneys. In most drug courts these
players are not adversaries in the traditional sense but rather
are to work in concert with the court for the sole purpose of
helping defendants become drug free. This nonadversarial role is
significant because the court does not arbitrate in the usual
fashion and has the opportunity to address addiction-related
issues. Further, drug courts place the defendant in the unique
role of being held publicly accountable for his or her actions </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \4 Justice and Treatment Innovation: The Drug Court Movement,
A Working Paper of the First National Drug Court Conference,
December 1993, John S. Goldkamp, October 1994 </p>

<p> COMMON ELEMENTS OF DRUG COURT PROGRAMS </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------ </p>

<p> Letter :8 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> COMMON ELEMENTS OF DRUG COURT PROGRAMS </p>

<p> ---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :8. </p>

<p> 1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, in most drug
courts, treatment is designed to usually last at least 1 year and
is administered on an outpatient basis with limited inpatient
treatment as needed to address special detoxification or relapse
situations.\5 These courts operate with the philosophy that
because drug addiction is a disease relapses can occur, and that
the court must respond with progressive sanctions and/or enhance
treatment rather than immediately terminate a participant </p>

<p> The central element of all drug court programs is attendance
at the regularly scheduled status hearings at which the drug
court judge monitors the progress of participants. Monitoring is
based on treatment provider reports on urine test results that
detect drug use, attendance at counseling, etc. The judge
reinforces progress and addresses noncompliance with program
requirements. The primary objective of the status hearing is to
keep the defendant in treatment </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \5 These programs recognize that some individuals will
require a longer period to complete the program </p>

<p> PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------ </p>

<p> Letter :9 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> PROGRAM REQUIREMENTS </p>

<p> ---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :9. </p>

<p> 1 Overall, according to the Drug Court Resource Center,
treatment program requirements are more demanding than the
applicable sanction received through traditional adjudication.
Most drug court programs require that defendants attend status
hearings, participate in counseling sessions, and submit to urine
tests with the goal of becoming drug free. Some programs focus on
special classes of defendants such as women. Many programs also
provide support services such as public health services;
assistance with housing, food, and child care; vocational
training; and job placement </p>

<p> TREATMENT PHASES </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :10 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> TREATMENT PHASES </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :10. </p>

<p> 1 Treatment services are generally divided into three phases:
(1) detoxification, (2) stabilization, and (3) aftercare. First,
the defendant's physical dependence on drugs is eliminated
through detoxification. Acupuncture is sometimes used as an
adjunct to treatment in the detoxification phase. According to
the Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center, 9 of 20
drug courts responding to the Center's 1994 survey indicated that
they used acupuncture. Second, the defendant's psychological
craving for the drugs is treated during stabilization. Frequent
group and/or individual counseling sessions are employed during
this phase. And third, aftercare focuses on helping the defendant
obtain education or job training, find a job, and remain drug
free </p>

<p> PROGRAM SANCTIONS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :11 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> PROGRAM SANCTIONS </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :11. </p>

<p> 1 Sanctions for failing to abide by program rules can include
(1) verbal admonition from the judge; (2) demotion to an earlier
stage of the program; (3) incarceration for several days or
weeks, increasing with the number and severity of the violations;
and (4) more frequent status hearings, treatment sessions, or
urine tests. Many programs also use graduated sanctions,
increasing the severity of the sanction with subsequent
violations of program rules </p>

<p> DOJ also pointed out that most drug courts use sanctions not
to simply punish inappropriate behavior but to augment the
treatment process. For example, many drug courts will place a
defendant in residential treatment if he or she is unable to
achieve satisfactory progress in an outpatient setting. In
addition, many drug courts incarcerate defendants for the purpose
of detoxification rather than detain them for inappropriate
behavior </p>

<p> REASONS FOR TERMINATING DEFENDANTS FROM THE PROGRAM </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :12 (See figure in printed edition.) REASONS FOR
TERMINATING DEFENDANTS FROM THE PROGRAM </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :12. </p>

<p> 1 Drug courts use various criteria for ending a defendant's
participation in the program before completion. These may include
a new felony offense; multiple failures to comply with program
requirements, such as not attending status hearings or treatment
sessions; and a pattern of positive urine tests. According to
DOJ, many drug courts do not terminate defendants for a new drug
possession offense </p>

<p> Before terminating a defendant for continuing to use drugs,
drug courts will use an array of treatment services and available
sanctions. There are no uniform standards for the number of
failed urine tests and failures to attend treatment sessions that
result in a participant being terminated that apply to all
programs. Each drug court sets its own standards. Relapses are
expected and the extent to which noncompliance results in
terminations varies from program to program </p>

<p> Generally, the drug court judge makes the decision to
terminate, but the prosecutor or treatment provider can recommend
the termination </p>

<p> Once a defendant is terminated, he or she will be referred
for adjudication or sentencing </p>

<p> PROGRAM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :13 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> PROGRAM GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :13. </p>

<p> 1 Drug courts typically require defendants to complete a
treatment program in order to graduate. Some impose other
conditions defendants must meet after treatment. These could
include remaining drug free and not being arrested for a
specified period of time, paying restitution, being employed
full-time, or performing community service </p>

<p> For example, the Seattle, WA, drug court requires that a
defendant complete all phases of the program to graduate.
However, the Beaumont, TX, drug court requires that, in addition
to completing the treatment program, the defendant maintain
sobriety for a specified time and participate in education and
vocational training and/or be working full-time </p>

<p> EFFECTS OF PROGRAM GRADUATION ON CASE OUTCOME </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :14 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> EFFECTS OF PROGRAM GRADUATION ON CASE OUTCOME </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :14. </p>

<p> 1 In many jurisdictions, completion of the drug court program
leads to a dismissal of charges or cessation of prosecution. In
others, the guilty plea can be stricken, the defendant can be
sentenced to probation in lieu of incarceration, or the
defendant's probation can be shortened </p>

<p> DOJ pointed out that some drug courts will seal all case
records, including arrests, when defendants complete the program.
The sealing of records is particularly significant when
attempting to measure the impact of drug court programs at a
later date </p>

<p> NUMBER OF DRUG COURTS STARTED, 1989-1994 </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :15 (See figure in printed edition.) Note: One drug
court was started in March 1995 </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) Source: GAO and Drug Court
Resource Center data </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> NUMBER OF DRUG COURTS STARTED, 1989-1994 </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :15. </p>

<p> 1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, as of March
1995, there were at least 37 drug courts operating across the
country.\6 Of these drug courts, 29 had been fully operational
for at least 9 months, and 8 others had been operating for a
lesser period </p>

<p> The number of drug courts steadily increased from 1991 to
1994, with substantial increases since 1993. As of March 1995, 24
jurisdictions were developing drug courts. Another eight
jurisdictions had exhibited interest in starting drug courts by
initiating feasibility studies </p>

<p> Appendix II lists the number of drug courts in operation and
being developed </p>

<p> -------------------- \6 Because of the absence of any
official requirement to report their existence to a central
organization, additional drug courts may exist </p>

<p> DRUG COURT LOCATIONS AS OF MARCH 1995 </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :16 (See figure in printed edition.) Source: Drug
Court Resource Center data </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) DRUG COURT LOCATIONS AS OF
MARCH 1995 </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :16. </p>

<p> 1 According to the Drug Court Resource Center, the 37 drug
courts in operation as of March 1995 are located in 15 states and
the District of Columbia. The largest number of drug courts are
located in Florida, with 10, followed by California, with 6.
There are two drug courts in each of six states, and there is one
drug court in each of the remaining eight states and the District
of Columbia. The specific location of each drug court is shown in
appendix II </p>

<p> DRUG COURT PARTICIPANTS' STATUS AS OF MARCH 1995 </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :17 (See figure in printed edition.) N = 20,421 (See
figure in printed edition.) Note 1: Based on responses from 33
drug courts </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) Note 2: Percentages do not
add to 100 percent due to rounding </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) Source: GAO questionnaires </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> DRUG COURT PARTICIPANTS' STATUS AS OF MARCH 1995 </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :17. </p>

<p> 1 Data obtained from 33 of 37 drug courts responding to our
questionnaire showed that since inception of the first drug court
in 1989, 20,421 persons have participated in drug courts. Of
these, 7,235 participants have graduated, and 7,595 are currently
in the programs. The remaining participants did not complete the
programs </p>

<p> Generally, when participants do not complete drug court
programs it is because they were terminated, voluntarily
withdrew, or died </p>

<p> Based on the data received, these totaled 5,591.\7 The number
of participants currently in each of these drug court programs
varied widely, ranging from a low of 1 participant in Santa Ana,
CA, a new drug court,\8 to a high of 1,200 participants in Miami,
FL, one of the oldest drug courts. The median number of
participants in these drug court programs is 105 </p>

<p> It should be noted that many of the drug courts have been
operating for less than a year and would not yet have graduates.
As shown, more than one-third of the total participants are
currently enrolled in drug court programs </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \7 We calculated the number (5,591) of participants not
completing the programs by subtracting the number (7,235) of
graduates and the number (7,595) of participants currently in the
programs from the total number (20,421) of participants in the
programs since their inception </p>

<p> \8 At the time of our review, Orange County, CA, had filed
for bankruptcy and curtailed resources for its drug court </p>

<p> FUNDING SOURCES
-----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :18 (See figure in printed edition.) According to the Drug
Court Resource Center Project Director, drug courts generally
piece together funding from a variety of sources </p>

<p> Information reported to the Drug Court Resource Center by 15
drug courts showed that these sources included local taxes and
surcharges, state alcohol and drug agency funds, private
foundation monies, participant fees, and federal grants </p>

<p> Some drug courts have developed innovative funding
approaches. For example, a drug court judge from Orange County,
CA, told us that when the county filed for bankruptcy, it cut
back services necessary for the drug court operation. The judge
said that he was forming a nonprofit corporation to try to
provide funding for the drug court outside of the bankruptcy
proceedings </p>

<p> Until the 1994 Crime Act, there was no federal grant program
specifically designed for drug courts. However, some drug courts
have received federal grants and technical assistance from the
Department of Health and Human Services' Center for Substance
Abuse Treatment (CSAT) and DOJ's Bureau of Justice Assistance
(BJA) </p>

<p> According to CSAT, it has provided or plans to provide an
estimated $15 million in assistance to some drug courts. Of the
$15 million, about $6 million is for a drug court demonstration
project for the District of Columbia Superior Court </p>

<p> BJA could not provide us with complete information on DOJ
grants used in support of drug courts. According to a BJA
official, &quot;drug courts&quot; was not a specific grant
category that grantees could designate for funding. However, this
official commented that BJA is aware that DOJ grant funds
provided under other grant categories such as &quot;corrections
options&quot; have been used in support of drug courts, and that
three drug courts had received $2.5 million from the Corrections
Options program. </p>

<p> \9 -------------------- \9 The Corrections Options program
assists states with design, development, and implementation of
innovative alternatives to traditional modes of incarceration </p>

<p> PARTICIPANT FEES </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :19 (See figure in printed edition.) PARTICIPANT FEES </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :19. </p>

<p> 1 We obtained data (based on our questionnaire and
information provided by the Drug Court Resource Center) from 34
drug courts on fees charged to participants in drug court
programs. Twenty-three of the 34 drug courts reported that they
charged fees, and 11 reported that they did not. Insufficient
data on fee amounts actually collected precluded us from
determining the extent to which drug courts relied on participant
fees as a funding source </p>

<p> Of the 23 drug courts charging participant fees, the amounts
charged for the total cost of treatment ranged from $20 to
$2,500. One drug court reported charging fees on a sliding scale
from $60 to $300 for treatment based on a defendant's ability to
pay, while another reported charging on a sliding scale from $500
to $2,500. At least nine courts responded that they charged fees
ranging from $200 to $350 </p>

<p> Several drug courts reported applying participant fees to
counseling and treatment costs, drug testing costs, and other
program expenses </p>

<p> In addition, DOJ commented that many treatment providers
believe participant fees are a useful therapeutic tool and should
be charged regardless of the extent to which fees are needed to
cover program costs </p>

<p> COST SAVINGS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :20 (See figure in printed edition.) COST SAVINGS </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :20. </p>

<p> 1 Drug courts have reported information to the Drug Court
Resource Center on savings that they believe their programs have
achieved in the costs of court and other criminal justice system
operations </p>

<p> One of the larger categories of savings reported by drug
courts was jail costs avoided, i.e., the estimated costs of
incarcerating a typical drug court defendant that would be
expected to incur if he/she were not participating in a drug
court program. One court estimated savings of $5,400 per drug
court participant, and another estimated savings of $2,566 to
$5,185 </p>

<p> Another drug court claimed a savings of $2 million over a
3-year period resulting from drug court participants spending
fewer days in custody and the consequent ability of the county to
rent unused jail cells to other law enforcement agencies. Still
another drug court estimated it had saved about $875,500 in jail
costs for its program but did not specify the time frame </p>

<p> The National Association of Drug Court Professionals noted
that drug court programs are much less costly than the
incarceration of drug-using offenders. The Association reported
that incarceration of drug-using offenders ranges from $20,000 to
$50,000 annually, and the cost to build a prison cell is $80,000
to $90,000. It also said that drug courts cost less than $1,500
annually for each offender </p>

<p> Some drug courts identified savings such as reduced caseloads
of other trial judges not in the drug court program. In addition,
some drug courts claimed savings in court-appointed attorney
fees, reduced probation office caseloads, and costs of
prosecution, arrests, and police overtime </p>

<p> We did not verify this information, and further analysis of
all drug court costs is essential to fully understanding the
benefits of these programs </p>

<p> Briefing Section II EVALUATIONS OF DRUG COURTS </p>

<p>
==============================================================
Letter DO DRUG COURTS MAKE A DIFFERENCE? </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :21 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> In evaluating the effectiveness of drug courts, the basic
question is: Do drug courts make a difference? Specifically, do
defendants who successfully complete drug court programs exhibit
reduced recidivism, decreased drug use, and other socially
beneficial effects as a result of participating in drug court
programs when compared to their counterparts, i.e., control
groups who were not exposed to the same drug court treatment?
Based on evaluations we reviewed, drug courts generally may have
some beneficial effects. However, because of the nature of the
study designs and the short periods of time elapsed between
treatment and measurement of outcomes (drug courts are relatively
new), firm conclusions cannot be drawn about the effects of drug
courts </p>

<p> It is both difficult and costly to conduct program
evaluations that can measure program effects. Although the
strongest design involves assembling and randomly assigning
defendants to control groups (comparing drug courts versus
traditional courts, for example), such studies raise serious
logistical and ethical issues. Additionally, according to the
Project Director of the Drug Court Resource Center, control
groups cannot be used properly unless a drug court is originally
designed to define such groups </p>

<p> An alternative approach is to design studies allowing the
researcher to create comparable groups from existing programs,
through the use of various analytical techniques. However, even
such studies are often made more difficult by the fact that
existing programs change over time, resulting in individuals at
the end of the study period being exposed to different treatments
than those at the beginning </p>

<p> Also, different locations of the same program may have very
different implementation needs, making it more difficult to
compare such programs </p>

<p> GAO ASSESSED DRUG COURT EVALUATIONS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :22 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> We assessed six evaluations that compared performance
outcomes for drug court defendants to the experiences of other
defendants, i.e., previous divertees or unsuccessful drug court
defendants or defendants who had never been in a drug court. In
order to determine whether a drug court has an impact on its
participants, an evaluation should compare outcomes of drug court
defendants to those of other groups of similar defendants who are
not in drug courts </p>

<p> The six evaluations covered five drug courts and varied
considerably in terms of the study designs, types of outcomes
measured, and scope of analyses performed on the available
information. Our assessment indicates that the evaluations
differed particularly in terms of the validity of the designs,
which determine the extent to which the reader is able to draw
conclusions from any findings. Of the six studies: two studies
had fairly strong designs; of these, one provided some evidence
of an effect of the drug court program, and the other study's
results were too preliminary to draw any conclusions; two studies
had designs with more serious problems; of these, one suggested
possible effects of the program, and the other was inconclusive;
and two studies had design weaknesses that prevented any
conclusions about the effects of the program </p>

<p> The major outcome measure used, in five of the six
evaluations, was recidivism (rearrest rates). To a lesser degree,
recidivism-related measures were also used, such as length of
time before rearrest and days spent in custody for felony
offenses. We focused on these measures in this report because
they provided the strongest evidence for the long-term effect of
the drug court programs, even though other measures were used in
these studies </p>

<p> EVALUATION OUTCOMES </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :23 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> Two of the six evaluations were well-designed. However, the
results in terms of recidivism outcomes were mixed. One of the
evaluations showed that drug court defendants had significantly
lower rearrest rates than defendants not in drug court, and that
they spent fewer days in custody for felony offenses (app. III,
evaluation 1). This evaluation also showed that drug court
defendants had a lower rate of failures-to-appear for required
court hearings than did other defendants. However, the other
evaluation, with preliminary information only, showed no
significant difference so far in rearrest rates between drug
court defendants and defendants who were not in the drug court
(app. III, evaluation 2) </p>

<p> Although these evaluations have strong study designs and one
indicates some beneficial effects on defendants resulting from
the drug court programs, the evidence does not permit firm
conclusions about the effects of the drug courts studied.
Additionally, for one of the evaluations, insufficient time had
elapsed to provide firmer evidence of program effect </p>

<p> Of the next two evaluations, both of the same drug court, one
provided some suggestive evidence of program effect. It showed
lower recidivism by drug court defendants and longer time before
rearrest (app. III, evaluation 3). The other generally showed no
difference in recidivism rates (app. III, evaluation 4). Design
problems made it difficult to attribute these findings to the
programs. There are too many potential differences between the
drug court participants and the groups to which they were
compared to develop strong conclusions </p>

<p> The final two evaluations did not provide reliable evidence
concerning the effects of the programs. One showed no substantial
difference in recidivism between drug court defendants and
defendants who left the drug court (app. III, evaluation 5). The
other evaluation measured defendants' drug abstinence and
failure-to-appear rates and showed positive results for drug
court defendants as compared to defendants terminated from the
drug court (app. III, evaluation 6). Because the study design did
not control for a number of factors, such as motivation and
susceptibility to treatment, these evaluations do not permit
conclusions to be drawn about the effects of the programs </p>

<p> Appendix III contains further information on each of these
evaluations </p>

<p> Briefing Section III FEDERAL DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM </p>

<p>
============================================================== </p>

<p> Letter THE 1994 CRIME ACT </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :24 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> THE 1994 CRIME ACT </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :24. </p>

<p> 1 Beginning in fiscal year 1995, DOJ may provide
jurisdictions with drug court grants. Title V of the Violent
Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (Public Law
103-322) authorizes the Attorney General to award discretionary
drug court grants to states, units of local government, Indian
tribal governments, and state and local courts. Grants may be
awarded to drug court programs when a judge continuously
supervises the progress of nonviolent offenders with substance
abuse problems </p>

<p> The act requires the Attorney General to issue regulations to
ensure that jurisdictions receiving drug court grants to support
their programs do not allow violent offenders to participate. It
defines a violent offender as a person who is charged with or
convicted of an offense involving a firearm, dangerous weapon,
death, serious bodily injury, or force; or who has one or more
prior convictions for a violent felony crime </p>

<p> Drug court programs must also integrate a number of judicial
sanctions and treatment services. Specifically, the act requires
programs to include (1) mandatory periodic testing for the use of
addictive substances; (2) substance abuse treatment; (3)
diversion, probation, or other supervised releases with the
possibility of prosecution, confinement, or incarceration when
participants do not comply with program requirements or fail to
show satisfactory progress; and (4) program and aftercare
services, such as relapse prevention, health care, education,
vocational training, job placement, housing placement, and child
care </p>

<p> FEDERAL FUNDING FOR DRUG COURTS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :25 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> FEDERAL FUNDING FOR DRUG COURTS </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :25.1 </p>

<p> The 1994 Crime Act authorized a total of $1 billion for
fiscal years 1995 through 2000 to support drug court programs.
Although the act authorized $100 million for fiscal year 1995,
DOJ's fiscal year 1995 Appropriations Act (Public Law 103-317)
included only $29 million for the drug court program. However,
Congress has proposed fiscal year 1995 budget cuts for the drug
court program. On March 16, 1995, the House passed H.R. 1158, the
Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act of 1995, which rescinds
$27.75 million for the drug court program. During its
consideration of H.R. 1158, the Senate reduced the rescission to
$17.1 million. On April 6, 1995, the Senate passed its version of
the bill and requested a conference with the House </p>

<p> The House and Senate conferees began May 3, 1995, to try to
reconcile the separate provisions of the bill </p>

<p> The President's fiscal year 1996 budget requests $150 million
for drug court grants. However, H.R. 667 (The Violent Crime
Incarceration Act of 1995) passed by the House of Representatives
on February 10, 1995, would amend Title V of the 1994 Crime Act
and in doing so would repeal the 1994 Crime Act's drug court
discretionary grant provisions. On February 22, 1995, H.R. 667
was referred to the Senate Committee on the Judiciary </p>

<p> DOJ'S RESPONSIBILITIES FOR DRUG COURTS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :26 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> DOJ recognizes that no single model exists for an effective
drug court. Consequently, DOJ plans to maintain flexibility in
awarding grants to programs that use a variety of approaches to
coordinate drug treatment and persuade offenders to abstain from
drugs with the goal of becoming drug free. In addition, given the
great diversity in the structure and operation of state and local
courts and criminal justice systems, DOJ plans to allow
jurisdictions to tailor local initiatives to best suit their
needs and local conditions </p>

<p> DOJ's Office of Justice Programs (OJP) has overall
responsibility for the new federal drug court program, including
policy setting. To carry out this responsibility, OJP has hired
an acting director and policy analyst to staff its Drug Court
Program Office. In addition, BJA, an office of OJP, recently
established a Drug Court Program Office to manage and monitor
drug court program grants, according to an OJP official. BJA has
hired four people to staff this office </p>

<p> Since November 1994, OJP and BJA staffs have worked together
to develop program guidelines and application materials.\10
Currently, these staffs are considering the most appropriate and
effective ways of providing technical assistance to federally
supported drug courts, operating drug courts, and related federal
projects to be funded with other fiscal year 1995 resources. The
level and source of funding to support this technical assistance
is also under review </p>

<p> OJP's National Institute of Justice (NIJ) is responsible for
funding a national evaluation of drug court program impacts. This
evaluation will assess whether federally supported drug court
programs have helped their participants to break the cycle of
substance abuse and crime. It will also assess the
cost-effectiveness of these programs </p>

<p> NIJ is also responsible for ensuring that drug court programs
use part of their grants to conduct process evaluations. These
are aimed at determining, among other things, if the drug court
is achieving its objectives, if it was implemented as originally
intended, and whether major changes are appropriate. They will
also examine how drug courts affect the rest of the court system
and other elements of the criminal justice system </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \10 In March 1995, DOJ published Drug Court Grant Program
Guidelines and Application Information </p>

<p> FISCAL YEAR 1995 DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :27 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> FISCAL YEAR 1995 DRUG COURT GRANT PROGRAM </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :27. </p>

<p> 1 If Congress does not rescind the fiscal year 1995
appropriation, DOJ plans to award grants for planning,
implementing, and improving or enhancing drug court programs.
Eligible applicants may apply only for one type of grant.
Assuming no rescission is enacted, of the $29 million
appropriated for fiscal year 1995, DOJ plans to award up to 100
planning grants for not more than $35,000 each to jurisdictions
interested in establishing drug courts, 10 implementation grants
for not more than $1 million each to jurisdictions that have
identified their target populations and case processing
procedures, 3 additional implementation grants for not more than
$2 million to larger jurisdictions with populations exceeding 1
million, and 20 improvement and enhancement grants for not more
than $1 million to jurisdictions that have already established
drug courts </p>

<p> Federal grants for each drug court program will be 75 percent
of program costs. The grantees will be required to provide cash
to fund the remaining 25 percent </p>

<p> Applications are due by May 23, 1995. Then, OJP and BJA
staffs will focus on screening and processing qualified
applications for potential grant awards, pending final
congressional action on the fiscal year 1995 budget rescission.
If the current deadline for filing drug court applications does
not change, the first grants are expected to be awarded in the
summer of 1995 </p>

<p> EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERALLY FUNDED DRUG COURTS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Letter :28 (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> Evaluating effectiveness is a critical element of the federal
drug court program. The 1994 Crime Act authorizes the Attorney
General to carry out or make arrangements for evaluations of
programs that receive discretionary program grants. The act also
mandates us to study and assess the effectiveness and impact of
these discretionary grants and report to the Congress by January
1, 1997 </p>

<p> OJP program guidelines require recipients of drug court
grants to cooperate with a national evaluation team. The
evaluation will be aimed at measuring program impact primarily
through the use of the following criteria: reduction in
recidivism rates of program participants, maintenance of
acceptable treatment completion rates, decreased participant drug
use, and maintenance of a cost-effective program </p>

<p> NIJ is responsible for overseeing the national evaluation.
The evaluation will focus on treatment and its impact and is
expected to take at least 2 years to complete. At the time of our
review, NIJ was developing the solicitation for proposals to
conduct the evaluation </p>

<p> Program guidelines also require each drug court grant
recipient to conduct process evaluations of their programs. For
these evaluations, grantees are expected to collect descriptive
information on the role of drug court players, potential eligible
population, and participant program characteristics. Grantees
will also be asked to collect information on program procedures
used to identify and screen eligible offenders, accept and assess
offenders, respond to relapses, manage and monitor cases, and
discharge and refer participants </p>

<p> FLOWCHART OF TWO DRUG COURT APPROACHES </p>

<p> =========================================================== </p>

<p> Appendix I (See figure in printed edition.) \a Judges may
reward progress and impose sanctions for noncompliance with
program requirements </p>

<p> Source: Drug Court Resource Center and GAO analysis of
selected drug court program descriptions </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) NUMBER AND LOCATION OF DRUG
COURTS IN OPERATION AND BEING DEVELOPED AS OF MARCH 1995 </p>

<p> ========================================================== </p>

<p> Appendix II </p>

<p> In About to Location operation start Planned </p>

<p> ------------------------ ---------- ---------- ---------- </p>

<p> Alabama </p>

<p> Mobile 1 </p>

<p> Arizona </p>

<p> Phoenix 1 </p>

<p> Arkansas </p>

<p> Little Rock 1 </p>

<p> California </p>

<p> Bakersfield 1 </p>

<p> East Bay Corridor 1 </p>

<p> El Monte 1\a </p>

<p> Los Angeles 1 </p>

<p> Oakland 1 </p>

<p> Riverside 1 </p>

<p> Sacramento 1 </p>

<p> Santa Ana 1\a </p>

<p> San Bernardino 1\a 1 </p>

<p> San Francisco 1 </p>

<p> Connecticut </p>

<p> Hartford 1 </p>

<p> Colorado </p>

<p> Denver 1 </p>

<p> Delaware </p>

<p> Wilmington 1 </p>

<p> District of Columbia </p>

<p> Washington 1 </p>

<p> Florida Bartow 1\a </p>

<p> Crestview 1 </p>

<p> Ft. Lauderdale 1 </p>

<p> Gainesville 1 </p>

<p> Jacksonville 1\a </p>

<p> Key West 1 </p>

<p> Miami 1 </p>

<p> Orlando 1 </p>

<p> Panama City 1 </p>

<p> Pensacola 1 1 </p>

<p> Tallahassee 1 </p>

<p> Tampa 1 </p>

<p> Georgia </p>

<p> Atlanta 1 </p>

<p> Hawaii </p>

<p> Honolulu 1 </p>

<p> Illinois </p>

<p> Chicago 1 </p>

<p> Indiana </p>

<p> Gary 1 </p>

<p> Kansas </p>

<p> Wichita 1 </p>

<p> Kentucky </p>

<p> Louisville 1 </p>

<p> Maryland </p>

<p> Baltimore 2\a </p>

<p> Massachusetts </p>

<p> Dorchester 1 </p>

<p> Michigan </p>

<p> Kalamazoo 1 </p>

<p> St. Joseph 1 </p>

<p> Missouri </p>

<p> Kansas City 1 </p>

<p> Nevada </p>

<p> Las Vegas 1 </p>

<p> Reno 1\a </p>

<p> New Mexico </p>

<p> Las Cruces 1 </p>

<p> New York </p>

<p> Rochester 1\b </p>

<p> Ohio </p>

<p> Akron 1 </p>

<p> Cincinnati 1 </p>

<p> Cleveland 1 </p>

<p> Sandusky 1 </p>

<p> Oregon </p>

<p> Eugene 1 </p>

<p> Portland 1 </p>

<p> South Carolina </p>

<p> Columbia 1 </p>

<p> Texas </p>

<p> Austin 1 </p>

<p> Beaumont 1 </p>

<p> Fort Worth 1 </p>

<p> Utah </p>

<p> Salt Lake City 1 </p>

<p> Washington </p>

<p> Seattle 1 </p>

<p> Tacoma 1\a </p>

<p> Spokane 1 </p>

<p> ============================================================ </p>

<p> Total 37 5 19 </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------ </p>

<p> \a Drug courts in operation less than 9 months. Includes one
of the two Baltimore drug courts </p>

<p> \b In commenting on a draft of this report, the Project
Director of the Drug Court Resource Center told us that a drug
court in Rochester began operating on a pilot basis in early 1995
</p>

<p> Source: Drug Court Resource Center data </p>

<p> OUTCOMES REPORTED IN AND GAO'S ASSESSMENT OF EVALUATIONS OF
FIVE DRUG COURTS </p>

<p> ========================================================= </p>

<p> Appendix III EVALUATION 1: F.I.R.S.T </p>

<p> OAKLAND </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:1 TREATMENT GROUP </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:1.0.1 Drug use defendants granted admission to a
diversion program </p>

<p> Admission requirements changed during the course of the study
</p>

<p> STUDY DESIGN \ </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:1.0.2 </p>

<p> Comparison of 110 defendants in a program with a similar
group of 110 defendants in a different program a year earlier </p>

<p> TIME OF STUDY </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:1.0.3 </p>

<p> Drug court participants referred in January and February of
1991; earlier group referred in January 1990 through March of
1990. The report contained a 3-year follow-up study </p>

<p> KEY MEASURES </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:1.0.4 </p>

<p> (1)Felony rearrests: Drug court defendants had a lower
average rate of felony rearrests per defendants (0.75) than had
previous divertees (1.33) </p>

<p> (2)Days in custody for felony offenses: Drug court
defendants, on average, spent fewer days in custody per defendant
(44) than had previous divertees (78) </p>

<p> (3)Bench warrants: Drug court defendants, on average, had
fewer bench warrants issued for failures to appear at court
hearings (0.67) than had previous divertees (1.1) </p>

<p> ASSESSMENT </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:1.0.5 </p>

<p> There were some questions concerning the comparability of the
two groups, as well as the eligibility requirements for the two
programs </p>

<p> (The report stated that eligibility requirements were relaxed
for the drug court program participants in order to obtain a
broader group for comparative purposes.) In spite of these
concerns, the evaluation suggested some fairly strong evidence of
program success after 3 years </p>

<p> EVALUATION 2: MARICOPA COUNTY </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:2 </p>

<p> TREATMENT GROUP </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:2.0.1 </p>

<p> Offenders sentenced to probation for first-time drug
possession convictions </p>

<p> STUDY DESIGN </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:2.0.2 </p>

<p> Random assignment to four groups: (1)No drug testing,
frequent visits (n=approximately 154) </p>

<p> (2)Monthly random drug testing, occasional visits
(n=approximately 154) </p>

<p> (3)Biweekly scheduled drug testing, limited visits
(n=approximately 154) </p>

<p> (4)Drug court, with testing and treatment supervised by a
probation officer (n=177) </p>

<p> TIME OF STUDY </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:2.0.3 </p>

<p> Participants in program between March 1992 and April 1993.
Current data reported only preliminary findings after 6 months </p>

<p> KEY MEASURES </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:2.0.4 </p>

<p> (1)Rearrest rates: No statistically significant differences
(16.95 percent for the drug court group vs. 15.37 percent for
others) </p>

<p> (2)Rates of technical probation violations: Drug court group
had lower rates than those of others (7.9 percent vs. 11.9
percent) </p>

<p> ASSESSMENT </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:2.0.5 </p>

<p> Although the evaluation design was quite strong, the results
were preliminary; insufficient time had elapsed to provide a firm
indication of program effect. Future comparisons may be
complicated by the fact that the drug court sample had lower
rates of reported history of prior marijuana use. Otherwise, the
control groups (groups 1-3) were quite similar to the drug court
group (group 4) </p>

<p> EVALUATION 3: DADE COUNTY (GOLDKAMP AND WEILAND) </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:3 TREATMENT GROUP </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:3.0.1 </p>

<p> Persons arrested for 2nd and 3rd degree drug-related felonies
</p>

<p> STUDY DESIGN </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:3.0.2 </p>

<p> Five key groups:\11 (1)Persons admitted to drug court program
(n=326) </p>

<p> (2)Sample of felony drug defendants in same period not
eligible because of more serious drug-related offenses (n=199) </p>

<p> (3)Sample of nondrug felony defendants in same period (n=185)
</p>

<p> (4)Sample of felony drug defendants in period several years
earlier (n=302) </p>

<p> (5)Sample of felony nondrug defendants in period several
years earlier (n=536) </p>

<p> In addition, the evaluation compared persons completing the
drug court program with those failing to complete </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \11 An additional sample of offenders could not reliably be
used as a control group because they were exposed to the drug
court program </p>

<p> TIME OF STUDY </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:3.0.3 </p>

<p> Participants in groups 1-3 had charges filed in August 1990
and September 1990. Charges for groups 4-5 were filed in the
summer of 1987. Data report results after 18 month follow-up </p>

<p> KEY MEASURES </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:3.0.4 </p>

<p> (1)Rearrest rates: Drug court defendants were rearrested at a
statistically significant lower rate (33 percent, vs. 40 percent
to 53 percent for other groups) </p>

<p> (2)Time before rearrest: Drug court defendants had
statistically significant longer time before rearrest (median of
235 days, vs. 52 to 115 days for other groups) </p>

<p> (3)Rearrests and treatment completion: Rearrest rates were
associated with failure to complete the treatment program </p>

<p> ASSESSMENT </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:3.0.5 </p>

<p> The results suggested an effect of the program. However, the
study design was unable to make the comparison with offenders in
the same situation with similarly serious drug offenses;
therefore, the results must be interpreted cautiously. In
particular, the drug court sample had fewer prior arrests than
had the other comparison groups, and the key group of felony drug
defendants used for comparative purposes were not eligible for
the drug court program because of the seriousness of their
charges or prior records </p>

<p> The comparisons between those completing and failing to
complete the program must also be viewed with caution, due to
possible motivational and other differences between the groups </p>

<p> In commenting on a draft of this report, DOJ officials noted
that this study had a strong design with carefully drawn
comparison groups. We agree that the study's design was generally
strong </p>

<p> However, as we state in this report, there were some
potentially important differences in prior arrest rates between
the groups, and the study was not able to compare similarly
situated drug defendants in a roughly similar time period.
Therefore, as we noted, the study's results should be interpreted
cautiously </p>

<p> EVALUATION 4: </p>

<p> DADE COUNTY (SMITH, DAVIS AND GORETSKY) </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:4 TREATMENT GROUP </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:4.0.1 </p>

<p> Defendants with no prior convictions charged with a drug
possession offense, admitting to a drug problem for which they
wanted treatment </p>

<p> STUDY DESIGN </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:4.0.2 </p>

<p> Comparison of 318 defendants assigned to the drug court with
a sample of 99 narcotics cases in early 1988. In addition, a
group of drug court defendants who were accepted into the drug
court program were compared on rearrest rates </p>

<p> TIME OF STUDY </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:4.0.3 </p>

<p> Participants were assigned to the drug court in January 1990
through March 1990. The comparison group was charged between
January 1988 and March 1988 </p>

<p> KEY MEASURES </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:4.0.4 (1) </p>

<p> Rearrest rates: There was no statistically significant
difference in the rate of felony rearrests after 1 year between
those assigned to drug court (32 percent) and the comparison
group of defendants charged 2 years earlier (33 percent). Those
defendants accepted by the drug court did have lower rates of
rearrest (15 percent), but the authors noted that these
individuals constituted &quot;a highly select group . . . least
disposed to commit new crimes.&quot; The rearrest results in this
evaluation differed from those in the other evaluation of Dade
County (evaluation 3) </p>

<p> (2)Sentencing dispositions: There were statistically
significant differences in dispositions between those assigned to
drug court and the comparison group of earlier defendants. Those
assigned to drug court were more likely not to face further
prosecution and less likely to serve probation or short jail
terms </p>

<p> ASSESSMENT </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:4.0.5 </p>

<p> There were concerns about the comparability of the
participants in the various groups. In particular, the finding of
lower rearrest rates for program participants should be viewed
cautiously in light of the selectivity of admission to the
program. As a result, there were strong reservations about the
results reported </p>

<p> DOJ officials, in commenting on a draft of this report,
indicated that this study had several flaws. They pointed out
that the study was done when this drug court was less than 10
months old. They further noted that information on successful
drug court participants was not available for evaluation because
the participants' records were sealed. We concur with these
comments </p>

<p> EVALUATION 5: BROWARD COUNTY (TERRY) </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:5 TREATMENT GROUP </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:5.0.1 </p>

<p> First-time offenders arrested for possession or purchase of
cocaine </p>

<p> STUDY DESIGN </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:5.0.2 </p>

<p> Comparison of 392 defendants completing or remaining in the
drug court program with 241 defendants not completing the drug
court program </p>

<p> TIME OF STUDY </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:5.0.3 Participants entered the program from July
1991 through June 1992 </p>

<p> Study results were reported for October 1993 </p>

<p> KEY MEASURES </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:5.0.4 </p>

<p> Rearrests: Persons remaining in the program committed
felonies at a slightly lower rate than did those leaving the
program (7.7 percent vs. 12.0 percent). (Cases dismissed were not
included in these comparisons.) No differences occurred in
comparing the proportions having committed misdemeanors (4.1
percent for persons remaining in the program vs. 5.0 percent for
those leaving the program) </p>

<p> ASSESSMENT </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:5.0.5 </p>

<p> There was no adequate comparison group in this study from
which to draw any conclusions about the effect of the program </p>

<p> EVALUATION 6: MULTNOMAH COUNTY </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:6 TREATMENT GROUP </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:6.0.1 </p>

<p> Defendants arrested for possession of any illegal substance
for personal use </p>

<p> STUDY DESIGN </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:6.0.2 </p>

<p> Comparison of 105 defendants graduating from the drug court
program with 78 defendants who terminated unsuccessfully </p>

<p> TIME OF STUDY </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:6.0.3 </p>

<p> Participants entered the program on or before August 1, 1992,
and graduated or terminated unsuccessfully on or before April 1,
1994 </p>

<p> KEY MEASURES </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:6.0.4 </p>

<p> Graduates had lower rates of bench warrants for failure to
appear, went slightly longer before the first bench warrant was
issued, and had a lower percentage of positive urine tests than
those who terminated unsuccessfully. However, the report did not
indicate whether these figures referred to prior histories or
follow-up information after program completion </p>

<p> ASSESSMENT </p>

<p> --------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Appendix III:6.0.5 </p>

<p> There was no adequate comparison group in this study from
which to draw any conclusions about the effect of the program </p>

<p> MAJOR CONTRIBUTORS TO THIS BRIEFING REPORT </p>

<p> ========================================================== </p>

<p> Appendix IV GENERAL GOVERNMENT DIVISION, WASHINGTON, D.C </p>

<p> Weldon McPhail, Assistant Director, Administration of Justice
Issues Samuel A. Caldrone, Senior Evaluator Deborah A. Knorr,
Senior Evaluator Patricia J. Scanlon, Staff Evaluator Barry J.
Seltser, Assistant Director, Design, Methodology and Technical
Assistance Group Douglas M. Sloane, Assistant Director David P.
Alexander, Senior Social Science Analyst Arthur J. Kendall,
Senior Mathematical Statistician Katherine M. Wheeler, Publishing
Advisor Pamela V. Williams, Communications Analyst BOSTON/NEW
YORK FIELD OFFICE Brenda R. James Towe, Evaluator-in-Charge
Rudolf F. Plessing, Core Group Manager Michael Savino, Senior
Evaluator OFFICE OF THE GENERAL COUNSEL, WASHINGTON, D.C </p>

<p> Ann H. Finley, Senior Attorney <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>