
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B32-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B044-185</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/dwda/staff4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131424 text/html 104372
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:14:08 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:07:59 GMT
Content-length: 104153
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Dealing With Drug Abuse - The Economics of Heroin</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->

<h1>Dealing with Drug Abuse </h1>

<p><b>A Report to the Ford Foundation</b> </p>

<p>THE DRUG ABUSE SURVEY PROJECT </p>

<p align="center">STAFF PAPER 4 </p>

<p align="center"><font size="5">The Economics of Heroin </font></p>

<p align="center"><i>by John F. Holahan, with the assistance of
Paul A. Henningsen<br>
</i></p>

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"><br>
<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Production * Policy Options: What Can Be Done *
Distribution * Consumption<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">This paper applies economic analysis to the
heroin market and to the effect of alternative government
policies on this market. The principal concern is supply, but
some discussion of demand is included because the effects of
public policy on the supply of drugs cannot be adequately
analyzed without some knowledge of the effect on demand of
changes in price, risk, and availability. The analysis must be
considered tentative. Accurate information on the economic
aspects of all drugs of abuse is scarce, that which exists is
frequently unreliable, and conclusions are often suspect. This
paper is no exception.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Much of the data used were taken from two
studies: (1) <i>The World Opium Situation </i>(October, 1970), by
the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs (BNDD) Intelligence
Staff; and (2) <i>Economics of Heroin Distribution </i>(1970), by
Mark Moore. While these papers contain the most extensive
economic research available in this area, the information is not
unimpeachable. This is not because of deficiencies in the
studies-which are excellent -but because of the inherent
difficulty of gathering accurate information on illegal
enterprises or consumers of illegal commodities.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The BNDD staff paper is the result of an
extensive survey of opium production and consumption throughout
the world. The paper provides considerably more data, in terms of
both quantity and quality, than are available from the United
Nations or from other publications. Unfortunately, it is not
possible to verify this information through other sources, nor
does it appear that it will be possible to do so in the near
future.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Moore paper provides a macroeconomic
analysis of the heroin distribution system, as well as
considerable interview data on daily expenditures of addicts and
sources of funds. The data are not derived from sufficiently
large samples to allow precise estimates, but they do indicate
rough orders of magnitude. Other data derived from interviews
with BNDD staff members or U.N. publications are subject to the
same general weaknesses. <br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>PRODUCTION<br>
</i></font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">SOURCES OF SUPPLY <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">The production and distribution of opiate
narcotics at the international level are complex and
little-understood matters. The crisis of heroin addiction that
has afflicted the United States in recent years has obscured the
fact that the growing of opium is an age-old, legal occupation in
many areas of the world. Heroin addicts in the United States
consume only a very small amount of the total quantity of opiates
produced worldwide. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
estimates that 10,000 to 12,000 pounds of heroin are sufficient
to supply the entire addict population in the United States for
one year.' Since, as is generally acknowledged, ten pounds of
opium are required to manufacture one pound of heroin, only
100,000 to 120,000 pounds of opium are needed for illicit heroin
use in the United States about 2 per cent of the estimated world
production </font><font size="1">.2</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Of the opium used by the U.S. heroin market, 80
per cent comes from Turkey, 15 per cent from Mexico, and 5 per
cent from the Far East.' These are not precise figures, however,
but assumptions rather generally derived from heroin seizures and
knowledge of the international illicit drug-import routes.'
Moreover, several recent developments may change the sources of
supply for the U.S. market. On June 30. 1971, President Cevdet
Sunay of Turkey decreed that all poppy cultivation and opium
production in that country will be forbidden beginning in the
fall of 1972. Until that time, licit opium production will be
limited to only four provinces and strictly policed. How well
this policy will be enforced, and what ultimate effect it will
have on heroin use in the United States, cannot as yet be
determined. However, already there has been considerable
speculation that the Far East supplies a greater amount than was
thought previously. The tighter controls now being imposed by
Turkey and the increased contacts between the U.S. and Southeast
Asia caused by the Indo-China War have shifted the sources of
supply somewhat.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Raw opium itself is produced from the poppy
plant <i>(papaver somniferum-the </i>sleep-bearing poppy), which
consists of a thin main stalk, three to four feet tall, with
several egg-shaped pods on top. Between June and July, the poppy
blooms, and, 10 days later, when the blossoms lose their petals,
the pods are ready for the opium resin to be extracted. Incisions
are made in the pods, and a milky fluid oozes out. At the end of
the day, this substance is scraped off the pods by hand. It later
hardens into a brown gum and is pressed into cakes of raw opium.
The amount of opium produced from a poppy crop will increase if
this process is repeated once again, as in Turkey, or several
times, as in India, but the morphine content will be reduced with
each lancing.'</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Many factors affect the opium yield per
acre-the quality of the soil, the temperature, rainfall, the
quality of the seedirriga-tion, fertilization, and crop rotation.
Intensive cultivation and a great deal of labor are required to
produce opium, particularly during harvest, when the pods must be
incised and the raw opium collected by hand, but labor is also
needed during the growing season to thin the poppy plants. It is
estimated that between 175 and 250 man-hours of labor are
required to produce 1 kilo of opium.6 Because of this
labor-intensive production process, poppies tend to be raised
only where labor is abundant and relatively inexpensive; but
there seems no clear reason, given a different set of relative
prices for labor and capital, that a more capital-intensive
process could not be employed.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Most poppy cultivation occurs in a zone
stretching from central Turkey through Iran, Afghanistan,
Pakistan, India, Burma, Laos, Thailand, and southern China, with
the greatest concentration in India and Southeast Asia. Poppy
cultivation is legal in India, Turkey, the U.S.S.R., and Iran.
Turkish licit poppy acreage was reported to be 29,600 acres in
1970.1 According to U.N. figures, India has at least 86,500 acres
planted.' Iran, which abolished the production of opium from 1956
to 1968, planned 29,600 acres of poppy cultivation for 1970. In
addition, roughly 30,000-32,000 acres each are believed to be
planted in the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, and
negligible amounts of licit opium are produced in Yugoslavia and
Japan.'</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">According to figures reported to the United
Nations by producing countries, the total licit world production
of opium is 1,0601,085 metric tons, or approximately 40-45 per
cent of the total produced. India is by far the world's largest
licit producer of opium, with a reported 750 metric tons in 1968.
Turkey and the U.S.S.R. each contribute 115-120 metric tons of
licit production. An estimate of 75-100 metric tons was made for
Communist China, based on expected medicinal needs for its
population. The estimated totals for licit and illicit production
are presented in Table 4-1.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Licit opium is used primarily in the
manufacture of medicinal opiates. Legal morphine production
currently amounts to approximately 150 metric tons per year-a
substantial rise from around 85 metric tons per year in the
mid-1950's. This growth is due chiefly to the rising demand for
codeine, but a small portion of the licit opium is used for
opium-maintenance programs in India, Pakistan, and Iran.<br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00005.gif" align="bottom" width="1294"
height="1119"> </p>

<p><font size="2">The world's illicit production of opium is
estimated at 1,2501,400 metric tons annually.10 The principal
concentration of illicit production is in the Burma-Laos-Thailand
region, which <br>
</font><font size="1">produces an estimated 700-750 tons. The
Afghanistan-Pakistan area produces another 250-300 tons of
illicit opium, and </font><font size="2">the </font><font
size="1">illicit output of Turkey is estimated at 100 tons.
Illicit cultivation of the plant also occurs in parts of Mexico,
South </font><font size="2">America, and North Africa, although
the amounts produced there are negligible. While some illegal
acreage is planted in Turkey, most of the illicit opium there is
diverted from the yield on legal acreage. On the other hand, all
the opium produced in Afghanistan, Burma, Laos, and Thailand and
part of the outputs of India and Pakistan are derived from
illegal acreage. About 40 metric tons of illicit Turkish
production was thought to enter Iran in 1970; the remainder is
exported to Western Europe and the United States.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Southeast Asian countries consume most of
their own opium, but some is shipped to Hong Kong for use there
and for distribution throughout the Far East. A small amount,
perhaps one or two metric tons, is shipped to the United States,
although this figure has probably risen recently. India also
consumes the major part of its illicit production; and, although
some of the Afghanistan-Pakistan production is consumed
internally, approximately 200 metric tons is thought to enter
Iran. Iran is the largest consumer of illicit opium in the world,
with an estimated 350,000 opium and heroin users. In 1969, Iran
began controlled production of opium in order to maintain its own
addicts.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1"><b>YIELDS, MARKET PRICES, AND
INCOMES<br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2">Income from poppy cultivation is affected by
the opium yield obtained, the morphine content of the raw opium,
and the current licit and illicit market prices. The reported
yields per acre in 1969 for four countries are presented in Table
4-2, but, since these are government figures provided by the
local farmers, both yields and acreage are probably understated.
This is undoubtedly the case for the crop yields in Turkey and
Pakistan. Turkish yields are closer to 13.4-14.2 pounds per acre,
with the nonreported amount diverted to illicit traders.&quot;
Opium yields are estimated at 8.6-28.6 pounds per acre in
Southeast Asia&quot; (probably closer to the lower figure&quot;),
and the Soviet Union reports yields of 27.5-32 pounds per
acre.&quot;<br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00006.gif" align="bottom" width="1290"
height="592"><font size="1"><b> <br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2">Prices for opium vary with quality. The
morphine content of Turkish opium, reportedly the highest in the
world, varies from 9 to 13 per cent, while in other producing
countries the morphine content varies from 4 to 12 per cent.
Prices to farmers for raw opium are presented in Table 4-3.
Because of its quality, the prices for Turkish opium are the
highest, with the exception of the Iranian price, which is
supported by the government in order to discourage diversion to
illicit traders. The licit prices are determined by the world
market price: the price at which the national opium monopolies
can sell to pharmaceutical companies. In Turkey, the illicit
price varies with the yield of the current year's harvest, the
season, enforcement efforts, and the demand for Turkish opium
from other countries, particularly Iran. The illicit price in
Iran is extremely high because of the strict enforcement of laws
against illicit trading.<br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00007.gif" align="bottom" width="1299"
height="657"> </p>

<p><font size="2">The absolute income per farm from opium
cultivation is greatest in Turkey, but the percentage of total
farm income accounted for by opium increases as one moves
eastward. In the late 1960's, there were an estimated 70,000
farms producing opium in Turkey. If 120 tons are sold by these
farms at the licit price of $11 per kilo 0 kilo=2.2046 pounds)
and 100 tons on the illicit market at $25 per kilo, the gross
income from opium amounts to $3,820,000, or $55 per farm. This
amounts to roughly 5-10 per cent of farm income in Turkey. In
India, roughly 200,000 farms earn $70-75 from poppy cultivation,
or 15-20 per cent of average total income per farm. Since the
income figures include income-in-kind (food, clothing produced on
farm), the income from opium provides an even higher percentage
of cash income than we have indicated. Opium is probably the
principal source of farm income in Burma, Laos, and Thailand;
cultivation is said to be concentrated in areas controlled by<b> </b>guerrilla
insurgents, who transport much of the output to Hong Kong and use
the proceeds for arms purchases.','</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Licit production of opium is of minor
importance even in India and Turkey. India earned roughly $6-7
million for exports of 530 metric tons in 1968, compared with
total export earnings of $2 billion. Indian farmers earned
approximately $7.7 million on production of 700 metric tons.
Turkish exports of 120 metric tons yield approximately $1.7
million, less than 0.3 per cent of total exports. Turkish
production is also very small in relation to national income of
$9 billion. On the other hand, opium sales are undoubtedly of
great economic importance to the producing regions of Burma,
Laos, and Thailand. <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2"><i>POLICY OPTIONS: WHAT CAN BE DONE<br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="2">Policies designed to attack the heroin problem
at the source of supply devolve into two basic alternatives: (1)
the purchase of entire opium crops, or (2) direct controls on
production. Each of these proposals has problems difficult to
surmount at present.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">PRE-EMPTIVE BUYING <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">The first alternative would be for the United
States to purchase the total output of opium from those countries
that supply the heroin entering its borders. The administrative
simplicity of this proposal makes it appear deceptively
attractive. In time, however, pre-emptive buying would
necessarily involve purchases of both licit and illicit
production in all countries where opium is currently grown. The
U.S. offer price would have to be raised above the maximum price
illicit traders are willing to pay; otherwise, the farmer would
have an incentive to sell to the higher bidder. If the offer
price is less than the illicit price, leakages into the illicit
market would probably result, and the policy would therefore have
little effect on the supply of opiates sent to the United States,
especially since the amount is so small relative to total world
production. And, seemingly, the illicit trader would be willing
to increase his offer price substantially, because, given the
large markups at each stage of the distribution system, the price
of raw opium has relatively little effect on the ultimate retail
price in the United States (see Table 4-4). (For example, if the
current price to the farmer for 10 kilos of illicit opium is
$250, and the retail street price for I kilo of heroin is
$264,900, then raising the farm price 100 per cent would raise
the retail price only .09 per cent.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">A pre-emptive buying policy would become very
costly, because opium producers would have a clear incentive to
increase their outputs, and other farmers would have a similar
incentive to begin substituting opium for other crops. Eugene
Rossides, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement and
Operations, has gone on record as strongly opposing any concept
of pre-emptive buying. He told a congressional committee that
&quot;it would simply stimulate production and it would take away
the responsibility of each nation to handle the problem as part
of the international community.&quot;&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Moreover, without strict administrative
controls, this policy would not only increase production in all
countries currently producing opium but might induce other
countries whose climate is suitable to begin production in the
hope of sharing in the windfall.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">If this policy were directed at only one source
of supply, such as Turkey, it would not prevent traders from
obtaining illicit supplies in other producing countries. The
100,000-120,000 pounds of opium used by the U.S. market could be
grown in an area of, at most, 11.2-23.2 square miles and thus
could easily be absorbed in another producing region.&quot; In
fact, some experts believe that 35 pounds of opium could be
produced on a single acre of land if a capital-intensive process
were employed under controlled circumstances. -If this proved
true, -generally, only 4.55.4 square miles would be needed to
supply the entire U.S. market. Consequently, a pre-emptive buying
policy, in the long run, could result in a change of location for
the source of U.S. supply with little or no effect on the
addiction problem.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Pre-emptive buying within an individual country
might prove effective in dealing with an internal addiction
problem if coupled with strict limitations on acreage and illicit
importation. Iran, for example, has discouraged export to illicit
markets in other countries by purchasing its entire internal
opium crop at a very high price, restricting production to
certain designated areas, and strictly enforcing its laws against
illicit markets. The legal opium purchased by the government is
used by the state-run addict maintenance program, in which 50,000
individuals are registered. The potential expense is one problem
with the high-support-price approach. If nearly all Iran's
300,000-400,000 users and addicts entered the program, the cost
would rise dramatically. Furthermore, even with severe penalties
against smuggling and illicit trading, Iran still experiences
difficulty in trying to prevent the importation of opiates. Some
success has been reported in eliminating illicit supplies from
Turkey, but imports from Afghanistan and Pakistan have not been
halted. The mid-1970 price in Iran for Afghani opium was well
below the licit price, despite intensive law-enforcement efforts.
It seems that the heavily armed mountain tribes operating out of
both Afghanistan and Pakistan have not as yet been deterred by
either the border authorities or the death penalty on smuggling.
On the other hand, the price of illicit Turkish opium in 1970 was
as high as $400 per kilo in Tehran-six to seven times the
government support price.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">As the Iranian example shows, the success of a
pre-emptive buying policy, even if accompanied by administrative
controls, depends on whether government can effectively exert its
will over the producing regions. In fact, most of the world's
opium supply is produced in areas where little political control
exists. Administrative controls themselves are difficult to
enforce, as we shall see. Therefore, because of the size of the
world market relative to U.S. heroin consumption, the high
elasticity of supply, and the difficulty of control, it is
unlikely that a policy of pre-emptive buying could be successful.
<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">DIRECT CONTROLS</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The application of administrative controls
alone is the other basic alternative to reduce opium supplies.
This involves restricting the acreage on which opium can be grown
and maintaining a low official price. A low official price may
reduce the illicit price, at least in the short run, and thereby
discourage illegal planting and crop diversion. Certainly, taken
by itself, a low official price will not induce new production.
But the most salient feature of direct controls is increasing the
risks of illicit trading and consequently reducing the
profitability.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Practically, however, continuous enforcement of
direct controls is both difficult and costly, and the necessary
resources available to most producing countries are quite
limited. Especially in countries with weak central governments,
controls present severe administrative problems. All countries
with an illicit trade lack adequate numbers of both trained law
enforcement personnel and motor vehicles. Given the low wages in
public-service jobs and the large profits in the opium trade,
corruption of government and police officials is a widespread
problem in most countries and is likely to continue. The bribes
that illegal importers are willing and able to pay are
considerably higher than the amounts officials are currently
accepting for inaction or nonenforcement of the law. Widespread
social acceptance of opium use in many rural areas of Pakistan,
Afghanistan, India, Burma, Laos, and Thailand is another
difficulty that makes enforcement of controls for the benefit of
an outside country appear especially burdensome. In Turkey, where
there is reportedly little opium use, controls have been
extremely unpopular because of both the loss of an important
source of farm income and the rising anti-American sentiment.
While limitations on local financial resources could presumably
be eased by American aid, the administrative and political
difficulties severely limit the possibility of successful
controls.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">If, however, the desire and resources to do so
were present, controls could probably be applied successfully in
certain individual countries. Communist China and Iran
successfully eliminated production in the 1950's. Turkey has
restricted legal acreage of poppy cultivation to 29,652 acres
from 103,782 acres in 1960. In the process, illegal production
may have been somewhat reduced, because illicit Turkish opium is
believed to come principally from larger than declared yields on
legal acreage.&quot; Turkish officials seem committed to their
pledge to enforce a ban on all poppy cultivation by the fall of
1972. The chances of this policy's success will be discussed
later.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The major problem in curtailing opium
production is that most of the world's supply is produced in
areas where no national control exists. The lack of control is
virtually complete in the producing regions of Burma, Laos, and
Thailand. Areas that are largely controlled by tribal groups are
responsible for opium production and distribution in Pakistan and
Afghanistan. Therefore, it seems likely that attempts to control
or abolish opium production in Turkey would have little effect,
as illicit traders turned to these areas for supplies. Indeed,
the recent changes in Turkey do not seem to have caused any
decrease in total U.S. imports of illegal opiates.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Still another difficulty is that of restricting
opium production in one country when neighboring countries do
not, or cannot, restrict production. After twelve years of
prohibition, Iran returned to limited production, because its
addicts were purchasing illicit opium from Turkey, Pakistan, and
Afghanistan.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Even in Turkey and India, control systems have
failed to halt the cultivation of illicit opium. Turkish farmers
make written declarations to the government of their licensed
acreage and expected kilogram yields, selling the surplus to the
illicit market. In 1969, for example, Turkish officials collected
116 tons of licit opium from poppies in eleven provinces. But in
1970, when nine provinces were allowed to produce, only 60 tons
were turned in. Presumably diversion accounts for some of the
difference. Some illicit production in Turkey has occurred from
unlicensed acreage, but this is relatively easy to discover if
sufficient efforts are made, since the poppies have a long
growing season and are easy to detect, especially from the air.
In India, on the other hand, the illicit opium output is produced
principally on unlicensed acreage.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Direct controls might be more effective if they
were combined with crop substitution, subsidies for production of
other goods, or direct payments for not growing poppies. But crop
substitution is unlikely to be successful, since it is difficult,
if not impossible, to find crops that yield as high a return per
unit of land as opium. For example, attempts to substitute a
high-yielding Mexican wheat in Pakistan failed because the crop
provided a return per acre roughly half that of opium, assuming
opium is sold at official prices.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In Turkey, there has been a sound agricultural
reason that crop substitution is difficult. Apart from
low-income-producing grains, the poppy is the only autumn-sown
crop and is not easily replaceable by the higher-yielding spring
crops, such as cotton, maize, sugar beets, tobacco, or melons.
The opium produced is important to the small farmer, not only
because of the amount of income gained, but also because it is
harvested before the grain and therefore provides expense money
for the main harvest. Furthermore, the harvest of opium occurs in
a period when the farmer has little else to do and can spend his
time on the lancing of the poppies and collection of the opium.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Subsidies for production of alternative crops
would certainly be required if the substitute crops provided less
income than opium. The cost of producing a unit of a substitute
crop would be reduced by a subsidy, and the transfer payment from
the government would allow the grower to increase production and,
in the process, bid resources, land, and labor away from other
crops, including opium. Because these inputs would become more
expensive, the cost per unit of producing opium would increase.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">However, if demand for opium in this particular
national black market is relatively insensitive to changes in
price, opium production would be little reduced, and little
reduction in farmer income would result. A higher subsidy would
be necessary to raise the relative return on the alternative
crop. If the demand for opium varies with price,&quot; perhaps
because of the availability of opium from other sources or
synthetic opiates, then the subsidy would probably reduce much of
the country's production.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Clearly, subsidies for output of other goods
could be set high enough so that the output of opium in a given
country could be greatly reduced. This may come, however, only at
great expense to the government or to the United States, if the
latter sponsors the program. The same types of administrative
problems that exist in the crop-purchase proposal are repeated
here.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Basically, it may be difficult to determine how
much of the production of the subsidized crop is actually land
diverted from opium.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Similar administrative problems would result if
governments made payments to producers for not growing opium,
since it would be difficult to determine how many farmers who do
not grow opium now would demand payment. In 1972, when Turkey's
complete prohibition on poppy cultivation goes into effect, the
government plans to pay farmers on the basis of the value on the
international market of their whole opium crop sold the previous
year to state officials. But, if only those who were originally
&quot;licensed&quot; to produce are given payments, and no
payments go to those who planted illegal acreage, there is no
incentive for these growers to cease producing opium, nor is
there an incentive for nongrowers to resist the urge to produce.
Furthermore, to be effective, payments must exceed the return on
output sold illegally. Since the illicit price of opium is
extremely low relative to the retail price of heroin in the
United States, it could rise greatly without much effect on the
final price to the addict. Therefore, payments would have to be
extremely high to be effective and would make the program very
costly. Thus, it also seems unlikely that a policy of direct
controls on opium production, even if combined with crop
substitution, subsidies for production of other goods, or direct
payments for not growing opium, could be completely successful.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">General economic development in poppy-growing
areas may eventually reduce the relative profitability of this
crop. The usual process is for technological innovations in
agriculture to increase the productivity of fanns to the point
where large surpluses of labor develop. Migration of labor to the
cities occurs because of the availability of employment and
public services. As industrial development increases the demand
for labor, real wages rise, and capital-intensive production
processes become more desirable. If no capital-intensive method
of cultivating opium can be found, then the return on poppy falls
relative to other goods and opium cultivation is greatly reduced.
Clearly, this ignores changes in the demand for opium; moreover,
it is, at best, a long-run solution. This situation may
eventually develop in Turkey but is not likely for a very long
time in the East. <br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>DISTRIBUTION<br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="2">Several books and articles have described the
system ky which opium is transformed into heroin and imported
into the United States. They are all in substantial agreement,
possibly because the primary source of information on the subject
is the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In the case of Turkish opium, growers either
withhold part of their output or plant illegal acreage.
Small-scale entrepreneurs gather opium from the farms in
relatively small quantities and deliver it to syndicates in or
near Istanbul. At this point, the opium is transformed into
morphine, which cuts the volume by 90 per cent. This process
formerly took place in Syria. but as relations between Syria and
Turkey have deteriorated in recent years, border controls have
been tightened and the morphine labs moved to the Istanbul area.
From Istanbul, the morphine is transported overland through
Bulgaria and Yugoslavia or by ship to its destination in southern
France, where covert laboratories refine the morphine into
heroin. (One theory is that some of the heroin labs are located
in trucks and are thus mobile and difficult to detect.) Once
refined, the heroin is smuggled to the United States through New
York, Montreal, or some other large port. According to some
sources, shipments are also being sent to the U.S. via South
America through a Southern port.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">MARKET <b>STRUCTURE <br>
</b></font></p>

<p><font size="2">The best available outline of the domestic
heroin distribution system, at least for New York City, was
developed by Mark Moore of the Hudson Institute.&quot; His
outline relies, in turn, on earlier analyses by John Casey and
Edward Preble&quot; and information from the Bureau of Narcotics
and Dangerous Drugs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Moore suggests that heroin passes through six
levels of distribution: the importer, the kilo-connection, the
connection, the weight dealer, the street dealer, and, finally,
the juggler or pusher. Table 4-4 shows the outline of the system
and includes estimates of the prices and value added to the
heroin at each level. Before reviewing the operation of the
specific segments of the system, it is important to discuss the
over-all market structure of the business. The key questions here
are: How tight is vertical organization? How competitive is the
system at the various levels? How much increase in risk would be
required to make it unprofitable for large operators to stay in
business? <br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00008.gif" align="bottom" width="1289"
height="1968"> </p>

<p><font size="2">For many years, conventional wisdom held that
the heroin business was monopolized by organized crime, perhaps
by the Mafia. BNDD now seems to believe, probably as a result of
recent arrests of South Americans at relatively high levels, that
10 or 12 large wholesalers with varying degrees of connection to
organized crime now control the distribution process in the
United States.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It seems clear that many economic principles
operating in society at large must also apply to illegal
enterprises,&quot; since the business of supply and distribution
of illicit drugs is presumably subject to the same general
economic laws, and responds to the same general set of
incentives, as prevail in more open industries. There are, of
course, some crucial differences caused by the fact of illegality
and also by the moral problems associated with dealing in many of
these drugs-for example, the need to minimize the risk of
detection of the origin of the distribution system.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Hudson monograph argues that the objective
of the industry is to maximize profits within the constraint of
the risk of arrest and imprisonment, and that this objective is
most likely to be attained if the industry is organized into
several small distribution units separated vertically from one
another, if higher levels in the system are monopolized, and if
lower levels are competitive with some elements of market power
(monopolistic competition). The small distribution units in the
heroin industry are separated from one another by restricting
information at one level about the identity and activities of
other levels. Risks are limited by close supervision and
discipline of employees, thus reducing the probability of
information leaks, and by the fact that penetration of one level
will not result in penetration of another. The primary
disadvantage of small, separate distribution units is their
inability to adjust to large changes in demand; suppliers end up
with either excessive or deficient inventories.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Moore argues that a monopoly could most
efficiently perform the functions required of the high levels in
the distribution network. The top levels in the system must: (1)
restrict the total supply of heroin to maintain high market
prices, (2) regularly and reliably supply an amount of heroin
fairly close to the realized demand, (3) manipulate supply
conditions above them with a minimum of explicit planning and
negotiation, and <b>(4) </b>adjust to errors in supply with a
minimum of negotiation and activity. A centralized organization
would be more effective in handling each of these problems. A
monopolist can restrict the total supply, allowing high prices
throughout the system. In addition, he is in a position to have
an efficient ordering policy, thus successfully accommodating
uneven deliveries and lead time. Agents can be coerced into
holding inventories or resupplied when short of heroin. Tight
control can be maintained over the circulation of information.
Finally, a monopolist can maintain a monopoly position in
relation to producers.. thus reducing lead times, unevenness, and
quality deterioration.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In contrast, a competitive market would be less
likely to ensure a smooth, restricted supply, adjusting to errors
in a discreet, efficient manner. In a more competitive situation,
it is more difficult to pool shipments or parcel out uneven
deliveries of heroin. With many suppliers at the top, there are
more transactions, more explicit negotiations, more occasions of
short supply or large inventories, more information circulating
freely-and thus a greater probability of arrest. A monopoly,
therefore, is logically the most efficient type of organizational
structure at high levels.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">But a successful monopoly requires the
existence of some type of leverage or barrier to entry, such as
(1) special knowledge unavailable to others, (2) total control
over some vital raw material, or (3) total control over the
market as to make the cost of entry prohibitive, especially if
entry requires a large fixed investment. It is doubtful that any
of these considerations applies to the heroin traffic. The
knowledge required to refine opium into heroin is certainly not
difficult to acquire. It is also doubtful that the knowledge of
methods of conducting illegal activities-such as smuggling-is so
limited as to allow any firm to maintain a monopoly. There are no
substantial fixed costs other than the investment in an
information system, needed to offset the high level of risk in
the trade. However, the difficulty, and thus the cost, of
developing such an information network may be a formidable
barrier to entry.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Trusted personal relationships with Turkish or
French syndicates may have put some organizations in a monopoly
position for Turkish opium. However, it would be in the interest
of the Turkish or French firms to sell to as many importers as
possible, forcing them to bid against each other and thus raise
the price of heroin. A firm desiring to enter the business
should, therefore, be able to establish the necessary
connections.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It is possible, of course, that the suppliers
are not profit maximizers; they may not wish to accept increased
risks for the sake of increased profits. Instead, after
establishing an acceptably low level of risk, they may seek to
maximize profits within this constraint. Such an approach would
sacrifice many of the benefits of competition among buyers
because of the need to limit the number of people who know the
supplier's identity. (This factor also operates as a barrier to
entry at other high levels of the distribution system.) If the
barriers to entry in the market for Turkish opium are too great,
however<b>, </b>a potential importer could go to Hong Kong,
Bangkok, Karachi, or Saigon.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Finally, as noted, trying to erect a barrier to
entry by attempting to control the raw material does not seem
feasible. The U.S. market relative to total world production is
simply too small to prevent other supplies from becoming
available. Also, the retail product is homogeneous and easily
divisible, making it difficult to hoard.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">However, for an illegal business, there are
additional techniques of monopolization. Violence is the most
likely method of securing market control; illegal operators can
readily hire agents or firms willing to kill quietly and
efficiently. If a heroin-distribution monopoly became established
early and acquired both a large organization and a sophisticated
information system, it could make it extremely dangerous for a
rival to compete. First of all, it might have the key advantage
of knowing who is trying to enter the business before its own
prior presence can be discovered. Since rivals would find it
difficult to purchase a comparable intelligence service secretly,
this acts as an important barrier to entry. Another way of
enforcing monopoly of an illegal product is to control the use of
legal force-corrupting police officials to serve one's own ends.
An effective use of corrupt police would be to have one's rivals
eliminated via arrest; sufficient arrests would satisfy the
public and allow the police to refrain from attacking the
monopoly itself. It is in the interest of the police, in turn, to
eliminate competition, protecting the source of their payoff
money while appearing to be effective law enforcers. The
symbiosis between criminal enterprise and elements in law
enforcement is well known and has occupied many investigatory
commissions without being eliminated.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">A firm could also obtain police cooperation
without police corruption. If one organization has better
intelligence than any other, and better intelligence than the
police, it could simply inform the police of the competing ring
and possibly provide the evidence necessary to break it up.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">The BNDD believes that 10 or 12 large wholesale
operations exist in the United States today. Thus, the potential
barriers to entry have apparently not been strong enough to allow
any one firm to enforce a monopoly. The system has probably
developed into an oligopoly or cartel, with each firm maintaining
a type of monopoly control of firms below it in the lower
distribution levels. It is not clear what agreements, if any,
exist among these firms with respect to prices or market areas,
but the risk of detection may limit the mobility of distributors
between top-level suppliers, thus allowing firms at the top to
maintain vertically integrated supply systems.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">At lower levels in the system, there are many
competitive suppliers, strict monopoly being impossible because
of the difficulty of disciplining customers. At these levels,
most customers are addicts who are highly motivated to maintain
relations with as many suppliers as possible. Low level suppliers
are arrested much more frequently than those in higher levels,
because they deal more often and more openly. Thus, relationships
between consumers and suppliers are constantly breaking up and
beginning again. Furthermore, addicts are always trying to break
into the lower levels of the system, and, given the small amount
of trust, skill, and capital needed, personnel and organizations
change rapidly.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Nevertheless, some elements of monopoly control
remain. Information is often unavailable to consumers, thus
restricting the number of markets in which they can buy. Also,
addicts find it useful to restrict their purchases to dealers who
consistently provide a high-quality product and who give them
lower prices as loyal and trusted clients. Thus, limited
information and product differentiation maintain elements of
monopoly advantage even for suppliers at low levels. <br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">COSTS AND PROFITS <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">Existing analysis of the economics of each
segment of the heroin industry is fragmentary because of the
nature of the business. The best available analysis is again that
of Moore, and most of the comments in this section are derived
from his model of the system.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">For the importer and kilo-connection at the
higher levels of the distribution system, the operating
costs-principally wages and inventory finance costs-are estimated
to be a much greater percentage of value added than at lower
levels (50-55 per cent versus 30 per cent). Importers need
skilled employees for the smuggling process and periodically
require large amounts of capital to finance transactions with
producers and processors. Kilo connections have relatively large
wage costs because of the elaborate organization needed for
exchanges and maintaining inventories as well as disciplining
lower-level suppliers. Financing costs are also high at this
level because of the need to store inventories for uncertain
periods of time.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Operating and finance costs are more moderate
for connections. Although they need to employ agents to develop
new markets, discipline customers, dilute heroin, and make
deliveries, there is a much faster turnover of inventories at
this level. The rate of turnover minimizes financing, but
connections may be forced to accept it from sources higher in the
organization. Weight dealers, street dealers, and jugglers are,
for the most part, self-employed; inventories are turned over
quickly, and individuals at these levels rarely have financing
problems.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In contrast to operating costs, expenditures
for bribes as a per cent of value added appear to increase as one
moves from high to low levels (2 per cent versus 5 per cent). At
the importer and kilo-connection levels, well-placed bribes can
secure considerable immunities at relatively low costs. Expenses
for bribery increase at the connection level, because they are
more vulnerable to arrest, engaging in a relatively more visible
activity. They must also frequently make payments to other
criminal organizations for &quot;protection.&quot; Weight
dealers, street dealers, and jugglers become even more vulnerable
to extortion and will also have to pay rather large bribes (as a
per cent of value added) to law-enforcement agencies.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Profits are great at each level of the
distribution network but decrease as a per cent of value added at
lower levels of distribution. Gross profits include (1) a
financial return equal to what could be made in the firm's next
best alternative line of business (its opportunity cost), (2) a
return to compensate for the risk of arrest and incarceration,
and (3) a return to monopoly power.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The kilo-connection at the top level of
distribution is probably the single most powerful component in
the system. At this level, gross profits are high and are
maintained by a large degree of monopoly power. Economic theory
suggests that the firm's profits must be at least as high as the
return from other attractive illegal opportunities, such as
loansharking or gambling. While risk-the probability of arrest-is
relatively low, the combination of monopoly power and high
opportunity costs makes profits at this level high. For the
importer, profits are probably less than those of
kilo-connections. His risks are low, because, being high on the
ladder, he is difficulty to identify. Opportunity costs are low,
because, with the substantial investment in building his
information network, an importer can make more money dealing in
heroin than he could make elsewhere. Some monopoly power exists
because the personal-relations network operates as a barrier to
entry, but this is probably limited by the encouragement by
kilo-connections of free-lance importers.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Gross profits of connections are less than
those of the two upper levels. The restricted access to
information about operations allows some degree of
monopolization, but risks become greater as visibility increases
and the police become more successful at arrest and conviction.
At this level, opportunity costs are low because of the large
investment in personal relations, which are not valuable unless
the connection is engaged in the heroin trade. Connections can
accept lower profits, and still find the business more profitable
than alternatives.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The remaining levels are characterized by
relatively high risk and low opportunity costs. All three levels
of<b> </b>operation are -relatively visible, have relatively high
arrest rates, and thus require adequate compensation for risks
incurred. On the other hand, opportunity costs are low because
few operators on this level have the skills required in other
types of enterprise. At the weight dealer level, a small degree
of monopoly is maintained, because access to information is
limited. At the street-dealer and juggler levels, monopoly
profits are minimal.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Analyzing operating costs and profits at each
stage of heroin distribution carries important implications for
law-enforcement policy. In summary, if a firm's costs are high,
and it has little monopoly power or attractive income-producing
alternatives, it may be quite easy to increase the risk enough so
that the firm leaves the industry. If these conditions do not
hold-if profits are high and protected by monopoly, or if few
good alternative profit opportunities exist-the firm might well
absorb the cost of the increased risk. These factors largely
determine the outcome of possible law-enforcement strategies. <br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">EFFECTS OF -POLICE -PRESSURE</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Increased police pressure on the distribution
system can clearly increase the risks' and operating costs of
those involved. Evidence does not show, however, that any one
firm is large enough or monopolistic enough so that its
destruction or neutralization would have an important impact on
the total distribution system and thus on heroin use at the
street level. During the last few years, the arrest of even major
distributors and traffickers has had no significant impact on the
price or availability of heroin. On the international level, for
instance, in the first six months of 1971, BNDD participated in
the arrest of 113 major traffickers outside the United States,
seizing large quantities of drugs in the process. Federal
officials face an almost impossible task of trying to stop the
smuggling of drugs at the border. About 250 million people enter
the country every year. Approximately 65 million cars and trucks,
306,000 planes, and 157,000 ships entered in 1970.&quot; If this
were not enough,<b> </b>customs officials state that, on an
average-size ship arriving at the Port of New York, there are
30,000 places where heroin can be hidden. Domestically, the
situation is not much different. A study of the undercover unit
of the New York City police narcotics division revealed that, in
1970, agents made 7,266 buys of narcotics that resulted in 4,007<b>
</b>arrests. However, only 4.97 pounds of highly adulterated
heroin were seized in these actions, at a total cost of $91,197,
and with no appreciable effect on heroin distribution citywide.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">In such a situation, law enforcement must rely
on the indirect effects of general deterrence rather than on
direct disruption. But it is far from clear how firms operating
in the field regard a successful attack on another firm.
Possibly, such an attack will cause them to reassess their own
risks and assume that they are in greater danger than they
believed before. On the other hand, it may be that existing firms
will simply assume that the destroyed operation was incompetent
or lacking in security and see no need to reassess their own
risk.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">To the extent that police are successful in
increasing a distributor's probability of arrest, one would
expect the chain to lengthen as each supplier attempts to deal
with fewer buyers and places more distance between himself and
the street. Suppliers would invest more time and absorb greater
operating costs in designing more complex delivery systems to
better conceal their activities. The risk involved in holding
inventories would cause suppliers to hold less in reserve, thus
increasing the time and complications involved in arranging
purchases and sales. However, police pressure might also increase
a monopoly's hold on the system. A monopoly can absorb the
increased risks more easily and is also likely to be better
protected. Markets might become even more centralized. Because of
higher costs and lack of competition, prices could be expected to
rise.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">For all these reasons, it seems clear that law
enforcement can raise the price of heroin. The effects of higher
prices, and thus the ultimate impact of law enforcement, are
uncertain. They depend heavily on how total demand reacts to the
changes.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">One hypothesis is that demand is inelastic,
that an addict is dependent on heroin and will try to maintain
his level of consumption regardless of price. If this is so, then
law-enforcement policy will have little effect. The added costs
of greater risks will be shifted to consumers, and the revenues
of the industry will increase. So will the social costs of the
activities addicts engage in to support the habit. (A logical
question is why firms are not already maximizing profits-that is,
if prices and revenues could be raised before the increased cost
was incurred, why did this not, in fact, take place? This may be
due to concern with public reaction. Higher heroin prices cause
higher crime rates, which increase the public's demand for strong
policy measures against the heroin traffic. Therefore, firms may
attempt to maximize profits, given the -constraint of maintaining
a low level of risk. This calls for keeping prices low enough so
that the crime needed to support it remains
&quot;tolerable.&quot; Competition might also play<b> </b>a
part.)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">A second theory is that demand is elastic, that
a price rise does cause a disproportionate decrease in
consumption. If so, then the suppliers would have to absorb the
increased cost of higher risks or raise the price and accept a
decline in total revenues.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">While it is commonly believed that the
addictive nature of heroin causes the demand for it to be
inelastic, it might, in fact, be elastic, for two reasons: First,
the development of methadone during the past few years has
created a low-cost alternative for addicts that did not exist
before. Secondly, over the last thirty years there has been a
substantial long-term rise in the price of heroin relative to the
price of other consumer goods. This may have produced a situation
in which most addicts are maintaining their habit at the highest
price level they are able to support. If the price increased
further, these addicts would have no choice except to decrease
the quantity of heroin used, because they would be unable to
raise their income enough to meet the new cost.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">If the demand is elastic, a law-enforcement
policy could be effective. If the price of heroin increased and
methadone was necessarily substituted, the social costs of
addiction, including crime, would decrease. If addicts chose to
adapt by using less heroin for the same cost, however, the crime
costs would not be decreased. It could be argued, on the other
hand, that increasing the cost of being an addict hastens the
time when the addict voluntarily leaves the addicted life.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">The firm attempting to maximize profits,
subject to the constraint of maintaining a low level of risk, may
choose to absorb the risk as increased operating costs rather
than attempt to shift it to the consumers. This, of course,
results in a lower rate of return and reduces the attractiveness
of heroin distribution. In the heroin business, the gross profits
of a firm (revenues minus operating costs) must be at least equal
to the return the firm could earn in an alternative investment
(its opportunity cost).</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Profits that exceed opportunity costs can be
considered a return to a monopoly position or compensation for
risk. Gross profits must exceed opportunity costs by at least
enough to compensate the firm for the risks it undertakes. If
gross profits, less opportunity costs, exceed the compensation
required for risk, the firm will stay in the business.
Alternatively, if gross profits, less opportunity costs, are less
than the return required for undertaking risk, the firm will not
be willing to absorb the risk and will leave the industry.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Risk for an illegal firm can be viewed as equal
to the probability of punishment, as the firm perceives it, times
the cost of certain punishment to that firm. The cost of certain
punishment is equal to the amount the firm would be willing to
pay to avoid </font><font size="1">it.26</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The probability of punishment can be affected
by public policy and by the firm's own actions, because it
depends on the probability of being apprehended and successfully
prosecuted. Changes in the criminal-justice system are essential
if high-level distributors are going to be put out of business.
These include more sophisticated training of police personnel,
higher salaries to lessen the temptation of bribes, and higher
budgets for purchasing information. In reality, law-enforcement
agencies have been unable to raise the level of risk anywhere
near what would be required to make this criminal enterprise
unprofitable. </font></p>

<p><font size="2">The cost of the expected punishment to the
illegal operation can also be influenced by changes in judicial
procedures and increases of sentences. Currently, many defendants
in narcotics cases forfeit bail, become fugitives, and, if
apprehended, are more likely to be tried for violating the
conditions of bail than for the original charge. If convicted,
this means a lesser sentence. The economic cost in such a
case-the amount the offender would pay to avoid detection-should
be equal to the amount of bail, plus the probability of being
arrested while. at large, times the penalty for jumping bail.
This cost would be increased if a change in public policy raised
the amount of bail or the penalty for violating its conditions </font><font
size="1"><b>.21 </b></font></p>

<p><font size="2">On the other hand, the probability of
punishment can be reduced if the illegal operation spends more on
bribes and devising elaborate, less conspicuous pickup and
delivery systems. If increased amounts are spent to reduce risks,
however, the illegal firms reduce their gross profits at the same
time. A firm will expend these sums if in doing so it can keep
its gross profits (minus opportunity costs) above the 'cost of
escaping imprisonment. If it is impossible, through further
spending, to reduce the expected risk below gross profits, less
opportunity costs, firms will leave the business. Alternatively,
firms could limit sales to trusted buyers, thereby reducing
revenues and gross profits but also reducing the chances of
getting caught.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">According to Moore's analysis of the
distribution hierarchy, gross profits are considerable at every
level. However, for the kilo-connection, high-yielding
alternatives are the greatest, and it is possible that monopoly
at this level could be broken. BNDD appears to believe that the
monopoly has already been broken, and that the industry is now
operating as an oligopoly with ten or twelve firms. But,
conceivably, an oligopoly or cartel could develop techniques for
supplying the total market as efficiently as a centralized
organization. If satisfactory agreements can be reached, the
amount of explicit communication necessary to guarantee avoidance
of frequent shortages or surpluses would be minimal. However, the
market becomes more unstable with a cartel, because there is
always an incentive for one firm to increase its sales at the
expense of another. If one firm does try to improve its position,
the others are likely to follow. If all try to do so, oversupply
develops, attempts to expand the market increase, prices decline,
and profits fall. In the process, higher levels of the
distribution system become more visible to the authorities, and
the probability of punishment increases. A kilo-connection may
then find one of his high-yielding alternative opportunities more
attractive and leave heroin distribution. Thus, there is always
some incentive for the police to attempt to infiltrate the
network at higher levels. Arrests made at this level reverberate
through the system, making arrests easier at all levels.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It is far from clear, however, that such a
public policy is altogether sound. While it could have a high
payoff in terms of seizures of heroin and arrests, it would lead
to considerable market expansion and increased heroin
availability. The elimination of monopoly would permit the
entrance of new firms; a competitively organized industry will
always provide more goods at lower prices than will a monopoly.
Market expansion would occur if lower prices increase the demand
for heroin, and, in fact, this may be occurring. Two very large
seizures by BNDD in May and June of 1970 reportedly had no effect
on price. No panics occurred following the seizures, as one would
expect, and the short-term trend over the year was one of
declining prices.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Theoretically, the best allocation of police
power is at the levels of the distribution hierarchy, where the
incremental gains from their actions (in terms of reduced social
costs) are equal to the incremental costs of the enforcement
efforts. This clearly requires employment of more resources at
some levels than at others. While the payoff from attempts to
infiltrate higher levels may be large, this policy is also very
expensive. And, again, it is possible that such a policy would
lead to a larger, less organized trade. Use of police resources
at lower levels has less potential for large payoffs but is less
costly. It is much easier to interrupt the heroin traffic at the
retail level, because firms engage in more transactions,
concealment is more difficult, and information is more available.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">On the other hand, risks must be increased
considerably before it becomes no longer profitable for low-level
operators to remain in the industry, because their opportunity
costs are low-i.e., they probably could not earn nearly so much
doing something else. Police are continually eliminating these
low-level operators through arrest, but, given the high profit
potential, others still find it worthwhile to enter the business
because of their low opportunity costs, mistaken perceptions of
the probability of punishment, or the low value placed on being
incarcerated for a given period. In addition, most street dealers
and pushers are themselves addicts. Being in the business keeps
them near the source of supply, giving them an income sufficient
to finance their own consumption and enabling them to buy their
own drugs wholesale.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Clearly, if heroin demand becomes relatively
elastic at some point as prices rise, the police could eventually
be successful in eliminating the industry. However, to accomplish
this, it is probable that society would have to allocate an
extraordinary amount of law-enforcement resources. Society might
prefer to reduce the industry to the &quot;optimum&quot; size,
where the costs imposed by heroin use are just equal to the
additional cost required to reduce it further.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>CONSUMPTION</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The consumption of heroin imposes costs on the
rest of the community, because most purchases are financed
through criminal acts such as theft. Because of these involuntary
redistributions of existing wealth, the community spends
resources to prevent crime and to apprehend, try, punish, and
rehabilitate criminals. This includes private expenditures on
locks, alarms, lights, and security guards and public
expenditures on police, courts, and correctional systems. To the
extent that these human and material resources would be employed
elsewhere in the absence of heroin addiction, they are properly
counted as costs of addiction. Social costs also include the
medical expenses and foregone productivity of individuals injured
in crimes and the lost productivity, medical expenses, and
premature deaths of addicts. Finally, one must also include the
fear and anxiety, avoidance of normal activity, disruption of
community life, and use of less efficient and more expensive
modes of transportation that are unquantifiable but nonetheless
very real costs of crime and drug addiction. This section
examines the direct cost of heroin consumption and estimates the
amount of crime required to finance it.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The most elementary question in determining the
direct costs of heroin consumption is the total cost of the
heroin consumed that is, how much money do addicts need to
support their addiction? But this calculation depends on several
unknowns: the number of addicts, the average number of days per
year heroin is consumed, and the average cost of heroin per day,
with an adjustment for the amount of heroin &quot;earned&quot;
from profits on sales to other addicts.&quot; This information is
essential for determining the magnitude of the problem and the
benefits from any investments designed to control or reduce it.<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">THE ADDICT POPULATION <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">The actual number of heroin addicts in the
United States is unknown and probably can never be determined
precisely with present techniques of estimation. Addicts become
known to officials only through death, arrest, or participation
in treatment programs. It is difficult to estimate the size of
the addict population from the number of deaths or arrests,
because each of these figures depends on other variables as well
as sum totals. For example, the ratio of addict deaths to addict
population will vary not only with the number of addicts but also
with the probability that a decedent will be medically identified
as an addict. Similarly, the frequency of addict deaths from
overdose will vary with sudden changes in the concentration of
pure heroin in the local supply. The ratio of addict arrests to
number of addicts can vary with the intensity of police efforts
in certain areas. The ratio of addicts in treatment to total
addicts can vary with the addicts' perception of the value of
treatment or the short-term availability of heroin.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Because of these difficulties, most estimates
of the addict population are mere guesses. However, there are two
methods that may ultimately prove useful, although both have
pronounced weaknesses at present. One is the &quot;Baden&quot;
formula, developed in New York City by Dr. Michael Baden of the
Medical Examiner's Office, and frequently applied elsewhere. New
York is unique in having a register of local heroin addicts as
reported by medical and police sources. The formula was computed
by comparing the number of addicts on the registry to the number
of overdose deaths and the number of deaths among persons named
on the register.&quot; Baden found that 50 per cent of the heroin
addicts who die are on the Narcotic Addict Register. On this
basis, he estimated that the total addict population numbers
about twice the registry total. In 1968, for example, the New
York Register had 42,500 addicts listed; it was therefore
concluded that the total addict population was approximately
85,000.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">This method has several problems, of which its
originators were well aware and are quick to acknowledge. They
were seeking a way of making a quick estimate of the total
population that would be more adequate than the register alone
without incurring expenses for research time. (It is ironic that
Dr. Baden is sometimes castigated for defects that he was the
first to point out.) First, it is assumed that addicts who are on
the register have the same probability of dying as those who are
not. If registered addicts are heavier users and thus more
susceptible to disease, such as malnutrition and hepatitis, they
would have a higher probability of dying. On the other hand, if
addicts not on the register are less experienced users they may
be more likely to die of overdose. Either, both, or neither
hypothesis could be correct, and it is impossible to determine
the net effect.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Secondly, since the register is cumulative over
a five-year period, some on the list will no longer be addicts
because of successful treatment, abstinence, or incarceration. To
the extent that this is the case, the estimate will exceed the
actual total by twice the size of the error in the register.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Third, the probability that an addict is listed
on the register is, in part, a function of his age and length of
addiction. A thirty year-old addicted for ten years is more
likely to be listed than an eighteen-year-old addicted for one
year. A sophisticated application of the technique requires at
least an age breakdown, and possibly other distinctions as well.
Baden himself works with such distinctions, but others who use
the method often do not. Serious difficulties develop when
officials attempt to use the Baden formula in other cities or at
other points in time. Statistical analysis of one set of
circumstances is rarely transferable to different situations. In
other words, heroin addicts in different places, for whatever
reasons, probably do not die at the same rate. Furthermore,
differences in diagnostic method change the probability of a
decedent's being identified as an addict. For example, in
Washington, D.C., during the eighteen months preceding July,
1970, diagnostic drug screens were performed on only 6.3 per cent
of all autopsied deaths; during the last six months of 1970, drug
screens were performed on 51 per cent of all autopsied
deaths.&quot; This frequency can also vary between cities, and a
small variance, when using Baden's formula, would change the
estimated population greatly, because the number of addicts who
die in any given year is likely to be only 1-2 per cent of the
total register.&quot; And New York has by far the best register
of any city.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs has
developed a somewhat similar approach in estimating the total
addict population. It multiplies the number of known users who
could be rearrested by the ratio of total heroin arrests to the
number of known users included in these arrests.&quot; On the
basis of this method, BNDD unofficially estimates that there are
at present 315,000 addicts nationally.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">This method also has several problems. First,
known addicts are voluntarily reported to BNDD by local police
departments. Reporting practices can vary considerably with
locality, as can intensity of enforcement efforts.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Secondly, the probability of any addict's being
arrested in period 2 is assumed to be the same regardless of
whether he had been arrested in period 1. This hypothesis is
unproved. It may be that addicts already known to the police are
heavy users and commit more crimes or are under greater
surveillance. Therefore, the probability of their rearrest would
be greater, and the estimate of the total addict population would
be less than the actual. On the other hand, if the addicts
unknown to the police are younger, and therefore more recently
addicted, the probability of their arrest may be higher, because
younger addicts tend to commit riskier crimes, such as robbery.
In this case, the estimate would be too large.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Thirdly, it is difficult to determine the
number of addicts reported in period I who remain active users
and are therefore eligible for arrest during period 2.
Statistical adjustments must be made for the probability that a
known user will be in jail during period 2, will die, will become
abstinent spontaneously, or will be in a treatment program. BNDD
has thus far adjusted satisfactorily only for the probability
that an addict will be in jail.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Some of the problems involved in these
adjustments are shown by the difficulty of estimating the
probability of death. BNDD made its adjustments on the average
probability that any individual over twenty-five will survive to
the next year. But the mortality rate for addicts is undoubtedly
higher than that of other individuals of the same age. On the
other hand, there may not be many addicts over forty, and thus
the mortality rate as originally calculated was biased upward by
calculating an average probability for all individuals over
twenty-five. Without knowing the true mortality rate, it is
difficult to make the proper adjustments to the estimates.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Some addicts do mature out of addiction as they
age, but the number is not known. Even active addicts may have
weeks or months of abstinence, but again no numbers are
available. Work on these problems is going on, and the results
will probably reduce the estimate below the present 315,000.
However, since reports from various urban areas indicate that the
number of addicts is still increasing, we will use alternative
estimates of 250,000 and 350,000 for the total addict population.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Some officials make a &quot;best guess&quot;
estimate and then attempt to test the reasonableness of the
figure by comparing it with the total population. For example,
the Narcotic Treatment Agency in Washington, D.C., has a
population of 95 per cent black, 85 per cent male, and 85 per
cent between the ages of fifteen and thirty four. Assuming that
the addict population not in treatment has the same
characteristics, one can make an estimate of the penetration of
addiction into the total population with these characteristics.
If there are 15,000 addicts in Washington, 10,296 are black males
between the ages of fifteen and thirty-four. According to 1970
Census data, there are a total of 83,158 black males between
fifteen and thirty-four in Washington, D.C. Thus, 12.1 per cent
of this population is addicted under the assumption of 15,000
addicts, and 8.2 per cent is addicted under the assumption of
10,000 addicts. The problem with these projections is that 8.2
per cent and 12.1 per cent seem equally 'reasonable&quot; If an
estimate approached 25 per cent or 30 per cent of a given
population, one would suspect exaggeration. Penetration
projections appear to have little value except as very rough
assessments.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">DAILY EXPENDITURES FOR HEROIN </font></p>

<p><font size="2">Addicts vary in the amounts of heroin they
consume per day and the per cent of time spent actively using the
drug. Some addicts can afford to increase their habits as their
tolerance to the drug grows; others cannot. There is also great
variance in vulnerability to arrest and incarceration as well as
in the frequency of &quot;vacations&quot; from addiction in
hospitals or treatment facilities. These periods of treatment
also serve to reduce the size using interviews with ex-addicts
and police, developed a breakdown of the addict population of New
York City.&quot; From their data, presented in Table 4-5, one can
estimate that an average addict is an active user 70 per cent of
the time, or 255 days per year per addict.<br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00009.gif" align="bottom" width="1311"
height="1179"> </p>

<p><font size="2">The frequently quoted estimates of the daily
costs of supporting an addiction are often exaggerated. Many are
derived from interviews with addicts who regard large habits as
status symbols and commonly overstate the level of their own use.
In general, the amounts of heroin consumed by addicts vary
widely, and reports of these amounts are unreliable. To say that
an addict has a $50 habit does not mean that he will spend this
sum day after day. Ideally, an addict would like to use as much
heroin as he needs to &quot;get high.&quot; In fact, however, the
increasing difficulty of obtaining the necessary money to pay for
increasing dosages imposes an upper limit on most addicts'
habits. But if an addict cannot consistently obtain large enough
dosages of heroin -to get high, he can use smaller amounts
without feeling acute withdrawal symptoms. In effect, the habit
size of a long-time heavy user is often not at the level of
euphoria but only at a level sufficient to suppress withdrawal or
to keep the withdrawal mild. Moreover, while there are many
addicts with expensive habits, there are also many addicts in the
early stages of dependence whose habit requires only $10-15 per
day. These factors should be kept in mind when interpreting any
estimates of the total cost of addiction.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The price, and quality, of heroin needed by an
addict determine his cost per day. Retail prices were obtained by
BNDD -for December, 1970, for several U.S. cities, and are listed
in Table 4-6. The considerable variation in price is probably due
to differences in local supply and demand, risks taken by
suppliers, and, probably, nonrandom buying procedures. The
unweighted average price-except in Chicago, where it is
extraordinarily high for unknown reasons-is about $0.55 per
milligram.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The average quantity used per day is probably
about 55 milligrams of pure heroin.&quot; At $0.55 per milligram,
this results in daily expenditures of approximately $30 per day
for the average addict, representing the amount paid on the
street by the addict who buys solely for his own consumption.
Some earn their heroin through services rendered as a distributor
of heroin-i.e., pusher; thus, the price paid by the ultimate
consumer includes the payment for that service. Heroin
&quot;earned&quot; in pushing, therefore, means that fewer
addicts have to steal from the community, or that some percentage
of the addict population supports the rest by theft,
prostitution, or legitimate work. The Hudson Institute study
estimated that 45 per cent of the heroin consumed is used by
those involved in its distribution and profit from its sale. If
other factors remain the same, the total social cost of heroin
addiction will be less if the percentage of consumed heroin
&quot;earned&quot; from pushing is increased.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">A rough estimate of the annual cost of heroin
purchases can be made using the information presented in the
preceding pages. The assumptions are that (1) addicts spend 70
per cent of the <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">.<img src="img00010.gif" align="bottom"
width="1339" height="719"> <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">SOURCES OF FUNDS FOR HEROIN PURCHASES</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The high cost of heroin requires most addicts
to resort to crime to finance their habits. Estimates of the
various sources of funds for the support of heroin addiction can
be made with data obtained by the Hudson Institute from
ex-addicts in New York City. As discussed previously,
approximately 45 per cent of the heroin consumed by the addict
population is obtained by selling heroin. This does not mean that
45 per cent of all addicts are pushers but that 45 per cent of
the heroin used by addicts is obtained in exchange for services
rendered in the distribution network. The remainder of the addict
population finance their own habits and those of pushers by
various means, including robbery, burglary, shoplifting,
prostitution, and legitimate work. Most addicts employ a
combination of means, legal or otherwise, in their constant quest
to obtain funds.&quot; The breakdown of sources of funds
presented in Table 4-7 was developed from the Hudson material.
These figures represent the funds used to purchase the 55 per
cent of heroin consumed that is not financed by rendering
services in the distribution network.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It is assumed that shoplifting, burglary, and
larceny yield real property, and that pickpocketing, robbery, and
confidence games yield cash. Therefore, the total property stolen
in these crimes can be roughly divided into 80 per cent real
property and 20<b> </b>per cent cash.&quot; It is assumed that
real property is fenced at one-third its value, so that an addict
must steal, on the average, property worth $2.60 to obtain $ 1.00
with which to finance his habit.&quot;<br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00011.gif" align="bottom" width="1337"
height="580"> </p>

<p><font size="2">The data needed to estimate the funds obtained
through property crime, prostitution, and legal sources used for
heroin purchases can be summarized as follows: <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">Number of addicts (N) 250,000; 350,000</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Per cent of year in active use (T) 70</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Average daily expenditure (X) $30</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Per cent of heroin earned through pushing (d)
45</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Proportion of funds obtained through property
crime (a) .62</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Reciprocal of fencing discount (average) (f)
2.6</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">Proportion of funds obtained through
prostitution (b) .31<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">Proportion of funds obtained through legitimate
sources (w) .07<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">The estimates of funds obtained from each of
the three alternative sources of funds are presented in Table
4-8. Clearly, any of these data could be biased in either
direction and thus limit the usefulness of the estimates derived
from them. <br>
</font></p>

<p><img src="img00012.gif" align="bottom" width="1335"
height="401"><br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>CONCLUSION<br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="1">The economics of heroin distribution has been
examined for whatever assistance such analysis may bring to
future policy considerations. Can heroin use be curbed? Can it be
eliminated? What are the most efficient methods of attacking the
problem?</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">In the marketing of any product, there are two
sides to a transaction-supply and demand. Our examination has
shown that public policies dealing with the production of opium
and the domestic distribution of heroin-the supply side-will
never be completely successful in eliminating heroin use in the
United States and the consequent street crime. Indeed, past
reliance on law-enforcement measures has accompanied an epidemic
growth of the heroin-addict population. It is ironic that our
national policy, by resorting almost exclusively to criminal
sanctions to </font><font size="2">eliminate addiction, has bred
a thriving illegal market that can be sustained only by criminal
activity.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Two factors primarily impede public policy
designed to suppress the supply of heroin. First, the amount of
opium needed to supply the demand for heroin in the United States
is only a minute portion of total world production. It is
probably impossible to curb all opium production, licit and
illicit, everywhere in the world. Secondly, the profits earned in
domestic distribution are so great that it is unlikely the risks
can be raised high enough to force dealers out of business. As
one former distributor has stated: &quot;If you put me away,
somebody else is going to stand in my spot.&quot;&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Clearly, more effort and greater resources must
be spent to curb the demand for heroin. For example, more addicts
must be treated and rehabilitated. Education to prevent drug
abuse must be expanded and made more meaningful. Finally, the
environmental factors that breed and sustain addiction must be
more successfully attacked. John Ingersoll, Director of the
Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, has stated before a
congressional committee that law enforcement is the first-aid
agency of society. It is not the curative, not the doctor, and it
doesn't eliminate causes of these problems. Our society has
gotten itself into an unfortunate state of affairs regarding
drugs because it has assumed that by passing laws and enforcing
them, the problem will go away.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So it seems to me that while you can expect
law-enforcement agencies to do the first-aid work, if you want a
cure, then we have got to go back to the basic causes and find
out what can be done from that end. We have to look to improved
and increased rehabilitation programs. We have to find out more
about drugs and why people use them, knowing of the debilitating
consequences </font><font size="1">.42 <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="2">No policy, of course, will. be successful if it
addresses only a part of the problem. There appears to be, for
instance, a causal relationship between strict law enforcement
and the number of addicts in treatment programs. If the
probability of arrest is increased, more addicts are induced to
enter treatment. Conversely, if more hard-core addicts enter
treatment programs, pushers must seek out new, less reliable
clientele; they become more visible and thus more vulnerable to
arrest. Development of an effective policy combining efforts to
suppress supply and inhibit demand for heroin necessarily
involves close scrutiny of the economic system and the relative
benefits and costs of various alternatives. In choosing between
policy alternatives, cost-benefit analyses can illuminate the
probable reduction in the social costs of addiction to be derived
from one policy as compared with another. If our public monies
are to be spent efficiently, it is imperative that such choices
be illuminated by full-scale studies of this nature. <br>
<br>
</font></p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><i>NOTES<br>
</i></font></p>

<p><font size="1">1. BNDD Staff. Interviews, November, 1971. This
assessment is based on two other estimates: the total number of
addicts in the United States, and the quantity of pure heroin
consumed by each addict per day. The accuracy of these estimates
will be analyzed later. But just one year ago, BNDD believed that
only 5,000-6,000 lbs. of imported heroin was sufficient to supply
the U.S. market. The current estimate should be interpreted
accordingly; the actual total is probably somewhat less than
10,000 lbs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">2. BNDD Intelligence Staff, <i>The World Opium
Situation </i>(unpublished paper), October, 1970, p. 13
(hereafter cited as WOS). This assumes that the illicit
production estimates are accurate,</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>3. Ibid., </i>p. 16.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">4. Select Committee on Crime, <i>Hearings into
Narcotics Research, Rehabilitation and Treatment, </i>U.S. House
of Representatives, 92d Cong., 1st sess., Serial 92-1, 1971, p.
358.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">5. <i>WOS) </i>p. 6.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">6. <i>Ibid.</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>7. Ibid., </i>p. 4.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">8. International Narcotics Control Board,
&quot;Statistics on Narcotics Drugs for 1967.&quot; International
Narcotics Control Board (New York: United Nations, 1970), <b>p. </b>viii.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">9. <i>WOS, </i>p. 5. This publication is the
chief source of the data in this section.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">10. It is extremely difficult to estimate
illicit production and consumption. Except for Turkey, illicit
production estimates were made on the basis of domestic
consumption. Some allowance for exports is included but is
probably subject to error. The BNDD staff considers the estimates
to be accurate within a confidence interval of 20 per cent.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">11. BNDD Staff, interview, March, 1971. Indian
opium is often adulterated with seed, leaves, and other foreign
matter. Indian yields are also higher because of additional
lancing.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">12. United Nations Survey Team, &quot;The Hill
Tribes of Thailand and the Place of Opium in Their Social
Economic Setting,&quot; <i>Bulletin of Narcotics, </i>XX, No. 3
(July-September, 1968).</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">13. <i>WOS, </i>p. 7.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">14. G. Shulzin, &quot;Cultivation of the Opium
Poppy and the Oil Poppy in</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">the Soviet Union,&quot; <i>Bulletin of
Narcotics, </i>XXI, No. 4 (October-December, 1969).</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">15. BNDD Staff, interview, March, 197 1.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">16. Select Committee on Crime, <i>op. cit., </i>note
4, p. 68.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">17. These figures are approximate. In fact, the
necessary land area could be considerably less, depending on the
number of total addicts and the opium yield per acre. The
11.2-23.2 square-mile estimate is obtained from the data in Table
4-2. For example, if the yield per acre is assumed to be 8.07
Ibs. (the approximate reported yield in Turkey), then the area
required to produce 100,000 and 120,000 lbs. of opium is
approximately 19.4 square miles and 23.2 square miles,
respectively. (If 1 acre yields 8.07 lbs., then 12,391.5 acres
will yield 100,000 lbs. This acreage is approximately 19.4 square
miles.) On the other hand, if the true Turkish yield, as
suspected, is approximately 14 Ibs. per acre, then the area
required to produce 100,000 and 120,000 lbs. is approximately
11.2 and 13.4 square miles, respectively.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">18. <i>WOS, </i>p. 32.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">19. WOS, P. 8.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">20. If demand is price-elastic, the percentage
reduction in quantity sold exceeds the percentage increase in
price. thus reducing farm revenues.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">21. Mark Moore, <i>Policy Concerning Drug Abuse
in New York State, Vol. III: Economics of Heroin Distribution </i>(Croton-on-Hudson,
N.Y.: Hudson Institute, 1970), pp. 67-73.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">22. John Casey and Edward Preble, &quot;Taking
Care of Business: The Heroin User's Life on the Street,&quot; <i>International
journal of the Addictions, </i>IV, No. I (March, 1967),12,</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">23. T. S. Schelling, &quot;Economics and
Criminal Enterprise,&quot; <i>The Public Interest, </i>No. 7
(Spring, 1967), 61-78.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1"><i>24. Ibid.</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">25. Select Committee, <i>op. cit., </i>p. 3.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">26. R=pV, where R is the cost of risk to the
firm, p is the probability of punishment as perceived by the
firm, and V is the value, or cost, of the expected punishment to
the firm.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">27. Select Committee on Crime, <i>Hearings into
Crime in America: Heroin Importation, Distribution, Packaging and
Distribution, </i>U.S. House of Representatives, 91st Cong.,
1970, pp. 52-91.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">28. The annual cost of heroin consumption can
be stated by this equation:</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">CH=365 [N (1-d) TX], where <br>
<img src="img00013.gif" align="bottom" width="568" height="69">
CH=net annual expenditures for heroin;</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">N =number of heroin addicts;</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">d =the percentage of all heroin consumed by the
addict population, which is obtained for services rendered in the
distribution network-i.e., pushing;</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">* =average percentage of the year heroin is
consumed by addicts; and</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">* =average cost of drugs per day to the addict
population.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">29. Baden's formula is:<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">N = D - <u>n</u>, where</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">d<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1"><i>A</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">N=estimated total addict population;</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">D =total number of deaths of addicts in given
year; n = number of addicts on Narcotic Register in given year;
d=number of deaths of addicts on Narcotic Register in given year;
and N =actual total addict population.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">30. Robert J. DuPont, &quot;Profile of a Heroin
Addiction Epidemic,&quot; in Select Committee on Crime, <i>op.
cit., </i>pp. 4,167.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">31. For example, the derived <u>n</u> in
Baden's formula for New York City</font> </p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">d</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">has been used to estimate the number of addicts
in Washington, D.C. The equation becomes: <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">n<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">N D, where<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1"><i>A</i></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">N =estimated total addict population in D.C.;</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">n =number of addicts on New York City Narcotics
Register; d= number of deaths of addicts on New York City
Narcotics Register in given year; and</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">* =total number of addict deaths in Washington,
D.C.; and</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">* =actual total addict population in
Washington, D.C.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">The problem here is that differences in
capabilities for identifying narcotics<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">n <u>n</u> <u>n</u></font> </p>

<p><font size="1">overdose deaths can make 7 vary among cities.
If d in DC &gt; d in New<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">n</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">York City, then N &lt; N; alternatively, if in
D.C. &lt; n in New York City,</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">d d<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">then N &gt; N. Clearly, similar problems arise
with efforts to use n for time</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">d<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">period I to estimate the addict population in
period 2 with the total number of deaths in period 2.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">32. BNDD Staff. Interviews. Included are only
those important features of<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">the method necessary for clear description.
Their equation is:</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">A <u>t<br>
</u></font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">T = N - , where</font> </p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">n<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">A</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">T =the estimated total addict population in
period 2;<br>
<img src="img00014.gif" align="bottom" width="1292" height="601">
<img src="img00015.gif" align="bottom" width="293" height="93"> N
=the number registered with BNDD in period 1, who could be
arrested in period 2;</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">t =the total number who are arrested in period
2; n=the number registered with BNDD in period 1, who are
arrested in period 2; and</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">T =the actual number of addicts in period 2.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">Once it is known how many addicts have been
arrested in period 2 (t), and what the number of these previously
registered with BNDD in period 1 (n) is, then N can be used to
estimate T. <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">33. As discussed in the text, the BNDD method
assumes <u>n</u> = <u>t</u> But, if m<br>
</font></p>

<p align="center"><font size="1">N T.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">is the number of addicts arrested in 2 who were
not arrested in 1, and if M is the total number of addicts not
registered with BNDD in period 1, then<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1"><u>n</u> . <u>m</u> must hold for the method to
yield true estimates. If <u>n</u> &gt; <u>m</u> then<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">N M N M</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">A</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">T &lt; T; similarly, if <u>n</u> &lt; <u>m</u>
then @ &gt; T.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">N M<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">If <u>n = M </u>a particularly useful feature
of this method would be the fact N Mthat new entrants in the
current period do not bias the estimate of the total population.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">34. Moore, <i>op. cit., </i>note 21, p. 66.
These estimates were made on the basis of a relatively small
number of interviews and should not be interpreted strictly.
However, this table provides the best available information on
these aspects of addict behavior.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">35. This estimate, while lower than several
others, may still be too high. First, the Hudson Institute
average of 55 milligrams includes an estimate that large-habit
dealers (I 1 per cent of the total user population) use 180
milligrams per day. While heroin dealers might have the income to
maintain such a large habit, it seems unlikely that they could be
active entrepreneurs and at the same time use such quantities of
the drug. The Hudson estimate was also derived from interviews
with addicts, who reportedly exaggerate estimates of use. So,
too, there may be less than 10 mg. of pure heroin per bag. 36.
The amount of funds obtained from each of three alternative
sources of funds (property crime, prostitution, legal sources)
can be estimated with the following equation:</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">C=365 [ U -d) NTX (af +b+w) where d, N, T, and
X have the same meaning as in the equation in footnote 28.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">C --the gross -amount uf -funds ubtained
-annually -from various -sources -for heroin purchases;</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">a=the proportion of funds spent on heroin that
comes from property crime;</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">b= the proportion of funds spent on heroin that
comes from prostitution; c=the proportion of funds spent on
heroin that comes from legitimate sources-i.e., work, public
assistance, family, or friends;<br>
<img src="img00016.gif" align="bottom" width="1263" height="1934">
f =the factor by which the amount stolen must exceed the amount
yielded by a property crime. (A stolen good must be transferred
from the thief to a fence to a final consumer. The thief receives
only a fraction of the market value of the good. To obtain a
given target yield, an addict can be expected to steal a given
amount, depending on the fencing discount, and the proportion of
value stolen that is property and not cash.) <br>
The amount of money annually spent by addicts for heroin can be
estimated with the equation in footnote 26. </font></p>

<p><font size="1">The cost to victims of property crime committed
by addicts can be estimated by this equation: <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1"><b>Cv = </b>365 [ (I - d) NTX (af)</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">where C, =cost to victims of property crime.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="1">37. These estimates are also weakened by the
interview technique em-<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">ployed and thus should not be considered a
precise reflection of addict behavior.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">38. The value of property stolen cannot be
counted totally when the costs to society are added. Some
percentage of the value of goods stolen accrues as a type of
subsidy to people who, knowingly or unknowingly, purchase stolen
goods because the price they pay is significantly below the
market price. This factor reduces the cost of crime to all
society by the value of real property stolen multiplied by the
reduced resale value (the fencing discount).</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">However, in ascertaining how large an
adjustment to make, it is difficult to compare the utility of
gains to the purchaser with the utility of the losses to the
victim-is it greater, less, or the same? In addition, from the
point of view of the community, the loss to the victim may be
given more weight than the gain to the ultimate consumer. The
item may, in fact, lose &quot;value&quot; because it is a stolen
good. Objectively, although a stolen television set may still
operate as well as before, the purchaser may feel that it is
worth less than the market value because of the risk of holding a
stolen good.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">39. <u>'80</u> +.20 ($ 1) = $2.60</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">1/3<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">40. The net annual addict income from property
crime can be estimated</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">by the following equation: <br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">PC= 365 [ (1 - d) NTXa]</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">where d, N, T, and X have the same meaning as
in footnote 28 and</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">PC= net annual addict income from property
crime.</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">The cost to the victims of the stolen property
is determined by multiplying</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">the net addict income from property crimes by
the reciprocal of the average</font> </p>

<p><font size="1">fencing discount.<br>
</font></p>

<p><font size="1">41. Select Committee on Crime, <i>op. cit., </i>note
27, p. 238.</font> </p>

<ol>
    <li><font size="1"><i>Ibid., </i>note 4, p. 367.<br>
        <img src="img00017.gif" align="bottom" width="1261"
        height="1810"><br>
        </font></li>
</ol>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schDWDA_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="dwdamenu.htm">Dealing
With Drug Abuse</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="17209" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>