
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B036-261</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/prohibit.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125020 text/html 36831
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:50:08 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:43 GMT
Content-length: 36613
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Prohibition and Violence by Richard Hamm</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<h1></h1>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<h1>&quot;American Prohibitionists and Violence, 1865-1920&quot; </h1>

<p> by Richard Hamm </p>

<p> Today I want to post part of a paper I delivered at a Meeting
of the Alcohol and Temperance History Group as an Affiliated
Society of the American Association for the History of Medicine,
at its 68th Annual Meeting at Pittsburgh in May 1995. At that
time I said I wasn't planning to publish it, for various reasons,
but I have been urged by people whose views I value to
disseminate it, so I placed it-in pieces-on the List serve of the
ATHG. It brought forth a good string, so I have agreed to place
this piece (essentially the Pittsburgh paper) on the Web page of
the ATHG. </p>

<p> The prohibitionists were social reform agitators who sought a
major change in their society's customs. Social reformers have
been, of course, a nearly constant presence in American society
since the early 19th century. Accounts of many social reformers'
campaigns, often deal with the violence inflicted upon reformers
seeking change in society and the violence engaged in by some
reformers to achieve their ends. Indeed, violence, even killing
and attempted killing, seems almost endemic to the history of
social reforms in the United States. But, with the special cases
of the Women's crusades of 1873 and Carry Nation aside, the vast-
and ever-growing literature on the temperance movement pays
little attention to the issue of violence.(1) This gap is a
serious deficiency. </p>

<p> There are two limits to my work. First, I am most interested
in violence in its most dramatic and drastic forms, killing or
attempting to kill people. So I will be talking mostly of
killings, attempted killings, and mobbings (because after all
they can easily lead to killings). Second, I am talking about
violence in respons to or as a part of agitation and not violence
attendant to law enforcement. Thus I am going to pass over
silently the many studies, popular and not, of moonshining,
bootlegging, and violence.(2) Violence in resistance to law or
violence undertaken by law officers is somewhat separate from
violence associated with a social reform movement's agitation for
change. Such violence grows out the state's presumption to have a
monopoly of force and its willingness to resort to force to gain
the ends of its policy. To break the law of the state is to risk
its use of violence against you, hence the likelihood that the
law breaker will engage in violence. Law enforcement and violence
go together hand and glove. </p>

<p> But within these limits there still broad area of violence to
be explored as reform and violence also seem to go together. We
can break down violence associated with reform into two large
categories. First, violence, used by their opponents, to stop
reformers from agitating. Second, violence by reformers directed
at achieving their ends-in their view, a righteous violence. A
brief look of some reforms in American history shows the
existence of these two types of violence. </p>

<p> Violence to deter reform, for example, surfaces in studies
and memory of the civil rights movement. The literature is filled
with works that explore the violence directed against civil
rights advocates in the American South in the 1950s and 1960s. We
all know of the bombing of the Birmingham churches, the mobbing
of sit in protesters and freedom riders, and the killing of
Goodman, Schwerner and Chaney.(3) Similarly, contemporary
commentary on the anti-abortion movement has focused on the wave
of violence against doctors and workers at women's health
centers, most notably in the cases of Pensacola shootings and the
recent the shootings in Brookline. </p>

<p> Historians of abolitionists, perhaps the most deeply studied
of all social reform movements, have delineated both types of
violence in that crusade. They have explored the many
anti-abolitionist mobs of the Jacksonian era, including that
which mobbed and killed the abolitionist editor Eliajah Lovejoy
in 1837. Also, they have spent considerable effort exploring the
forces and meaning of John Brown's and other abolitionists'
willingness to engage in terrorism to bring about the end of
slavery.(4) But virtually no where in the vast scholarly studies
of the prohibition movement are there similar studies of the
prohibitionists and violence. Its not because violence is not
there </p>

<p> On the issue of deadly violence against agitators, the recent
scholarly literature is almost silent on the subject but the drys
themselves recorded that it happened. The temperance movement at
its peak, sought to encourage the faithful and to preserve the
records of its achievements and struggles by publishing, among
other things, prohibition encyclopedias. Two standard reference
books produced by the drys, <i>The Pocket Cyclopedia of
Temperance</i> (1916) and <i>Standard Encyclopedia of the Alcohol
Problem</i> (1925-1930) show that drys included information on
violence against prohibitionists. Both works contain articles on
so called &quot;Temperance Martyrs.&quot; Indeed, scattered
through the six volumes and 2940 page <i>Standard Encyclopedia</i>
are many accounts of mobbings, attempted killings, and killings
of drys. Some of the stories in the <i>Standard Encyclopedia</i>
are classics. For instance, it details in the article on
Pennsylvania how a county chairman of the Anti-Saloon League was
shot at in 1913, but &quot;fortunately the bullet, intended for
his heart, was arrested by a copy of the bible which he carried
under his arm.&quot; The article includes a picture of the page
where the bullet was stopped. While such miraculous tales were
rare, pedestrian tales of violence were common in the temperance
movement.(5) </p>

<p> I have combined the counts of the <i>Standard Encyclopedia</i>
and the <i>Pocket Encyclopedia</i> to come up with some ball park
figures of the violence directed against prohibitionists. These
numbers exclude from them prohibitionists who suffered violence
as a result of official or unofficial law enforcement or (from
the sources available) who suffered violence in uncertain
circumstances. For example, a minister who denounced violators of
a state prohibition law and sought to bring private prosecutions
in the courts and suffered violence would be in this estimate
engaging in unofficial law enforcement and is not included in the
figures of prohibitionist agitators who experienced violence.
Including such persons would roughly double the number of
assaults and triple the number of the killings. Combining the two
lists, I have found the names of six drys who between 1874 and
1908 were killed over their advocacy of their cause. At least
another nineteen drys were mobbed, beaten, shot at, or had their
homes (or businesses) dynamited for their support of
temperance.(6) </p>

<p> Without a doubt, advocating prohibition was a dangerous
business for some of its agitators. On the other hand, the
temperance advocates seemed not to have engaged in violence
against their enemies. I know of no prohibitionist who engaged in
violence to the point of killing to bring about their goal of a
dry nation. Some prohibitionists, Carry Nation being the most
prominent though certainly not alone, did engage in direct action
against liquor sellers, destroying their place of business and
their stock through violent means. Assaults on people sometimes
emerged from such attacks. But such &quot;hatchetation&quot;
aside, the prohibitionists did not seem to engage violence that
could lead to killing. I would like to is explain two things.
First, why the violence against drys has received so little
attention. And second, explain the relative dearth of righteous
violence by drys. </p>

<p> Why does the scholarly literature not contain much
information on the topic of violence against prohibitionist
agitators? One explanation can be dismissed out of hand, that is
that those who the opponents perpetuated their deeds against were
too obscure to make an impact. Among the six prohibitionist
killed, are a doctor, a judge, a minister, four editors of reform
or other newspapers (including the minister), and a United States
Senator. (The Senator is Edward Carmack of Tennessee.) If you
turn toward those who suffered assaults or mobbing for agitation
on the temperance question, the trend is similar with editors and
ministers predominating. Those attacked included figures of some
renown in temperance history; for example Albert Banks-clergyman,
dry editor, and propagandist- was shot and wounded and Samuel W.
(&quot;Sam&quot;) Small- journalist, dry, and evangelist-was
mobbed and beaten. The violence occurred in all areas of the
nation, though the South and West seem disproportionally
represented, and extended from the decade after the Civil War
through the second decade of the 20th century. It should appear
much more prominently in the scholarly literature. </p>

<p> Two general causes seem to explain why the violence against
prohibitionists for their agitation has received so little
attention. First, contentions from the time of the killing or
other violence that the violence had nothing to do with
prohibition may have led scholars not to consider the topic.
Second, and more importantly, there was little place for accounts
of such violence in the evolving scholarly interpretations of
prohibition. </p>

<p> I know of at least one example of a dry killed over his
advocacy of prohibition where non-prohibitionists sources
asserted that he &quot;was not slain because of his convictions
but&quot; because of a &quot;personal difficulty.&quot;(7) If
other killings and attacks have similar conflicting accounts (and
logic would indicate that they should, as it was in the interests
of the opponents of prohibition to downplay violence against
their enemies) it is likely that scholars have been misdirected
away from the topic of violence against dry agitators. But, there
is little evidence that scholars have paid any attention to the
topic at all. </p>

<p> While scholarly interpretations of prohibition have changed
dramatically over time, all of them share the trait that they
either have little room in their frameworks for discussions of
violence or have a tendency to turn scholars away from approaches
and sources that would explore issues violence. Since World War
II, scholarly interpretations of prohibition have been marked by
two large trends. First, there is the focus on the social status
of the members of the movement.(8) Second, there is the question
of how, if at all, prohibition related to the reform movements of
the day: populism, progressivism, and women's rights.(9) Scholars
working in the field have thus tended to mine the sources to
answer questions about these concerns. Thus by combing membership
rolls, church records, tax records, census data, and other
sources they have told us much about the social status of the
prohibitionists. Similarly in exploring the links between
anti-monopolism, regulation, peace reform, women's suffrage,
divorce reform, and anti-prostitution (just to name some)
scholars have illuminated the connections of the movement to
other reforms. But in doing these things they have mostly
eschewed writing narratives of movement history that would have
confronted the sources that raise the questions of violence
against drys and violence by drys.(10) It is to violence by drys
that I would like to turn now. </p>

<p> One thing is clear about violence by drys: there was no dry
equivalent to John Brown, there was no dry equivalent to Michael
F. Griffin or John Salvi The closest that the prohibition
movement ever came to such figures was Carry Nation. Nation's
trashing of saloons is the stuff of American legend and folklore.
Moreover it has been the subject of some scholarly work.(11) Thus
a look at Nation and her movement in the context of the righteous
violence of other movements is illuminating. </p>

<p> When we talk about figures in reform movements adopting
violence, two things stand out. First that they believed that
their violence is justified; violence-even killing-has become an
acceptable means of bringing about the change that they want.
Second, they act violently because they perceive that their
movement is loosing ground. Hence John Brown's moral certainty of
the evil of slavery and belief that sin could only be expatiated
by the spilling of blood convinced him that violence was
acceptable. He, in turn, convinced others to fight and kill with
him in Kansas and Virginia because, after the Compromise of 1850
with its Fugitive Slave Law and the Kansas Nebraska Act repealing
the Missouri compromise, for the abolitionists crusade their
enemies seemed to have gained the upper hand.(12) Similarly, the
justifiable homicide argument used by the advocates of violence
in the anti-abortion movement give them a moral base for their
actions.(13) Significantly, also, the first killing by
anti-abortionists came after it became clear that the Supreme
Court was not going to overturn <i>Roe v. Wade</i> </p>

<p> , the second came after a pro-abortion candidate was elected
president. How do these two factors, developing a view that see
the violence as acceptable and acting out of fear of failure of
the reform play out in the prohibition movement and in the career
of Carry Nation? </p>

<p> There was a potential for developing an ideology of righteous
violence, in the prohibition movement. And evidence of it does
not rest alone on the career of Carry Nation. Before I turn to
Nation and her ideas for justifying her violence, let me turn to
another source that show that drys did enunciate such ideas. The
1915 novel <i>Quarrytown</i>, written by Douglas Dobbins and
published by the American Issue Publishing (the press of company
of the Anti-Saloon League) shows community organized righteous
violence in a favorable light. In this fictionalized account of
the struggle against the return of saloons to a stone quarrying
town, the drys ultimately resort to violence. </p>

<p> At the opening the town is dry and virtually free of crime.
But the dry utopia vanishes, as neither law nor community action
offer adequate protection from the evil trade. Drys fail to block
the issuing of a liquor license at a state liquor licensing board
(dominated by politicians beholden to the organized liquor
interest), a dry organized boycott falters when its denounced by
a new editor of the town's newspaper, and citizen prosecutions of
the saloon keeper for violations of the law falter before
corrupted juries. Thus the saloon spreads crime and disorder
throughout the community, literally turning brother against
brother in drunken brawls. After all other means have been tried
the dry townsmen resort to violence. One night after the saloon
is shut, they engage a Boston Tea Party type raid on it,
destroying its fixtures and stock. When the newspaper editor
condemns the act as lawlessness he is ostracized by the town.
When the saloon keeper rebuilds, the temperance men of the town
blow up the establishment with three separate dynamite bombs, the
first being set away from where the proprietor slept to allow him
time to escape. Moreover, the local minister preached a sermon in
advance of the act calling for the blowing up of &quot;every
hell-hole in the United States tomorrow with dynamite!&quot; And
in case the message was not clear, the dynamite works. The saloon
keeper never came back and the town was the better for it: no
murders, or assaults, no wife beatings, and no squandering of
food and education money on whisky occur within its borders.(14) </p>

<p> Without ever saying it in so many words, this publication of
the Anti-Saloon League legitimated violence against saloons. But
it did so in a rather limited way. Violence was not the first
resort, but the last resort for the drys of Quarrytown. Its only
because law and boycotts have failed them, and only after liquor
begins to wreck havoc in their community do they take action. And
their first action, does not threaten life or limb. Even the
bombing is planned to allow the saloon keeper to escape harm.
Similarly, Carry Nation carried the conviction that her violence
was justified and resorted to violence only after other means had
failed. </p>

<p> Once you get past the myth and hype, Nation's short career as
a saloon smasher is revealing of the potential of righteous
violence in the prohibition movement. Nation captured the
national imagination in 1900 when she began single-handedly
destroying dives in Kansas. Her actions were quickly overshadowed
by the hucksterism to which she resorted to keep her agitation
going: the selling of hatchets and the appearances at resorts
like Coney Island. She remained a national figure until her death
in 1911. Nation was motivated, like many drys, by a personal
religious belief that liquor selling was sinful. Indeed, in her
autobiography she recounting receiving visions from God showing
her the evils of liquor. And she adopted violence only after
other she had tried other means.(15) </p>

<p> In 1900 Nation lived in state that had a two decade old, and
widely violated, policy of prohibition. Moreover, it must of have
seemed to her that the temperance movement was in a rut. In her
town of Medicine Lodge, working with the WCTU she closed the
town's seven bars through the tried a true techniques of the
women's crusade of 1873: picketing with song, prayer, and moral
appeals to the sellers and purchasers. These were techniques that
had been used against legal saloons, in Kansas there were nothing
but illegal ones. Moreover, for a decade now in Kansas the policy
had been widely violated, often with the contrivances of the
state's political leaders. And at the national level the
temperance movement was stalled. Between 1889 and 1907 no state
adopted prohibition. WCTU had lost its driving force with the
death of Frances Willard in 1898 and the Prohibition Party had
splintered into two warring camps. The leading temperance
organizations seemed unable to advance the cause or indeed to
stop the rollback movements in various states with prohibition.
Hence, with conviction, and at a time when the movement was
faltering, Nation turned away from moral suasion and turned to
violence. As she explained, &quot;If there's anything that's weak
and worse than useless it's this moral suasion. I despise it.
these hell traps of Kansas have fattened for twenty years on
moral suasion.&quot;(16) </p>

<p> And her violence struck a chord among some temperance
advocates. While some debated the value of violence, others
joined Nation. She soon headed an organization of several hundred
similarly minded saloon foes. And, in a two month period,
following her lead this group, and others, engaged in vigilante
action against saloons in Kansas's major cities, Topeka and
Wichita. Mobbings and riots swept the cities; people were beaten
and shots were fired in anger. And among some temperance workers
the violence was welcome. One woman letter writer to a WCTU paper
wrote: &quot;What if a few people do get killed[?] . . . I'm
tired of this sentimental gush about 'stopping before it comes to
bloodshed. . . .' I for one, hope a thousand more of them will be
smashed in Kansas before she stops.&quot; The response to Nation,
shows that the potential for righteous violence existed in the
temperance crusade.(17) </p>

<p> Which raises new questions: Why was there only one Carry
Nation? Part of the answer lays in the changing circumstances of
the prohibition movement. Soon after Nation's actions in Kansas,
the Anti-Saloon League emerged as the dominate organization in
the temperance movement. And the League's techniques of political
lobbying, official law enforcement, and public opinion building
changed the fortunes of the crusade. For example, take the topic
of national legislation; the League's Washington Office, between
1902 and 1919, pressured the United States Congress to enact laws
that: prohibited the sale of liquor in federal buildings, banned
the transport of liquor through the mails, ended liquor sales in
national soldiers' homes, retained a law excluding all alcoholic
beverages from Army posts, created Oklahoma as a dry state, and
limited and then prohibited the transportation of liquor into dry
states. A similar record of success can be found in the
prohibitionists' campaigns in the states in the same period.(18)
The very success of the drys in gaining what they wanted through
the political process made righteous violence redundant. </p>

<p> This pattern of potential righteous violence in the
prohibition crusade and the mostly unstudied violence used
against drys by their opponents, suggest that we need to look
more deeply into prohibition as a reform movement. As Robin Room
wrote over twenty years ago, &quot;we must attempt to understand
the antiliquor movement . . . as a massive, sustained organized
effort with a highly developed set of tactics and coherent,
tangible goals.&quot; (19) Indeed, if we seek a usable past, one
that might help deal with current social reform crusades, say
against abortion or cigarettes, it is imperative that we look,
far deeper than I have here, into tactics, strategies, and
contexts, of the temperance crusade to see how they prompted or
retarded violence. </p>

<menu>
    <li>Richard F. Hamm </li>
    <li>SUNY Albany </li>
    <li>hamm@csc.albany.edu </li>
</menu>

<h2>Notes </h2>

<p> (1) Typical of the treatment of the topic of violence and the
prohibitionists can be found in examining the three available
surveys of the movement's history. Norman Clark, <i>Deliver Us
From Evil: An Interpretation of American Prohibition</i>(New
York: W. W. Norton &amp; Co., 1976) and Paul Aaron and David
Musto, &quot;Temperance and Prohibition In America: A Historical
Overview&quot; in Mark H. Moore and Dean Gernstein, eds., <i>Alcohol
and Public Policy: Beyond the Shadow of Prohibition</i>
(Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1981), 127-181 devote no
space to the topic. Jack S. Blocker, Jr. <i>American Temperance
Movements: Cycles of Reform</i>(Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1989),
30- 34, 59-64, 74-79 mentions violence in connection with
enforcement of the Maine Law and in the direct action of the
women's crusades of 1873 and their precursors. Moreover, Mark
Lender, editor, <i>Dictionary of American Temperance Biography</i>
(Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 1984) does not contain a sketch of
any prohibitionists killed, either as response to agigation or
because law enforcement activities. </p>

<p> Three works discuss the role of violence associated with
temperance reform. Jed Dannebaum, <i>Drink and Disorder:
Temperance Reform in Cincinnati from the Washington Revival to
the WCTU</i> (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press,
1984) and Jack S. Blocker Jr., <i>&quot;Give to the Winds Thy
Fears&quot;: The Women's Temperance Crusade, 1873-1874</i>
(Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985); Robert Bader, <i>Prohibition
in Kansas</i> (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1986). </p>

<p> On liquor law enforcement before national prohibition see:
Stephen Cresswell, <i>Mormons, Cowbosy, Moonshiners, and
Klansmen: Federal Law Enforcment in the South and West, 1870-
1893</i> (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1991); William
F. Holmes, &quot;Moonshining and Collective Violence: Georgia,
1889- 1895,&quot; <i>Journal of American History</i> 67 (1980):
589-611; William F. Holmes, &quot;Whitecapping: Agrarian Violence
in Mississippi, 1902-1906,&quot; <i>Journal of Southern History</i>
35 (1969): 165-185; Wilbur R. Miller, <i>Revenuers and
Moonshiners: Enforcing Federal Liquor Law in the Mountain South,
1865-1900</i> (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1991). </p>

<p> (2) Indeed, certain killings connected to the civil rights
crusade have been used to illuminate the very nature of the
movement and its opponents. See for example, Seth Cagin and
Philip Dray, <i>We Are Not Afraid: The Story of Goodman,
Schwerner and Chaney and the Civil Rights Campaign for
Mississippi</i> (New York: Bantam Books, 1988) and Herbert
Shapiro, <i>White Violence and Black Response From Reconstruction
to Montgomery</i> (Amherst: University of Massachsetts Press,
1988). </p>

<p> (3)On the topic of abolitionist violence and their reactions
to violence see, Jane H. Pease and William Pease,
&quot;Confrontation and Abolition in the 1850s,&quot; <i>Journal
of American History</i> 58 (1972): 923-937; John Demos, &quot;The
Antislavery Movement and the Problem of Violent 'Means,'&quot; <i>New
England Quarterly</i> 37 (1964): 501-526; Lewis Perry, <i>Radical
Abolitionism: Anarchy and the Government of God in Antislaery
Thought</i> (Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 1973); Michael
Fellman, &quot;Rehearsal for the Civil War: Antislavery and
Proslavery at the Fighting Point in Kansas, 1854-1856,&quot; in
Lewis Perry and Michael Fellman, <i>Antislavery Reconsidered: New
Perspectives on the Abolitionists</i> (Baton Rouge: Louisiana
University Press, 1979), 287-307; Silvan S. Tomkins, &quot;The
Psychology of Commitment: The Constructive Role of Violence and
Suffering for the Individual and for His Society, in Martin
Duberman, editor, <i>The Antislavery Vanguard: New Essays on the
Abolitionists</i> (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965),
270-298. On violence directed against abolitionists see <i>&quot;Gentleman
of Property and Standing:&quot; Anti-Aboliton Mobs in Jacksonian
America</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1970). Beyond
specific works that deal with violence, three surveys of the
abolitionist crusade show how intergal the topics of violence are
to the reform's history as they devote attention to both the
violence against and by abolitionists: Ronald G. Walters, <i>The
Antislavery Appeal: American Abolitionism After 1830</i> (New
York: Norton, 1978); Merton L. Dillon, <i>The Abolitionists: the
Growth of a Dissenting Minority</i> (Dekalb: Northern Illinois
University Press, 1974) and James B. Stewart, <i>Holy Warriors:
The Abolitionists and American Slavery</i> (New York: Hill and
Wang, 1976). </p>

<p> (4) Clarence T. Wilson, Deets Picket, and Harry G. McCain,
editors, <i>The Pocket Cyclopedia of Temperance</i> (Topeaka:
Temperance Society of Methodist Epsicopal Church, revised
edition, 1916), 155-162; Ernest Cherrington, ed., <i>Standard
Encyclopaedia of the Alcohol Problem</i> 6 volumes (Westerville,
OH: American Issue Publishing Co., 1925-1930), 2618-2620, also
for example see 85, and 1800-1801, &amp; 2133 (bible story); even
midway through the crusade, drys were recording the suffering of
their martyrs, see: <i>Cyclopaedia of Temperance and Prohibition</i>
(New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1891), 201-202. </p>

<p> (5) The list, derrived from <i>SEAP</i> and <i>Pocket</i>
includes: Dr. J. W. Beal and Judge D. R. Cox both killed in
Malden, Missouri on Februray 18 1907; Edward W. Carmack, United
States Senator from Tennessee, shot November 9, 1908 in
Nashville; Sam D. Cox, editor and publisher of <i>The Sentinel</i>
killed in Minatare, Nebraska on December 20 1906: Roderick D.
Gambrell, editor of <i>The Sword and Shield</i> killed in
Jackson, Mississippi on May 5, 1887; Rev. John R. Moffett, editor
of <i>Anti-Liquor</i> shot on November 11, 1892 in Danville
Virginia; and Joseph B. Rucker editor of the <i>Somerset Reporter</i>
killed in Somerset, Kentucky on September 19, 1892. Two of these
killings have received scholarly treatment, Paul Isaac, <i>Prohibition
and Politics: Turbulent Decades in Tennessee, 1885-1920</i>
(Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1965) and Richard F.
Hamm, &quot;The Killing of John R. Moffett and the Trial of J. T.
Clark: Race, Prohibition, and Politics in Danville,
1887-1893,&quot; <i>Virginia Magazine of History and Biography</i>
101 (1993): 375-404 </p>

<p> (6) This is the case of John R. Moffett, for details see:
Hamm, &quot;Killing.&quot; The assertion that Moffett did not die
for his convictions generated a controversy between the slain
man's brother and William Copeland, editor of the Danville paper
at Moffett's death and later editor of the <i>Times Dispatch</i>.
See: S. H. Thompson, <i>The Life of John R. Moffett</i> (Salem:
McClung &amp; White, 1895), 141-144. Richmond <i>Times Dispatch</i>,
April 17, 1903, 4; Correspondence between W. W. Moffett &amp;
Richmond <i>Times Dispatch</i> Concerning Reverend John R.
Moffett&quot; bound typescript, Virginia Baptist Historical
Society, Botwright Library, University of Richmond, Richmond;
Richmond <i>Times Dispatch</i> May 26, 1903, 4; Guide, Walter
Scott Copeland Papers #5497, E. J. Jordan, Jr., compiler, Rare
Books and Manuscripts Alderman Library, University of Virginia. </p>

<p> (7) After the pioneering work of Joseph Gusfield on the
social status of temperance reformers, scholars rushed to test
this theory, and for nearly a generation, the study of
prohibition focused, as the title of one article put it, on
&quot;The Prohibitionists Who Were They?&quot; Joseph R.
Gusfield, <i>Symbolic Crusade: Status Politics and the American
Temperance Movement</i> (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
1963); Jack Blocker, Jr. &quot;Modernity of Prohibitionists&quot;
and Charles A. Isetts, &quot;A Social Profile of WCTU Crusade:
Hillsboro, Ohio&quot; in Jack Blocker Jr., ed., <i>Alcohol Reform
and Society: the Liquor Issue in Social Context</i> (Westport,
CN: Greenwood Press, 1979), 99-110, 149-170; Robert A. Hohner,
&quot;The Prohibitionists: Who Were They?&quot; <i>South Atlantic
Quarterly</i> 68 (1969): 491-505; Jack S. Blocker Jr., <i>&quot;Give
to the Winds Thy Fears&quot;: The Women's Temperance Crusade,
1873-1874</i> (Westport, CN: Greenwood Press, 1985). The salience
of relgious idenity and the prohibition issue emerged as a topic
in political histories. Richard Jenson, <i>The Winning of the
Midwest, Social and Political Conflict, 1888-1896 </i>(Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1971); Paul Kleppner, <i>The Cross
of Culture: A Social Analysis of Midwestern Politics, 1885-1900</i>
(New York: MacMillian Free Press, 1970); Jed Dannebaum,
&quot;Immigrants and Temperance: Ethnocultural Conflict in
Cincinnati, 1845-1860&quot; <i>Ohio History</i> 87 (Autumn 1978):
125-139. </p>

<p> (8) On the issue of whether prohibition should be considered
a progressive reform, Richard Hofstader in <i>The American
Political Tradition</i> (New York: Vintage Books, 1954) and in <i>Age
of Reform</i> (New York: Vintage Books, 1955) and Andrew
Sinclair, <i>Era of Excess: A Social History of the Prohibition
Movement</i> (New York: Harper and Row, 1962) argued no. John
Burnham in &quot;New Perspectives on the Prohibition 'Experiment'
of the 1920s&quot; <i>Journal of Social History </i>2 (1968):
51-68; and James Timberlake in <i>Prohibition and the Progressive
Movement, 1900-1920</i> (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1963) challenged that view. Jack S. Blocker, Jr., <i>Retreat from
Reform: The Prohibition Movement in the United States, 1890-1913</i>
(Westport: Greenwood Press, 1976) plotted the temperance
movement's abandonment of broader social reform to concentrate on
prohibition alone. Works by, Norman Clark and Austin Kerr,
utilizing the organizational interpretation of Robert Wiebe,
placed prohibition firmly within the panapoly of progressive
reforms. See Clark, <i>Deliver Us From Evil</i>; K. Austin Kerr, <i>Organized
for Prohibition: A New History of the Anti-Saloon League</i> (New
Haven, CN: Yale University Press, 1985). On the organizational
interpretation see: Louis Galambos, &quot;The Emerging
Organizational Synthesis of Modern American History,&quot; <i>Business
History Review</i> 44 (Autumn 1980): 279-90; Samuel P. Hays, <i>Response
to Industrialism, 1885-1914</i> (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1957), 48- 70; Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., <i>The Visible
Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business</i>
(Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1977); Louis Galambos,
&quot;Technology, Political Economy, and Professionalization:
Central Themes of the Organizational Synthesis,&quot; <i>Business
History Review</i> 57 (Winter 1983): 471-93. Recently, the work
on temperance reform has focused on its relationship with larger
question of reform in the history of women. Ruth Bordin, <i>Woman
and Temperance </i>(Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1981),
15-33; Barbara Leslie Epstein, <i>The Politics of Domesticity:
Women, Evangelism and Temperance in Nineteenth Century America</i>
(Middletown, CN: Wesleyan University Press, 1981, 1986); Ruth
Bordin, <i>Francis Willard: A Biography</i> (Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press, 1986); Ian Tyrrell, <i>Woman's
World Woman's Empire: the Woman's Christian Temperance Union in
International Perspective, 1880-1930</i> (Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press, 19. </p>

<p> (9) I am as guilty as any other scholar in the field, see
Richard F. Hamm, <i>Shaping the Eighteenth Amendment: Temperance
Reform, Legal Culture, and the Polity, 1880-1920</i> (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995). We do not have a
good modern history of the Prohibition Party, though Blocker, <i>Retreat</i>
is a good start; similarily WCTU histories have tended to trail
off with Frances Willard's death. Where such narratives are to be
found are in the local studies of an area or region. Local
studies which have looked at the mechanics of the movement like
Robert L. Hampel, <i>Temperance and Prohibition in Massachusetts,
1813- 1852</i> (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Research Press, 1982); have
often focused on areas that did not have significant outbreaks of
violence during temperance agitation. </p>

<p> (10) The only full length biolgraphies of Nation are old and
negative, Herbert Asbury, <i>Carry Nation</i> (New York: Knopf,
1929) and Robert Lewis Taylor, <i>Vessel of Wrath: The Life and
Times of Carry Nation</i> (New York: Signet Books, 1966). The
recent work by Robert Bader is more sympathic and connects her
clearly to events in Kansas. Robert S. Bader, &quot;Mrs.
Nation,&quot; <i>Kansas History</i> 7 (1984/5): 246-262; and <i>Prohibition,
</i>133-155. Nation is desperately in need of a biography which
could use the insights of women's history, gender relations, and
temperance studies to illuminate her career. The place to begin
such a reinterpretation of Nation is her autobiography, Carry A.
Nation, <i>The Use and Need of the Life of Carry A. Nation</i>
(Topeka, KA: F. M. Stevens and Sons, 1909). </p>

<p> (11) Stephen B. Oates, <i>To Purge This Land with Blood: A
Biography of John Brown</i> (New York: Harpers, 1970); Dillon, <i>Abolitionists</i>
119,-243; Stewart, <i>Holy</i>,147-148, 151-161, 164-177;
Walters, <i>Antislavery</i>, 28-33. </p>

<p> (12) Lisa Belkin, &quot;Kill For Life,&quot; <i>New York
Times Magazine</i> October 30, 1994, 47-50, 62, 76, 80;
&quot;Rescuing a City's Reputation,&quot; Transcript &quot;All
Things Considered&quot; August 26, 1994, 9-16. </p>

<p> (13) Douglas Dobbins, <i>Quarrytown</i> (Westerville:
American Issue Publishing, 1915), 48-48, 51-67, 71-80, 100-107,
155-159, 184-189, 201-207. </p>

<p> (14) Bader, <i>Prohibition</i>, 134-155; Taylor, <i>Vessel</i>,
62-94, 113-142 </p>

<p> (15) Quoted in Bader, <i>Prohibition</i>, 140; Hamm, <i>Shaping</i>,
123-129. </p>

<p> (16) Quoted in Bader, Prohibition, 149-150. </p>

<p> (17) Blocker, <i>Retreat</i>, 197-234; Hamm, <i>Shaping</i>,
155- 255; <i>SEAP</i>, 177, 207, 2725. </p>

<p> (18) Robin Room, &quot;Governing Images and the Prevention of
Alcohol Problems,&quot; <i>Preventative Medicine</i> 3 (1974):
11-23, 11. </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>