
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-70</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B006-355</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/sumdis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134919 text/html 20025
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:49:06 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:47 GMT
Content-length: 19807
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana -- Summary and
Discussion</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana</b> </p>

<h1>SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION</h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Under the influence of marihuana changes in personality as
shown by alterations in test performance are slight. They are not
statistically significant and indicate only tendencies or trends.
Moreover, the drug effect is not always in proportion to the
amount taken, nor are the changes consistently in one direction.
In many instances the effect of small doses (2 cc.) or of
marihuana cigarettes is the opposite of the effect of larger
doses (5 cc.) (2) </p>

<p>(2) While sufficient experimentation has not been made to
validate the finding, it should be noted that the personality
changes produced by 2 cc. or marihuana cigarettes are almost
always in agreement in contrast to the changes resulting from the
ingestion of 5 cc. The 2 cc. Dosage apparently more nearly
approximates the amount a person would take if left to his own
devices. </p>

<p>The personality changes observed when the subject is under the
influence of 2 cc. of marihuana or marihuana cigarettes
demonstrate that the subject experiences some reduction in drive,
less objectivity in evaluating situations, less aggression, more
self-confidence and a generally more favorable attitude toward
himself. These reactions can be ascribed to two main causes,
namely, an increased feeling of relaxation and disinhibition and
increased self-confidence. As the drug relaxes the subject, the
restraints which he normally imposes on himself are loosened and
he talks more freely than he does in his undrugged state. Things
which under ordinary circumstances he would not speak about are
now given expression. Metaphysical problems which in the
undrugged state he would be unwilling to discuss, sexual ideas he
would ordinarily hesitate to mention, jokes without point, are
all part of the oral stream released by the marihuana. </p>

<p>At the same time that he verbalizes more freely, there is a
reduction in the individual's critical faculty. This is probably
due both to the intellectual confusion produced by the drug and
to the less exacting attitude his feeling of relaxation induces.
He holds himself less rigidly to the standards of his undrugged
phase and does not drive himself to achieve. He is satisfied with
himself and willing to accept himself as he is. This
self-satisfaction undoubtedly helps produce the feeling of
self-confidence which allows the subject to come out more freely
in fields which he formerly avoided. This increased confidence
expresses itself primarily through oral rather than physical
channels. Physically the subject reports pleasant sensations of
&quot;drifting&quot; and &quot;floating&quot; and he allows
himself to become enveloped in a pleasant lassitude. </p>

<p>After the administration of larger doses of marihuana (5 cc.)
the pleasurable sensations appear to be outweighed by concomitant
feelings of anxiety'and, in some cases, of physical distress,
such as nausea. Under these circumstances, for many subjects
there is little increase in confidence but rather heightened
insecurity which precludes outgoing reactions and tends to evoke
generally negativistic attitudes to most stimuli. </p>

<p>It is important to note that neither the ingestion of
marihuana nor the smoking of marihuana cigarettes affects the
basic outlook of the individual except in a very few instances
and to a very slight degree. In general the subjects who are
withdrawn and introversive stay that way, those who are outgoing
remain so, and so on. Where changes occur the shift is so slight
as to be negligible. In other words reactions which are natively
alien to the individual cannot be induced by the ingestion or
smoking of the drug. </p>

<p>Although in most instances the effects of the drug are the
same for the user and the non-user, there are some differences
both in kind and extent. Where the effects for the two groups are
in the same direction they generally are more marked in the case
of the non-user. This is not unexpected in view of the non-user's
lack of habituation to the drug action. For the nonuser his
present experience is a strange, even hazardous one, and the
uncertainty and anxiety attendant upon this impairs the sense of
well-being which the drug produces in the user. Thus the non-user
frequently feels-less secure when he is &quot;high&quot; than he
does normally and is less well adjusted than he is in ordinary
circumstances. </p>

<p>When the productions of the undrugged marihuana user are
studied, certain personality traits which serve to differentiate
him from the non-user and from the &quot;average&quot; individual
can be discerned. As a group the marihuana users studied here
were either inhibited emotionally or turned in on themselves,
making little response to stimuli in the world about them. People
with this type of personality generally have difficulty adjusting
to others and are not at ease in social situations. This
withdrawal from social contacts apparently finds little
compensatory or sublimating activity elsewhere. These subjects
did not have a desire or urge to occupy themselves creatively in
a manner which might prove socially useful. They showed a
tendency to drift along in passive fashion and gave a good
portion of their attention to relatively unimportant matters.
These men were poorly adjusted, lonely and insecure. As indicated
by their history they seldom achieved good heterosexual
adjustment. </p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS </p>

<ol>
    <li>Under the influence of marihuana the basic personality
        structure of the individual does not change but some of
        the more superficial aspects of his behavior show
        alteration. </li>
    <li>With the use of marihuana the individual experiences
        increased feelings of relaxation, disinhibition and
        self-confidence. </li>
    <li>The new feeling of self-confidence induced by the drug
        expresses itself primarily through oral rather than
        through physical activity. There is some indication of a
        diminution in physical activity. </li>
    <li>The disinhibition which results from the use of marihuana
        releases what is latent in the individual's thoughts and
        emotions but does not evoke responses which would be
        totally alien to him in his undrugged state. </li>
    <li>Marihuana not only releases pleasant reactions but also
        feelings of anxiety. </li>
    <li>Individuals with a limited capacity for effective
        experience and who have difficulty in making social
        contacts are more likely to resort to marihuana than
        those more capable of outgoing responses. </li>
</ol>

<hr>

<p><b>Family and Community Ideologies</b> </p>

<p>Adolph G. Woltrnann, MA </p>

<p>At the outset of the study it seemed worth while to supplement
the quantitative data by some qualitative procedures of the
projective type which might throw light on the social reactions
of the individuals who were being studied. One of the methods
that has shown its possibilities, particularly in its use with
children, is the play technique in which the individual is
permitted to give free expression to some of his unconscious
motivations in a way that is not immediately apparent to him. The
limitation of this technique is the fact that it is highly
interpretive, but it has the advantage of permitting observations
of the subject's personality reactions in problem situations. </p>

<p>Such a study was accordingly carried out on 18 subjects in the
early part of the investigation. </p>

<p>METHOD </p>

<p>Two situations were studied: one, subsequently to be referred
to as the family set-up, in which toys were used to build an
apartment or home, and another, subsequently to be known as the
community set- up, in which a second variety of toys were used to
construct a town setting. </p>

<p>The Family Set-up </p>

<p>The equipment used in this part of the study consisted of a
box of household toys of the type available in the ten-cent
store, including beds, dressers, chairs, tables, sinks, a stove,
a bathtub, a wash basin, a piano, lamps, flower boxes, a
telephone, doll sets of a man, woman, boy, girl, and maid, and,
in addition, several small wooden slats which were intended to be
used as room partitions. </p>

<p>The box of toys and materials was presented to the subject
with the following directions: &quot;Here are a number of toys
which can be placed in such a manner that a house can be built
from them. You are supposed to be this doll (man). Go ahead and
build yourself a house or apartment. You may use as few or as
many toys as you wish. You may also make believe you are a
bachelor or a married man with or without a family.&quot; </p>

<p>The Community Set-up </p>

<p>In studying the community set-up the following items were
employed: eighteen wooden houses, trees, cars, trucks, fire
engines, an ambulance, a radio police car, a railroad train,
airplanes, and numerous figures representing men, women, and
children from different walks of life. All these toys were handed
to the subject at the same time with the instruction to build a
town or city. As in the family set-up, no further help or
suggestions were given. </p>

<p>The actual method of handling these materials allows for two
approaches. In the free method the subject is encouraged to play
with any toy and to create and act out any situation that the
nature of the toy suggests to him. No help, clues, or hints are
given. In the controlled methods either the subject is told to
create a specific pattern or his responses and reactions to a
predetermined particular situation are elicited. Both methods
were used in this study. </p>

<p>After the subject had completed either his family or his
community set-up and answered questions regarding certain
situations about which the examiner had questioned him the
following points were investigated: ( 1 ) subject's marital
status, both real and assumed; (2) type of home he built for
himself (number of rooms, type of furnishing); (3) subject's
assumed occupation; (4) monthly income and rent which he posited;
(S) his reaction to attempted burglary; (6) his reaction to his
wife's and his own infidelity; and (7) the attitude he would take
toward civic problems if given a position of responsibility such
as mayor. In addition, the examiner appraised the subject's
neatness and orderliness in his home and community setup. The
experiment was given first when the subject was undrugged and
then when he was under the influence of marihuana. </p>

<p><b>FINDINGS</b> </p>

<p>Results were collated in terms of the type and frequency of
responses to different situations both before and after taking
marihuana and in terms of number of items (toys) employed in the
set- up, as, for example, in the case of the home situation, the
number of rooms the subject thought necessary for his apartment
and the amount of rent he thought he ought to pay and its
relation to the income he posited for himself; in the case of the
community set- up, the number of times the subject provided for
ambulances, firemen, and policemen; in the case of the subject's
reaction to burglary, whether he took a passive or a resistant
attitude toward the burglary and whether he assumed the burglar
had absconded with most of the property and so on; in the case of
his attitude toward his wife's adultery, whether he thought he
ought to divorce her or try for reconciliation; and, when the
subject was unfaithful, whether he thought his wife ought to
forgive his delinquency. </p>

<p>In most cases comparisons between responses or reactions
showed little difference in attitude before and after the
ingestion of marihuana and therefore it would not be too
profitable in this short summary of the work to present all the
data obtained. However, by way of illustrating the type of
material procured, the following tables are given: </p>

<p>(TABLE 20) </p>

<p>(TABLE 21) </p>

<p>The majority of the patients, though unmarried in real life,
assumed families and responsibilities in the play situation, and
in a free situation acted out family activities and ideologies.
These figures reveal that, on the average, the subjects when
under the influence of the drug tended to build apartments with
somewhat fewer rooms. The impression of the examiner was that
this was due primarily to the subject's desire to get through
with the task as quickly as possible in order to return to his
room to rest and sleep. </p>

<p>(TABLE 22) </p>

<p>A &quot;make-believe&quot; sickness or accident necessitating
the use of an ambulance was the most frequently observed play
pattern. When the subjects were under the influence of the drug
the incidence of the ambulance and the police was considerably
less than it was when they were in the undrugged state. </p>

<p>(TABLE 23) </p>

<p>The most frequent form of passive reaction to his wife's
infidelity was that the subject would pack up and leave home. The
aggressive reactions consisted of ordering the wife out of the
home in three instances, jailing the wife and lover in one
instance, throwing the wife out in one instance, killing the
lover but leaving the wife unmolested in one instance, and
beating up the lover and leaving the wife unharmed in one
instance. </p>

<p>The following are examples of subjects' responses to the
adultery situation. When he was facing the pretended situation
before taking marihuana, one subject immediately left his house,
borrowed money from his employer, and traveled to the West Coast.
After he arrived there he proceeded to drink and in due time
became a derelict on the Barbary Coast. When asked about his
children he said, &quot;That's closed with the rest of the
chapter. Let her ardent lover support the children. I take on an
assumed name. Others might get a divorce and custody of the
children but in my case my home life would be a closed
chapter.&quot; After the administration of marihuana he still
showed a passive attitude, but, having assumed the role of a
psychologist, he felt obliged to act accordingly. At first he
considered divorce action, but since that would deprive the
children of a home, he finally forgave his wife. Then he stopped
in his contemplations, looked at the examiner and said, &quot;Why
do I become altruistic? . . . That's beyond me . . . Maybe I
become a martyr . . . I commit an act of martyrdom.&quot; Another
subject, when in the undrugged condition, ordered his wife out of
the house and later divorced her. In the drugged state customary
procedures were reversed. The subject went to his parents and
remained passively at home while his mother unsuccessfully tried
to bring about a reconciliation. </p>

<p>The subject's attitude toward adultery did not change in the
drugged state. The data in Table 24 illustrate the fact that
ingestion of marihuana generally does not alter the subject's
basic attitude. </p>

<p>(TABLE 24) </p>

<p>Practically all the subjects approved of saloons. Gambling was
rejected because it deprives wives and children of money and
leads to trouble. A heavy loser may try to recoup his losses
through holdups, and fights and homicide may develop from
quarrels. Prostitution was condoned by about 5O per cent of the
subjects both before and after the ingestion of the drug, but the
use of marihuana was frowned upon more often when the subject was
undrugged than when he was in the drugged state. </p>

<p>(TABLE 25) </p>

<hr>

<p><b>SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS<br>
</b></p>

<p>Eighteen subjects who participated in the marihuana study were
subjected to the play situation with the idea of seeing whether
the pattern of play or the ideas investigated were materially
altered in consequence of the ingestion of the marihuana. Among
the ideologies which were appraised were: (1) attitude toward
family set-up; (2) attitude toward different occupations; (3)
attitude toward income; (4) attitude toward situations ordinarily
calling for aggression, namely an attempted burglary of his home
and sexual infidelity on the part of his wife; (5) attitude
toward authority. </p>

<p>In general the subject's attitude toward family and community
ideologies as manifested in play did not change markedly as a
result of the ingestion of marihuana. The subjects (in play) were
not intolerant of infidelity or aggressive toward lawbreakers
either before or after the ingestion of marihuana. On the whole
the initial passive reactions already observed in other parts of
the study were likewise observed in the play situation
experiment. The only very definite change as a result of the
ingestion of marihuana was in their attitude toward the drug
itself. Without marihuana only 4 out of 14 subjects said they
would tolerate the sale of marihuana while after ingestion 8 of
them were in favor of this. </p>

<p>Another significant manifestation in the play situation
pertains to the construction of the community set-up. In general
the community was less orderly and well organized when the
subjects had had marihuana. It is probable that this poor
organization may be ascribed to the generally indifferent
attitude and lack of motor coordination already observed in the
more controlled studies. </p>

<p>On the whole, the experiment with play technique gave less
information as to the effect of marihuana on subjects than had
been hoped for. This may have been due to the incompleteness of
the method employed or possibly to the fact that this technique
is designed to give data about the basic personality of the
individual rather than such alterations in it as might be caused
by pharmacological agents.<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>