
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-45</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B006-335</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/omintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034124 text/html 14015
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:06 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:38 GMT
Content-length: 13797
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Opium Monopoly -- Introduction</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM MONOPOLY</h1>

<p><b>BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE</b> </p>

<p><b>INTRODUCTION</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>We first became interested in the opium traffic during a visit
to the Far East in 1916. Like most Americans, we had vaguely
heard of this trade, and had still vaguer recollections of a war
between Great Britain and China, which took place about
seventy-five years ago, known as the Opium War. From time to time
we had heard of the opium trade as still flourishing in China,
and then later came reports and assurances that it was all over,
accompanied by newspaper pictures of bonfires of opium and opium
pipes. Except for these occasional and incidental memories, we
had neither knowledge of, nor interest in the subject. On our way
out to Japan, in the July of 1916, we met a young Hindu on the
boat, who was outspoken and indignant over the British policy of
establishing the opium trade in India, as one of the departments
of the Indian Government. Of all phases of British rule in India,
it was this policy which excited him most, and which caused him
most ardently to wish that India had some form of
self-government, some voice in the control and management of her
own affairs, so that the country could protect itself from this
evil. Without this, he declared, his country was powerless to put
a stop to this traffic imposed on it by a foreign government, and
he greatly deplored the slow, but steady demoralization of the
nation which was in consequence taking place. As he produced his
facts and figures, showing what this meant to his people-this
gradual undermining of their moral fiber and economic efficiency
we grew more and more interested. That such conditions existed
were to us unheard of, and unbelievable. It seemed incredible
that in this age, with the consensus of public opinion sternly
opposed to the sale and distribution of habit-forming drugs, and
with legislation to curb and restrict such practices incorporated
in the laws of all ethical and civilized governments, that here,
on the other side of the world, we should come upon opium traffic
conducted as a government monopoly. Not only that, but conducted
by one of the greatest and most highly civilized nations of the
world, a nation which we have always looked up to as being in the
very forefront of advanced, progressive and humane ideals. So
shocked were we by what this young Hindu told us, that we flatly
refused to believe him. We listened to what he had to say on the
subject, but thinking that however earnest he might be, however
sincere in his sense of outrage at such a policy, that he must of
necessity be mistaken. We decided not to take his word for it,
but to look into the matter for ourselves. </p>

<p>We did look into the matter. During a stay in the Far East of
nearly a year, in which time we visited Japan, China, Hong Kong,
French IndoChina, Siam and Singapore, we looked into the matter
in every country we visited. Wherever possible we obtained
government reports, and searched them carefully for those
passages giving' statistics concerning the opium trade-the amount
of opium consumed, the number of shops where it was sold, and the
number of divans where it was smoked. We found these shops
established under government auspices, the dealers obtaining
their supplies of opium from the government, and then obtaining
licenses from the government to retail it. In many countries, we
visited these shops and divans in person, and bought opium in
them freely, just as one goes to a shop to buy cigarettes. We
found a thorough and complete establishment of the opium traffic,
run by the government, as a monopoly. Revenue was derived through
the sale of opium, through excise taxes upon opium, and through
license fees paid by the keepers of opium shops and divans* -A
complete, systematic arrangement, by which the foreign government
profited at the expense of the subject peoples under its rule. In
European countries and in America, we find the governments making
every effort to repress the sale of habit-forming drugs. Here, in
the Far East, a contrary attitude prevails. The government makes
every effort to encourage and extend it. </p>

<p>Two notable exceptions presented themselves. </p>

<p>One was Japan. There are no opium shops in Japan, and the
Japanese Government is as careful to protect its people from the
evils and dangers of opium as any European country could be. It
must be remembered, however, that Japan is a free and independent
country. It has never been conquered by a European country, and
perhaps one explanation as to why the Japanese are a powerful,
virile people, is because Japan is the one Oriental nation that
has never been dominated by a European power, and in consequence,
never drugged. </p>

<p>The other exception is our own possession of the Philippines,
which although a subject country, has never had the opium traffic
established as part of the machinery of an alien government. </p>

<p>On our return to America, we were greatly exercised over these
facts which we had unearthed. We continued our researches as to
the opium traffic in the New York Public Library, and in the
Library of Congress, in Washington, in both of which places there
is a rich and abundant literature on the subject. We obtained
ready access to official blue books and government reports,
issued by the British Government, and it is from these sources
that the material in this book is largely drawn. We were somewhat
hampered in our investigations by the fact that because of the
war, these blue books have not always been of recent date, some
of them being two or three years old. For this reason, it has not
always been possible to give the most recent figures as to opium
consumption and distribution in the various countries. However,
we feel that we have obtained enough information to uphold our
case, and in any event, there is no doubt that the opium traffic,
as fostered by the British Government, still continues. In
looking over the list of British colonies where it is
established, we may find here and there a diminution in the
amount of opium consumed, but this is probably due to the
exigencies of war, to the lack of shipping and transportation,
rather than to any conscientious scruples or moral turnover;
because the revenue derived from the opium trade is precious. In
some instances, as in the case of the Straits Settlements, the
local British Government derives from forty to fifty percent of
its revenue from this source. Yet, taken in relation to the
whole, it is not large. However valuable it may be, however large
the percentage in the case of any particular colony, it can
surely never be large enough to compensate for the stigma
attached.- It is a blot upon the honor of a great nation to think
that she deliberately runs her colonies on opium: No revenue,
whether large or small, can be justified when coming from such a
source as this. </p>

<p>In all these blue books and official reports, the question of
the Opium Monopoly, as it is called, is dealt with freely. There
is no attempt to hide or suppress the facts. The subject is
reported frankly and fully. It is all there, for any one to read
who chooses. How then, does it happen that we in America know
nothing about Great Britain's Opium Monopoly? That the facts are
new to us and come to us as a shock? One is because of our
admiration for Great Britain. Those who know and there are a
few-hesitate to state them. Those who know, feel that it is a
policy unworthy of her. We hesitate to call attention to the
shortcomings of a friend. There are other reasons also for this
conspiracy of silence-fear of international complications, fear
of endangering the good feeling between the two countries,
England and America. Consequently England has been able to rely
upon those who know the facts to keep silent, either through
admiration or through fear. Also the complete ignorance of the
rest of us has been an additional safeguard. Therefore, for
nearly a century, she has been running her Opium Monopoly
undisturbed. It began as a private industry, about the time of
the East India Company, but later on passed out of the hands of
private individuals into the department of Opium Administration,
one of the branches of the colonial government&quot; But, loyal
as we have been all these years, we can remain silent no longer.
The time is now rapidly approaching when the two countries,
England and America, are to become closely united. How can we
become truly united, however, when on such a great moral question
as this we stand diametrically opposed? </p>

<p>There is still another reason why we should break silence. The
welfare of our own country is now at stake. The menace of opium
is now threatening America, and our first duty is to ourselves.
Little by little, surreptitiously, this drug has been creeping in
over our borders, and to-day many thousands of our young men and
young women are drug addicts, habituated to the use of one of the
opium derivatives, morphia or heroin. The recent campaign against
drug users, conducted by the New York Department of Health, has
uncovered these addicts in great numbers; has brought them before
us, made us see, in spite of ourselves, that thousands of them
exist and that new ones are being created daily. The question
arises, how do they obtain the drug? It was the fortune of the
writer to be present during the first week of the opening of the
Health Department Clinic for Drug Addicts, and her work consisted
in taking the histories of these pitiful, abject wrecks of men
and women who swarmed to the clinic in hundreds, seeking supplies
of the drug which they could not obtain elsewhere. The history of
these patients was almost invariably the same-there was a
monotony in their tragic, pathetic recital as to how they became
victims, how they first became acquainted with the drug. As a
rule, they began in extreme youth, generally between fifteen and
twenty years of age, one boy having begun at the age of thirteen.
In nearly every case they had tried it as a lark, as an
experiment. At &quot;parties,' they said, when some one of the
company would pass round a box full of heroin, inviting them to
snuff it. To snuff it, these children, very much as a small boy
goes behind the barn to try his first cigarette. In many
instances those who produced the box were peddlers, offering it
as a gift at first, knowing that after a dose or two the fatal
habit would be formed and another customer created. These
peddlers doubtless obtained their supplies from smugglers. But
that takes us back to our argument, namely, the part played by
that great nation which grows and distributes opium to the world.
For that nation produces an oversupply of opium, far more than is
needed by the medical profession for the relief of pain. Opium is
not profitable in its legitimate use. It is only profitable
because of the demands of addicts, men and women deliberately
debauched, either through the legalized machinery of colonial
governments, or through the illegal activities of smugglers. A
moral sentiment that will balk at this immense over-production,
the sole object of which is to create drug victims, is the only
weapon to fight it. In giving this book to the public, we are
calling upon that moral sentiment. We feel that we shall number
among our staunchest supporters that great body of men and women
in England who have for years been vainly fighting the opium
traffic. No more bitter opponents of this policy are to be found
than amongst the English people themselves. From time to time, in
Parliament, sharp debates have arisen as to the advisability of
continuing it, and some of the greatest men in England have been
steadfastly opposed. The great Gladstone has described it as
&quot;morally indefensible.&quot; The time has now come for us,
people of both countries, to unite to stop it.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>