
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B042-122</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ledain/nonmed1a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130916 text/html 36024
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:09:04 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:08 GMT
Content-length: 35806
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Canadian Government Commission - The Commission's
Interpretation of Its Task</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<h2>CHAPTER ONE </h2>

<h2>THE COMMISSION'S INTERPRETATION OF ITS TASK </h2>

<p> </p>

<h3>The Background of the Commission's Appointment </h3>

<p>1. The Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs
was appointed by the Government of Canada under Part I of the
Inquiries Act on May 29, 1969, on the recommendation of the
Honourable John Munro, Minister of National Health and Welfare. </p>

<p>The concern that gave rise to the appointment of the
Commission is described in Order-in-Council P.C. 1969-1112, which
authorized the appointment, in the following terms: </p>

<p>The Committee of the Privy Council have had before them a
report from the Minister of National Health and Welfare,
representing: </p>

<p>'That there is growing concern in Canada about the non-medical
use of certain drugs and substances, particularly, those having
sedative, stimulant, tranquillizing or hallucinogenic properties,
and the effect of such use on the individual and the social
implications thereof; </p>

<p>That within recent years, there has developed also the
practice of inhaling the fumes of certain solvents having an
hallucinogenic effect, and resulting in serious physical damage
and a number of deaths, such solvents being found in certain
household substances. Despite warnings and considerable
publicity, this practice has developed among young people and can
be said to be related to the use of drugs for other than medical
purposes; </p>

<p>That certain of these drugs and substances including lysergic
acid diethylamide, LSD, methamphetamines, commonly referred to as
'Speed', and certain others, have been made the subject of
controlling or prohibiting legislation under the Food and Drugs
Act, and cannabis, marijuana, has been a substance, the
possession of or trafficking in which has been prohibited under
the Narcotic Control Act; </p>

<p>That notwithstanding these measures and the competent
enforcement thereof by the R.C.M. Police and other enforcement
bodies, the incidence of possession and use of these substances
for non-medical purposes has increased and the need for an
investigation as to the cause of such increasing use has become
imperative. </p>

<p>During the year or so preceding the appointment of the
Commission, members of parliament had called for an inquiry into
the use of drugs. One member spoke of 'the galloping increase in
the use of marijuana and the increasing number of young people
tragically being paraded daily before the courts' and of 'the
extreme urgency of dealing properly with these cases'. In
announcing the Government's intention to appoint the Commission,
the Minister of National Health and Welfare spoke of 'the grave
concern felt by the Government at the expanding proportions of
the use of drugs and related substances for non-medical
purposes'. </p>

<h3>The Commission's Terms of Reference </h3>

<p>3. The Order-in-Council authorizing the appointment of the
Commission sets out its terms of reference as follows; </p>

<p>That inquiry be made into and concerning the factors
underlying or relating to the non-medical use of the drugs and
substances above described and that for this purpose a Commission
of Inquiry be established, constituted and with authority as
hereinafter provided. </p>

<p>(a) to marshal from available sources, both in Canada and
abroad, data and information comprising the present fund of
knowledge concerning the non-medical use of sedative, stimulant,
tranquillizing, hallucinogenic and other psychotropic drugs or
substances; </p>

<p><i>(b) </i>to report on the current state of medical knowledge
respecting the effect of the drugs and substances referred to in
(a); </p>

<p><i>(c)</i> to inquire into and report on the motivation
underlying the non-medical use referred to in (a); </p>

<p><i>(d)</i> <i>to inquire into and report on the social,
economic, edu</i>cational and philosophical factors relating to
the use for non-medical purposes of the drugs and substances
referred to in (a) and in particular, on the extent of the
phenomenon, the social factors that had led to it, the age groups
involved, and problems of communication; and </p>

<p><i>(e)</i> <i>to inquire into and recommend with respect to
the ways </i>or means by which the Federal Government can act,
alone or in its relations with Government at other levels, in the
reduction of the dimensions of the problems involved in such use.
</p>

<h3>The Implications of the Terms of Reference </h3>

<p>4. While the Commission's terms of reference make specific
mention of the sedative, stimulant, tranquillizing and
hallucinogenic drugs, they also require inquiry concerning other
psychotropic drugs and substances. <i>The Commission understands
drug to mean any substance that by its chemical nature</i><b> </b><i>alters
structure or function in the living organism. The psychotropic
drugs are those drugs which alter sensation, mood, consciousness
or other psychological or behavioural functions. </i>These
concepts are further clarified in Chapter Two<b> </b>of this
report. A number of classifications of psychotropic drugs have
been brought to the Commission's attention. Chapter Two presents
the classification that has been accepted by the Commission. It
also contains a detailed account of the psychotropic properties
and medical and non-medical uses of certain of the drugs causing
the greatest public concern. It is clear to the Commission that
it would not be appropriate to confine its attention to the
so-called 'soft drugs' such as marijuana, hashish and LSD. The
'hard drugs' such as the opiate narcotics, of which heroin is an
example, have marked psychotropic effects. The amphetamines or
'speed' drugs which are popularly considered as hard drugs appear
to be increasing in their non-medical use. Moreover, both the
structure of present Canadian drug laws and the nature of the
drug controversy make it impossible to consider the 'soft drugs'
without reference to the amphetamines and the opiates. Indeed,
the opiate narcotics have been and are an important reference
point in, establishing the public perspective for the non-medical
use of many other drugs. The Commission believes that it has
properly focused its primary attention in the initial phase of
its inquiry on the non-medical use of drugs such as cannabis, LSD
and amphetamines by young people. However, we have had a growing
concern for the facts and implications of the use of drugs such
as alcohol and tobacco by people of all ages. These two drugs,
both of which are psychotropic, remain the most popular drugs in
non-medical use among both young people and adults. Adults
generally seem unwilling to accept the fact that alcohol and
tobacco are drugs, and often find it difficult to view the
non-medical drug use of youth with reference to and in the
context of the socially acceptable use of drugs by adults. </p>

<p>5. Two broad categories in which the use of psychotropic drugs
can be classified are: (a) medical and non-medical use, and (b)
legal and illegal use. While the distinction between legal and
illegal use is simple and derives directly from the law, it is
difficult to find a satisfactory definition of medical and
non-medical drug use. <i>Medical use of drugs is taken</i> <i>by
the Commission to be use which is indicated for generally
accepted medical reasons, whether under medical supervision or
not; all drug use which is not indicated on generally accepted
medical grounds is considered to be non-medical use. </i>Thus,
the occasional use of aspirin to control the pain of an ordinary
headache is considered to be medical use, while the dependent use
of large quantities of barbiturates obtained through one or more
prescriptions is not. Clearly, non-medical use is not to be
equated with illegal use. The use of alcohol by adults is
generally non-medical but it is legal, whereas the use of
marijuana is both non-medical and illegal. </p>

<p>6. The commission is invited to marshal the present fund of
world knowledge concerning the non-medical use of psychotropic
drugs and substances. Taken literally, this task is impossible,
with the time and resources available to the Commission. The
world literature on all the psychotropic drugs and substances is
very extensive. There are over 40,000 items on alcohol alone at
Rutgers University, a major centre of alcohol studies. There are
estimated to be over 2,000 items on cannabis. Experts in the
field have testified to the extreme difficulty of keeping abreast
of the literature, particularly because of its multi-disciplinary
character. There are only a few sources of comprehensive
information on this continent: the Addiction Research Foundation
of Ontario is by far the best equipped in this country; the
National Institute of Mental Health in the United States provides
a computerized data retrieval service. In Geneva, the World
Health Organization of the United Nations possesses extensive
bibliographical resources. </p>

<p>Collecting the available data and information is only one
stage. It is also necessary to establish and apply criteria of
scientific validity to such data and information. In many
instances, the Commission is obliged to rely heavily on the work
of experts who have themselves sifted and critically evaluated
the available literature. It must form its judgements on the
basis of the materials which they have identified as most
relevant and reliable. The Commission cannot carry out a
comprehensive bibliographical work for the whole range of
psychotropic drugs and substances. It must try to seize upon the
essentials in the present fund of knowledge as they bear upon the
areas of concern and the issues in this inquiry. </p>

<p>7. The Commission is required to report on the current state
of medical knowledge concerning the effect of psychotropic drugs
and substances. This it has attempted to do in an interim
fashion, in Chapter Two, entitled 'The Drugs and Their Effects'.
The effects contemplated by paragraph (b) in the terms of
reference are presumably the physiological and psychological
ones, including their behavioural manifestations. The term
'medical' is rather too narrow as a reference to the expertise
which is in the determination of drug effects since these are a
complex result of many factors, including the expectation of the
user and the social setting in which the drug is taken. In its
interim brief to the Commission, the Canadian Medical Association
stressed the multi-disciplinary character of the study required
for a proper understanding of non-medical drug use. We have,
therefore, interpreted the word 'medical' to refer broadly to all
scientific knowledge concerning the effects of drug use. The
language of paragraph (b) of the terms of reference suggests that
it was not intended that the Commission would itself undertake
original research into the effects of non-medical drug use.
Although we do not exclude the possibility of some clinical or
experimental work, particularly with respect to the effect of
certain drugs on psychomotor functions, it is our opinion that
with the time and resources at our disposal, and having regard to
the research currently being conducted by such organizations as
the Addiction Research Foundation and the National Institute of
Mental Health, we should confine ourselves to carrying out a
critical review of the existing knowledge and ongoing research,
as well as attempting to identify research priorities and the
role which the federal government can play in relation to
research. </p>

<p>8. The remaining paragraphs in the terms of reference deal
with the extent and the causes of non-medical drug use. They
reflect a broad concern to understand the reasons for the
increase in such use. They invite the Commission to attempt to
place this phenomenon in a proper social and philosophic context.
We cannot help feeling that this is one of the most important
aspects of our task: one on which there is a compelling need for
an understanding of current Canadian attitudes. This is implied
by the allusion in paragraph (d) of the terms of reference to
'problems of communication'. To understand the factors underlying
non-medical drug use and the problems for which government action
may be indicated, it is necessary to consider not only the
effects, extent, and causes of such use, but the range of social
response and attitude which such use has elicited from
government, other institutions and individuals. For non-medical
drug use and the social response to it are interacting and
mutually conditioning phenomena. </p>

<h3>Methods of Inquiry </h3>

<p>9. The Commission has used a variety of methods of inquiry.
Because of the profound social significance of the non-medical
drug use phenomenon and of the importance of personal and public
attitudes to it, the Commission decided early to conduct public
hearings in all of the provinces. It has attached particular
important to these hearings. They have been used to foster the
widest possible public discussion. In order to encourage the
participation of young people, it was decided to hold some of the
public hearings in more informal settings than may have been
customary for such commissions in the past. In addition to the
public hearings, the Commissioners have collectively and
individually held numerous private hearings, have consulted with
experts in several fields related to non-medical drug use, and
have read extensively in the scientific and legal literature. The
Commission has also received many communications, written and
oral, from Canadians in all walks of life. </p>

<p>10. At the beginning of September, 1969, the Commission wrote
to over 750 individuals and organizations inviting them to submit
briefs or to make oral submissions. In particular, the Commission
solicited briefs from: federal and provincial government
departments; law enforcement authorities, educational
institutions and associations; members of university faculties
and departments; medical and pharmaceutical institutions and
associations, addiction research foundations; street clinics and
other innovative services; correctional and welfare
organizations; bar associations; youth organizations; student
organizations; and a wide variety of other organizations and
individuals having an evident concern or point of contact with
the phenomenon of non-medical drug use in Canada. The Commission
received a gratifying response to this invitation, and despite
the relatively short time available in some cases for the
preparation of briefs, individuals and organizations made a very
commendable effort to prepare submissions for the public hearings
which began in the middle of October. </p>

<p>11. A list of the organizations and individuals who have been
identified with submissions to the Commission in the initial
phase of this inquiry is contained in Appendix A to this report,
Fifty-five organizations have been represented at the public
hearings at which they have submitted written briefs; twenty have
been represented by oral submissions; forty-five have made
written submissions to the Commission without appearing at a
public hearing. Thirty two individuals have submitted written
briefs and 45 others have made oral submissions at public
hearings. In addition, there have been numerous oral submissions
and interventions by members of the public who have attended the
hearings. The Commission has also received several hundred
letters from individuals, and a selection of these letters or
excerpts from them is included in the Report as Appendix B. We
emphasize that this selection is not intended to convey the
weight of opinion in this correspondence, but simply to reflect
something of the range of response. </p>

<p>12. In the initial phase of this inquiry, the Commission has
held public hearings in the following centres: Toronto - October
16, 17 and 18; Vancouver - October 30 and 31; Victoria - November
1; Montreal - November 6, 7 and 8; Winnipeg - November 13 and 14;
Ottawa - December 12 and 13; Halifax - January 29 and 30; St.
John's - January 31; Fredericton - February 19; Moncton -
February 20; Sackville - February 20; and Charlottetown -
February 21; Kingston - March 5. </p>

<p>A special word may be appropriate concerning the nature of the
public hearings. They have been conducted in a rather informal
manner. There has been a considerable degree of audience
participation. People have felt free to comment on formal
submissions, and there has been a great deal of informal exchange
among persons attending the hearings. On the whole, response to
this style of hearing has been favourable, although there has
been some criticism from one or two organizations who have
expressed the opinion that we should not have permitted questions
and critical comments from members of the public. Because of the
nature of the phenomenon which it is required to investigate, the
Commission is convinced that it has been essential to attempt to
establish a true public forum for discussion<i> </i>of the
issues. Most organizations have reacted favourably to this kind
of inquiry. In addition to the more traditional settings of
hotels and public buildings, the Commission has held public
hearings at universities and from time to time in coffee houses
that have become centres of the new youth culture. </p>

<p>Informal hearings have been held in the following
universities: York University; the University of Toronto; the
University of British Columbia; the University of Montreal;
McGill University; Sir George Williams University; the University
of Manitoba; the University of Winnipeg; the University of
Ottawa; Carleton University; Dalhousie University; Memorial
University; the University of New Brunswick; the University of
Moncton; Mount Allison University; the University of Prince
Edward Island; and in the following coffee houses: 'The Penny
Farthing' in Yorkville, Toronto; 'The Bistro' in Vancouver, and
the 'Back Door' in Montreal. </p>

<p>The hearings in these more informal settings have given the
Commission direct and vivid contact with the opinions and
attitudes of young people in Canada. All the Commission hearings
have been recorded on tape, and in addition there has been a
stenographic record. In many ways it is a matter of regret that
an audio-visual record could not have been made, but the nature
of the subject matter is such that the Commission felt obliged to
protect individuals appearing before it from undue publicity. The
media have cooperated with the Commission in respecting its
request that members of the public should not be photographed
while making submissions. In many cases, the submissions have
been of a highly personal nature, and the hearings would have
been much inhibited if they had been photographed. At the same
time, the Commission has been intensely aware of the fact that it
was listening to an unusual social commentary. Opinions and
feelings have poured forth in the hearings with great
spontaneity, particularly in the more informal settings. The
Commission has been deeply impressed, and on several occasions,
moved by the testimony which it has heard. It has been struck by
the depth of feeling which this phenomenon and the social
response to it have aroused. As a result of the initial phase of
its inquiry, the Commission is more than ever convinced that the
proper response to the non-medical use of psychotropic drugs is a
question which must be worked out by the people of Canada,
examining it and talking it over together. It goes to the roots
of our society and touches the values underlying our whole
approach to life. It is not a matter which can be confined to the
discrete consultation of experts, although experts obviously have
their role, and a very important one, to play. </p>

<p>13. A word should be said about the protection of witnesses.
The terms of reference of the Commission empower it to take
testimony in such manner as to safeguard the anonymity of
witnesses. The Order-in-Council authorizing the appointment of
the Commission provides: </p>

<p>That the said Commissioners may, if they deem the same
expedient, cause a record to be made of the evidence which shall
be given or produced before them, or any part of that evidence,
as to the matters to be inquired into and reported upon and may
direct that the oral evidence of witnesses, before them, or any
such witness, shall be taken in shorthand by a shorthand writer,
approved and sworn by the said Commissioners or one of them, and
may direct that the oral evidence of any such witness may be so
given and recorded, whether under oath or otherwise, without a
disclosure of the identity of that witness, and that any evidence
so recorded shall be certified by the person or persons taking
the same in shorthand, as correct. </p>

<p>The notices which the Commission has published of its hearings
have given prominence to this readiness to take evidence given
privately and anonymously, and many witnesses have availed
themselves of this opportunity. The Commission has also received
a number of anonymous submissions through the mail. At the same
time, concern has been expressed from time to time that the
public hearings might be used for law enforcement purposes. As a
result of an understanding at the outset of this inquiry with the
officers of the R.C.M.P., the Commission has been able to assure
the public that its hearings would not be exploited for law
enforcement purposes. It has every reason to believe that this
understanding has been respected. Although there have been
rumours from time to time that law enforcement personnel have
taken advantage of the hearings for purposes of investigation, no
evidence of this has been brought to the attention of the
Commission, despite public statements by the Chairman that any
such instances should be reported to him. </p>

<p>The Commission has been very impressed by the candour with
which people of all ages have come forward and spoken from a
depth of conviction, and feeling about the phenomenon of
non-medical drug usage and its relation to other aspects of
social and cultural change today. </p>

<p>14. Altogether, it is estimated that nearly 12,000 Canadians
have attended the hearings up to the end of February. The
Commissioners have travelled some 17,000 miles, and in the months
ahead they will continue to move back and forth across the
country until every province and major city have been visited, as
well as many of the smaller communities. </p>

<p>15. The Commission has had the benefit of a wide range of
advice from experts in the field of non-medical drug use. It is
only possible here to mention some of those who were particularly
helpful. </p>

<p>The Commission has had several sessions with officers of the
R.C.M.P, and has received the fullest cooperation from the Force
in its attempt to understand the lessons of law enforcement in
this field. In addition to the public submission of the Force,
each Division prepared a brief, and the Commission has had the
advantage of private hearings with officers from each Division.
Moreover, research consultants of the Commission have been
permitted to observe law enforcement by the Force at first hand.
The Commission has also received a number of written
communications from the Force in addition to its formal
submissions. We can not speak too highly of the cooperation that
we have received from the R.C.M.P., who went to particular
trouble, on relatively short notice in the initial stages of the
inquiry, to give the Commission the benefit of their experience.
Whatever view one may take of law enforcement policy in this
controversial field, we feel obliged to record our respect for
the highly professional manner in which the R.C.M.P. have sought
to per-form their duty in relation to this inquiry. We look
forward to their continued cooperation as we deepen our study of
the problems of law enforcement and the administration of justice
in the field of non-medical drug use. </p>

<p>The Commission has also received a great deal of valuable
assistance from addiction foundations, notably the Addiction
Research Foundation of Ontario, the Narcotic Addiction Foundation
of British Columbia, and OPTAT (Office de la Prevention et du
Traitement de l'Alcoolisme et des Autres Toxicomanies). From the
outset of its inquiry the Commission has had the benefit of
frequent consultation with members of the Ontario Foundation, and
the Commission's research staff have made extensive use of the
bibliographical and documentary resources of the Foundation. </p>

<p>The Commission has also consulted with many other experts, in
Canada and the United States. It plans to consult with many more,
including experts outside North America, in the ensuing year. For
the present, it would like to make special mention of the
assistance which it has received from Dr J. Robertson Unwin, Dr
Lionel Solursh and Mr Wilfred Clement, whose intimate knowledge
of the Canadian drug scene from a scientific, yet deeply human
perspective, has made their observations and advice invaluable.
The Commission should also record its indebtedness for advice
received in the early stages of the inquiry from Dr Helen Nowlis
of the University of Rochester, Samuel Pearlman of the City
University of New York, Dr Daniel Glaser of the New York State
Narcotic Addiction Control Commission; members of the National
Institute of Mental Health, and Department of Justice in the
United States. </p>

<h3>The Role of the Interim Report </h3>

<p>16. We have had some difficulty in determining what should be
the role of our interim report. In particular, we have been
somewhat perplexed as to how far we are justified in coming to
conclusions and making recommendations at this time. But we are
required by our terms of reference to render an interim report,
and we assume that something more is expected than a simple
report of progress. We believe that what is expected, at the very
least, is a report, which conveys our initial understanding of
the subject matter of the inquiry and makes such recommendations
as we feel are urgent and for which we believe we have a
sufficient basis at this time. We hope it will serve to put the
phenomenon of non-medical drug use in some perspective, to
identify the issues, and to provide the basis for further
consideration and discussion by the people of Canada. Further, by
identifying certain attitudes, hypotheses, and tentative
opinions, the interim report will serve, we hope, as a sounding
board, eliciting further evidence and opinion, and indicating to
us wherein our definition of the issues and our preliminary
opinions may require revision. </p>

<p>17. The function of the final report will be to complete the
picture begun by the interim report and to report upon the system
of social response which we recommend for the phenomenon of
non-medical drug use. The inquiry between the interim report and
the final report will test the definitions of issues and the
hypotheses reflected in the interim report, add necessary
information with respect to the effects, the extent, and the
causes of non-medical drug use, as well as the role played by the
various aspects of social control and response, and lay the
foundation for specific recommendations concerning these various
aspects. The interim report is primarily concerned with a
statement of the issues and applicable principles, and the final
report is to be concerned with the detailed application of these
principles to the development of a satisfactory system of social
response. </p>

<p>We recognize, however, that the urgency of some of the
problems involved in non-medical drug use and the time required
to develop adequate resources to cope with them may indicate the
appropriateness of certain recommendations at this time. This is
particularly true with respect to preparations and organization
for which considerable lead time is required. In such cases it
may be sufficient to indicate the general direction which certain
responses should take, leaving it to further study and
consultation in the ensuing year to settle matters of detail. </p>

<p>18. Chapter Two on the effect of the drugs is offered at this
time for two reasons. First, we have been profoundly impressed by
repeated assertions of the need for more reliable information,
and we hope that this chapter will serve a useful purpose as
material for drug education. Secondly, we feel that it is an
indispensable basis for the development of public understanding
of the issues. In effect, in Chapter Two we disclose our initial
assumptions concerning the effects of the drugs. Our </p>

<p>object is to identify the body of reliable and generally<b> </b>accepted
knowledge, and to determine where the important uncertainties and
gaps exist. We certainly concur in the impression which others
have conveyed of a field of knowledge bedevilled by controversy,
conflicting professional opinion, and uncertainty. Some observers
question whether it is possible, in view of the intense feelings
on this subject, ever to come to agreement on what should be
accepted as scientifically known. Erich Goode in his article,
'Marijuana and the Politics of Reality', observes that 'the
multitude of results from the many marijuana reports forms a sea
of ambiguity into which nearly any message may be read'. He makes
the point that whether a particular drug effect is good or bad
depends on one's subjective point of view - the implications of
the effect in term's of one's own system of values. Goode sees no
possible reconciliation of these <i>'</i>differential evaluations<i>
</i>of the same &quot;objective&quot; consequences', and he
concludes that 'the essential meaning of the marijuana issue is
the meaning which each individual brings to it'. The Addiction
Research Foundation of Ontario makes the same point in its
preliminary submission to the Commission. It puts the matter this
way: </p>

<p>However, after all possible information has been acquired and
verified scientifically, the final steps in the formulation of
legislation or governmental policy will be based upon value
judgements. Even the classification of the effects of drug use as
'beneficial' or 'adverse' is a process of evaluation with respect
to subjective standards. </p>

<p>The response to non-medical drug use is profoundly a matter of
attitudes. At the same time we must make every effort to
ascertain what should be accepted as scientific knowledge of the
'objective' effects. It is intolerable that the process of
subjective evaluation should take place in ignorance of the
objective facts. At the same, we would do well to heed Goode's
caution that there is an inevitable tendency to select and
emphasize those views of 'objective' facts which support our own
subjective evaluation. And as Goode points out, with special
reference to the La Guardia Report on marijuana, the various
findings can be used to support conflicting points of view. Are
we to conclude that the task is hopeless? We think not. We can
certainly make progress by attempting to identify what should be
accepted scientifically concerning the 'objective' effects, by
pointing out the important areas of scientific controversy or<b> </b>lack
of scientific knowledge, and by making explicit the value
judgements underlying the conflicting views as to how the effects
should be subjectively characterized. We believe it is helpful to
clarify the issues of the debate. </p>

<h3>Staff and Research </h3>

<p>19. The members of the Commission and their staff are listed
in Appendix C. The Commission is carrying out its task with a
small nucleus of full-time staff and with research consultants on
a part-time basis for special aspects of its study. The
Commission's Research Associates, Dr Charles Farmilo and Dr Ralph
D. Miller, are concentrating on<b> </b>psychopharmacological
research into the effects of the drugs. Dr Miller is the author,
with the assistance of Dr Farmilo, of Chapter Two on 'The Drugs
and Their Effects'. Research that has been commissioned so far
includes survey research to determine the extent and patterns of
non-medical drug use in Canada, as well as Canadian perceptions
of and attitudes towards this phenomenon, and legal studies, both
doctrinal and empirical, of the various problems involved in the
regulation of non-medical drug use. The section of Chapter Five
dealing with the law is based in part on preliminary work by
Professor Paul Weiler and John Hogarth. </p>

<p>Research is only part of the work that is involved in an
inquiry of this kind. Special mention should be made of the
administrative staff who have had to work under particular
pressure because of the requirement of an interim report,
impinging concurrently with the organization and conduct of the
public hearings. We would like to express our appreciation of the
work of Mr James J. Moore, Executive-Secretary of the Commission,
who has had the general direction of operations and who has also
participated in the writing of the report; Mr Jack Macbeth, who
has been of great assistance in the organization of hearings and
the preparation of the report; Mrs Vivian Luscombe who has
supervised the secretarial staff of the Commission; Mr C. William
Doylend, the Ottawa Office Manager, and other members of the
administrative, secretarial and research staff. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>