
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-70</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B020-97</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/maa1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053213 text/html 10067
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:31:47 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:15 GMT
Content-length: 9850
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Marijuana Addicts Anonymous</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Marijuana Addicts Anonymous </h1>

<p> <b>by Lance B.</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> An article in the June 23, 1987 Oakland Tribune caught my
eye: &quot;Grass not always green for long term marijuana
users&quot; described the formation of Marijuana Addicts
Anonymous on the Alcoholics Anonymous' 12 step model. </p>

<p> I put a quarter in the can and poured myself a cup of Peet's
espresso and was shown the stash of real half-and-half in the
refridge instead of the simulated dairy creamer out on the
counter. Flavoured mineral waters and juices for reasonable
donations gave the scene a definite Berkeley ambience. </p>

<p> After overcoming my behavioural denial &quot;mistake&quot; of
going to the wrong address and leaving the newspaper article with
the correct address at home that set my visit back by a week I
finally arrived at the meeting place. </p>

<p> Housed in a defunct computer software house's office building
now dedicated to drug treatment. </p>

<p> I had to rehearse it numerous times before going in.
&quot;Hi, I'm Lance and I'm a marijuana addict&quot;, smile, and
seem sincere. The words choked in my throat at first but became
easier as I set the script in place to be recited. A room in the
back was populated with angular chrome/naugahyde stacking chairs,
a heterogeneous grouping of 20 to 30 men and women from early
20's to late 40's sat down in a circle and recited the
&quot;serenity prayer&quot;. </p>

<p> I studied the handouts I collected from the table. Blurry
gray but readable copies of the lists of the 12 steps, serenity
prayer, 12 questions. There was an undated hit piece by Daryl
Inaba, recent convert to the NEW STRONGER DANGEROUS marijuana
federal mythology that enumerated the usual litany of brain
damage, immune system suppression, higher addictive potential,
lung cancer liability, and harm to sexual functioning. While all
of these claimed adverse effects are still problematic and
indelibly tainted by the current policy of &quot;its the signal
we send them&quot; school of psychopharmacology, the significant
role of marijuana in facilitating other drug dependencies Inaba
cites appears to have merit. </p>

<p> Fred, an extroverted unemployed mid-thirtyish balding man
with workingman plaid cotton flannel shirt and thick glasses who
giggled nervously, fidgeting, was chosen to read the
&quot;Questions&quot; The following questions may help you
determine whether marijuana is a problem in your life:
&quot;(insert 12 questions) He later went onto describe his other
difficulties with paranoid schizophrenia and alcoholism. His
monologue became disjointed and he would laugh an inappropriate
laugh that sounded mighty stoned- the way weed made me feel 20
years ago. </p>

<p> For a few moments when different members of the group
responded with the same laughs I felt the dry contact high. </p>

<p> Fred also attended AA meetings as did over half the group to
deal with concurrent problems with alcohol. The protocol and
routines of AA were easily modified to center on difficulties
with marijuana abuse and dependence. </p>

<p> &quot;Hi! I'm Cindy. I'm a marijuana addict.&quot; The
temporary chair, Cindy, a slender woman in her mid 20's with a
broad-jawed attractive face with aquiline nose described how it
dulled her ability to do her ceramics and caused her to become
withdrawn and shut down. </p>

<p> Helen, a short tense voluptuous woman in her late 20's
described difficulties dealing with the feelings of anger she now
attempts to cope with by working through instead of using
marijuana to suppress her feelings. She described confronting her
need to quit when her therapist refused to see her if she didn't.
The group applauded her staying straight for the last month. </p>

<p> Bob, a rather overweight man in his mid twenties described
undergoing a brush with temptation and death over the weekend
when out hiking in the Mt Shasta area he stumbled into a
marijuana patch and was confronted by the armed growers. He
managed to talk his way out of the situation but was sorely
tempted to buy some. He obsessed about it all the way back to San
Francisco and has memorized the way to find the patch should he
plan to go back up. </p>

<p> He still might. </p>

<p> Rick, a fourth year law student at Hastings in San Francisco
described his need to give up cannabis after having detoxed and
stayed clean from alcohol for the past six weeks. If he let
himself go to pot it set him up to fall of the wagon and take
that critical drink that would end in an uncontrollable binge. </p>

<p> Grace, a hefty dark hispanic in her 30's, brought along her
two preadolescent daughters who sat quietly on the chairs or on
the floor listening. A single parent divorcee grappling with her
other main addiction of overeating to cope with her bad feelings
as an adult child of an alcoholic family. </p>

<p> Many who attended AA or NA meetings complained that neither
group would give appropriate support to participants concerned
with kicking the cannabis habit. The AA groups, of course, were
centered around alcohol. The NA groups were dominated by the
heroinists and cocaine compulsives that discounted the concern
with cannabis dependence. </p>

<p> The topic of the evening was denial. The moderator of the
meeting after giving his potalog of his difficulties caused by
his cannabis habit and then called for a volunteer to speak out.
The substance may be different from alcohol but the addiction
process is the same. </p>

<p> Denial springs like crab grass on the lawn needing
extirpation all the time. </p>

<p> &quot;Im ____ and I'm a marijuana addict&quot; &quot;Hi
_____&quot; the group choruses in response. </p>

<p> Avoiding the weed is a preoccupation that brings as a
consequence the dealing with emotional issues nakedly instead of
with the help of that mild sedative that cuts down the fear and
anger reactions. Everything goes along OK until something goes
wrong and then without thinking a joint is rolled and smoked.
Back to square one. </p>

<p> Trying to interpose the detached less reactive
marijuana-stoned self unfortunately has the consequence of
emotionally distancing one from others with resulting problems
with family and friends. Additionally, the sedation and spaciness
from the weed cuts into concentration that causes problems on the
job with the secondary worries from the impaired performance. </p>

<p> There were no horror stories of broken homes, violence,
writhing-on-the-floor withdrawal but minor irritability,
nightmares during the first week and then the yearnings for the
herb in a social situation when it was offered by friends. The
biggest factor in relapse was some stressful event. </p>

<p> As the hour and a half drew to a close the secretary of the
meeting called for business announcements before all joined hands
in a circle and recited the closing prayer. </p>

<p> After the meeting outside the back door many of the members
carried on conversations in small knots- lighting up and often
passing around nicotine cigarettes. Overcoming addictions is a
step-by-step, drug-by-drug process for the afflicted is a
life-long personal struggle. </p>

<p> Three members were looking over hand drawn tentative designs
for a logo for the first chapter of Marijuana Addicts Anonymous
in the world here in Berkeley with gossip about some proprietary
marijuana dependence treatment groups. One of these for profit
groups back on the east coast have already laid claim to a
marijuana leaf with a red slashed circle superimposed. </p>

<p> There was clearly group pride and cohesiveness. This was
indeed a group of self-helpers that are there to help its members
hang on from week to week without the heavy exploitive hand of
government agencies. Telephone numbers are exchanged so that a
member in danger of relapse can reach out in his or her time of
need. </p>

<p> MAA now meets in Berkeley and Oakland in two different
locations three times a week. A new chapter will probably start
up soon in San Francisco. I admitted after the meeting to a few
people that I was active with NORML which didn't seem to put them
off. I suggested that MAA solicit support from NORML since we all
agreed the criminalization of marijuana didn't help anything...
at least these individuals didn't. When I told NORML's west coast
coordinator he liked the idea and will attend MAA with me in two
weeks. Who knows? </p>

<p> Lance B. </p>

<p> Berkeley, California </p>

<p> August 12, 1987 </p>

<p> Meeting number two was dominated by the potalog of Sheila an
attractive blonde female physician in her early thirties who was
recovering from alcohol and then finally kicking the pot habit
described her feelings of loss of control as she found herself
screaming at her patients. Speaking in a barely audible voice she
described her success in dealing with the emotions she once
suppressed with cannabis and other chemicals. </p>

<p> The number in attendance was pushing 30 and many were eager
to share their stories of temptation and travail. The speakers
would make efforts to refer to the previous offerings giving
liberal strokes of acknowledgment of similarity or pertinence to
his or her situation. </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>