
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-52</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B014-155</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/alcohol/FEDCNCL.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122042528 text/html 7453
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:25:20 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:35:41 GMT
Content-length: 7236
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>The Federal Council of Churches and Prohibition </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_alcohol_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="alcohol.htm">Alcohol</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="45071" -->

<h2><font color="#000000">The Federal Council of Churches</font></h2>

<p><font color="#000000">The Federal Council of Churches
supported prohibition and the 18th Amendment. In 1926 two of its
officers reaffirmed that support in testimony before the
Committee on the Judiciary of the United States Senate. The
following is scanned from K. Austin Kerr, ed., <i>The Politics of
Moral Behavior: Prohibition and Drug Abuse</i> (Reading: Addison
Wesley, 1973) </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">The support of national prohibition by
the Federal Council of the Churches rests upon four fundamental
considerations. </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">First. The belief that in dealing with
gigantic social evils like disease or crime, individual liberty
must be controlled in the interest of the public welfare. Second.
The belief that the liquor traffic is beyond question such an
evil. Third. The conviction that no plan less thoroughgoing than
prohibition is sufficient to eradicate the evils of the liquor
traffic. Fourth. The evidence of history that other methods of
attempting to control the traffic have failed and that
prohibition, despite inadequacies of enforcement, is succeeding
better than any other program. </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">Limitation upon individual freedom in
matters affecting society is the price that any people must pay
for the progress of its civilization. Personal liberty can not
rightly be claimed for practices which militate against the
welfare of others or the interests of the community as a whole. </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">It is especially contrary to democratic
ideals and to enlightened public policy to permit any citizen to
make profit from a business which is detrimental to his neighbor.
This is readily recognized by all as sound policy in regard to
the trade in narcotics. It is equally true of the liquor traffic.
To insure social protection against a trade whose avowed purpose
was to get people to consume the maximum possible amount of
alcoholic liquor is the foundation on which our national policy
of prohibition rests. </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">The policy of prohibition was not
adopted hastily nor was it foisted upon the country by a
puritanical minority. It was first voted in most of the States
separately and then nationally, because the people had become
convinced that the liquor traffic was a social evil of such
magnitude that it had to be destroyed. The eighteenth amendment
was made a part of the Constitution by the regular methods which
the founders of the Republic devised with a view to making the
amendment to the Constitution difficult rather than easy. Yet
this amendment was adopted more promptly than any other change in
the Constitution ever proposed. </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">The reasons which led to prohibition not
only remain to-day but have been reinforced by the experience of
other nations. The social peril of alcoholism is becoming a
growing concern to statesmen throughout the world. If serious
evils have sprung up since prohibition, they are far less than
the evils which arose from the liquor traffic prior to the
amendment. The liquor traffic with the accompanying saloon was
allied with political corruption, crime, gambling, and
prostitution. It meant the wreckage of men and the degradation of
families, which social workers and ministers saw constantly in
their daily work. It produced needless inefficiency in industry.
Moreover, the tendency in the United States, as has been the case
in Europe, was toward an increasing consumption of the stronger
liquors with consequent intensifying of social hazards. Methods
of control short of prohibition, such as taxation, regulations,
and the governmentally controlled systems of some of the Canadian
Provinces, Norway, and Sweden, have all proved inadequate to cope
with the evil. </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">The proposal to modify the Volstead Act
so as to permit the sale of wines and beer presents insuperable
objections. It would make enforcement more difficult. It would
inevitably mean the return either of the saloon or something
equally undesirable. Bootlegging in stronger liquors would become
more menacing because it would tend to operate through the places
where the milder intoxicants were sold. Moreover, there is no
evidence to justify the contention that to permit wine and beer
would reduce the consumption of ardent spirits. The teaching of
experience is to the contrary. </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">The one path of advance is for all good
citizens personally to observe the law and to support the great
enterprise, born of the idealism of the people, of completely
ridding the Nation of as demoralizing a business as the liquor
traffic has always proved itself to be. Least of all should our
prohibition law be changed in response to the cry of those who by
their own disrespect for the law are preventing it from receiving
a fair trial or who, because of their special interest in the
return of the liquor traffic, are artificially stimulating an
agitation for changing our present law. The call of the hour is
for such a thoroughgoing work of moral persuasion and legal
enforcement as will give the policy of prohibition an adequate
opportunity to demonstrate its full value to the Nation and to
the world. </font></p>

<p><font color="#000000">Rev. S. Parkes Cadman, President.<br>
Rev. Charles S. Macfarland, General Secretary. </font></p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_alcohol_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="alcohol.htm">Alcohol</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="45071" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>