
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-69</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-260</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/potbible.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044050 text/html 83408
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:40:34 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:47:47 GMT
Content-length: 83190
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marijuana and the Bible by The Ethiopian Zion Coptic
Church</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<h1>MARIJUANA AND THE BIBLE </h1>

<p><b>by</b> </p>

<p><b>The Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h2>OFFERINGS OF DEVOTION </h2>

<p>With offerings of devotion, ships from the isles will meet to
pour the wealth of the nations and bring tribute to his feet. The
Coptic Church believes fully the teachings of the Bible, and as
such we have our daily obligations, and offer our sacrifices,
made by fire unto our God with chants and Psalms and spiritual
hymns, lifting up holy hands and making melody in our hearts. </p>

<p>Herb (marijuana) is a Godly creation from the beginning of the
world. It is known as the weed of wisdom, angel's food, the tree
of life and even the &quot;Wicked Old Ganja Tree&quot;. Its
purpose in creation is as a fiery sacrifice to be offered to our
Redeemer during obligations. The political worldwide
organizations have framed mischief on it and called it drugs. To
show that it is not a dangerous drug, let me inform my readers
that it is used as food for mankind, and as a medicinal cure for
diverse diseases. Ganja is not for commerce; yet because of the
oppression of the people, it was raised up as the only liberator
of the people, and the only peacemaker among the entire
generation. Ganja is the sacramental rights of every man
worldwide and any law against it is only the organized conspiracy
of the United Nations and the political governments who assist in
maintaining this conspiracy. </p>

<p>The Coptic Church is not politically originated, and this was
firmly expressed when we met with the political directorate of
the land during the period of pre-incorporation. We support no
political organization, pagan religion, or commercial
institution, seeing that religion, politics, and commerce are the
three unclean spirits which separate the people from their God.
Because of our non-political stand, the church has received
tremendous opposition from the politicians, who do not want the
eyes of the people to be opened. Through its agency, the police
force, the church has been severely harassed, victimized, and
discriminated. Our members have passed through several acts of
police brutality, our legal properties maliciously destroyed,
members falsely imprisoned, divine services broken up and all
these atrocities performed upon the Church, under the name of
political laws and their justice. </p>

<p>Walter Wells -- Elder Priest of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic
Church of Jamaica, West Indies </p>

<h2>THE USE OF MARIJUANA IN ANCIENT TIMES </h2>

<p>The use of marijuana is as old as the history of man and dates
to the prehistoric period. Marijuana is closely connected with
the history and development of some of the oldest nations on
earth. </p>

<p>It has played a significant role in the religions and cultures
of Africa, the Middle East, India, and China Richard E. Schultes,
a prominent researcher in the field of psychoactive plants, said
in an article he wrote entitled &quot;Man and Marijuana&quot;: </p>

<p>&quot;...that early man experimented with all plant materials
that he could chew and could not have avoided discovering the
properties of cannabis (marijuana), for in his quest for seeds
and oil, he certainly ate the sticky tops of the plant. Upon
eating hemp the euphoric, ecstatic and hallucinatory aspects may
have introduced man to an other-worldly plane from which emerged
religious beliefs, perhaps even the concept of deity. </p>

<p>The plant became accepted as a special gift of the gods, a
sacred medium for communion with the spiritual world and as such
it has remained in some cultures to the present.&quot; </p>

<p>The effects of marijuana was proof to the ancients that the
spirit and power of the god(s) existed in this plant and that it
was literally a messenger (angel) or actually the Flesh and Blood
and/or Bread of the god(s) and was and continues to be a holy
sacrament. Considered to be sacred, marijuana has been used in
religious worship from before recorded history. </p>

<p>According to William A. Embolden in his book Ritual Use of
Cannabis Sativa L, p. 235: </p>

<p>&quot;Shamanistic traditions of great antiquity in Asia and
the Near East has as one of their most important elements the
attempt to find God without a vale of tears; that cannabis played
a role in this, at least in some areas, is born out in the
philology surrounding the ritualistic use of the plant. Whereas
Western religious traditions generally stress sin, repentance,
and mortification of the flesh, certain older non-Western
religious cults seem to have employed Cannabis as a euphoriant,
which allowed the participant a joyous path to the Ultimate;
hence such appellations as &quot;heavenly guide&quot;. </p>

<p>According to &quot;Licit and Illicit Drugs&quot; by the
Consumer Union, page 397-398: </p>

<p>&quot;Ashurbanipal lived about 650 B.C., but the cuneiform
descriptions of marijuana in his library &quot;are generally
regarded as obvious copies of much older texts.&quot; Says Dr.
Robert P. Walton, an American physician and authority on
marijuana, &quot;This evidence serves to project the origin of
hashish back to the earliest beginnings of history.&quot; </p>

<h2>THE USE OF MARIJUANA AS INCENSE </h2>

<p>According to the Encyclopedia Britannica:
&quot;Pharmacological Cults&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;...the ceremonial use of incense in contemporary ritual
is most likely a relic of the time when the psychoactive
properties of incense brought the ancient worshipper in touch
with supernatural forces.&quot; </p>

<p>In the temples of the ancient world, the main sacrifice was
the inhalation of incense. Incense is defined as the perfume or
smoke from spices and gums when burned in celebrating religious
rites or as an offering to a deity. Bronze and gold incense
burners were cast very early in history and their forms were
often inspired by cosmological themes representing the harmonious
nature of the universe. </p>

<p>The following piece was taken from &quot;Licit and Illicit
Drugs&quot;, page 31. </p>

<p>&quot;In the Judaic world, the vapors from burnt spices and
aromatic gums were considered part of the pleasurable act of
worship. In proverbs (27:9) it is said that 'Ointment and
perfumes rejoice the heart.' Perfumes were widely used in
Egyptian worship. Stone altars have been unearthed in Babylon and
Palestine, which have been used for burning incense made of
aromatic wood and spices. While the casual readers today may
interpret such practices as mere satisfaction of the desire for
pleasant odors, this is almost certainly an error; in many or
most cases, a psychoactive drug was being inhaled. In the islands
of the Mediterranean 2,500 years ago and in Africa hundreds of
years ago, for example leaves and flowers of a particular plant
were often thrown upon bonfires and the smoke inhaled; the plant
was marijuana.&quot; </p>

<p>(Edward Preble and Gabriel V. Laurey, Plastic Cement: The Ten
Cent Hallucinogen, International Journal of the Addictions, 2
(Fall 2967): 271-272. </p>

<p>&quot;The earliest civilizations of Mesopotamia brewed
intoxicating beer of barley more than 5,000 years ago; is it too
much to assume that even earlier cultures experienced euphoria,
accidentally or deliberately, through inhalation of the resinous
smoke of Cannabis?&quot; </p>

<p>(Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L, p. 216.) </p>

<p>&quot;It is said that the Assyrians used hemp (marijuana) as
incense in the seventh or eighth century before Christ and called
it 'Qunubu', a term apparently borrowed from an old East Iranian
word 'Konaba', the same as the Scythian name 'cannabis'.&quot;
(Plants of the Gods - Origin of Hallucinogenic Use by Richard E.
Schultes and Albert Hoffman) </p>

<p>&quot;It is recorded that the Chinese Taoist recommended the
addition of cannabis to their incense burners in the 1st century
as a means of achieving immortality.&quot; </p>

<p>(Marijuana, the First Twelve Thousand Years by Earnest Abel,
page 5) </p>

<p>&quot;There is a classic Greek term, cannabeizein, which means
to smoke cannabis. Cannabeizein frequently took the form of
inhaling vapors from an incense burner in which these resins were
mixed with other resins, such as myrrh, balsam, frankincense, and
perfumes.&quot; (Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L) </p>

<p>&quot;Herodotus in the fifth century B.C. observed the
Scythians throwing hemp on heated stone to create smoke and
observed them inhaling this smoke. Although he does not identify
them, Herodotus states that when they &quot;have parties and sit
around a fire, they throw some of it into the flames. As it
burns, it smokes like incense, and the smell of it makes them
drunk, just as wine does us. As more fruit is thrown on, they get
more and more intoxicated until finally they jump up and start
dancing and singing.&quot; (Herodotus, Histories 1.202.) </p>

<h2>EVIDENCE INDICATING THE SEMITIC ORIGIN OF CANNABIS </h2>

<p>The name cannabis is generally thought to be of Scythian
origin. Sula Benet in Cannabis and Culture argues that it has a
much earlier origin in Semitic languages like Hebrew, occurring
several times in the Old Testament. He states that in Exodus
30:23 that God commands Moses to make a holy anointing oil of
myrrh, sweet cinnamon, kaneh bosm, and kassia. He continues that
the word kaneh bosm is also rendered in the traditional Hebrew as
kannabos or kannabus and that the root &quot;kan&quot; in this
construction means &quot;reed&quot; or &quot;hemp&quot;, while
&quot;bosm&quot; means &quot;aromatic&quot;. He states that in
the earliest Greek translations of the old testament
&quot;kan&quot; was rendered as &quot;reed&quot;, leading to such
erroneous English translations as &quot;sweet calamus&quot;
(Exodus 30:23), sweet cane (Isaiah 43:24; Jeremiah 6:20) and
&quot;calamus&quot; (Ezekiel 27:19; Song of Songs 4:14). </p>

<p>Benet argues from the linguistic evidence that cannabis was
known in Old Testament times at least for its aromatic properties
and that the word for it passed from the Semitic language to the
Scythians, i.e. the Ashkenaz of the Old Testament. Sara Benetowa
of the Institute of Anthropological Sciences in Warsaw is quoted
in the Book of Grass as saying: &quot;The astonishing resemblance
between the Semitic 'kanbos' and the Scythian 'cannabis' leads me
to suppose that the Scythian word was of Semitic origin. These
etymological discussions run parallel to arguments drawn from
history. </p>

<p>The Iranian Scythians were probably related to the Medes, who
were neighbors of the semites and could easily have assimilated
the word for hemp. The Semites could also have spread the word
during their migrations through Asia Minor. </p>

<p>Taking into account the matriarchal element of Semitic
culture, one is led to believe that Asia Minor was the original
point of expansion for both the society based on the matriarchal
circle and the mass use of hashish.&quot; </p>

<p>The Ancient Israelites were a Semitic people. Abraham, the
father of the Israelite nation, came from Ur, a city of Babylonia
located in mesopotamia. The Israelites migrated throughout Asia
Minor and could easily have spread the religious use of
marijuana. </p>

<h2>THE ISRAELITE USE OF INCENSE </h2>

<p>It was said that Moses, at the direction of Almighty God,
first brought in the use of incense in public worship, and that
the other nations of antiquity copied the practice from him. It
was however a practice that began with Adam. The &quot;Book of
Jubilees&quot;, an Apocryphal book, (the Apocrypha was considered
canonical by the early church and is to this day by the Ethiopian
Zion Coptic Church) states that &quot;on the day when Adam went
forth from the Garden of Eden, he offered as a sweet savour an
offering of frankincense, galbanum, and stacte, and spices, in
the morning with the rising of the sun, from the day when he
covered his shame.&quot; And of Enoch we read that &quot;he burnt
the incense of the sanctuary, even sweet spices, acceptable
before the Lord, on the Mount.&quot; </p>

<p>Incense was assigned miraculous powers by the Israelites. It
was burned in golden bowls or cauldrons placed on or beside the
altar. It was also burned in hand-held censers. In the Blessing
of Moses, a poem belonging to the Northern Kingdom of Israel, and
written about 760 B.C., the sacrificial smoke is offered to the
God of Israel. </p>

<p>Let them teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law; Let
them offer sacrificial smoke to thy nostrils, and whole burnt
sacrifice upon thy altar. </p>

<p>Throughout the Bible the ancient patriarchs were brought into
communion with God through smoking incense and at Mt. Sinai God
talked to Moses out of a bush that burned with fire (Exodus 3:1-
12). After Moses brought the Israelite people out of Egypt he
returned to Mt. Sinai at which time God made a covenant with
Moses in which the Ten Commandments were revealed. Exodus 19:8
describes the conditions at the time of this covenant. </p>

<p>Exodus 19:8 &quot;And Mount Sinai was altogether on smoke,
because the Lord descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof
ascended as smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked
greatly. </p>

<p>The Mysterious smoke mentioned in the covenant on Mt. Sinai is
also referred to as a cloud. Exodus 24:15 &quot;And Moses went up
into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount. 16 And the glory
of the Lord abode upon Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six
days: and the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst
of the cloud. </p>

<p>Scriptures make it abundantly clear that the clouds and the
smoke are related to the burning of incense. Exodus 40:26
describes Moses burning incense, a cloud covering the tent of the
congregation and the glory of the Lord filling the tabernacle. </p>

<p>Leviticus 16:2-13 describes how God appeared in a cloud and
refers to it as the clouds of incense. Numbers 16:17-19 describes
how every man of the congregation had a censer full of burning
incense and that the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the
congregation. </p>

<p>Isaiah 6:4 describes how Ezekial saw God in a smoke-filled
inner court. Numbers 11:25 describes how God was revealed to
Moses and the seventy elders in a cloud; that the spirit rested
upon them and that they prophesied and ceased not. </p>

<p>The Book of Grass by Andrew and Vinkenoog includes a section
on Ancient Scythia and Iran by Mircea Eliade, one of the foremost
experts on the history of religions. On pages 11 and 12 is the
following: </p>

<p>&quot;On one document appears to indicate the existence of a
Getic shamanism: It is Straho's account of the Myssian
KAPNOBATAI, a name that has been translated, by analogy with
Aristophanes' AEROBATES, as 'those who walk in clouds'; but it
should be translated as 'those who walk in smoke'! Presumably the
smoke is hemp smoke, a rudimentary means of ecstasy known to both
the Tracians and the Scythians...&quot; </p>

<p>This passage should be carefully noted. Biblical passages make
it abundantly clear that the ancient Isrealites also walked in
clouds and in smoke. In fact it was in the clouds of smoke that
God was revealed to the ancient Isrealites. The words
&quot;smoke&quot; and &quot;smoking&quot; appear fifty times in
the King James Version of the Bible and two separate times the
Bible says of the Lord, &quot;There went up a smoke out of his
nostrils.&quot; II Samuel 22:9, Psalms 18:8. </p>

<p>There are numerous other places in the Bible that mention the
burning of incense, the mysterious cloud, and smoke. This common
thread is found throughout the Bible, including the New
Testament. St. Matthew 24:30 &quot;And then shall appear the sign
of the Son of Man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the
Earth morn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the
clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.&quot; </p>

<p>Revelations 1:7 &quot;Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every
eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all the
kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. Even so,
Amen.&quot; </p>

<p>Revelations 8:3 &quot;And another angel came and stood at the
altar, having a golden censer: and there was given unto him much
incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints
upon the golden altar which was before the throne. 4 And the
smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints,
ascended up before God out of the Angel's hand.&quot; </p>

<p>Revelations 15:8 &quot;And the temple was filled with smoke
from the glory of God, and from his power.&quot; </p>

<h2>THE SYMBOLISM OF FIRE IN THE ANCIENT WORLD </h2>

<p>The word &quot;fire&quot; is mentioned several hundred times
in the King James version of the Bible. The sacrifice of the Lord
is made by fire (Exodus 29:18, 25; Leviticus 2:10-11; Leviticus
6:13; Numbers 28:6; Deuteronomy 4:33; Joshua 13:14; I Samuel
2:28; II Chronicles 2:4; Isaiah 24:15; Matthew 3:11; Luke 1:9;
Revelations 8:4-5) </p>

<p>Abraham, the father of the Israelite nation, came from Ur
which was a city of Ancient Sumer in South Babylonia. For the
Babylonians, fire was essential to sacrifice and all oblations
were conveyed to the gods by the fire god Girru-Nusku, whose
presence as an intermediary between the gods and man was
indispensable. Girru-Nusku, as the messenger of the gods, bore
the essence of the offerings upward to them in the smoke of
sacrificial fire. </p>

<p>At Babylon: &quot;The glorious gods smell the incense, noble
food of heaven; pure wine which no hand has touched do they
enjoy.&quot; (L. Jeremias, in Encyclopedia Biblica, i.v. 4119,
quoting Rawlinson, Cuneif. Inscrip. IV, 19 (59).) </p>

<p>The most important of the ancient Indian gods was Agni, the
god of fire, who like the Babylonian god Girru-Nusku acted as a
messenger between men and the gods. The fire (Agni) upon the
altar was regarded as a messenger, their invoker. </p>

<p>&quot;...For thou, O sage, goest wisely between these two
creations like a friendly messenger between two hamlets.&quot; </p>

<p>According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, the section on
&quot;mysticism&quot;: </p>

<p>&quot;The Vedas (Hindu sacred writings) are hymns to the
mystic fire and the inner sense of sacrifice, burning forever on
the 'altar Mind'. Hence the abundance of solar and fire images:
birds of fire, the fire of the sun, and the isles of fire. The
symbol system of the world's religions and mysticisms are
profound illuminations of the human-divine mystery. Be it the
cave of the heart or the lotus of the heart, 'the dwelling place
of that which is the Essence of the Universe, &quot;the third
eye&quot;, or the eye of wisdom' - the symbols all refer back to
wisdom entering the aspiring soul on its way to progressive
self-understanding. 'I saw the Lord with the Eye of the Heart. I
said, &quot;Who art thou?&quot; and he answered,
&quot;Thou&quot;'.&quot; </p>

<p>The ancient Indian mystics said, &quot;...that in the ecstasy
of bhang (marijuana) the spark of the Eternal in man turns into
light the murkiness of matter or illusion and the self is lost in
the central soul fire. Raising man out of himself and above mean
individual worries, bhang makes him one with the divine force of
nature and the mystery 'I am he' grew plain. (Taken from the
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission Report which was written at the turn
of the twentieth century.) </p>

<p>The concept of spiritual or inner light was found throughout
the ancient world. As we shall see that spiritual light was
directly related to the burning of incense. According to Lucie
Lamy in &quot;Egyptian Mysteries&quot;, page 24: &quot;The
Pharaonic word for light is akh. This word, often translated as
'transfigured', designated transcendental light as well as all
aspects of physical light; and in the funerary text it denotes
the state of ultimate sublimation. </p>

<p>&quot;The word akh, first of all, is written with a glyph
showing a crested ibis, ibis comata. This bird - the name of
which was also akh -- lived in the southern part of the Arabian
side of the Red Sea (near Al Qunfidhah) and migrated to Abyssinia
(Ethiopia) during the winter. Both these places are near the
regions from which sacred incense came, and were called the
&quot;Divine Land&quot;. The bird's crest, together with its dark
green plumage shot with glittering metallic specks justifies the
meanings 'to shine', 'to be resplendent', 'to irradiate'; of the
root akh in the hieroglyphic writing. &quot;Akh indeed expresses
all notions of light, both literally and figuratively, from the
Light which comes forth from Darkness to the transcendental light
of transfiguration. It is also used to designate the 'third eye',
the ureaeus, related in old tradition to the pineal body and to
the spirit.&quot; </p>

<p>In the next chapter we will see that the sacred cloud of
incense was instrumental in the transfiguration of Christ. Note
that Ethiopia was referred to as the &quot;Divine Land&quot; and
that it was the source for the sacred incense. The ancients also
referred to Ethiopia as the &quot;Land of God&quot;. </p>

<p>The ancient Egyptians believed that they had received their
divinities from Ethiopia and have always held to the ancient and
honored tradition of their southern origin. Ethiopia is so
important in ancient history that it is mentioned as being in the
Garden of Eden (Genesis 2:12). </p>

<p>The ancient Greek historian Diodorus Siculus wrote: &quot;The
Ethiopians conceived themselves to be of greater antiquity than
any other nation; and it is probable that, born under the sun's
path, its warmth may have ripened them earlier than other men.
They supposed themselves to be the inventors of worship, of
festivals, of solemn assemblies, of sacrifice, and every
religious practice.&quot; </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT </h2>

<p>According to Jack Herer in The Emperor Wears No Clothes or
Everything You Wanted to Know About Marijuana But Were Not Taught
in School, &quot;The Essenes, a kabalistic priest/prophet/healer
sect of Judaism dating back to the era of the Dead Sea Scrolls,
used hemp, as did the Theraputea of Egypt, from where we get the
term 'therapeutic'.&quot; </p>

<p>The Theraputea of Egypt were Jewish ascetics that dwelt near
Alexandria and described by Philo (1st century B.C.) as devoted
to contemplation and meditation. Alexandria is where St. Mark is
traditionally held to have established the Coptic Church in 45
A.D. </p>

<p>The Coptic Church has been neglected by Western scholars
despite its historical significance. This has been due to the
various biases and interest of the Catholic Church which claimed
Christianity for its own. The result is that for the Coptic
Church there is very little history. It is however assumed that
the Coptic religious services have their roots in the earliest
layers of Christian ritual in Jerusalem and it is known that the
Coptic church is of ancient origin going back to the time of the
first Christian communities and even before. </p>

<p>Tradition states that &quot;Coptic&quot; was derived from
&quot;Kuftaim&quot;, son of Mizraim, a grandchild of Noah who
first settled in the Nile valley, i the neighborhood of Thebes,
the ancient capital of Egypt. </p>

<p>At one time Thebes was the greatest city in the world and
history records that by 2200 B.C. the whole of Egypt was united
under a Theban prince. The splendor of Thebes was known to Homer,
who called it &quot;the city with a hundred gates&quot;. (Richard
Schultes states that in ancient Thebes marijuana was made into a
drink.) </p>

<p>According to E.A. Wallis Budge in The Divine Origin of the
Herbalist, page 79, &quot;The Copts, that is to say the Egyptians
who accepted the teachings of St. Mark in the first century of
our era, and embraced Christianity, seem to have eschewed medical
science as taught by the physicians of the famous School of
Medicine of Alexandria, and to have been content with the methods
of healing employed by their ancestors.&quot; </p>

<p>The Essenes were an ascetic sect closely related to the
Theraputea that had established a monastic order in the desert
outside of Palestine and were known as spiritual healers. It has
been suggested that both John the Baptist and Jesus may have been
of the Essene sect as they were both heavily dependent on Essene
teachings. The scripture makes no mention of the life of Jesus
from the age of 13 to 30. Certain theologians speculate that
Jesus was being initiated by the Essenes, the last fraternity to
keep alive the ancient traditions of the prophets. </p>

<p>Every prophet, however great, must be initiated. His higher
self must be awakened and made conscious so that his mission can
be fulfilled. Amongst the Essenes' ritual lustrations preceded
most liturgical rites, the most important one of which was
participation in a sacred meal -- an anticipation of the
Messianic banquet. </p>

<p>Throughout the ancient world sacrifice was a sacramental
communal meal involving the idea of the god as a participant in
the meal or as identical with the food consumed. The communion
sacrifice was one in which the deity indwells the oblation so
that the worshippers actually consume the divine. The original
motive of sacrifice was an effort toward communion among the
members of a group, on one hand, and between them and their god,
on the other. </p>

<p>At its best, sacrifice was a &quot;sacrament&quot; and in one
form or another life itself. </p>

<p>The central focus of the early Christian church was the
Eucharist or the &quot;body and blood&quot; of the Lord. This was
interpreted as a fellowship meal with the resurrected Christ. In
meeting the Resurrected One in the Eucharist meal the Christian
community had the expectation of the Kingdom of God and
salvation. Christ communicated life to his disciples through the
Eucharist or Christian sacrament. Christ said in describing the
sacrament, &quot;Take, eat, this is my body, this is my blood. Do
this as often as you will in remembrance of me.&quot; (I
Corinthians 11:24- 25) </p>

<p>Baptism is defined as the Christian sacrament used in
purification and the spiritual rebirth of the individual. I
Corinthians 10:1 makes it clear that the smoking cloud of incense
was directly related to baptism. I Corinthians 10:1
&quot;Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant,
how that our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through
the sea; 2 And were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in
the sea; 3 And did all eat the same spiritual meat: for they
drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock
was Christ. </p>

<p>In the Biblical story of Creation, God said, &quot;Behold, I
have given you every herb bearing seed and to you it will be for
meat.&quot; (Genesis 1:29) Marijuana is technically an herb and
was considered a spiritual meat in the ancient world. </p>

<p>From this passage in Corinthians we see that the spiritual
cloud resulting from the burning of incense was instrumental in
the baptism of the Israelites. This baptism is also compared to
the &quot;eating and drinking&quot; of the spirit of Christ.
Spirit is defined as the active essence of the Deity serving as
an invisible and life-giving or inspiring power in motion. </p>

<p>Scripture makes it abundantly clear that the sacrificial cloud
or smoke contained the Spirit of God (Christ) and was
instrumental in inspiring, sanctifying, and purifying the
patriarchs. </p>

<p>In Numbers 11:25 the cloud results in the Spirit resting upon
Moses and the seventy elders. This passage indicates that they
prophesied ecstatically. &quot;Prophesy&quot; is defined as
follows: to utter or announce by or as if by divine inspiration;
to speak for God or a deity; to give instruction in religious
matters. </p>

<p>Throughout the Holy Bible prophets of God spake as they were
moved by the Holy Spirit. The smoking burning cloud of incense
contained the spirit and was instrumental in bringing about the
spiritual revelations of the prophets. In the ancient world
marijuana was used to reveal the future. The virtues of marijuana
include speech-giving and inspiration of mental powers.
&quot;Psychoactive&quot; is defined as effecting the mind or
behavior. When we of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church think of
mind or behavior we think of that inward essence or element that
makes up the individual. This is the person's spirit. We are all
spiritual beings. It is just as important to keep the spiritual
part of a person healthy as it is to keep the physical body
healthy and in fact they are related. Hence marijuana and its
relationship to spiritual food. </p>

<p>In the Apocrypha (Book of Jubilees), Chapter 10, God tells an
angel to teach Noah the medicines which heal and protect from
evil spirits. Surely God taught Noah about marijuana. In the
ancient world marijuana played an important role in purification
and protecting from evil influences. </p>

<p>Note the following concerning the transfiguration of Christ:
St. Matthew 17:1 &quot;And after six days Jesus taketh Peter,
James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into a high
mountain apart. 2 And he was transfigured before them: and his
face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as light. 3
And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking
with him. 4 Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is
good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three
tabernacles; one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias. 5
When yet he spake, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them; and
behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.&quot; </p>

<p>The Bible Dictionary by John McKenzie, page 898, says
concerning the transfiguration that the cloud and the formula of
the utterance of the Father are derived from the baptism of
Jesus. </p>

<p>He says that the change described in the appearance of Jesus
suggests the change which is implied in the resurrection
narratives. </p>

<p>Some of the synonyms for transfiguration are transformation,
metamorphosis, transubstantiation, and avatar. These terms imply
the change that accompanies resurrection or deification. Across
the world, legends of godlike men who manage to rise, in a state
of perfection go back to an era before human beings had cast away
from the divine source. Hence the gods were beings which once
were men, and the actual race of men will in time become gods.
Christ revealed this to the people of his day when he told them
to whom the word of God came, &quot;Ye are gods.&quot; (St. John
10:34) </p>

<p>St. Matthew 17:2 says that during the transfiguration of
Christ that his face did shine as the sun. The face of Moses also
shone when he returned from the cloud on Mt. Sinai (Exodus
30:34). </p>

<p>The shining countenances are the result of their
resurrections, of their being spiritually illumined in the cloud
of smoking incense. Most people are under the impression that
Christ baptized with water. As you can see from the following
account of John the Baptist this isn't so. John the Baptist
baptized with water and Christ baptized with fire. </p>

<p>St. Matthew 3:11 &quot;I indeed baptize you with water into
repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy
Spirit and with fire.&quot; </p>

<p>It is only logical that this baptism with the Holy Spirit and
with fire is related to the baptism of Christ in the burning,
smoking cloud of incense and to the baptism of the patriarchs in
which the patriarchs did all eat of the same spiritual meal
(incense). In the section dealing with the &quot;Holy
Spirit&quot; the Encyclopedia Britannica states that Christian
writers have seen in various references to the Spirit of Yahweh
in the Old Testament an anticipation of the doctrine of the Holy
Spirit. It also says that the Holy Spirit is viewed as the main
agent of man's restoration to his original natural state through
communion in Christ's body and, thus, as the principle of life in
the Christian community. The patriarchs were recipients of a
revelation coming directly from the Spirit (incense) and this was
expressed in the heightening and enlargement of their
consciousness. It is clear from Scripture that this spiritual
dimension was also evident in the life of Jesus, in whom the
experience of the Hebrew prophets was renewed. </p>

<p>Through the Eucharist Christ passed this spiritual dimension
on to his apostles. One of the apostles even makes mention in
Philippians 4:18 of a sweet smelling sacrifice that is well
pleasing to God. </p>

<p>Christ compares this baptism to the drinking of a cup. St.
Mark 10:38 &quot;But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what ye
ask: can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptized
with the baptism that I am baptized with?&quot; </p>

<p>This cup is referred to as the cup of salvation in Psalms
116:12. </p>

<p>Psalms 116:12 &quot;What shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and call
upon the name of the Lord. It is called the cup of blessing in
connection in connection with the eucharist. </p>

<p>1 Corinthians 10:16 &quot;The cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood and the body of Christ? 17
For we being many are one bread, and one body; for we are all
partakers of one bread. Here we see a connection between the cup
of blessing and the communion of the blood of Christ. Blood is
the life-giving substance of the living being. Christ
communicated life to his disciples through the Eucharist or
Christian sacrament. </p>

<p>In I Corinthians 10:16 we note the mention of bread as the
communion of the body of Christ and that we are all partakers of
one bread. This is the spiritual bread or food used by Christ and
his disciples. (A synonym for the Eucharist or the Body and Blood
of the Lord is the bread of life.) It is interesting to note that
the finest marijuana in Jamaica is called Lamb's bread. </p>

<p>1 Corinthians 12:13 &quot;For by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one body, whether we be Jew or Gentiles, whether we
be bond or free; and have all been made to drink into one Spirit.
</p>

<p>1 Corinthians 11:25 &quot;After the same manner also he took
the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the New
Testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me. 26 For as often as ye eat this bread and drink
this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come. </p>

<p>If these passages are compared to 1 Corinthians 10:1-4, it is
plain that the &quot;eating of one bread&quot; is the same as the
patriarchs &quot;eating the same spiritual meat&quot; and the
&quot;drinking of one Spirit&quot; (the cup) is the same as the
patriarchs &quot;drinking of the Spiritual Rock that followed
them: and that Rock was Christ.&quot; By making this comparison
we see that the terminology of the Eucharist is directly related
to the smoking cloud of incense used in the baptism of Christ and
the patriarchs. </p>

<p>It is interesting to note that smoking was referred to as
&quot;eating&quot; or &quot;drinking&quot; by the early American
Indians. Peter J. Furst in Hallucinogen and Culture states the
following: &quot;Considering its enormous geographic spread in
the Americas at the time of European discovery, as well as the
probable age of stone tobacco pipes in California, the inhaling
(often called &quot;drinking&quot; or &quot;eating&quot;) of
tobacco smoke by the Shaman, as a corollary to therapeutic
fumigation and the feeding of the gods with smoke, must also be
of considerable antiquity.&quot; </p>

<p>In Licit and Illicit Drugs, page 209, the following is quoted:
</p>

<p>&quot;Columbus and other early explorers who followed him were
amazed to meet Indians who carried rolls of dried leaves that
they set afire -- and who then &quot;drank the smoke&quot; that
emerged from the rolls. Other Indians carried pipes in which they
burned the same leaves, and from which they similarly &quot;drank
the smoke&quot;. </p>

<p>The Encyclopedia Britannica states in the section on
&quot;Sacrifice&quot; that the interpretation of sacrifice and
particularly of the Eucharist as sacrifice has varied greatly
within the different Christian traditions because of the
sacrificial terminology in which the Eucharist was originally
described became foreign to Christian thinkers. </p>

<p>We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare that the true
understanding of the Eucharist has been passed down from
generation to generation so that we are able to give an accurate
interpretation of the sacrificial terminology used to describe
the Eucharist. We have shown, using history and Biblical
passages, that his terminology is directly related to burning
smoking incense. We have shown that the &quot;eating&quot; or
&quot;drinking&quot; contained in the terminology concerning the
Eucharist is associated with the inhalation of smoke. We have
shown that marijuana was used as incense and that it was the
number one spiritual plant of the ancient world. </p>

<p>We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare that the cup
that Christ baptized his disciples with in the baptism of the
Holy Spirit and fire was in fact a pipe or chillum in which
marijuana was smoked. This is a bottomless cup and soon as it is
emptied, it is filled again and passed in a circle. There is a
picture of this cup or pipe below, as well as on the cover. Like
the pipe of the ancient North American Indians, this cup was a
portable altar. Christ was the Father of the doctrine of the
Eucharist which is the communion that Jesus gave his brethren.
Jesus taught that the communion is his body and blood. Jesus was
not speaking of His physical body and blood. He was speaking of
His spiritual body and spiritual blood that was the communion of
his holy church. The supper that Jesus celebrated with his
disciples &quot;on the night that he was betrayed&quot; (1
Corinthians 11:23) inaugurated the heavenly meal that was to be
continued. </p>

<p>1 Corinthians 11:23 &quot;For I have received of the Lord that
which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same
night in which he was betrayed took bread: 24 And when he had
given thanks, he brake it and said, Take, eat, this is my body,
which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. 25 After
the same manner also he took the cup, which he had supped,
saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood; this do ye, as
oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. 26 For as often as ye
eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye do shew the Lord's
death till he come. 27 Wherefore whosoever shall eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. 28 But let a man
examine himself, and let him eat of the bread, and drink of that
cup. 29 For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and
drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body. </p>

<p>Christ said, &quot;Do this in remembrance of me.&quot; Here
the original unity of man with God is restored. In general the
reception of the Holy Spirit is connected with the actual
realization, the inward experiencing of God. Marijuana has been
referred to as a mild euphoric (the producer of a feeling of
well-being) that produces a profound religious experience of a
mystical and transcendental nature. This religious experience is
said to be brought about by the stirring of deeply buried,
unconscious sensitivities so that one experiences ultimate
reality or the divine and confirms the feeling of the worshipper
that he has been in the presence of God and has assimilated some
of His powers. </p>

<p>To be lifted above sense to behold the beatific vision and
become &quot;incorporate&quot; in God is the end sought in
ecstasy. The priest or mystic in enthusiasm or ecstasy enjoys the
beatific vision by entering into communion with God and by
undergoing deification. The experience of ecstasy, states Mircea
Eliade, one of the foremost authorities on religion, is a
timeless primary phenomenon. Psychological experience of rapture,
he continues, are fundamental to the human condition and hence
known to the whole of archaic humanity. (Some of the synonyms of
rapture are bliss, beatitude, transport, exaltation.) </p>

<p>Baudelaire, a member of the Club Des Hashichins (Hashish Club)
founded in Paris around 1835 and writer of Artificial Paradises
states the following about hashish: Hashish is the unadulterated
resin from the flowering tops of the female hemp plant. </p>

<p>&quot;One will find in hashish nothing miraculous, absolutely
nothing but an exaggeration of the natural. The brain and
organisms on which hashish operates will produce only the normal
phenomena peculiar to that individual -- increased, admittedly,
in number and force, but always faithful to the original. A man
will never escape from his destined physical and moral
temperament: hashish will be a mirror of his impression and
private thoughts - a magnifying mirror, it is true, but only a
mirror. </p>

<p>He cautions that the user must be in the right frame of mind
to take hashish, for just as it exaggerates the natural behavior
of the individual, so too does hashish intensify the user's
immediate feelings. Baudelaire describes three successive phases
a hashish user will pass through. He says the final stage is
marked by a feeling of calmness, in which time and space have no
meaning, and there is a sense that one has transcended matter. He
says that in this state, one final supreme thought breaks into
consciousness. &quot;I have become God.&quot; </p>

<p>Realization of one's union with God is necessary in
understanding the true Christian sacrament. The understanding of
man's relationship to God and God's relationship to man (God in
Man and Man in God) was quite prevalent in the ancient world,
particularly among the religions that utilized marijuana as part
of their religious practice. </p>

<p>Said the great Hindu sage, Manu, &quot;He who in his own soul
perceives the Supreme Soul in all beings and acquires equanimity
toward them all, attains the highest bliss.&quot; To recognize
oneness of self with God was contained in all the teachings of
Gautama Buddha. In the Liturgy of Mithra (the Persian god of
light and truth) the suppliant prays &quot;abide with me in my
soul; leave me not,&quot; and &quot;that I may be initiated and
the Holy Spirit may breathe within me.&quot; The communion became
so intimate as to pass into identity: &quot;I am thou and thou
art I.&quot; Athanasius, a theologian, ecclesiastical statesman,
and Egyptian national leader who was closely tied to the Coptic
Church in Egypt said, &quot;Even we may become gods walking in
the flesh,&quot; and &quot;God became man that man might become
God.&quot; </p>

<p>Western theology (Catholic and Protestant) teaches that the
spirit created matter but remained aloof of it. In Hinduism and
other Eastern religions, the spirit is the inside, the matter is
the outside; the two are inseparable. Eastern theologians hive
rightly perceived that the God one worships must posses all the
aspects of his worshippers' nature as well as his own divine
nature. Otherwise, how can he create beings whose nature is
entirely foreign to his own? What, then, would be the meaning of
the Biblical phrase: &quot;God made man in his own image&quot;? </p>

<p>The fact that modern Christendom has no sense of union with
God has led to numerous churches without the understanding for
building a Christian culture and kingdom to replace the confusion
of modern politics. This lack of understanding was not lacking in
the ancient church and was a major source of enthusiasm for the
prophets of old. In fact, the power of the early church was
manifested due to this understanding of the spirit of God
dwelling in man, the temple of God. To the ancient prophets it
was not a God above, nor a God over yonder, but a God within.
&quot;Be still and know that I am God&quot; -- for the
visionaries and mystics of every time and place, this has been
the first and greatest of the commandments. </p>

<p>In 1 Corinthians 11:28 Christ said, &quot;Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of the
cup.&quot; Probably the most relevant study to date about what
might be considered typical marijuana experience concludes that
marijuana gives spontaneous insights into self (Dr. Charles Tart,
&quot;On Being Stoned: A Psychological Study of Marijuana
Intoxication&quot;, Science and Behavior, 1971). </p>

<p>The sacramentality of marijuana is declared by Christ himself
and can be understood only when a person partakes of the natural
divine herb. The fact is communion of Jesus cannot be disputed or
be destroyed. Marijuana is the new wine divine and cannot be
compared to the old wine, which is alcohol. Jesus rejected the
old wine and glorified the &quot;new wine&quot; at the wedding
feast of Cana. </p>

<p>Cana is a linguistic derivation of the present day cannabis
and so it is. (Some Biblical scholars -- and there is a certain
amount of support in early tradition of the view -- have looked
upon the miracle of Cana as a sign of the Eucharist.) </p>

<p>Note the references to new wine in the Bible: </p>

<p>Isaiah 65:8 &quot;Thus saith the Lord, As the new wine is
found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for a
blessing is in it; so will I do for my servant's sake&quot; </p>

<p>Acts 2:13 &quot;Others mocking said, &quot;These men are full
of new wine.&quot; </p>

<p>Isaiah 65:8 declares that the new wine is found in the cluster
and that a blessing is in it. When one mentions clusters, one
thinks of clusters of grapes. Webster's New Riverside Dictionary,
Office Edition, defines marijuana: 1. Hemp 2. The dried flower
clusters and leaves of the hemp plant, esp. when taken to induce
euphoria. </p>

<p>The Encyclopedia Britannica says the following about hemp: </p>

<p>Seed producing flowers form elongate, spike like clusters
growing on the pistillate, or female plants; pollen producing
flowers form many branched clusters or staminate, on male plants.
Here and in Webster's, marijuana fits the description of the new
wine and as history has shown a blessing is in it. Baudelaire
said the following about the effects of hashish: &quot;This
marvelous experience often occurs as if it were the effect of
superior and invisible power acting on the person from
without...This delightful and singular state...gives no advance
warning. It is as unexpected as a ghost, an intermittent haunting
from which we must draw, if we are wise, the certainty of a
better existence. This acuteness of thought, this enthusiasm of
the senses and the spirit must have appeared to man through the
ages as the first blessing.&quot; </p>

<p>In the books of Acts the apostles were accused of being full
of new wine. Acts 2:13 was the time of pentecost when the Holy
Spirit descended upon the apostles. Numerous outpourings of the
Spirit are mentioned in the Acts of the apostles in which
healing, prophesy, and the expelling of demons are particularly
associated with the activity of the Spirit. Incense (marijuana)
was used by the ancients for healing, prophesy, and the expelling
of demons. </p>

<p>When Christ ascended into heaven in the cloud (Acts 1:9-11) he
sent his disciples the Holy Spirit with the &quot;gift of
tongues&quot; (Acts 2:3) and there appeared unto them cloven
tongues like as a fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they
were filled with the Holy Spirit and were given the power to
prophesy or witness. </p>

<p>(Marijuana has been credited with speech giving and
inspiration of mental powers.) </p>

<p>The first two gifts of the Holy Spirit are traditionally said
to be wisdom and understanding, which no doubt are the two things
most needed by the human race. In Jamaica today marijuana is
referred to as the &quot;weed of wisdom&quot; and is reputed to
be the plant that grew on Solomon's grave, a man known for his
great wisdom. Marijuana expands consciousness and enhances the
capacity for mystical and creative inspiration. </p>

<p>In Acts 2:3 Fire speaks figuratively of the Holy Spirit. Fire
was also a means which to transport a saint to heaven. 2 Kings
2:11 &quot;And it came to pass, as they still went on, and
talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and
horses of fire, and parted asunder; and Elijah went up by a
whirlwind into heaven.&quot; </p>

<p>Recent writers have speculated that this passage was in
reference to flying saucers. That is because they look at this
passage physically. This ascension of Elijah like the ascension
of Christ in the cloud into heaven is the &quot;withdrawal&quot;
from the external or physical world, to be the inmost reality of
all. This can be referred to as ecstasy, rapture, or transport
and is a result of the Holy Spirit. Ecstasy, rapture, or
transport therefor agree in designating a feeling or state of
intense, often extreme mental and emotional exaltation. Rapture
is defined as ecstatic joy or delight; joyful ecstasy. Some of
the synonyms of rapture are bliss, beatitude, transport, and
exultation. The true rapture is therefore one in which one is
spiritually transported to the heavens. Don't expect to float up
into the sky. </p>

<p>Marijuana as history has shown is the catalyst used to achieve
the spiritual journey into the heavens. That is why in India it
was referred to as the Heavenly-Guide, the Poor Man's Heaven, and
the Sky-flier. That is why Professor Mircea Eliade, perhaps the
foremost authority on the history of religion, suggested that
Zoroaster may have caused hemp to bridge the metaphysical gap
between heaven and earth. </p>

<p>One dictionary defines marijuana as the leaves and flowering
tops when taken to induce euphoria. Euphoria is defined by the
same dictionary as great happiness or bliss. (In India, marijuana
has been referred to as the joy-giver and the soother of grief.) </p>

<p>Bliss is defined as the ecstasy of salvation, spiritual joy.
Some of the synonyms of bliss are beatitude, transport, rapture,
ecstasy, paradise, heaven. </p>

<p>Throughout the ancient world there is mention of &quot;magical
flight&quot;, &quot;ascent to heaven&quot;, and &quot;mystical
journey&quot;. All these mythological and folklore traditions
have their point of departure in an ideology and technique of
ecstasy that imply &quot;journey in spirit&quot;. </p>

<p>The pilgrimage from earth to heaven is not a journey to some
other place or some other time, but is a journey within. One must
realize that &quot;death&quot; through which we must pass before
God can be seen does not lie ahead of us in time. Rather it is
now that we have a man of sin within us that must be killed and a
new man free from sin that must be born. This is actualized in
baptism and the sacramental life in the church. For as many of
you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ
(Galatians 3:27). The effect of baptism is spiritual regeneration
or rebirth, whereby one is &quot;enChristened&quot;, involving
both union with Christ and remission of sins. In Titus 3:5
baptism is the &quot;bath of regeneration&quot; accompanying
renewal by the Spirit. Some of the synonyms of regeneration are
beatification, conversion, sanctification, salvation,
inspiration, bread of life, Body and Blood of Christ. Sara
Benetowa of the Institute of Anthropological Sciences in Warsaw
is quoted in the Book of Grass as saying: </p>

<p>&quot;By comparing the old Slavic word 'Kepati' and the
Russian 'Kupati' with the Scythian 'cannabis' Shrader developed
and justified Meringer's supposition that there is a link between
the Scythian baths and Russian vapor baths. </p>

<p>&quot;In the entire Orient even today to 'go to the bath'
means not only to accomplish an act of purification and enjoy a
pleasure, but also to fulfill the divine law. Vambery calls
'bath' any club in which the members play checkers, drink coffee,
and smoke hashish or tobacco.&quot; </p>

<p>St. Matthew's account of the institution of the Eucharist
attaches to the Eucharist cup these words: &quot;Drink of it, all
of, for this is the blood of the covenant, which is poured out
for many for the remission of sins (st. Matthew 26:27). Drinking
the sacramental cup therefor serves like baptism (Acts 2:38)
where Peter said unto them, &quot;Repent, and be baptized
everyone of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. We of the
Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare a three-part doctrine of the
Holy Herb, the Holy Word, and the Holy Man (Woman). </p>

<p>The present and future benefits to the individual communicant
have their importance given them by Jesus, who said, &quot;He who
eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will
raise them up at the last day.&quot; (John 6:54) As such we must
see that the divine person who is active in creation, in renewal,
and in human rebirth and resurrection, is also active in the
Eucharist. There was a profound change in America when marijuana
smoking started on a large scale in the late 1960's. A large
number of people resisted the draft, resisted the war ... started
letting their hair and beards grow ... became interested in
natural foods... the ecology and the environment. What we really
saw was the awakening of our generation to the beginning of
Christian mentality through marijuana smoking. The earmarks of
this mentality are: I don't want to go to war; I really don't
want to be part of the political-military-economic fiasco you
call society. </p>

<p>Like the Indians Hemp Drug Commission three quarters of a
century earlier, the Canadian Le Dain Commission conducted an
inquiry into the use of marijuana. On page 156 of the report is
the following: &quot;In the case of cannabis, the positive points
which are claimed for it include the following: It is a relaxant;
it is disinhibiting; it increases self-confidence and the feeling
of creativity (whether justified by creative results or not); it
increases sensual awareness and appreciation; it facilitates self
acceptance and in this way makes it easier to accept others; it
serves a sacramental function in promoting a sense of spiritual
community among users; it is a shared pleasure; because it is
illicit and the object of strong disapproval from those who are,
by and large, opposed to social change, it is a symbol of protest
and a means of strengthening the sense of identity among those
who are strongly critical of certain aspects of our society and
value structure today.&quot; </p>

<p>On page 144 of the Report, marijuana is associated with peace.
&quot;In our conversation with (students and young people) they
have frequently contrasted marijuana and alcohol effects to
describe the former as a drug of peace, a drug that reduces
tendencies to aggression while suggesting that the latter drug
produces hostile, aggressive behavior. Thus marijuana is seen as
particularly appropriate to a generation that emphasizes peace
and is, in many ways, anticompetitive.&quot; </p>

<p>In a magazine article by G. S. Chopra entitled &quot;Man and
Marijuana&quot; on page 235 is a section dealing with Human
Experiments. One hundred persons with an established marijuana
smoking habit smoked marijuana. They described the symptoms as
follows: </p>

<p>&quot;I have done things today which I usually dislike but
which I rather enjoyed doing today.&quot; &quot;Nothing seemed
impossible to accomplish.&quot; &quot;I assumed a cool and
composed attitude and forgot all mental worries.&quot; &quot;I
behaved in a childish and foolish manner.&quot; &quot;It relieves
sense of fatigue and gives rise to feelings of happiness.&quot;
&quot;I feel like laughing.&quot; &quot;My head is dizzy.&quot;
&quot;I feel like taking more food.&quot; &quot;The world is gay
around me.&quot; &quot;I feel inclined to work.&quot; &quot;I am
a friend to all and have no enemy in the world.&quot; </p>

<p>According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, in the section on
&quot;Roman Catholicism&quot;: </p>

<p>&quot;To understand the meaning and use of the Eucharist we
must see it as an act of universal worship, of cooperation, of
association else it loses the greater part of its significance.
Neither in Roman Catholic nor in Protestant Eucharistic practice
does the sacrament retain much of the symbolism of Christian
unity, which clearly it has. Originally, the symbolism was that
of a community meal, an accepted social symbol of community
throughout the whole of human culture.&quot; </p>

<p>Marijuana has been used as sacrifice, a sacrament, a ritual
fumigant (incense), a good-will offering, and as a means of
communing with the divine spirit. It has been used to seal
treaties, friendships, solemn binding agreements and to
legitimize covenants. It has been used as a traditional defense
against evil and in purification. It has been used in divinations
(1. the art or practice that seeks to foresee or foretell future
events or discover hidden knowledge; 2. unusual insight;
intuitive perception.) It has been used in remembrance of the
dead and praised for its medicinal properties. </p>

<p>Most Christians agree that participation in the Eucharist is
supposed to enhance and deepen communion of believers not only
with Christ but also with one another. We must therefor ask the
question, &quot;What substance did the ancients use as a
community meal to facilitate communion with the Lord?&quot; The
answer to that question is marijuana. Hemp as originally used in
religious ritual, temple activities, and tribal rites, involved
groups of worshippers rather than the solitary individual. The
pleasurable psychoactive effects were then, as now, communal
experiences. </p>

<p>Practically every major religion and culture of the ancient
world utilized marijuana as part of their religious observance.
Marijuana was the ambrosia of the ancient world. It was the food,
drink, and perfume of the gods. It was used by the Africans, the
Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Asians, the Europeans, and possibly
the Indians of the Americas. Would it be too much to suggest that
the ancient Israelites also utilized marijuana? </p>

<p>The following information was taken from the most
authoritative books dealing with the history of marijuana. They
are mentioned at the end of this work. </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA IN INDIA </h2>

<p>In Indian tradition marijuana is associated with immortality.
There is a complex myth of the churning of the Ocean of Milk by
the gods, their joint act of creation. They were in search of
Amrita, the elixir of eternal life. When the gods, helped by
demons, churned the ocean to obtain Amrita, one of the resulting
nectars was cannabis. After churning the ocean, the demons
attempted to gain control of Amrita (marijuana), but the gods
were able to prevent this seizure, giving cannabis the name
Vijaya (&quot;victory&quot;) to commemorate their success. </p>

<p>Other ancient Indian names for marijuana were &quot;sacred
grass&quot;, &quot;hero leaved&quot;, &quot;joy&quot;,
&quot;rejoicer&quot;, &quot;desired in the three worlds&quot;'
&quot;gods' food&quot;, &quot;fountain of pleasures&quot;' and
&quot;Shiva's plant&quot;. </p>

<p>Early Indian legends maintained that the angel of mankind
lived in the leaves of the marijuana plant. It was so sacred that
it was reputed to deter evil and cleanse its user of sin. In
Hindu mythology hemp is a holy plant given to man for the
&quot;welfare of mankind&quot; and is considered to be one of the
divine nectars able to give man anything from good health, to
long life, to visions of the gods. Nectar is defined as the
fabled drink of the gods. </p>

<p>Tradition maintains that when nectar or Amrita dropped from
heaven, that cannabis sprouted from it. In Hindu mythology Amrita
means immortality; also, the ambrosial drink which produced it. </p>

<p>In India hemp is made into a drink and is reputed to be the
favorite drink of Indra (the King of Indian gods.) Tradition
maintains that the god Indra gave marijuana to the people so that
they might attain elevated states of consciousness, delight in
worldly joy, and freedom from fear. </p>

<p>According to Hindu legends, Siva, the Supreme God of many
Hindu sects, had some family squabble and went off to the fields.
He sat under a hemp plant so as to be sheltered from the heat of
the sun and happened to eat some of its leaves. He felt so
refreshed from the hemp plant that it became his favorite food,
and that is how he got his title, the Lord of Bhang. Cannabis is
mentioned as a medicinal and magical plant as well as a
&quot;sacred grass&quot; in the Atharva Veda (dated 2000 - 1400
B.C.) </p>

<p>It also calls hemp one of the five kingdoms of herbs...which
releases us from anxiety and refers to hemp as a &quot;source of
happiness&quot;, &quot;joy-giver&quot; and &quot;liberator&quot;.
Although the holy books, the Shastras, forbid the worship of the
plant, it has been venerated and used as a sacrifice to the
deities. Indian Tradition, writing, and belief is that the
&quot;Siddhartha&quot; (the Buddha), used and ate nothing but
hemp and its seeds for six years prior to announcing
(discovering) his truths and becoming the Buddha. </p>

<p>Cannabis held a preeminent place in the Tantric religion which
evolved in Tibet in the seventh century A.D. Tantrism was a
religion based on fear of demons. To combat the demonic threat to
the world, the people sought protection in plants such as
cannabis which were set afire to overcome evil forces. </p>

<p>In the tenth century A.D. hemp was extolled as indracanna, the
&quot;food of the gods&quot;. A fifteenth-century document refers
to cannabis as &quot;light-hearted&quot;, &quot;joy-full&quot;
and &quot;rejoices&quot;, and claimed that among its virtues are
&quot;astringency&quot;, &quot;heat&quot;,
&quot;speech-giving&quot;, &quot;inspiration of mental
powers&quot;, &quot;excitability&quot; and the capacity to
&quot;remove wind and phlegm&quot;. </p>

<p>Today in the Tantric Buddhism of the Himalayas of Tibet,
cannabis plays a very significant role in the meditative ritual
to facilitate deep meditation and heighten awareness. In modern
India it is taken at Hindu and Sikh temples and Mohammedan
shrines. Among fakirs (Hindu ascetics) bhang is viewed as the
giver of long life and a means of communion with the divine
spirit. Like his Hindu brother, the Musalman fakir reveres bhang
as the lengthener of life and the freer from the bonds of self. </p>

<p>At the turn of the twentieth century, the Indian Hemp Drugs
Commission set up to study the use of hemp in India contains the
following report: </p>

<p>&quot;...It is inevitable that temperaments would be found to
whom the quickening spirit of bhang is the spirit of freedom and
knowledge. In the ecstasy of bhang the spark of the Eternal in
man turns into the light the murkiness of matter. </p>

<p>&quot;...Bhang is the Joy-giver, the Sky-filler, the Heavenly-
Guide, the Poor Man's Heaven, the Soother of Grief...No god or
man is as good as the religious drinker of bhang...The supporting
power of bhang has brought many a Hindu family safe through the
miseries of famine. To forbid or even seriously restrict the use
of so gracious an herb as the hemp would cause widespread
suffering and annoyance and to large bands of worshipped
ascetics, deep-seated anger. It would rob the people of a solace
on discomfort, of a cure in sickness, of a guardian whose
gracious protection saves them from the attacks of evil
influences... </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA IN CHINA </h2>

<p>Hemp was so highly regarded in ancient China that the Chinese
called their country &quot;the land of mulberry and hemp&quot;.
Hemp was a symbol of power over evil and in emperor Shen Nung's
pharmacopoeia was known as the &quot;liberator of sin&quot;. The
Chinese believed that the legendary Shen Nung first taught the
cultivation of hemp in the 28th century B.C. Shen Nung is
credited with developing the sciences of medicine from the
curative power of plants. So highly regarded was Shen Nung that
he was deified and today he is regarded as the Father of Chinese
medicine. Shen Nung was also regarded as the Lord of fire. He
sacrificed on T'ai Shan, a mountain of hoary antiquity. </p>

<p>A statement in the Pen-ts'ao Ching of some significance is
that Cannabis &quot;grows along rivers and valleys at T'ai-shan,
but it is now common everywhere.&quot; Mount T'ai is in Shangtung
Privince, where the cultivation of the hemp plant is still
intensive to this day. Whether or not this early attribution
indicates the actual geographic origin of the cultivation of the
Cannabis plant remains to be seen. (An Archeological and
Historical Account of Cannabis in China by Hui-Lin Li) </p>

<p>A chines Taoist priest wrote in the fifth century B.C. that
cannabis was used in combination with Ginseng to set forward time
in order to reveal future events. It is recorded that the Taoist
recommended the addition of cannabis to their incense burners in
the 1st century A.D. and that the effects thus produced were
highly regarded as a means of achieving immortality. In the early
Chinese Taoist ritual the fumes and odors of incense burners were
said to have produced a mystic exaltation and contribution to
well-being. </p>

<p>Webster's New Riverside Dictionary defines marijuana: 1. Hemp
2. The dried flower clusters and leaves of the hemp plant, esp.
when taken to induce euphoria. Euphoria is defined as a strong
feeling of elation or well-being. </p>

<p>Like the practice of medicine around the world, early Chinese
doctoring was based on the concept of demons. The only way to
cure the sick was to drive out the demons. The early priest
doctors used marijuana stalks into which snake-like figures were
carved. </p>

<p>Standing over the body of the stricken patient, his cannabis
stalk poised to strike, the priest pounded the bed and commanded
the demon to be gone. The cannabis stalk with the snake carved on
it was the forerunner to the sign of modern medicine (the staff
with the entwined serpents.) </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA IN JAPAN </h2>

<p>Hemp was used in Ancient Japan in ceremonial purification
rites and for driving away evil spirits. In Japan, Shinto priests
used a gohei, a short stick with undyed hemp fibers (for purity)
attached to one end. According to Shinto beliefs, evil and purity
cannot exist alongside one another, and so by waving the gohei
(purity) above someone's head the evil spirit inside him would be
driven away. Clothes made of hemp were especially worn during
formal and religious ceremonies because of hemp's traditional
association with purity. </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA IN ANCIENT IRAN </h2>

<p>Ancient Iran was the source for the great Persian empire, Iran
is located slightly to the northeast of the ancient kingdoms of
Sumeria, Babylonia, and Assyria. According to Mircea Eliade,
&quot;Shamanistic ecstasy induced by hemp smoke was known in
ancient Iran.&quot; Professor Eliade has suggested that
Zoroaster, the Persian prophet, said to have written the
Zend-Avesta, was a user of hemp. </p>

<p>In the Zend-Avesta hemp occupies the first place in a list of
10,000 medicinal plants. One of the few surviving books of the
Zend-Avesta, called the Venidad, &quot;The Law Against
Demons&quot;, calls bhanga (marijuana) Zoroaster's &quot;good
narcotic&quot;, and tells of two mortals who were transported in
soul to the heavens where, upon drinking from a cup of bhang,
they had the highest mysteries revealed to them. </p>

<p>Professor Eliade has theorized that Zoroaster may have used
hemp to bridge the metaphysical gap between heaven and earth. </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA IN ANCIENT EGYPT </h2>

<p>In the book, Plants of the Gods: Origin of Hallucinogenic Use
by Richard E. Schultes and Albert Hofman, page 72, it is stated
that the specimens of marijuana nearly 4,000 years old have
turned up in an Egyptian site and that in ancient Thebes the
plant was made into a drink. </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA IN EUROPE </h2>

<p>According to Nikolaas j. van der Merwe (Department of
Archaeology, University of Cape Town, South Africa) the peasants
of Europe have been using cannabis as medicine, ritual material,
and to smoke or chew as far back as oral traditions go. </p>

<p>Marijuana was an integral part of the Scythian cult of the
dead wherein homage was paid to the memory of their departed
leaders. This use of cannabis was found in frozen Scythian tombs
dated from 500 to 300 B.C. Along with the cannabis a miniature
tripod-like tent over a copper censer was found in which the
sacred plant was burned. </p>

<p>It is interesting to note that two extraordinary rugs were
also found in the frozen Scythian tombs. One rug had a border
frieze with a repeated composition of a horseman approaching the
Great Goddess who holds the &quot;Tree of Life&quot; in one hand
and raises the other hand in welcome. </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA IN AFRICA </h2>

<p>The African continent is probably the zone showing the widest
prevalence of the hemp drug habit. When white men first went to
Africa, marijuana was part of the native way of life. Africa was
a continent of marijuana cultures where marijuana was an integral
part of religious ceremony. The Africans were observed inhaling
the smoke from piles of smoldering hemp. Some of these piles had
been placed upon altars. The Africans also utilized pipes. The
African Dagga (marijuana) cults believed that Holy Cannabis was
brought to earth by the gods. (Throughout the ancient world
Ethiopia was considered the home of the gods.) </p>

<p>In south central Africa, marijuana is held to be sacred and is
connected with many religious and social customs. Marijuana is
regarded by some sects as a magic plant possessing universal
protection against all injury to life, and is symbolic of peace
and friendship. Certain tribes consider hemp use a duty. The
earliest evidence for cannabis smoking in Africa outside of Egypt
comes from fourteenth century Ethiopia, where two ceramic
smoking-pipe bowls containing traces of excavation. In many parts
of East Africa, especially near Lake Victoria (the source for the
Nile), hemp smoking and hashish snuffing cults still exist. </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA IN THE NEW WORLD </h2>

<p>According to Richard L. Lingeman in his book Drugs from A to
Z, page 146, &quot;Marijuana smoking was known by the Indians
before Columbus.&quot; After the Spanish conquest in 1521 the
Spaniards recorded that the Aztecs (Mayans) used marijuana. </p>

<p>The present day Cuna Indians of Panama use marijuana as a
sacred herb and the Cora Indians of the Sierra Madre Occidental
of Mexico smoke marijuana in this course of their sacred
ceremonies. </p>

<p>In the Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L by William A Emboden,
Jr., pages 229 and 231, is the following: &quot;A particularly
interesting account of a Tepehua (no relationship to
&quot;Tepecana&quot;) Indian ceremony with cannabis was published
in 1963 by the Mexican ethnologist Roberto William Garcia of the
University of Veracruz, northernmost branch of the Maya language
family. </p>

<p>&quot;In his account of Teehua religion and ritual, William
Garcia (1963:215-21) describes in some detail a communal curing
ceremony focused on a plant called santa rose, &quot;The Herb
Which Makes One Speak&quot;, which he identified botanically as
Cannabis Sativa: According to Garcia it is worshipped as an earth
deity and is thought to be alive and comparable to a piece of the
heart of God.&quot; </p>

<h2>MARIJUANA USE BY THE MOSLEMS </h2>

<p>It is interesting to note that the use of hemp was not
prohibited by Mohammed (570-632 A.D.) while the use of alcohol
was. Moslems considered hemp as a &quot;Holy Plant&quot; and
medieval Arab doctors considered hemp as a sacred medicine which
they called among other names kannab. The Sufis (a Moslem sect)
originating in 8th century Persia used hashish as a means of
stimulating mystical consciousness and appreciation of the nature
of Allah. Eating hashish to the Sufis was &quot;an act of
worship&quot;. They maintained that hashish gave them otherwise
unattainable insights into themselves, deeper understanding and
that it made them feel witty. They also claimed that it gave
happiness, reduced anxiety, reduced worry, and increased music
appreciation. </p>

<p>According to one Arab legend Haydar, the Persian founder of
the religious order of Sufi came across the cannabis plant while
wandering in the Persian mountains. Usually a reserved and silent
man, when he returned to his monastery after eating some cannabis
leaves, his disciples were amazed at how talkative and animated
(full of spirit) he seemed. After cajoling Haydar into telling
them what he had done to make him feel so happy, his disciples
went out into the mountains and tried the cannabis themselves. So
it was, according to the legend, that the Sufis came to know the
pleasures of hashish. (Taken from the Introduction to A
Comprehensive Guide to Cannabis Literature by Earnest Abel.) </p>

<h2>SUMMARY </h2>

<p>Due to the prosecution of God's church from the beginning of
the Christian era and due to the persecution against marijuana
the true understanding of the Eucharist has remained hidden from
Christendom and the world, only to be revealed in these times,
the culmination of all human history. </p>

<p>We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare marijuana for
the communion of saints, the forgiveness of sins, and for the
resurrection of mankind. The fruits of the mystery are
remembrance of the passions and death of Christ, propitiation for
sins, defense against temptation, and the indwelling of Christ in
the faithful. </p>

<p>Preparations for communion consist of confession of sins,
fasting from sin, and reconciliation with all mankind. As such
the participant in the Eucharist will be in a condition in which
prayer and meditation are easy and fruitful. He will find his
emotion purified and stimulated, his spirituality quickened and
his heart filled with love. </p>

<h2>SOURCES </h2>

<p>Richard E. Schultes, article: &quot;Man and Marijuana&quot; </p>

<p>Richard E. Schultes and Albert Hofman, Plants of the Gods -
Origin of Hallucinogenic Use (McGraw-Hill Book Co. [U.K.]
Limited, Maidenhead, England [1979]). </p>

<p>G.S. Chopra, article: &quot;Man and Marijuana&quot;,
International Journal of the Addict,1969, 4, 215-247. </p>

<p>Earnest L. Abel, Marijuana, the First Twelve Thousand Years
(Phenum Press, New York, 1980) </p>

<p>Earnest L. Abel, A Comprehensive Guide to Cannabis Literature </p>

<p>Earnest L. Abel, Marijuana Dictionary: Words, Terms, Events
and Persons Relating to Cannabis(Greenwood Press, Westpoint,
Connecticut [1982]) </p>

<p>Edward M. Breecher and the Editors of Consumer Reports, The
Consumer Union Report, &quot;Licit and Illicit Drugs&quot;,
(Little, Brown, and Co.) </p>

<p>Louis Lewin, Phantastica, Narcotic and Stimulating Drugs:
Their Use and Abuse, (London: Kegan, Trench, Turbner and Co.,
Ltd. Translated from the second German edition by P.H.A. Wirth,
1931) (N.Y., Dutton, 1964, reprint, 1924, trans. 1931) </p>

<p>Sula Benet, Cannabis and Culture, ed. V. Rubin (The Hague:
Moutan, 1975) </p>

<p>Richard E. Lingeman, Drugs from A to Z, A Dictionary
(McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1969, 74) </p>

<p>John R. Glowa, The Encyclopedia of Psychoactive Drugs (Chelsea
House Pub., N.Y., New Haven, Philadelphia, 1986) </p>

<p>George Andrews and Simon Vinkenoog, The Book of Grass: An
Anthology on Indian Hemp; Chandler and Sharp Series in Cross
Cultural Themes (N.Y., Grove Press [1967]) </p>

<p>Jack Herer, The Emperor Wears No Clothes, 1985, 90, 91, 92. </p>

<p>Peter T. Furst, Hallucinogens and Culture (Chandler and Sharp
Publishers, Inc., 1976) </p>

<p>Baudelaire, Artificial Paradises </p>

<p>Dr. Charles Tart, &quot;On Being Stoned: A Psychological Study
of Marijuana Intoxication&quot; (Science and Behavior, 1971) </p>

<p>William A. Emboden, Jr. Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L </p>

<p>S.I. Rudenko, Frozen Tombs of Siberia (Dent., London, 1970) </p>

<p>Edward Atchley, A History of the Use of Incense in Divine
Worship </p>

<p>E. A. Wallis Budge, The Divine Origin of the Craft of the
Herbalist </p>

<p>Egon C. Corti, A history of Smoking, by Count Corti;
Translated by </p>

<p>Paul England (G.G. Harrap, London, England, 1931) </p>

<p>Francis Robicsek, The Smoking Gods: Tobacco in Mayan Art,
History, and Religion (University of Oklahoma Press, Norman,
1978) </p>

<p>Diodurus, Histories 1.97.7 </p>

<p>Herman Scneider, History of World Civilization, 2v (New York,
1931) </p>

<p>M.N. Dhalla, Zoroastrian Civilization (Oxford University
Press, N.Y., 1922) </p>

<p>Sir Charles Eliot, Hinduism and Buddhism 3v. (Routledge &amp;
K. Paul, London, 1921) </p>

<p>A.A. McDonell, India's Past (The Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1927) </p>

<p>Charles Anthon, A Classical Dictionary (N.Y., Harpers and
Brothers, 1848) </p>

<p>G. Maspero, The Dawn of Civilization: Egypt and Chaldea
(London, 1897) </p>

<p>Lucy Lamy, Egyptian Mysteries </p>

<p>Friedrich Ratzel, History of Mankind (N.Y., Gordon Press) </p>

<p>R.H. Charles The Book of Jubilees, cap, iij, (London, 1902) </p>

<p>Alfred Wiedemann, Religion of the Ancient Egyptians (London,
1987) </p>

<p>Geoffrey Wainwright, Eucharist and Eschatology (Epworth Press,
London, 1971) </p>

<p>Webster's Third New International Dictionary, 1966 </p>

<p>The Book of the Dead, Edit. E.A.W. Budge, British Museum,
1895, p. 250 </p>

<p>J. Jeremias, in Encyclopedia, Iv, 4119, quoting Rawlinson,
Cuneiform Inscription IV. 19 (59) Cnf. the story of Bel and the
Dragon. </p>

<p>John McKenzie, The Bible Dictionary (N.Y. MacMillan Pub. Co.,
1965) </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Holy Spirit&quot; (15th
Edition, 1978) </p>

<p>Micropaedia, Ready Reference and Index </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Sacrifice&quot; (15th Edition,
1978) </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Pharmacological Cults&quot;
(15th Edition, 1978), p. 199 </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Coptic&quot; </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Essenes&quot; </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Theraputea&quot; </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Sacred Pipe&quot; (15th
Edition) </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Incense&quot; </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Hemp&quot; (Microppaedia Ready
Reference and Index, p. 1016) </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Roman Catholicism, The
Eucharist&quot; (Volume 15, p. 998) </p>

<p>Encyclopedia Britannica, &quot;Mysticism&quot; </p>

<p>King James version of The Bible </p>

<p>The Apocrypha </p>

<p>We hope you enjoyed this pamphlet. If you have any questions
or comments, we would like to see them. Send them to the
Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church, P.O. Box 1161, Minneola, FL
34755-1161. </p>

<p>We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church decided to publish this
pamphlet in order to give the public an opportunity to study the
church and its doctrine; not from inflated and misleading media
but from historical and Biblical reference. The Church has
received extensive publicity as &quot;60 Minutes&quot; has done a
segment; Life, Omni, Science, Rolling Stone, and High Times
magazines have all done articles, countless newspaper articles
have been written, and various brothers have been on radio and TV
talk shows around the country. </p>

<p>We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church revere ganja
(marijuana) as our &quot;holy&quot; Eucharist and &quot;spiritual
intensifier&quot; with Biblical, historical and divine
associations for its use. </p>

<p>Ganja is the mystical body and blood of &quot;Jesus&quot; --
the burnt offering made by fire -- which allows a member to see
and know the &quot;living God&quot;, or the &quot;God in
man&quot;. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>