
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-69</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B020-70</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/mjmedhb.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053138 text/html 60657
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:31:27 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:11 GMT
Content-length: 60439
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Marijuana Medical Handbook</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Marijuana Medical Handbook </h1>

<p> <b>by Tod Mikuriya, M.D.</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> DRAFT </p>

<p> Sedative Effects </p>

<p> Continued Use exhibits a much more controlled pattern of mood
management through a mild stimulation with low repeated inhaled
doses. Modulation of emotional reactivity appears to be another
significant desired effect of cannabis. The net effects for the
continuing moderate user are a unique combination of mood
elevation with a decrease in anxiety that is easily controlled. </p>

<p> Antidepressant </p>

<p> The ancient Greek, Indian, Persian, writings are replete with
descriptions of antidepressant properties: </p>

<p> Homer's Odyssey describes Helen using a potion obtained from
Polydamna that lifted the spirits at a morose gathering by
slipping Nepenthe in the wine. Nepenthe means &quot;against
sorrow&quot; . </p>

<p> Samscrit and Hindi writings characterize cannabis: </p>

<p> Before the 8th century an anti phlegmatic, Circa 1050:
victorious (Vijaya), and victorious in three worlds
(Trailokyavijaya). </p>

<p> 1300 A.D. in The Rajanighantu of Narahari Pandita: the light
hearted (Capala), the joyful (Ananda), the rejoicer (Harsini),
speech giving (vakpradatva) inspiring of mental power
(medhakaritva), and a most excellent excitant (cresthadipanatva).
</p>

<p> 17th Century Materia Medica The Rajavallabha: &quot;It
creates vital energy, the mental powers, and internal heat,
corrects irregularities of the phlegmatic humour, and is an
elixir vitae.&quot; </p>

<p> In contemporary terms a case of severe and chronic depression
may have been successfully treated through self medication with
cannabis. </p>

<p> The Persian physician Mirza Abdool Rhazes wrote:&quot;The
oldest work in which Hemp is noticed is a treatise by Hasan, who
states that in the year 658 (Mahometan era)(1258), the Sheikh
Djafar Shirazi, a monk of the order of Haider, learnt from his
master the history of the discovery of Hemp. Haider, the chief of
ascetics and self-chasteners, lived in rigid privation on a
mountain between Nishabor and Romah, where he established a
monastery of Fakirs. Ten years he had spent in his retreat,
without leaving it for a moment, till one burning summer's day,
when he departed alone to the fields. On his return an air of joy
and gaiety was imprinted on his countenance; he received the
visits of his brethren, and encouraged their conversation. On
being questioned, he stated that: struck by the aspect of a plant
which danced in the heat as if with joy, while all the rest of
the vegetable creation was torpid, he had gathered and eaten of
it's leaves. He led his companions to the spot, all ate, and all
were similarly excited. A tincture of the Hemp leaf in wine or
spirit seems to have been the favorite formula in which the
Sheikh Haider indulged himself. An Arab poet sings of Haider's
emerald cup; an evident allusion to the rich green colour of the
tincture of the drug. The Sheikh survived the discovery ten
years, subsisting chiefly on this herb, and on his death his
disciples by his desire planted it in an arbour about his tomb.
From this saintly sepulcher the knowledge of the effects of Hemp
is stated to have spread into Khorasan.&quot; </p>

<p> In 1845 J.J. Moreau de Tours, a French psychiatrist utilized
cannabis in the treatment of depression described the drug's
effects: </p>

<p> &quot;It seems that nothing can hurt you in this peace of
mind, that you are inaccessible to sadness. I doubt that the most
unfortunate news could draw you out of that imaginary bliss,
which can only be appreciated through experience. </p>

<p> I have just attempted to give an idea of the delights that
hashish produces. I hasten to add that I have presented them here
in no more than raw form, as it were, and at their simplest. It
will depend upon external circumstances to confer upon these
feelings of happiness still greater intensity by directing them
toward a determined goal and by concentrating them on a single
point. One imagines what reality can add to this state of bliss
and how much the joys of hashish can be enhanced by external
impressions, by direct sensory excitations, or by the stirring of
passions through natural causes. At that time, the rapture of
hashish intoxication, taking shape and form, will assume the
dimensions of delirium. This disposition of the mind, linked with
another which I will discuss later, was, I feel, the fertile
source from which the fanatic inhabitants of Lebanon derived that
happiness, those ineffable delights for which they gladly
sacrificed their lives. </p>

<p> It is necessary here to clarify what I have just said. It is
really happiness that hashish gives, and by that I mean mental
joy, not sensual joy as one might be tempted to believe. This is
indeed very curious, and one can draw strange conclusions- this
one among others, that all joy, all contentment, even though its
cause is strictly mental, deeply spiritual, and highly
idealistic, could well be in reality a purely physical sensation,
developed physiologically, exactly like those caused by hashish.
At least, if one relies on inner feelings, there is no
distinction to be made between these two orders of sensations, in
spite of the diversity of the causes to which they are related
for the hashish user is happy, not in the manner of the glutton,
of the ravenous man who satisfies his appetite, or even of the
hedonist who gratifies his desires, but in the manner, for
example, of the man who hears news that compounds his joys, of
the miser counting his treasures, of the gambler whom luck
favors, or the ambitious man whom success intoxicates. </p>

<p> However, the preceding remarks were not intended to raise a
psychological question. I am merely recording observations, and
have no other pretension than that of being the faithful and
exact historian of my sensations.&quot; This characterization of
the antidepressant effects of the drug in contemporary contexts
would be unthinkable pro drug sedition and would never be found
in any advertisement. </p>

<p> Depression as one of the conditions listed for treatment
appeared in general Materia Medica, or medical texts , , , </p>

<p> Subsequent clinical use in depression is described as having
variable results. Clouston in 1871 from the Cumberland and
Westmoreland asylum reported on five cases of melancholy with
some success in four and marked improvement in one. Villard
describes similar variable results in melancholia by physicians
in France. The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission in 1894 reviewed
medical literature, testimony by both indigenous medical
practitioners and Western trained physicians and described
cannabis to be used as a tonic to increase stamina, </p>

<p> Cannabis decreases emotional reactivity and intensity of
affect while increasing introspection as evidenced by the slowing
of the EEG after initial stimulation. The unique sedative effects
of cannabis then begin to prevail. Obsessive and pressured
thinking give way to introspective free associations when in
relaxed circumstances. Emotional reactivity is smoothed out,
worries are less pressing. The alteration of time perception
relieves the &quot;hurry sickness&quot;. </p>

<p> Analgesic Effects </p>

<p> Two thousand years ago Chinese used cannabis in high doses to
induce a state of altered consciousness to permit major surgery.
The analgesic effects of cannabis, which are less potent than the
opiates, appear in part to be from decreased affective
reactivity, which is modulated by altered time perception. </p>

<p> &quot;During the time that this remarkable drug is relieving
pain a very curious psychical condition sometimes manifests
itself; namely, that the diminution of pain seems to be due to
its fading into the distance, so that the pain in a delicate ear
would grow less and less as a beaten drum was carried farther and
farther out of the range of hearing. </p>

<p> This condition is probably associated with the other well
known symptom produced by the drug, namely, the prolongation of
time.&quot; Cannabis was mentioned in most general medical texts
as an analgesic but with lesser potency than the opiates. </p>

<p> Different types of pain respond differently to cannabis.
Review of clinical literature discloses two general categories
that respond affirmatively: Intermittent spasmodic pain and
inflammation. (See table 1) </p>

<p> Migraine Headache is a specific type of pain for which
cannabis was first described to be useful by J. Russell Reynolds
. After some thirty years clinical experience after this initial
observation, he described &quot;Migraine: very many victims have
for years kept their sufferings in abeyance by taking hemp at the
moment of threatening, or onset of the attack.&quot; In Osler's
medical text it was the treatment of choice for migraine
headache. The most recent (and last) mention of cannabis for the
treatment of migraine was from Morris Fishbein, M.D., Editor of
the Journal of the American Medical Association in 1942. </p>

<p> Cannabis was compared with alcohol in cross-cultural
comparisons in India. Daru vs Bhang. G. Morris Carstairs
described differences in emotional reactivity: contrast of
cannabis comparable effects of alcohol intoxication that
increases emotional reactivity. Cannabis cools the passions.
Alcohol inflames them. I have never heard of a pot room brawl. </p>

<p> Physical Effects: </p>

<p> Reddened Eyes: Increased Blood Circulation to the Brain </p>

<p> Moreau in his description of the clinical pharmacological
effects on the brain were to increase blood circulation during
effects of the drug. </p>

<p> The phenomenon of dilated eye blood vessels with cannabis
intoxication has been described extensively in writings on the
drug. The meninges, the membrane covering the brain, covers the
external eye. (except for the corneal area) The reddened eyes
represent a general increase in cerebral blood flow (CBF). This
increase in blood circulation is due to decreased peripheral
resistance from dilation of the capillaries in the cerebral
cortex. CBF changes reflect mental effects; increased CBF:
stimulation of cognition, decreasing CBF: sedation. Chronic heavy
users appear to have decreased CBF when deprived of the drug. </p>

<p> Circulation and Heart Rate </p>

<p> Increased heart rate is due to central nervous system
modulation of the tenth cranial nerve (the vagus nerve). There
are no direct effects on the heart's electrical conduction system
nor general peripheral vasodilation. Heart rate increase is dose
related but not greater than moderate exercise. </p>

<p> Orthostatic hypotension which takes place with some cannabis
users is due to a transient lag in changes in the muscle tension
in artery walls when standing up after sitting or lying down. It
is a feeling of faintness or dizziness that is relieved by
sitting or reclining. This phenomenon is due to effects of
interfering with the reflex response readjusting the muscle
tension in arterial walls. Again, mediated through the vagus
nerve. </p>

<p> Glaucoma </p>

<p> Hepler and Frank in 1971 serindipitously discovered that
Marijuana smoking significantly lowered pressure in the eyeball
in 9 of 11 normal subjects. Frederick Blanton, M.D. , A Florida
ophthalmologist in private practice read about Hepler and Frank's
findings and tried cannabis in the form of marijuana spiked
brownies and marijuana cigarettes in 100 administrations with
positive results as compared to pilocarpine. In his series of 20
glaucoma patients their intraocular pressure was dropped from an
average of 25 to 18 mm Hg*. (Which is from the moderately
elevated to a normal value) Rather than being greeted by his
colleagues and the medical profession he was censured by his
county medical society and suspended for 6 months. The Hepler and
Frank team in a legal controlled study at U.C.L.A. confirmed Dr
Blanton's findings. </p>

<p> Robert Randall, a sufferer of glaucoma, after his arrest for
cultivation for personal use, successfully sued the federal
government on the basis of medical necessity and is currently
maintained on cannabis supplied by the National Institute on Drug
Abuse. He continues to hold his symptoms at bay through smoking
marijuana but if he attempts to stop experiences characteristic
symptoms of &quot;halo&quot; effects around lights and eye pain.
These symptoms cease when he starts inhaling marijuana smoke
again. </p>

<p> Asthma </p>

<p> The contradictory properties of irritation to the throat and
lungs causing bronchitis and the antiasthmatic effects
acknowledged by the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission: </p>

<p> &quot;In asthma and bronchitis inhalation of ganja smoke
appears to be very frequently prescribed; while on the other
hand, there is evidence which tends to indicate that both
affections may be induced by charas or ganja smoking indulged in
as a habit.&quot; </p>

<p> In Western medicine where the smoked route was rarely
employed cannabis was described as effective in controlling
asthma and cough. Since cannabis Prohibition the same seemingly
paradoxical properties have been confirmed. </p>

<p> Topical Effects </p>

<p> Cannabis resin, with the consistency of pine pitch, insoluble
in water is irritating to tissues although it has some topical
anesthetic properties. The crude plant also has bactericidal
properties. </p>

<p> Tracheobronchial Tree and Lungs </p>

<p> Because the most common route of administration is the smoked
route irritation to these organs is a safety concern. The
additional products from burning are undeniably irritating.
Animal experiments indicate that cannabis is different from
tobacco in its irritating effects on the lungs. The frequently
heard coughing fits of the cannabis smoker give irrefutable
involuntary vocal testimony to this undesirable side effect from
smoking cannabis. </p>

<p> Topical Applications </p>

<p> Aside from contact dermatitis in hemp harvesters and
processors at high levels of exposure, some allergenic
individuals react similarly to exposure to small amounts of
cannabis. </p>

<p> The powdered crude plant is moistened and applied to
arthritic joints. </p>

<p> Concentrated cannabis resin is topical anesthetic. Applied
directly to a nerve, the electrical impulses are inhibited. It
was mentioned as used on dental caries for treatment of pain. </p>

<p> Prior to removal from the market it was combined with
salicylic acid, a proteolytic agent, and collodion to keep it in
place for callus removal on feet. </p>

<p> [insert Corn Remedy Advertisement] </p>

<p> Although cannabis is water insoluble powdered cannabis has
been moistened and applied as a poultice to arthritic joints. </p>

<p> Cannabis powder has also been used as a topical antiseptic
applied to wounds to promote healing and prevent infection. </p>

<p> The antibiotic properties of cannabis appears to be in the
cannabidiolic acid and cannabidiol </p>

<p> Increased Appetite </p>

<p> Cannabis has been recognized as an appetite stimulant for
hundreds of years in non-western medicine. Mirza Abdool Rhazes,
&quot;a most intelligent Persian physician...considers Hemp to be
a powerful exciter of the flow of bile, and relates cases of its
efficacy in restoring appetite..&quot; &quot; &quot;produces a
healthy appetite,..digestive, easy of digestion,..and the
digestive faculty&quot; . </p>

<p> During its' century long prescriptive availability before
being taken off the market, stimulation of appetite was
frequently described, as a secondary effect during its use as an
analgesic or sedative in comparison with the opiates. McConnell
in 1888 specifically described success in treating anorexia
&quot;One of the conditions in which the drug has proved useful
in his hands is anorexia- loss of appetite consequent upon
exhausting diseases such as prolonged fevers, diarrhoea,
dysentery, phthisis, etc.&quot; </p>

<p> Appetite Stimulant </p>

<p> Antidiarrheal </p>

<p> Laxative </p>

<p> Lees described the drug as a mild stimulant to overcome
constipation and gastritis that is nervous in origin </p>

<p> Antiemetic </p>

<p> Anticonvulsant </p>

<p> With the introduction of cannabis to Western medicine in 1838
</p>

<p> Consroe and Sandyk 507 </p>

<p> TABLE 1 </p>

<p> Reported Effects of Marijuana Treatment on Features of
Neurological Disorders Described in the 19th Century and Possible
Contemporary Analogies to These Neurological Disorders </p>

<p> Disorders of the Contemporary Effect of </p>

<p> 19th century disorders marijuana </p>

<p> Convulsions: recurrent. Tonic-clonic seizures: Benefit </p>

<p> general, tonic. clonic generalized epilepsy </p>

<p> Convulsions: petit mal Absence seizures: </p>

<p> generalized epilepsy No effect </p>

<p> Spasms of torticollis torticollis; </p>

<p> and Dystonic movements: spasmodic No effect </p>

<p> writer's cramp writer`s cramp </p>

<p> Rheumatic chorea: </p>

<p> Choreic movements: Sydenham`s Benefit; </p>

<p> generalized chorea chorea: </p>

<p> Huntinpton`s chorea no effect </p>

<p> Tremor of paralysis agitans Resting tremor: No effect </p>

<p> Parkinson`s disrase </p>

<p> I </p>

<p> Tonic painful spasms; jerky Spasticity and Ataxia: Benefit </p>

<p> movements of spinal sclerosis </p>

<p> spinal cord injury: no effect </p>

<p> multiple sclerosis </p>

<p> Pain of neuropathy. Sustained pain: No effect </p>

<p> e.g. sciatica </p>

<p> neuropathic pain Pain of neuropathy Paroxysmal pain,
trigeminal neuralgia neuropathic pain Benefit </p>

<p> Migraine headache Migraine headache Benefit </p>

<p> Analgesic </p>

<p> ANTIINFLAMMATORY- Systemic </p>

<p> First described by O'Shaughnessy in the treatment of acute
and chronic arthritis in 1839, Clendinning confirmed the findings
in 4 of his 18 patients in 1843. Acute rheumatism was
successfully treated by Buckingham in 1858 </p>

<p> Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug: </p>

<p> Similar chemical structure to steroids </p>

<p> [Insert chemical structure diagram] </p>

<p> Lipid metabolic pathway of the Eicosanoids </p>

<p> Release of Prostaglandin and decrease of PG production. </p>

<p> Inhibition of healing of viral infection </p>

<p> Antagonism of marihuana effects by indomethacin </p>

<p> Post traumatic Arthritis </p>

<p> Auto immune Diseases </p>

<p> Nail Patellar Tooth </p>

<p> Charcot Marie Tooth </p>

<p> Drusen of Optic Nerve </p>

<p> Cough Suppressant </p>

<p> Clendinning in 1843 described 18 cases of whom 6 presented
with cough- both acute and chronic that responded favorably to
cannabis. In addition to mention in most Materia Medica and
general medical literature as an antitussive, cannabis was
included in proprietary cough medicine like Piso's cough cure
that were available until 1937. </p>

<p> Antiasthmatic effects are described with both oral and smoked
routes of administration although the bronchitis from chronic use
was recognized as an undesirable side effect. </p>

<p> It was recognized to be useful &quot;in some cases of
Spasmodic Asthma&quot; </p>

<p> Antipruritic </p>

<p> Chronic and acute itching appear to respond well to cannabis
and is mentioned in several general medical texts. Grinspoon and
Baklar in Marijuana Forbidden Medicine reports a case of
self-medication with marijuana for intractable itching. </p>

<p> Alcohol, Opioid, and Sedative Substitute </p>

<p> Harm reduction through substitution </p>

<p> Clendinning also must be credited with substituting cannabis
for opium dependence in 4 of the 18 cases reported. Mattison in
1891 described cannabis as treatment of choice for the treatment
of opiate and alcohol dependence and cautioned the practitioner
to think twice before resorting to prolonged opiate use for pain:
&quot;Would that the wisdom which has come to their professional
fathers through, it maybe, a hapless experience, might serve them
to steer clear of narcotic shoals on which many a patient has
gone awreck. </p>

<p> Indian hemp is not here lauded as a specific. It will at
times, fail. So do other drugs. But the many cases in which it
acts well, entitle it to a large and lasting confidence.&quot; </p>

<p> Withdrawal and Substitute For Alcohol, Opioids, Sedatives,
and Nicotine </p>

<p> Three of Clendinning's cases were withdrawal from alcohol
dependence . Birch in 1889 and Mattison described cannabis as
useful in withdrawal from and substitute for chronic chloral and
chronic opium dependence. Reed described cannabis for the
treatment of nicotinism </p>

<p> Febrifuge </p>

<p> The mention in the 17th century Persian medical text
Makhzan-el-Adwiya as &quot;imparting a gentle heat, and then a
considerable refrigerant effect.&quot; The Indian Hemp Drugs
Commission took note: There is a large body of evidence showing
that hemp drugs, both as smoked and as drunk, are used as a
febrifuge or preventive of diseases common in malarious tracts or
arising from bad water.&quot; Cannabis continues to be used in
contemporary Ayurvedic Medicine to treat malarial fever. </p>

<p> Clendinning in 1843 described effectiveness in the treatment
of four cases of febrile illness. </p>

<p> While this property of cannabis went largely unnoticed by
Western medicine, it was rediscovered in the classified Army
research done from 1954 - 1959 reported by Van M. Sim, M.D.,
chief of the Edgewood Arsenal research program in an interview:
&quot;The tetrahydrocannabinols also are capable of lowering the
body temperature three to four degrees centigrade under
conditions of severe hyperpyrexia.&quot; While Dr Sim is credited
with getting the findings declassified, at this writing there has
been no clinical follow-up. </p>

<p> Sedative </p>

<p> The sedative and sleep inducing properties of cannabis were
described in both general and medical literature as the end phase
after an initial stimulation. </p>

<p> Edes while unsuccessfully treating headache relieved a
patient of nightmares. As late as 1937 it was officially
described by the American Medical Association as being
&quot;...the average physician will readily admit that Indian
hemp is employed in various preparations for internal use as a
sedative and antispasmodic&quot; Hindu and Persian writings give
many different accounts of the biphasic effects of the drug. The
legendary nepenthe in Greek mythology may have been cannabis. </p>

<p> Uterine stimulant and contracting agent </p>

<p> Hashish was discovered in an ancient tomb in Israel; a woman
who ha apparently died in chilbirth . Used in Africa by the
smoked route. Studied by Christison , Willis , Dey, Stille&quot;
, Grigor , and Batho all reported help with uterine dysfunction
as well as stimulation of labor. Treatment of dysmenorrhea and
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) . </p>

<p> Aphrodisiac and sexual aid </p>

<p> While controversial, the alleged aphrodisiac properties are
mentioned frequently in the Indian literature, there have never
been any definitive studies. A book was devoted to the sexual
power of marijuana. Sex and drugs continue to have continuing and
complex relationships. </p>

<p> Psychological Research Tool </p>

<p> With the development of the philosophy and psychology of the
individual with scientific methodology in the mid 19th century,
the study of effects of cannabis on the mind were diverse.
O'Shaughnessy's opening of a medical transcultural portal with
his 1838 monograph, On the Preparations of the Indian Hemp, or
Gunja (Cannabis Indica) Their Effects on the Animal Systems in
Health, and Their Utility in the Treatment of Tetanus and Other
Convulsive Diseases a timeless paradigm of modern scientific
method. Review of the literature, social observation, animal
studies, healthy human studies, and effects with diseases.
Psychotropic effects of cannabis were a salient aspect of this
drug which was new to western medicine. This basic primary
knowledge disseminated throughout medical and lay literature saw
a diverse application of cannabis' effects on the mind. </p>

<p> John Stuart Mill suggested using cannabis for the recall of
forgotten memories. </p>

<p> Moreau de Tours described study of the effects to mimic
mental illness, self administration to experientially understand
pathologic mental states of dementia, mania, and delusional
conditions suffered by patients. He also recommended personally
experiencing the effects of therapeutic drugs in order to be a
more empathetic and effective clinician. Self-study through the
effects of cannabis was not only acceptable but necessary for a
proper understanding of the drug. </p>

<p> Bell proposed its use in the treatment of mania, dementia,
and melancholia and cited Moreau's model of simulation of
different forms of mental disorder. </p>

<p> Kubie and Margolin described cannabis as useful in recovering
repressed memories during dissociative mental states caused by
the drug. Rolls and Stafford-Clark described success with the use
of a single session cannabis experience in the treatment of a
case of depersonalization where pentobarbital and methamphetamine
narcosynthesis had failed. </p>

<p> These properties of cannabis and the disruption of cognition
at higher dose were evaluated as chemical weapons by the secret
government research from 1947 through 1977 . It was an original
candidate as an aid in interrogation designated the &quot;Truth
Drug&quot; TD </p>

<p> Therapeutic Power of Cannabis: A General Theory </p>

<p> Effects of any drug are more than the pharmacology. The
effects include the set (or expectations), setting, physical and
psychological makeup of the user. The set and setting includes
the culture which is expressed in its language. Semantics and
pharmacology define the drug. </p>

<p> The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission reviewed Other beneficial
effects: </p>

<p> &quot;The drugs are said to be cheering in their effects, and
to be prized by many on this account. An interesting illustration
of this may perhaps be found in the popular belief existing in
many parts that these drugs protect against cholera and other
epidemic diseases. One very intelligent witness, who had seen
much of this use, explains it to as due to the stimulating and
inspiriting* nature of the drugs.&quot; </p>

<p> This semantic attitudinal component is synergistic with the
pharmacology of the drug in producing its therapeutic effects.
This affirmative &quot;popular belief&quot; may be seen as a
factor that favorably affects the physiology of the user
including the immune system in optimizing its resistance to
stress. Psychogenic factors play a significant role in the
mediation of the immune response. </p>

<p> Linguistically the Sanskrit and Hindi references are to the
attributes of healing, strength, and success: </p>

<p> Vijaya victorious </p>

<p> Trailokyavijaya victorious in three worlds </p>

<p> Indracana Indra's food </p>

<p> Jaya victorious </p>

<p> Virapattra leaf of heroes </p>

<p> Capala the light hearted </p>

<p> Ajaya the unconquered </p>

<p> Ananda the joyful </p>

<p> Harsini the rejoicer </p>

<p> vakpradatava speech giving </p>

<p> medhakaritva inspiring of mental power </p>

<p> creshadipanatva a most excellent excitant </p>

<p> With these product images of cannabis the set and
expectations are not of forbidden deviance or illicit sensual
pleasure implicit in the contemporary argot- marijuana. </p>

<p> The fact that medical marijuana was &quot;discovered&quot;
despite the heavy prohibitionist censorship and pejorative
semantics in descriptions of characteristics of the drug attests
to the significant and strong pharmacological component of the
therapeutic effects of cannabis. </p>

<p> I am left with the question as to the relationship between
social, psychological, and physical elements; the sequence, and
eventual accomodation. At this writing the salient problem is a
generalized ignorance within the medical and scientific
communities resulting from unavailability for clinical use- a
serious case of disuse atrophy. The vaccuum of clinical
experience with cannabis has been filled by poisonous fiction.
Medline, the computer data base of medical and scientific
abstracts and listings memorializes (if memorialize can be said
of volatile and evanescent data bases) the absence of therapeutic
applications. This temporocentric window of a decade or less on
the topic of cannabis is a poisonous memory hole. Drug policy
based upon this structurally mandated ignorance is harmful and
stupid. A social form of dementia. This ignorance is then
defended by the policy makers as they make wrongheaded and
harmful decisions that perpetuate these policies. These are
collective delusional behaviors. The courts, prosecutors, and
police play an excessively active role in facilitating and
perpetuating- if not actively perpetrating this social illness.
On the tricentennial of the Salem Witch Trials Satan is alive and
well; fed on the demonology of Prohibition. William Bennett,
first recent Drug Czar designate of the United States, proclaimed
Satan as etiology of drug woes. </p>

<p> Marijuana, Hashish, Cannabis, or Hemp?: What's in a Name? </p>

<p> Only with reluctance I have chosen to utilize the term
marijuana over cannabis or hemp drugs because of its contemporary
meanings. Etymologically, one sees this distinction in the 1839
paper by O'Shaughessey </p>

<p> &quot;The term &quot;marihuana&quot; is a mongrel word that
has crept into this country over the Mexican border and has no
general meaning, except as it relates to Cannabis preparations
for smoking. It is not recognized in medicine...&quot; testified
William C. Woodward, M.D., lobbyist for the American Medical
Association before congress at hearings for the 1937 Marihuana
Tax act that ended the medicinal use of cannabis after a
century's availability. </p>

<p> But one finds this in medical and scientific literature not
listed under marijuana- but under cannabis or hemp drugs. </p>

<p> Notwithstanding the availability of one of the active
principles, delta 1, 9 tetrahydrocannabinol (dronabinol)
dissolved in sesame oil, (Marinol) since 1986 as a schedule II
drug with approved applications as an antiemetic for side effects
of cancer chemotherapy and since 1993 for AIDS wasting syndrome.
The numerous other medicinal uses of cannabis- or hemp drugs
remain largely undocumented and unreported (including use of
Marinol for applications not authorized under federal law but
permitted under California law) The chilling effect of policies
of the federal Drug Enforcement Administration and its precursors
since the removal of cannabis from the U.S. Pharmacopeia and
National Formulary in 1940 continues to maintain the fiction that
cannabis drugs have no medicinal uses. </p>

<p> Unfortunately this harmful fiction has devastating
consequences for the many patients with serious painful
debilitating and lethal conditions. The poisonous immoral,
illicit and illegal image of marijuana has caused numerous
sufferers to reject efficacious treatment with cannabinoids. </p>

<p> When in consultations with elderly patients in proffering
Marinol to patients for anorexia, nausea, and vomiting, an
occasional victim rejects the &quot;pot&quot; pill &quot;because
it is wrong&quot;, I curse the deluded ignorance of our
contemporary medical and scientific realities distorted by
putting prosecutors and police in charge of medical decisions.
Sick? Call a cop. </p>

<p> The Future of Marijuana lies in the Past </p>

<p> Our contemporary font of knowledge of the therapeutic uses of
cannabis is poisoned by official moralistic lies and censorship.
Besides the immediate toxicity of inappropriate withholding of
the drug, the resulting loss of credibility of these statements
by those with personal experience diminishes trust and belief in
the sources. Thus the clinical research reported by medicine
before marijuana prohibition in 1937 becomes even more important.
</p>

<p> Contemporary perseverative voices claiming &quot;We don't
know enough to proceed further!&quot; merely articulate their
ignorance of the existing clinical literature. </p>

<p> Just below the layer of fouled and distorted information of
the present lies a convincing body of objective clinical
information on therapeutic attributes of the drug. </p>

<p> Cannabis in Western Medicine </p>

<p> Introduced to Western medicine by Sir William B.
O'Shaughnessey, M.D. in 1839 , he acknowledged both medical and
non-medical uses and confirmed previous observations cited in
earlier literature: &quot;...the kind of mental excitement it
produces depends on the temperament of the consumer.&quot; an
observation described in 1695 in Rumphius Herbarium Amboinense .
O'Shaughnessy, not confining himself to the minimal information
in contemporary Western medical literature, turned to Ayurvedic,
Persian, and Arabic systems for additional descriptions: </p>

<p> The pre-synthetic era pharmaceutical industry confronted
problems with wide variations in potency of different
preparations of cannabis. The descriptions of inadvertent
overdose with the drug are the most numerous in medical
literature of the 19th century. </p>

<p> A clinical protocol whose applicability transcends time and
technologic innovation is that of Sir J. Russell Reynolds, M.D.,
F.R.S. in 1890: </p>

<p> &quot;The dose should be given in minimum quantity, repeated
in not less than four or six hours, and gradually increased by
one drop every third or fourth day, until either relief is
obtained, or the drug is proved, in such case, to be
useless.&quot; </p>

<p> This patient, prudent, and cautious regimen by this physician
to Queen Victoria's court summarized his thirty years of clinical
experience with the drug. The Reynolds Protocol should be used
whenever possible. </p>

<p> Patience is of prime importance since it compensates for
idiosyncratic sensitivity, lengthy onset time when taken orally,
and variability in potency of the preparation. </p>

<p> In the 1800's, Transportation, storage, handling, shipping,
and processing problems caused significant variation in potency
from one sample to another. Today, the illicit market for
cannabis produces similar variability. </p>

<p> Unlike a century ago, a salient issue is the availability of
the crude drug in quantities adequate for continued personal
therapeutic trial. </p>

<p> A Legal Cannabinoid: Marinol </p>

<p> Marinol* Roxane Laboratories, Inc. , a synthetic single
tetrahydrocannabinol dissolved in sesame oil (dronabinol) in
doses of 2.5, 5.0, and 10.0 milligram soft gelatin capsules may
be quite useful in some cases. A schedule II drug requiring a
triplicate prescription, it is restricted for use in nausea and
vomiting for side effects in cancer chemotherapy, and (since
12/93) AIDS wasting syndrome. </p>

<p> In my clinical experience with Marinol it has been useful not
only in these indicated conditions and also in the treatment of
depression, insomnia, agitation, muscle spasm, migraine headache
and pain. </p>

<p> For others, Marinol is either ineffectual or produces
undesirable side effects. With some who experience side effects
it is due to improper administration. </p>

<p> Route of Administration: Inhalation vs Oral. </p>

<p> If at all possible, the oral route is preferable since the
throat and lungs are not irritated by the drug. The clinical
medical literature and pharmaceutical catalogs prior to the
removal of cannabis in 1937 indicates the oral route was the
medicinal standard. While crude powdered cannabis was available
through pharmacies that could be smoked, it was apparently
minimal compared with the use of tinctures (alcoholic solutions
of cannabis) and extracts (cannabis resin). In addition, cannabis
was added to sedative mixtures that would contain combinations of
other plant extracts and bromine salts. </p>

<p> Advantages of the oral route </p>

<p> * No irritation to throat and lungs </p>

<p> * Stable levels of the drug </p>

<p> * Lengthy period of action </p>

<p> Disadvantages of the oral route </p>

<p> * Difficult to estimate dosage with single doses </p>

<p> * Once eaten, the dose cannot be adjusted </p>

<p> * Slow onset of effects </p>

<p> * Dependent on activity and content of stomach and small
intestines </p>

<p> * Lengthy period of action </p>

<p> * Slow wearing off of effects </p>

<p> * Inefficient use of the drug </p>

<p> With an empty stomach in a relaxed situation, effects may
start in a an hour or so. The length of action is related to the
dosage or sensitivity. With a small dose some three or four
hours, with a large dose twelve or more hours. </p>

<p> The intensity of mental effects is directly dose related. </p>

<p> Inhalation: Smoking </p>

<p> Smoking, while traditionally associated with social or
recreational use, may be desirable for certain users but
unsuitable for others. </p>

<p> The advantages to inhalation are: </p>

<p> * Rapid onset of effects- a minute or less </p>

<p> * Accurate adjustment of dose </p>

<p> * Fast disappearance of effects </p>

<p> * Efficient use of drug </p>

<p> * Not effected by contents of stomach or intestines </p>

<p> * Not impeded by liver </p>

<p> * Difficult- if not impossible to overdose </p>

<p> Smoking: Minimizing Harm </p>

<p> Pharmacologically, as with most things there is no free
lunch; smoked crude cannabis is undeniably irritating to the
throat and lungs. If the user opts for the smoked use of cannabis
reducing harm is possible. </p>

<p> The stronger, cooler and cleaner the better. </p>

<p> The more potent the cannabis, the less the throat and lungs
are exposed to irritating impurities as fewer puffs are needed
for the desired effects. The further away from the mouth and
throat, the cooler the smoke which decreases irritation both by
the heat, itself, and by the mix of compounds carried in the
smoke. Bubbled through water, water soluble irritants are
lessened. </p>

<p> Irritation from smoked cannabis can be minimized by using a
water pipe which will absorb some of the unwanted impurities and
cool the smoke. The cooler the smoke, the less irritation. The
use of hand rolled cannabis cigarettes &quot;joints&quot; add
additional impurities from the burning paper. The small burnt
down end of the joint, a &quot;roach&quot; has the hottest and
most irritating mix of impurities. </p>

<p> Irritation from hot, impurity laden smoke from the roach can
be diminished by holding the stub away from the lips with a tube
made from a rolled up paper. Better yet; use a pipe instead. </p>

<p> Pipes </p>

<p> The further from the throat and lungs, the cooler. A pipe
with a long stem is better than a short stem. </p>

<p> Water Pipes </p>

<p> Water pipes (and bongs) must provide adequate scrubbing of
the smoke with a minimum of &quot;dead space&quot; inside the
vessel. </p>

<p> Smoking techniques </p>

<p> In countries where cannabis is inexpensive and available like
Morocco and Nepal the cannabis smoker lights a pipe and smokes it
much like a tobacco pipe with a medium sized breath with
immediate exhaling. (and in Morocco tobacco is added) Coping with
scarce and expensive cannabis, the United States and European
cannabis smokers learn techniques to maximize the efficiency of
using the drug. The smoker exhales as much as possible before
taking in the puff of carbureted smoke with a puff of air
following to push it past the &quot;dead space&quot; of the
throat, trachea, and bronchi. The breath is then held for some
five seconds before exhaling. </p>

<p> Irritation from low grade cannabis is felt immediately but
irritation from high resin cannabis has a delay of a few seconds
before the irritation is felt. The user thinks &quot;this wasn't
so harsh&quot; before the fit of coughing begins as the receptors
in the lungs respond to the irritation by the resin. (This delay
may be from topical anesthetic properties of cannabis resin
slowing the transmission of signals from receptors to the nervous
system.) The user then adjusts by increasing the dilution of the
smoke with air on subsequent puffs. Continuing adjustment is
needed because of the variability of the quality and potency of
the illicit plant. Even long time experienced users still may be
seen with fits of coughing from inhaling too concentrated puffs
of smoke. Heavy cannabis smokers suffer a chronic bronchitis from
this irritation. &quot;As in long-continued and excessive
cigarette smoking considerable bronchial irritation and chronic
catarrhal laryngitis may be induced, so to may a similar
condition be caused by excessive ganja (buds of the female plant
without seeds) or charas (hashish) smoking...&quot; </p>

<p> Variable Potency </p>

<p> Unless there is access properly stored large supplies that
will last for long periods, the chronic cannabis user can expect
this variability. While the medicinal cannabis user of a century
ago may have had to put up with variability, under cannabis
prohibition today must cope with variability in addition to
expense and scarcity. </p>

<p> Because of the rapid onset of effects through the inhaled
route self adjustment of dose (autotitration) is easy. The user
stops when the desired state is attained and waits until the
effect starts to wear off before taking another puff. </p>

<p> Smoking Behavior: Set and Setting </p>

<p> Expectations and circumstance are important in the effects of
cannabis. The effect of the drug will be different in different
situations. Sitting alone or with friends in a safe and private
place versus speeding down the highway at the wheel of a car with
a police cruiser pulling up from behind, lights flashing, would
produce different effects. </p>

<p> Since we are not islands unto ourselves one must consider the
effects of smoking upon others which are not without
consequences. Putting oneself and others at risk are not
responsible behavior. Operation of any complicated machinery like
driving a car under the influence of cannabis is a poor idea. </p>

<p> Detection and capture </p>

<p> As long as cannabis is illegal being caught and punished is
far more dangerous to one's well-being than any of the effects of
the drug. Depending on one's circumstance, it may be the end to a
career path, employment, or reputation. The poisonous personal
effects from social sanctions should not be minimized. Cannabis
users must be discreet to avoid these most harmful of side
effects of ignorance and viciousness that will befall if found
out. Knowledge of cannabis use can easily be used for blackmail
in a Prohibition society. </p>

<p> Side stream Exposure </p>

<p> Your throat and lung irritation is undesirable. Exposing
others to these effects without agreement is even less desirable.
If you didn't like or were allergic to the smoke you wouldn't
want it inflicted upon you. Cannabis smoke tends to be less
noxious than tobacco smoke because there is less of it. Ten times
as expensive, the cannabis smokers take fewer puffs and hold
their breath for better absorption. Smokers of high potency
cannabis take even fewer puffs with less resultant exhaled smoke.
Avoid smoking in a closed or poorly ventilated space. </p>

<p> Passing the Pipe, Joint- and Maybe Disease </p>

<p> While passing the joint or pipe may be a primal social
behavior that add to feelings of acceptance and help the relaxing
effects of the drug, the user is exposed to all saliva borne
infectious diseases in the group. </p>

<p> How can one minimize this not so obvious but real risk in
cannabis use? </p>

<p> Don't share with others. Either smoke solo or pass up the
pipe or joint when it is passed your way. &quot;No thanks, I have
a cold and don't want to give it to you&quot; should be an
acceptable reason. </p>

<p> Don't let the pipe or joint touch your lips. Hold it so as to
inhale in such a way as not to let it touch. This may take some
practice. Others may think you are a bit strange. If you must use
a joint, put it in your own personal holder that is not shared. </p>

<p> [insert picture of hand with joint or holder] </p>

<p> Sterilize the mouthpiece of the pipe for a second with flame
or wipe it with an alcohol pad. </p>

<p> Vaporization; Safer Inhalation of Cannabinoids </p>

<p> The unique physical property of consistency like pine pitch
and lack of water solubility of the active principles of cannabis
pose unique problems for administration. </p>

<p> Heating cannabis to a temperature where the drug portion of
the plant turns into a vapor which can be inhaled without burning
is safer than smoking. Vaporization avoids exposing the throat
and lungs to the irritating and toxic products of combustion of
the crude plant. In the 5th century BC, Herodotus' description of
the Scythians throwing cannabis atop a fire in an enclosure and
inhaling the vapors may be a an early description of
vaporization- or an inexact translation confusing smoke for
vapor. </p>

<p> Tetrahydrocannabinols, Cannabidiols, and cannabinols vaporize
in the range of 400* Fahrenheit; below their ignition point.
These resinous portions come to a boil and condense into tiny
particles which are dispersed in a fine air emulsion that is then
inhaled. Vaporization devices have been around since the sixties
but, because of their inefficiency (and illegality as drug
paraphernalia), have never become popular. </p>

<p> Prototype Vaporizers </p>

<p> Cigarette lighter element &amp; chamber </p>

<p> Powdered cannabis is placed in a thin layer on the heating
element which is heated until white vapor appears in the chamber.
The vapor is inhaled through a tube in the floor of the chamber
(made from a small glass jar or bowl). </p>

<p> Shrink tubing heater </p>

<p> Powdered cannabis is placed on a small mesh brass screen in
glass funnel with rubber or plastic tubing for inhalation. A hand
held electric heater with a small fan used for heating shrink
tubing on electronic parts is calibrated with a thermometer held
in the stream of hot air. (400 degrees Fahrenheit). </p>

<p> Heated wire and extracted resin </p>

<p> Cannabis resin with the consistency of pine pitch is placed
dropwise on the end of an iron or steel wire which is then
applied to a hot soldering iron or glowing charcoal. The ensuing
puff of vapor is captured by a large drinking straw placed close
above the point where the droplet is applied inhaled through the
straw. The application is timed with the beginning of the taking
in of a breath. </p>

<p> Charcoal pellet and heat exchange chamber </p>

<p> Utilized by the Premier cigarette by the Phillip Morris Co.
developed and test marketed in 1989 before dropped after protests
from nicotine prohibitionists and poor sales. This device it was
claimed could be converted from using enclosed the nicotine
pellet to other drugs- namely crack cocaine. </p>

<p> Effects: Physical and Mental </p>

<p> The Bell shaped curve </p>

<p> Reactions to cannabis products vary from totally beneficial
and necessary for life, to harmful, dangerous, and to be avoided.
They can be life saving to life threatening. An AIDS wasting
patient whose appetite is restored or a person violently allergic
or sensitive to smoke </p>

<p> Dose Relationships </p>

<p> The combination of individual sensitivity with amount taken
add up to the effects experienced. Route of administration also
affects the results. Effects both in terms of intensity and
length are directly related. </p>

<p> Dose and Route of Administration </p>

<p> The inhaled route avoids overdose since the rapid onset of
effects permits the user to cease intake of the drug when the
level of drug effect is reached. The oral route with it's slow
onset and variable absorption after eating does not allow this
fine degree of control in the case of a single dose. </p>

<p> Site of action </p>

<p> Unlike other sedative compounds, cannabinoids have their
effect in the upper portions of the brain with physical effects
mediated downward, rather than affecting lower centers of the
brain as with alcohol, barbiturates, or benzodiazepines. </p>

<p> While the existence of receptor sites have been identified in
homogenates of rat brains using radioisotopes, precise anatomic
sites have not been located in humans. </p>

<p> The limbic system is a prime candidate as an area that lies
below the cerebral cortex and plays a significant role in
mediating connections with upper and lower centers within the
central nervous system. </p>

<p> [insert diagram of limbic system] </p>

<p> Effects on the central nervous system </p>

<p> Brain Wave Effects </p>

<p> Cannabis' effects on the electroencephalogram (EEG) are a
biphasic stimulation and sedation that are mediated by dose, set,
setting, physiology, and personality. Initially, there is a
speeding up of brain wave activity and a reactive slowing as the
drug effects wear off. The higher the dosage, the more intense
the effects and longer the experience. As the effects wear off,
the stimulation gives way to sedation. The buzzing ideation of
the beta state gives way to introspection, then dream imagery of
alpha and theta frequencies moving towards sleep. With continuing
low level use, the effects are less intense but more frequent in
need to take inhaled drug. </p>

<p> Stimulation of both beta and theta frequencies. </p>

<p> Beta waves, high frequency (&gt;14 Hz) reflect the increased
cognitive activity subjectively experienced as a &quot;flow of
ideas&quot; that characterize the onset of cannabis mental
effect. The distortion of time with this &quot;speeding up of
thoughts&quot; causes subjective perception that there is a
slowing of time. </p>

<p> Theta waves, low frequency (4-7 Hz) are seen with visual
imagery. These images break through a background of thinking and
disrupt the train of thought. The thinking is distracted by these
intrusions which then modify thought content to varying degrees,
depending on dose, expectations, setting, and personality. </p>

<p> Adverse Effects of Cannabis </p>

<p> As with any drug, cannabis is a tool. There will always be
individuals that experience adverse consequences from any drug
use. The abuse of cannabis has been recognized for millennia.
These problems were described by O'Shaughnessey during his
observations in India in 1839 which included references in the
Persian medical literature. With widespread non medical use of
the drug for the past thirty years, psychiatrists have developed
classifications of cannabis presented in the latest Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual, Revision IV (DSM-IV) </p>

<p> Intoxication/Overdose </p>

<p> Overdose is most common by the oral route since the time from
taking the drug until the experience of effects begin is from one
to three or more hours. Inexperienced and ignorant first time
users will have an unforgettable experience. </p>

<p> The effects of overdose have been numerously described in
general, clinical, and scientific literature. Cannabis overdose
comprises the majority of listings in the Surgeon General's List,
19th century precursor of the Indicus Medicus. American literary
accounts in books: FizHugh Ludlow's Hasheesh Eater and An Essay
on Hasheesh by Victor Robinson M.D. are expressly devoted to
cannabis. Descriptions of experience with the drug as part of
travel to areas of indigenous use may be found in English and
European literature over the past three centuries. Scientific and
medical descriptions of effects of cannabis overdose have been
numerous extensive. Before and after its removal in 1937. </p>

<p> The effects of overdose are from the stimulation and sedation
of the central nervous system. Stimulation with a flooding of
ideas and images that are vivid and rapidly changing. Attention
and concentration are markedly impaired. Time perception is
significantly altered with minutes seeming like hours. There may
be distortion of spatial perception. </p>

<p> Secondary physical effects, aside from a speeding up of the
heart rate from the central nervous system stimulation, are
remarkable in their absence. The acceleration of the heart rate
is generally no more than that associated with mild to moderate
exercise. </p>

<p> Cannabis-Induced Disorders </p>

<p> 292.89 Cannabis Intoxication </p>

<p> A. Recent use of cannabis. </p>

<p> B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or
psychological changes (e.g., impaired motor coordination,
euphoria, anxiety, sensation of slowed time, impaired judgment,
social withdrawal) that developed during, or shortly after,
cannabis use. </p>

<p> C. Two (or more) of the following signs, developing within </p>

<p> 2 hours of cannabis use: (1) conjunctival injection (2)
increased appetite (3) dry mouth (4) tachycardia </p>

<p> D. The symptoms are not due to a general medical condition
and are not better accounted for by another mental disorder. </p>

<p> Specify if: </p>

<p> With Perceptual Disturbances: This specifier may be noted
when hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory,
visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
Intact reality testing means that the person knows that the
hallucinations are induced by the substance and do not represent
external reality. When hallucinations occur in the absence of
intact reality testing, a diagnosis of Substance-Induced
Psychotic Disorder, With Hallucinations should be considered. </p>

<p> 292.81 Cannabis Intoxication Delirium </p>

<p> 292.11 Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With Delusions
Specify if With Onset During Intoxication </p>

<p> 292.12 Cannabis-Induced Psychotic Disorder, With
Hallucinations Specify if With Onset During Intoxication </p>

<p> 292.89 Cannabis-Induced Anxiety Disorder Specify if: With
Onset During Intoxication </p>

<p> Continuing or chronic use. </p>

<p> Use or abuse? Cannabis, like any other drug, is a tool.
Properly utilized with realistic expectations and awareness of
its properties, cannabis is a safe and effective medicine.
Improperly used with unrealistic expectations and ignorance,
adverse effects may result. The onset of unwanted effects may be
obvious or insidious. The general etiology is some emotional
discomfort for which cannabis is taken to relieve producing
undesirable consequences from using the drug itself. </p>

<p> Paranoia and delusional thinking are not uncommon effects of
cannabis both acute and chronically. In the acute experience it
appears to be from the perceptual distortions of space, time and
feelings of detachment. </p>

<p> In chronic use paranoid and delusional thinking appear to be
the consequences of the suppression of feelings, The dulling of
feelings may alienate the cannabis users from others by
diminishing empathetic capabilities. This emotional insensitivity
then results in conflict through misperception. Misperception
results from the dulling of affect that is important contextual
collateral information source. An effective relief of emotional
distress then becomes an impediment to relationships with the
cannabis user. Feelings are an integral dimension of social
perception that convey important contextual information.
Cannabis, as an effective sedative and antidepressant, has this
undesirable side effect when misused. The relief afforded by the
drug may be paid for by complications caused by avoiding dealing
with the causes of the emotional pain as well as diminished
functioning while under its influence. </p>

<p> Cognitive impairment by continuing or overuse of cannabis
creates a form of mild dementia that may persist for up to
several weeks after discontinuing the drug. Individuals sensitive
to the drug report a persistent &quot;hangover&quot; that
diminishes the ability to pay attention and concentrate. The
onset may be insidious, subtle, and gradual. This condition is
reversible with abstinence from cannabis. </p>

<p> 304.30 Cannabis Dependence </p>

<p> A maladaptive pattern of cannabis use, leading to clinically
significant impairment or distress, as manifested by three (or
more) of the following, occurring at any time in the same
12-month period: </p>

<p> (1) tolerance, as defined by either of the following: </p>

<p> (a) a need for markedly increased amounts of the substance to
achieve intoxication or desired effect </p>

<p> (b) markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same
amount of the substance </p>

<p> (2) withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: </p>

<p> (a) the characteristic withdrawal syndrome for the substance </p>

<p> (b) the same (or a closely related) substance is taken to
relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms </p>

<p> (3) cannabis is often taken in larger amounts or over a
longer period than was intended </p>

<p> (4) there is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to
cut down or control cannabis use </p>

<p> (5) a great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to
obtain cannabis (e.g., visiting multiple dealers or driving long
distances), use the substance (e.g., chain-smoking), or recover
from its effects </p>

<p> (6) important social, occupational, or recreational
activities are given up or reduced because of cannabis use </p>

<p> (7) cannabis use is continued despite knowledge of having a
persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is
likely to have been caused or exacerbated by the substance </p>

<p> 305.20 Cannabis Abuse </p>

<p> A. A maladaptive pattern of cannabis use leading to
clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by
one (or more) of the following, occurring within a 12-month
period: </p>

<p> (1) recurrent cannabis use resulting in a failure to fulfill
major role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated
absences or poor work performance related to substance use;
cannabis-related absences, suspensions, or expulsions from
school; neglect of children or household) </p>

<p> (2) recurrent cannabis use in situations in which it is
physically hazardous (e.g., driving an automobile or operating a
machine when impaired by cannabis use) </p>

<p> (3) recurrent cannabis-rclatcd legal problems (e.g., arrests
for cannabis-related disorderly conduct) </p>

<p> (4) continued cannabis use despite having persistent or
recurrent social or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated
by the effects of the substance (e.g., arguments with spouse
about consequences of intoxication, forgotten promises) </p>

<p> B. The symptoms have never met the criteria for Cannabis
Dependence for this class of substance. </p>

<p> 232.9 Cannabis-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified </p>

<p> The Cannabis-Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified
category is for disorders associated with the use of cannabis
that are not classifiable as one of the disorders listed above. </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page.</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>