
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B005-14</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc9c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134305 text/html 60910
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:42:52 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:25:46 GMT
Content-length: 60692
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Impact of the Legitimate Drug System</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h2>Consultant Paper: Part 2: The Impact of the Legitimate Drug
System </h2>

<p>The last important factor shaping the structure, conduct and
performance of the illicit drug industry is the character of the
legitimate drug system that operates alongside it. The
significance of the legitimate drug system is most obvious for
drugs such as methadone, amphetamines and barbiturates, which
have important medical uses, and very large legitimate production
and distribution systems. Even those drugs that do not have
legitimate medical uses often have some contact with a legitimate
market system. Some illicit heroin, for example, comes from
legitimate opium crops grown to produce morphine. Hallucinogens
and methamphetamine are often manufactured from chemical
precursors that have significant legitimate uses. And even
marijuana has a legitimate sector composed of researchers who are
experimenting with its pharmacological characteristics and
potential medical applications for the control of glaucoma and
depression. </p>

<p>The existence of a legitimate sector in which raw materials,
precursors, or finished goods are produced, stored, distributed
and consumed has a potentially significant impact on the
character of the illicit industry. The reason is that diversion
from the legitimate market becomes an alternative to wholly
illicit production and distribution as a source of supply to
illicit markets. Exactly what influence will be exerted depends
on the size of the legitimate market, the strength of the
regulatory regime that surrounds it, and whether the legitimate
system includes the production and distribution of finished goods
or stops some place short of this goal. </p>

<p>For drugs which have a large, loosely regulated legitimate
supply system that includes the distribution of finished goods,
diversion from legitimate sources is likely to become the
dominant source of supply to illicit users. For drugs that have
only a small legitimate sector that is limited to raw materials
or precursors, the illicit supply will be dominated by wholly
illicit production and distribution. Thus, the illicit demand for
tranquilizers is likely to be supplied principally by diversion.
The illicit demand for hallucinogens and marijuana will be
principally supplied by wholly illicit production and
distribution. Also, the illicit demand for amphetamines and
opiate analgesics, such as heroin, morphine and methadone, will
be supplied partly by diverted legitimate drugs, and partly by
wholly illicit production and distribution. </p>

<p>The existence of a legitimate sector from which drugs may be
diverted to illegal use will generally improve the performance of
the illicit market in that drugs will be cheaper and more readily
available than they would be if no legitimate sector existed.
This is true simply because some portion of the activities
necessary to produce and distribute the drug will not be hampered
by the difficulties created by illicitness. Raw materials can be
acquired, transformed into finished products, stored, and
distributed with fewer worries about theft and betrayal by
associates, or disruption by enforcement officials. True,
operating costs will be increased by the requirements of the
regulatory regime. And true, also, someone must absorb the costs
and risks of diverting the drugs to illicit markets. But in all
likelihood, these costs will be much smaller than the costs
imposed on the firms, if they had to assume all of the burden of
protecting their property and enforcing contracts as they have to
in wholly illicit industry. To the extent that only a portion of
the supply system must pay these costs, operating costs and
therefore prices should be lower in illicit markets. </p>

<p>The existence of the legitimate industry should also make the
illicit markets much more flexible. If an illicit amphetamine
laboratory finds that it cannot obtain precursors from the
legitimate market, it can always go into the business of stealing
them from the legitimate sector. Once it has the capacity to
steal precursors, the illicit firm might find it easier to steal
finished products. In short, the existence of the legitimate
market allows illicit dealers the options of relying on theft or
fraud with or without the collusion of people within the
legitimate industry to meet market demands - options that would
not be available if there were no legitimate market. </p>

<p>The impact of the legitimate market on the structure of the
illicit industry is also quite important. The crucial variables
are the places where leaks occur in the process of production and
distribution and the size and regularity of leaked quantities. </p>

<p>Obviously, if only raw materials and precursors leak from the
legitimate system, the illicit system will have to develop
illicit production capabilities to transform the raw materials
into finished goods. This will exert a slight centralizing trend,
for the knowledge and the equipment necessary to produce the
drugs constitute a form of capital that must be amortized and
that means those who possess these will stay in business long
enough and produce enough drugs to achieve this goal. The
break-even point may not require a very large or very durable
firm. The point is that the diversion of raw materials will be
associated with larger more durable firms than the diversion of
finished goods. </p>

<p>When finished goods are stolen, the firm may have no capital
to amortize, and may stay in business only long enough to dispose
of an existing quantity. Of course, a large theft, such as a
truck hijacking, can make a firm look like a major trafficker. If
the firm arranges to continue hijacking drug shipments, it may
become a major drug dealer with an unusual source of supply. In
the more likely case, however, a large theft of legitimate drugs
will produce a large, but transient firm. It will go out of
business shortly. </p>

<p>The other possibilities are that small quantities of finished
goods are diverted either continuously or irregularly from the
legitimate supply system. This form of diversion will produce
small firms that are either durable or transient depending on how
frequently they go back to the well. </p>

<p>Thus, the supply of drugs that have legitimate uses to illicit
markets will be decisively influenced by the size and character
of the leaks from the legitimate system. The earlier in the
process of production and distribution the leaks occur, the
larger and more continuous they are, the more the illicit supply
system will be composed of large durable firms. The later in the
process of distribution, and the smaller and more erratic the
leaks, the more the industry will be atomized. Thus, one might
expect the illicit market in tranquilizers and methadone to be
composed primarily of small, transient firms fueled by small
scale thefts. The illicit markets in amphetamines and
hallucinogens are likely to somewhat more concentrated with more
of the illicit supply in the hands of larger, more of the illicit
supply in the hands of larger, more durable firms. </p>

<p>Different Drugs, Different Industries </p>

<p>So far, our analysis of the illicit drug industry has
abstracted from the particular features of the principal drugs of
abuse in the United States. We have treated heroin, cocaine,
marijuana, hallucinogens, amphetamines, barbiturates and
tranquilizers in a similar analytic framework. But to analyze the
supply systems for these drugs from the same analytic perspective
is not the same as assuming that the supply systems will be
similar. It is only to assume that they will be pushed in similar
directions by the factors we have considered. Exactly how far
they will be pushed in one direction or another strongly depends
on all the factors we have considered, including how zealously
the illegal supply systems are controlled by regulatory and
criminal enforcement. </p>

<p>Heroin </p>

<p>Heroin, for example, seems to be primarily a problem of wholly
illicit production and distribution. The fields in which the
opium poppies are grown are generally illicit fields in countries
that cannot adequately enforce existing laws prohibiting the
cultivation of opium. Similarly, the processing of the raw opium
into heroin occurs principally in foreign countries - probably to
reduce the bulk of the material to facilitate international
smuggling. Because the volume of heroin is so small, it comes
into the United States through many different devices - in the
carry-on luggage of pilots, hidden in small cans of tomatoes and
olive oil, concealed in secret compartments built into cars, and
so on. In the United States the distribution systems seem
moderately tightly concentrated with significant local
monopolies, but little vertical integration. There is probably
some degree of horizontal integration at the importing stage, and
it is at this stage that the concentration of the distribution
system is probably the greatest. Perhaps the few largest firms in
any given city control more than two-thirds of the total volume
of heroin in the city, with some cities in the U.S. serving as
transshipment points for other cities. This relatively tight and
concentrated structure is the result of the fact that the
enforcement pressures are probably still the heaviest against
heroin dealers. </p>

<p>Cocaine </p>

<p>The cocaine supply system seems quite similar to the one for
heroin. It is principally a problem of wholly illicit production
and distribution. The sources of raw materials and finished
products are primarily foreign. The physical volumes to be
handled are small enough to make concealment of the drugs a
relatively trivial matter and to allow smugglers to use a variety
of different methods for bringing the drugs into the country. The
average size of the deals measured in terms of financial
requirements seem to be approximately the same as those that
occur in the heroin market. </p>

<p>The major difference between the heroin and the cocaine supply
systems seems to be that the cocaine system is less concentrated,
and more violent than the heroin market. There seem to be many
more entrepreneurs who enter the cocaine business on a short term
basis. Moreover, none of the groups operating on a more permanent
basis seems to have established predominance in the industry.
Thus, it is not surprising that this market is more violent than
the heroin market, for there are cash, drugs and market position
up for grabs in a way unlike the heroin market. </p>

<p>Marijuana </p>

<p>Marijuana is similar to heroin and cocaine in that it is a
wholly illicit system with predominantly foreign sources of raw
materials. Three principal differences seem to make the marijuana
supply system quite different, however. One crucial difference is
that the bulk of marijuana per dollar of value is so much greater
than that of heroin and cocaine that the smuggling problem is
enormously exacerbated. A hundred thousand dollars of heroin or
cocaine can easily be held in a suitcase, but to carry a hundred
thousand dollars worth of marijuana, one needs a small truck,
boat or plane. Because marijuana is so much more visible than
heroin or cocaine, the primary mode of smuggling is in large
loads landed between ports of entry rather than infiltrated
through ports of entry in the huge volume of cargo and people
that daily cross the U.S. borders. This also implies that many
specialized firms might grow up to cope with the special problems
of smuggling marijuana. </p>

<p>A second difference between heroin and cocaine on the one hand
and marijuana on the other is that the pressures in the illicit
industry seem less. It is not that marijuana dealers do not face
substantial financial risks. Indeed, it seems that quite the
opposite is true. The best current estimates indicate that
marijuana dealers lose from a quarter to a third of their
shipments to enforcement agencies. Instead it seems that the
losses are primarily financial, and primarily inflicted by the
government. Other criminals do not seem to prey on marijuana
traffickers in the same way that they attack heroin and cocaine
dealers. Moreover, even if the government seizes property and
arrests the dealers, the prison terms meted out to marijuana
traffickers seem less severe than for those who traffick in other
drugs. Since the marijuana dealers face smaller and less drastic
threats from both the government and other criminals, the
marijuana market seems less preoccupied by the problems of
secrecy, discipline and security than the heroin and cocaine
markets. The net result of this is an industry that is probably
less concentrated then either the heroin and cocaine market, and
almost certainly less violent. </p>

<p>The third important difference shaping the marijuana industry
is the existence of small scale domestic production and
distribution as well as foreign. Indeed, the potential for small
scale domestic cultivation of marijuana makes the marijuana
market more like the market for barbiturates and tranquilizers
than for heroin, because some portion of the overall illicit
demand will be met by those who grow their own. It is this fact
that guarantees the overall industry cannot become very
concentrated, just as it is the widespread availability of
barbiturates and tranquilizers through small scale diversion from
legitimate sources that prevents a concentrated illicit industry
in these drugs from developing. </p>

<p>Hallucinogens, Barbiturates and Amphetamines </p>

<p>The supply system for hallucinogens seems to be primarily
domestic illicit production, although it is possible that some
drugs come from Mexico or Canada. There is a degree of
concentration in this industry as a result of specialized
knowledge, and the creation of brand names to which consumers
become loyal. It seems to operate with relatively little reliance
on either violence or bribery, probably because the industry is
sufficiently small to not be worth the time of enforcement
officials or other criminals. </p>

<p>The industry that supplies barbiturates to illicit markets
seems to depend primarily on diversion from the legitimate
market. Thus, its structure mirrors the character of the leaks
from the legitimate system. This seems to produce a highly
atomistic market composed of small or transient firms. Again,
there is little reliance on either violence or corruption because
the economic stakes seem too small to warrant such risky conduct.
</p>

<p>The amphetamine industry seems to be a combination of the
supply system for hallucinogens and barbiturates. There seems to
be small scale illicit production and distribution that is
primarily domestic, but also from our near neighbors. There is
also diversion from the large legitimate supply system. The net
result is an industry that is high in performing, relative
atomistic in structure, and relies little on either violence or
corruption. </p>

<p>Designing a Strategy to Attack the Illegal Drug Industry </p>

<p>From the perspective of drug abuse policy the primary
objective of a strategy to attack the illegal drug industry is to
increase the effective prices of drugs in illicit markets. Given
our analysis of the factors shaping the structure, conduct and
performance of the industry, it is reasonable to suppose that
making the production and distribution of drugs illegal will tend
to make drugs more expensive and less available than they would
be if they were legal. The important policy question is how the
resources of the government - its diplomatic initiatives, its
interdiction efforts, and its criminal investigations - might be
deployed to maximize the impact of supply reduction efforts on
the effective prices of illicit drugs. </p>

<p>Priorities in Attacking the Illegal Drug Industries </p>

<p>One way to establish priorities is to determine which
particular drugs seem to be causing the greatest social problems,
and which present opportunities that would give supply reduction
efforts relatively powerful leverage. The worse the drug, and the
more powerful the leverage that can be exerted, the higher the
priority. </p>

<p>Of course, the question of which drugs pose the greatest
threat to the society is much debated. One way to resolve the
issue is to gauge the number of chronic users of each drug, and
to weight that number by the seriousness of the health, economic
and social problems that the chronic users of each drug suffer.
By this reckoning, heroin, amphetamines and barbiturates tend to
come out on top as the worst drugs. </p>

<p>A second standard would be to consider which drugs are most
widely used, and therefore operate as the principal transmitter
of an illicit drug culture and the most common introduction to
drug use for young children. By this standard, marijuana and
tranquilizers would probably come out on top. </p>

<p>A third standard would be to determine which drugs seem to be
associated with the most money, violence and corruption, and
attack that drug as the principal threat to the society. This
last standard would probably make cocaine and heroin the dominant
targets of drug policy. </p>

<p>In thinking about which of these standards night be
appropriate to use in deciding which drugs caused the greatest
social problems, it is worth trying to keep the separate
objectives of drug abuse policy and organized crime policy in
mind. The principal objective of drug use abuse policy is to
minimize the social problems associated with drug use. A key
instrument of that policy are criminal laws controlling the
supply of drugs. These policies succeed when there are few people
using drugs in patterns that create grave threats to their health
and economic welfare. In effect, we use criminal laws and
criminal enforcement to achieve a social welfare objective. </p>

<p>The principal objectives of organized crime policy are to
suppress the provision of illegal goods and services that
constitute the core of organized crime, to prevent the violence
and corruption that is more characteristic of organized crime
groups than other kinds of criminal activity, and to prevent the
emergence of very large, durable organizations with well
developed capacities for violence and corruption. </p>

<p>There is a substantial overlap in the goals of organized crime
policy and supply reduction efforts insofar as organized crime
policy takes the control of the supply of drugs as an important
objective, and insofar as the illicit supply systems included
violence, corruption and large firms. But to the extent that the
core of organized crime policy is really concerned with the
disruption of major criminal organizations, there is an overlap
between the core of drug abuse policy and organized crime policy
only insofar as the drugs are supplied by rich, violent and
powerful criminal organizations. As we have seen, that is true of
only a certain number of drugs, and not necessarily the drugs
that pose the greatest threats in terms of widespread and
dangerous consumption. </p>

<p>In fact, the third standard described above is closer to a
description of the core objectives of organized crime policy than
to the core objectives of drug abuse policy. In essence, the
society has to decide whether it means to go after the drugs that
cause it the most problem in illicit use, or whether it should
attack the drugs that are supplied by the nastiest and toughest
dealers. These are not necessarily the same. </p>

<p>The Instruments of a Strategy Against Illicit Drug Industries </p>

<p>Once the society has implicitly or explicitly established its
objectives, it must then look to the available instruments of a
supply reduction strategy. Again, there are many different ways
one can think about the available instruments. </p>

<p>Attacking Different Drugs. One way is to think about them in
terms of the particular drugs they attack. Thus, one can
distinguish the instruments of heroin policy (which include the
effective control of legitimate opium in Turkey, the suppression
of illicit crops in Mexico and Afghanistan, the encouragement of
crop substitution in Thailand, the creation of specialized heroin
detecting devices at U.S. ports of entry, and the targeting of
heroin importing and distributing organizations, and even the
occasional attacks on street level dealing in notorious areas of
a city) from the instruments of a marijuana control policy (which
includes diplomatic initiatives and foreign aid to Mexico and
Jamaica, the eradication of illicit fields, the training of
marijuana sniffing dogs to stand guard at the border, the
mobilization of the Navy and Coast Guard to aid in the
identification of ships engaged in large scale smuggling, and so
on). The point is that many policy initiatives are specific to,
or have their maximum impact on, one drug rather than another,
and it is a useful exercise to see how our efforts are deployed
against particular drugs. </p>

<p>Operating in Different Locations. A second dimension in which
strategies against the illegal drug industry can be described and
evaluated is geography. One can talk about the division between
the international drug control effort and the domestic
activities. Among the international efforts, one can talk about
policy towards Southeast Asia (which would be principally
directed at heroin), or towards Colombia (which would be
principally directed against cocaine), or towards Mexico (which
would embrace heroin, marijuana and amphetamines). Within the
domain of domestic supply reduction efforts, one can discuss the
allocation of enforcement efforts across major cities in the
United States, and this, too, has implications for the different
drugs attacked. Enforcement efforts in New York and Los Angeles
will probably give more emphasis to heroin and cocaine than
efforts in Kansas City or St. Louis. </p>

<p>Targeting Factors of Production. A third dimension in
characterizing and analyzing supply reduction policy instruments
is the factor of production and distribution that is the
principal target. Thus, one can distinguish eradication and crop
substitution programs, which are directed at raw materials; from
financial investigations, which attack the capital of illicit
dealers; from interdiction programs which attack goods in
transit, from conspiracy investigations, which are designed to
immobilize trafficking network; from street level enforcement
which is designed to discourage advertising and the development
of new markets. Of course, many instruments allow one to reach
other targets as well as its principal target. Indeed, conspiracy
investigations are often built from the discoveries made in
interdiction and street enforcement programs. The point is that
these different policy instruments have different factors of
production as their proximate targets. To the extent that some
factors of production and distribution are scarcer than others,
the relative importance of the different supply reduction
instruments in constricting the supply of drugs may be gauged and
appropriate adjustments made in the supply reduction strategy. </p>

<p>Relying on Different Agencies. A fourth way of thinking about
supply reduction policy instruments, and probably the most
common, is in terms of the agencies that are principally
responsible for carrying out different activities within the
overall supply reduction effort. Thus, one thinks in terms of the
international supply reduction program as the principal
responsibility of the State Department; the interdiction effort
as the primary responsibility of the U.S. Customs, Border Patrol,
and Coast Guard with occasional assistance from the U.S. Armed
Forces; the domestic investigation program as the primary
responsibility of DEA and the FBI; and the street level
enforcement effort as the primary responsibility of the nation's
thousands of local police departments. Thinking about the supply
reduction effort in these terms has the advantage of bringing
immediately to mind which agencies are available for supply
reduction efforts, and of suggesting approximately where they can
make a contribution both geographically and in terms of squeezing
particular factors of production and distribution. It has the
disadvantage, however, of not sharply distinguishing among the
different efforts in terms of either drugs or specific factors of
production and distribution. </p>

<p>The Strengths and Limitations of Alternative Instruments </p>

<p>For purposes of a broad brush strategic analysis, we will use
this last set of categories, since they are the terms in which
most of the policy discussions at the federal level are now being
carried out. Our task will be to determine the potential of each
area in minimizing the supply of drugs to illicit markets in the
U.S. That, in turn, depends on our ability to see how each of
these programs affects the factors of production and distribution
for the major drugs of abuse. </p>

<p>The International Program. The international drug control
program has two principal liabilities as an instrument of supply
reduction efforts. The first is that this program is inevitably
hostage to the interests and capabilities of foreign governments:
the U.S. can do no more in this area than other governments will
allow it to do. Of course, there are numerous ways in which the
U.S. government can increase the motivation and capacities of
foreign governments to control drugs that reach U.S. markets. The
U.S. can indicate the importance it attaches to drug control
among other interests it is pursuing within a given country; or
it can appeal to obligations a country has under international
treaties; or it can appeal to the country's self interest by
documenting the extent of the country's domestic drug problem. On
the capacity side, the U.S. can contribute money, or particular
kinds of equipment, or technical assistance in the forms of
specific on-site advice, or more generalized training of drug
control officials. These specific measures constitute the daily
activities of the international program. In the end, though, they
run up against more or less unmovable barriers, such as the
limited control of central governments over out-lying areas of a
country, or the inefficiency and corruption of government
agencies. Against these obstacles there is often little that the
U.S. government can do. </p>

<p>The second limitation is that the bulk of this program seems
too targeted on the raw materials for heroin, cocaine and
marijuana. Arguably, this is not particularly effective, since
there is not particular reason to believe that the raw materials
for these drugs are in long run short supply. Indeed, all our
experience and intelligence suggests that potential growing areas
for these drugs are widespread, and that the elimination of
fields in one place will fairly soon be replaced by cultivation
elsewhere. </p>

<p>These limitations are sufficiently severe that it would
probably be a mistake to rely on the international program as the
primary instrument in a supply reduction strategy. It simply
cannot do enough work reliably enough to merit that position.
Having said this, however, there are some very important things
the international program can do that will make an important
contribution to the overall effectiveness of supply reduction
efforts. </p>

<p>The first is that it will occasionally occur that the standard
efforts of the international program suddenly become effective.
This usually occurs when a country important in supplying drugs
to the United States suddenly becomes highly motivated to control
drugs. When this happens, support from the United States can
often result in a significant shortage of the drug. Typically,
the shortage lasts no longer than a year or two as the illicit
industry adjusts to the new conditions. But even so, that
shortage is worth producing. That is particularly true for drugs
that are unusually dependence producing, for the shortage means
that a cohort of children in the ages of maximum vulnerability
squirts through that period of relative shortages with much lower
probabilities of dependence or addiction. </p>

<p>Indeed, this is what happened in the early part of the 1970's,
when Turkey suddenly shut down its legitimate production of opium
and helped to produce a two to three year shortage in the supply
of heroin. The effect of this success was high effective prices
in the United States, reduced incidence of heroin use, and a
shift to Mexico and Southeast Asia as the principal sources of
supply, although for a while at lesser volumes than had been true
when Turkey was also a supplier. </p>

<p>Keeping open such opportunities, and being in a position to
exploit them when they come along, are the principal
contributions of the international drug program. Hut one cannot
always count on such successes. It is important, then, that the
international program continue, trying to increase the likelihood
that it can occasionally produce such successes, but no one
should rely on it as the principal supply reduction instrument. </p>

<p>A second way that the international program can be helpful is
by stepping up its efforts to support international criminal
enforcement. In essence, the focus of the international program
might usefully shift from crop eradication, to efforts to deny
international traffickers &quot;safe havens&quot; anywhere in the
world. This would mean concretely increased progress in
negotiating extradition treaties with countries that now harbor
traffickers, and improving operational coordination between
foreign and U.S. police agencies to take advantage of both
extradition and investigations and prosecutions within the host
country. </p>

<p>Such a thrust has potential for two reasons. First, it is a
narrowly focused program. It has none of the logistical and
bureaucratic difficulties of massive crop control programs.
Second, it is targeted against a factor of production and
distribution that is probably in long run short supply, namely
individuals with a sufficiently well established reputation for
both reliability in successful transactions and viciousness in
betrayals, who become the primary people with whom large drug
deals can be made. If this is the factor in long run short supply
in the illicit industry; and if the international program could
squeeze this factor even more by denying notorious dealers safe
havens anywhere in the world; then the international program
would have another more reliable and more powerful way of making
a contribution than cultivating the motivations and capacities of
foreign governments to control illicit crops. </p>

<p>Interdiction. In recent years, the interdiction program has
probably been the fastest growing component of the supply
reduction effort. The growth has come primarily as a result of
engaging the U.S. Coast Guard and other military agencies in the
pursuit of smugglers on the ocean and in the air. The results of
this effort can be seen in the dramatic difference in the price
of drugs landed in the U.S. as compared with the price of drugs
off-shore, or in foreign source countries. </p>

<p>The principal problem with interdiction as the dominant
instruction of supply reduction efforts is that it is principally
focused on a single drug - marijuana. That is particularly true
insofar as it concentrates on bulk shipments clandestinely landed
between ports of entry, for marijuana is the only drug whose
volume restricts smugglers to these methods of getting the drugs
across the borders. Smugglers of heroin and cocaine have many
more options, and much more of these drugs seem to come across in
relatively small containers through ports of entry. Thus, the
engagement of the Coast Guard, the Navy, the Air Force, and the
Federal Aviation Administration, turns out to be an initiative
that is primarily targeted against marijuana. To the extent that
one thinks marijuana is currently a high priority drug to
control, this may be counted a benefit rather than a problem. But
to the extent that one thinks other drugs are higher priority, or
to the extent one wanted flexible supply reduction instruments
that could be used for controlling several different drugs, the
current interdiction program has important limitations. </p>

<p>The interdiction program has a further limitation. It is
principally targeted on finished inventories of drugs. There is a
certain, concrete satisfaction in capturing drugs that would
otherwise reach illicit markets. But as in the case of crop
elimination, one can wonder whether the inventories are what is
in long run short supply. When we think about legitimate firms,
we don't think of their inventories of finished goods as being
particularly important. Obviously, the inventories have value,
and to the extent they are eliminated, the firm had less capital
than it otherwise would. But the inventories usually reflect only
a small portion of the total value of the firm. When Tylenol had
to be taken off the market, for example, no one expected the
company to go out of business, even though a month's worth of
production had to be written off, and their reputation had been
seriously tarnished. </p>

<p>Similarly, it is hard to understand why we think it is so
important when drugs are seized. This may be important if the
firm was a short term operation, and the seized shipment
represented a large fraction of its total assets, but there is no
particular reason to believe this. Most of the time it seems that
shipments are divided up precisely to hedge against the
possibility that he drugs will be seized, and this seems to be a
likely event. Current estimates indicate that somewhere between
one-quarter and one-third of all marijuana shipments are seized,
but this has had little impact on the effective price of
marijuana. Thus, our experience and our reasoning suggest that
finished goods are not a factor of production and distribution
that is in long run short supply. Consequently, a policy
instrument directed primarily against such inventories will not
exert enormous leverage on the long run effective price of drugs
in illicit markets. </p>

<p>Domestic Enforcement. The standard criticism of the domestic
enforcement program is that it is &quot;too far from the
source&quot; of drugs to allow effective control. By this
reckoning both the international and the interdiction programs
are preferred instruments because they attack the chain of
production and distribution at an earlier stage than domestic
enforcement. A second criticism is that the quantity of drugs
seized in the domestic enforcement program is too low to allow it
to have much effective control. A third criticism is that too
much of the effort within the domestic enforcement program goes
into low level cases, which are farthest from the source and
involve the smallest quantities of drugs. </p>

<p>The difficulty with these criticisms is that they rely on
assumptions - with little evidence or reasoning behind them -
about the best way to control the supply of drugs. In fact, they
emphasize physical over economic relationships. A priori there is
no particular reason to assume that resources are better spent
&quot;nearer the source.&quot; True, if one stops the drugs
earlier rather than later on need not worry about the later
stages; and, true, the drugs may be at their maximum
concentration with respect to volume at the point they are
processed into finished products. But neither point indicates
that he source is the most important point to attack. As we have
seen, it may be quite difficult to mount an attack at that point.
Moreover, both arguments place too much emphasis on the drugs and
not enough on the entrepreneurs and firms whose continued
determination and adaptability keep the drugs flowing, even if
production runs are spoiled and inventories seized. </p>

<p>If the principal difficulties that confront dealers in
producing and distributing drugs are risks posed by enforcement
agents and other criminals, then the crucial factors of
production and distribution are not raw materials and technology
and warehouses, but the determination and capacity to complete
transactions in this risky environment. Those may be qualities
possessed by specific individuals or trafficking networks - not
the raw materials, not the finished inventories, not even the
financial capital. If these observations are accurate, then any
instrument that attacked the capacities to complete risky trans
actions would be more effective than those that attacked raw
materials or inventories. </p>

<p>It is here that domestic enforcement operations have
advantages as an instrument in a supply reduction strategy. The
principal objective of domestic enforcement is the traffickers
themselves. The drugs are important only as convincing evidence
that will be sufficient to jail, and therefore presumably
immobilize, the traffickers. In addition, the tactics of domestic
enforcement operate principally on the capacity to execute
transactions. The principal tactics include informants,
undercover agents, and wiretap investigations. The first two
attack the ability to make transactions by forcing dealers to be
wary of associates, employees and customers, since any of these
might become an informant or an undercover agent. The third makes
it difficult for traffickers to communicate efficiently with
associates, employees and customers. Therefore domestic
enforcement presses hard on the factors of production and
distribution that seem in long run short supply. </p>

<p>It is worth noting that slowing transactions and forcing
dealers to be cautious has value at many different stages of
production and distribution. Even at the lowest levels of
distribution there are some advantages in forcing dealers to be
cautious, for it prevents the aggressive recruitment of new
customers and makes it more difficult even for regular consumers
to find drugs. In short, street level enforcement increases the
effective price of drugs in illicit markets. At intermediate or
high levels each transaction that is slowed reduces the overall
capacity of the system to supply drugs, and each trafficking
network that is eliminated results not only in loss of current
inventories, but also in future capacity to supply. </p>

<p>Moreover, it is possible that the same techniques of attacking
transactions, and immobilizing those networks that have developed
a continuing capacity to execute transactions in a risky
environment, would have enormous value in the international
program as well as in the domestic one. Indeed, while one cannot
assume that foreign countries have laws enforcement agencies that
allow them to attack criminal trafficking organizations, it seems
that it is primarily convention that makes us think of the
international program as focused on raw materials, and the
domestic program as focused on trafficking networks. In
principle, one could have a criminal enforcement program that
moved across national boundaries. And that might hold the best
chance not only for minimizing the supply of drugs to illicit
markets, but also for advancing the subjectives and using the
resources of organized crime policy. </p>

<p>An Alternative Approach to Attacking Illegal Drug Industries </p>

<p>If the right way to think about strategies against the illegal
drug industry is to guess which factor of production and
distribution is in long run short supply and then to devise a
strategy that presses hardest on that factor, and if the factor
in long run short supply is the capacity to make transactions
quickly and effectively, then a different way is opened to think
about the strategy against the illegal drug industry.
Specifically, the principal aim should be to frustrate
transactions and immobilize the largest trafficking
organizations. </p>

<p>With this as the principal aim the way that we think about
each of the other instruments changes. Of course, the
international efforts to control legitimate crops and eradicate
illicit fields retain their special, occasional importance, and
the separate arguments for maintaining pressure at the street
level remain strong. But we can also see that the international
program, interdiction, and domestic enforcement all represent
different opportunities to slice into the illicit industry, and
create possibilities for developing cases against illicit
traffickers. To see how this alternative strategy would work, it
is useful to introduce some different analytic terms. </p>

<p>Patrol versus Investigation. If the goal is to immobilize
trafficking organizations that are able to complete transactions
with ease and efficiency, the central problem is to determine who
the traffickers are and to develop evidence against them. This
sounds like a problem of criminal investigation, and so it is.
But all investigations must begin somewhere. In ordinary criminal
investigations the start is usually provided by a victim or
witness to the offense or by physical evidence available at the
site of the crime. In narcotics investigations there is no
victim, the witnesses are likely to be implicated in the crime,
and the physical evidence will not reveal much. On the other
hand, the traffickers are likely to continue committing offenses,
and therefore the opportunity to observe a crime occurring is
high, if the enforcement agencies can get themselves into
position to see it. </p>

<p>In practice this means that narcotics investigations are
extremely dependent on informants and undercover operators, who
can provide evidence themselves or produce sufficiently precise
and accurate information to justify a wire-tap or other less
intrusive but more expensive and less penetrating form of
surveillance. They can position the evidence-gathering
capabilities of enforcement agencies and how to infiltrate
undercover agents into the illicit industry. The question thus
becomes how to develop and use informants and how to use
informants and how to infiltrate undercover agents into the
illicit firms. </p>

<p>One answer to that question is to attack the illicit supply
systems in the places where it is least protected. This means on
the streets in central cities where the distribution system must
finally come into the open. Or, it means at the point that is
inherently vulnerable, where drugs are moved physically from one
place to another. Or, it means as raw materials are being
collected from remote fields in foreign countries. Surveillance
and undercover operations conducted in these areas will not only
frustrate transactions at these levels, and remove small stocks
of drugs, but they will also produce the rumors, the physical
evidence, and the potential informants who might provide the
basis for more intrusive and determined investigations of larger
networks. </p>

<p>This will not always work, of course. Many people arrested at
this level will be small scale, transient operators. Others will
be employees, but they may be unable to supply information. Still
others may know a great deal but be afraid to reveal it.
Moreover, there are other ways of developing informants. One can
offer large payments to those who are greedy, or protection to
those who are afraid, or both to potentially valuable sources.
And, just as low level enforcement operations against street
dealers, smugglers, and collectors in foreign countries can
produce potential informants,, all successful investigations
against medium and high level investigations can also yield
informants. Therefore, successful cases can be built from many
sources other than low level cases. </p>

<p>But the argument is that a high volume enforcement effort at
low levels is often quite valuable as a source of rumors,
intelligence and informants. In fact, there is an argument
supporting low level enforcement. Even more unexpectedly, there
is an argument for a low level enforcement that is not directed
or guided by intelligence about the operations of major
traffickers. </p>

<p>The strength of investigative efforts is their capacity to
make connections among known facts and inform enforcement
agencies how to position themselves to penetrate existing
trafficking organizations and develop evidence for a successful
prosecution. The weakness of investigation is that it becomes
increasingly narrow and discounts information that cannot be
related to something that is already known. In attacking
something as mysterious and dynamic as the illicit drug industry,
this tendency to become narrow is potentially very dangerous.
There is always the chance that one is concentrating on only a
small piece of the overall industry and that there is a newer or
better shielded piece that has so far escaped notice. If this is
true, the only way that enforcement agencies could discover this
is to look in areas where they didn't expect to find something.
That is the role of broad, untargeted low level enforcement
agencies. Like pickets and patrols sent out by a main military
force to maintain contact with a mysterious enemy force, agents
on the street, at the border, and in the bazaars of foreign
countries help the investigative forces stay in touch with the
emergence and development of new trafficking capabilities. </p>

<p>For analytic purposes it is useful to think of these broad,
low level enforcement operations as &quot;patrol&quot;
operations, which are scanning for drug offenses, and the
remaining pieces as &quot;investigative&quot; operations, which
can develop the leads into powerful cases that immobilize major
trafficking organizations. Moreover, in many ways, the patrol
operations perform better, if they are broad and random, rather
than narrowly targeted. A random strategy is more successful in
deterrence, and in disclosing previously unsuspected trafficking
networks. </p>

<p>The Role of Intelligence and Conspiracy Investigations. To
take full advantage of the potential relationship between
investigative and patrol functions and to produce the maximum
impact on trafficking organizations, it is necessary that some
previously neglected capabilities be more fully developed. Two
are particularly important: the intelligence function within the
investigative agencies, and the capacity to develop and prosecute
conspiracy cases within investigative and prosecutorial offices. </p>

<p>By the intelligence function, I mean the capacity to make
disciplined use of the information about trafficking networks
that is potentially available to the investigative agencies. This
is essential not only to take full advantage of any opportunities
that present themselves, but also to make sure the investigative
agencies are not misled by informants. As we have seen, there is
always an incentive for traffickers to inform on their
competitors. And there is always an incentive for enforcement
agencies to use the information and keep the informant alive.
This is acceptable as long as the informant is not more important
than the traffickers he is delivering to the enforcement
agencies. But if the informant is himself a dealer, then the
result of his informing looks like he and the enforcement agency
are colluding to maintain his position in the market. The only
way to guard against this is to have relatively accurate
information about both the informant and the target and to have
someone other than the case agent monitoring this situation. That
is something that a good intelligence analysis function could
provide. </p>

<p>The capacity to make conspiracy cases is essential because
there are many traffickers who can be revealed only through
conspiracy indictments. They may never be in direct contact with
drugs, or with the violence and corruption that provide the
structure within which the drugs can be confidently moved from
place to place and from person to person. In addition, conspiracy
cases have the advantage of simultaneously immobilizing many
pieces of a trafficking network, leaving no remnants from which a
new network might be constructed. If a single person is removed,
he may be replaced. If the entire network is eliminated,
replacement is more difficult because none of the personal
relationships that are so essential to successful trafficking
remain. </p>

<p>The challenges to investigators in making conspiracy cases are
partly matters of technique. Electronic surveillance is often an
essential ingredient, as are financial investigations. And each
require the development of special skills. Hut producing high
quality conspiracy investigations also requires a change in
attitude. They require patience - including situations where
enforcement agencies allow some dealers to continue operating
even though they are indictable. They also require risking
certain cases that are certain, for a future case that may or may
not develop. Finally, the prosecution of conspiracy cases often
depends on telling convincing stories rather than hard physical
evidence. Even though the stories night be a more accurate
account of what has been happening than the hard physical
evidence, it requires a real knack for analysis and inference to
make the story solid and convincing. In short, patience, a
willingness to take risks for an uncertain gain, and thought are
required, and these are not always qualities plentiful in
action-oriented enforcement agencies. Yet, without these, the
aggressive actions might have less impact than they otherwise
could. </p>

<p>Summary and Conclusions </p>

<p>Criminal statutes directed at illicit drug trafficking and use
are an important part of drug abuse policy. If they were
perfectly effective in discouraging people from drug trafficking
and drug abuse, there would be little need for any other
instruments. </p>

<p>The problem is that these laws are imperfectly effective: they
leave a residual market that consists of a continuing (but
smaller) demand for drugs, and a continuing (but smaller)
capacity to supply drugs to that market. To deal with the
continuing demand, the society relies on drug treatment and
preventive education programs. To deal with the continuing
supply, the country invests in diplomatic efforts to motivate
foreign countries to control drugs destined for the U.S.,
interdiction efforts to keep the drugs from landing on our
shores, domestic enforcement to disrupt trafficking networks and
discourage the aggressive marketing of drugs to non-users,
regulatory efforts to keep legitimate drugs contained in
legitimate channels of distribution and use. </p>

<p>These efforts on the supply side of the illegal drug market
are helpful in achieving the purposes of drug policy. They
increase the price and reduce the availability of drugs, and
therefore discourage new drug use and motivate older users to
abandon their drug use. But the laws create a problem for
organized crime policy, for they establish the soil from which an
illegal industry can grow. The firms that continue in the
industry will make a great deal of money as compensation for the
risks they run by continuing in the business. In addition, they
will engage in violence and corruption as crucial elements of
their strategies for surviving in an illicit industry. Finally,
some of the individuals and organizations involved in drug
trafficking may grow to become powerful criminal institutions
that seem to defy effective control by law enforcement agencies.
To the extent that these illicit firms become more adept at
dealing drugs, they may become not only an organized crime
problem, but an increased threat to the objectives of drug abuse
policy. Thus, the special instruments we associate with organized
crime policy must be deployed not only to deal with the organized
crime problem that is created by our drug abuse policy, but also
to prevent organized criminal groups from defeating the purposes
of drug abuse policy. </p>

<p>Viewed from the perspective of drug abuse policy, the central
objective of a strategy attacking the illegal drug industry is to
minimize the capacity of the illicit drug industry to supply
drugs to illicit markets. In terms of traditional analyses of
industrial organization, this objective can be described as
minimizing the &quot;performance&quot; of the illicit industry. </p>

<p>Viewed from the perspective of organized crime policy, the
central objectives are to prevent the development of wealthy and
powerful criminal groups and to reduce the violence and
corruption associated with the illicit drug industry. Again, in
the traditional analyses of industrial organization, these
objectives can be captured by attacking the structure and shaping
the conduct of the industry. </p>

<p>There may be some tension between the objectives of drug abuse
policy on the one hand, and organized crime on the policy on the
other. To the extent that the drug laws create the conditions
under which an illicit industry might arise, there is an obvious
conflict. Legalization of the drugs would almost certainly
increase the number of chronic, intensive drug users and
therefore make the drug problem worse. But it would also
eliminate drugs as an organized crime problem. Beyond this
observation is another paradox, however. From the perspective of
drug abuse policy, a highly concentrated industry may be
preferable to an atomized industry. A concentrated industry might
supply fewer drugs at higher prices than an atomized industry.
And, although each firm in the industry may be harder to attack
effectively, the impact of a successful attack might be larger
and more enduring than the results of ten successful attacks on
smaller firms that accounted for a smaller portion of the total
supply capacity and were easier to replace. From the perspective
of organized crime policy, however, a concentrated industry would
be worse because it would imply the existence of large, enduring
organizations of substantial power and influence. What is not in
conflict, however, is the need of both drug abuse policy and
organized crime policy to develop and use tactics that are
successful in attacking large, entrenched criminal organizations.
This is useful to drug policy and essential to organized crime
policy. </p>

<p>In controlling the supply of drugs to illicit markets the
United States relies on many instruments, in addition to
attacks&quot; on organized criminal groups that deal in drugs.
There is an &quot;international program&quot; that tends to focus
on the production of raw materials to produce heroin and cocaine.
This has the advantage of occasionally producing a significant
but short-lived result when a foreign country's increased
motivation and capacity to deal with the problem eliminates an
important source of supply to the U.S. But the value of the
instrument overall is limited by the widespread availability of
raw materials and the fact that U.S. objectives are always
hostage to the motivations and capacities of foreign governments.
</p>

<p>There is also an &quot;interdiction program&quot; designed to
intercept the drugs and shipment before they cross U.S. borders.
This has the advantage of creating a significant obstacle to
traffickers and inflicting economic losses on traffickers as a
result of seizures. It has the disadvantages of focusing
principally on the inventories of drugs rather than on the
organizations that continue to send them, and of being relatively
less successful in dealing with heroin and cocaine than with
marijuana. </p>

<p>Finally there is a &quot;domestic enforcement program&quot;,
designed to attack domestic trafficking organizations, and to
discourage the aggressive marketing of drugs through street level
enforcement. This program has the advantages of focusing on the
trafficking organizations and engaging the substantial resources
of the nation's 400,000 local police officers. It has the
disadvantages to being only occasionally successful in
eliminating major trafficking organizations. </p>

<p>What appears to be missing in this common conception of the
nation's strategy against the supply of drugs to illicit markets
is precisely the perspective that a focus on international
criminal organizations would bring. It seems likely that the
capacity to execute large scale transactions in the risky
environment of an illicit industry is in long run, short supply
in the illicit drug industry. The firms that can overcome these
difficulties are likely to be large scale, enduring,
organizations with a well established reputation for irresistible
violence. Thus, these firms - in all likelihood, international
firms - should become the main targets of a supply reduction/
organized crime policy. </p>

<p>If this is the principal target, one's view of how the society
should deploy it resources should change dramatically. The
interdiction and domestic enforcement programs are suddenly seen
principally as &quot;patrol operations&quot;, which can produce
intelligence and informants to be used in mounting attacks on
major trafficking organizations. Moreover, the focus of the
international program should shift from concerns about crop
control to the support of foreign enforcement efforts and the
negotiation of treaties, which would allow the more convenient
prosecution of drug traffickers whose crimes cross national
boundaries. Finally, major investments should be made in the
capabilities of intelligence agencies and an orientation towards
sustained conspiracy cases among investigators and prosecutors.
This strategy holds the greatest potential to achieve the
objectives of both drug abuse policy and organized crime policy.
Moreover, this strategy depends most heavily on the continuing
development of our capacity to deal with organized criminal
groups no matter what illegal goods and services they happen to
be supplying.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>