
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-58</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B047-87</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/whatnext.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115315 text/html 19461
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:53:06 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:24:45 GMT
Content-length: 19243
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>What's Next? for Drug Legalization</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>What's Next? </h1>

<p> <b>by Clifford A. Schaffer</b> </p>

<p> This is my view of what is the current most important step in
promoting drug policy reform. This includes some suggestions on
how you can help. </p>

<p> <img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2><a name="DDE_LINK2"><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif"
align="BOTTOM"></a>WHAT IS THE MAIN PRIORITY AT THIS POINT? </h2>

<p> A few people have asked the basic question, What's next? What
is the main priority at this point? </p>

<p> A good question. In order to answer it correctly we have to
back up and review the current state of affairs. </p>

<h2><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">WHERE ARE
WE WITH RESPECT TO THE GOALS? </h2>

<p> First, it is necessary to establish where we are with respect
to our goals. Atlanta has come and gone. I don't think the drug
warriors got as much publicity as perhaps they wanted, and it
looks like a flash in the pan. No doubt they will try to use
their resolution as proof of something </p>

<p> when they are pressed in the debate. In their rather
simplistic view of the issue they have confused the main point
and will continue to lose debates as time goes on. As Drug Czar
Lee Brown has recently stated, their strategy will be to pretend
that the issue doesn't exist. They just don't want to hear about
it. </p>

<p> The bottom line is that Atlanta won't do much to change the
long term trend in public thinking, particularly if we are
intelligent about what we do. The trend is going our way and will
continue to go our way. Little by little, we are working our way
to a majority. </p>

<h2><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">THE HOOVER
RESOLUTION? </h2>

<p> Alan asks if the main priority at this point should be to
push the Hoover Resolution. In a sense, that should be the main
priority, but we have to recognize the underlying issues
involved. </p>

<p> The Hoover Resolution was built upon the recognition of the
single biggest flaw behind the drug war -- ignorance. No one
could support these kinds of policies if they had even read the
evidence, so I knew that every drug warrior could be defeated if
you could just get to the evidence. A good knowledge of the
evidence is enough to publicly destroy any of them. </p>

<p> The Hoover Resolution has already been successful to a
certain extent. The last Crime Bill provided for a commission
which is due to start work in 1996. They are now selecting people
to sit on the commission, but I have no idea of their progress on
selecting any members. There is still some question about whether
it will come off or, if it does, who will be on it or how deeply
it will delve into the issues. </p>

<p> Regardless of the commission, we should be prepared with the
information the commission should read, or that anyone should
read on this issue. We should have such complete evidence and
research on the issue that anyone who wants information on the
issue will have to come to us. </p>

<h3>IS IT PROPER TO REFER TO IT AS THE HOOVER RESOLUTION? </h3>

<p> No, but I often do it anyway. </p>

<h3>SHOULD WE POST THE HOOVER RESOLUTION ON A FORM? </h3>

<p> Sure. As long as we follow all of the original rules of the
Hoover Resolution -- that is, it must be very clear what the
people are agreeing to -- only what the Resolution states.
Signatures must include name, title, mailing address, and the
form should ask them if they would like to join any of the
various national organizations. </p>

<h3><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">MEMBERSHIP
SUBSCRIPTION PAGES </h3>

<p> We should have an independent membership page for each of the
organizations covered under our group. People should be allowed
to subscribe on-line. We don't have to hassle the problems with
credit cards or anything yet, just let them enter their name and
address and the organization can send them an envelope. </p>

<h2><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">WHY WILL
THE DRUG WAR FALL? </h2>

<p> The drug war will eventually fall for the same reason that
communism fell. That is, they are both repressive systems which
depend upon hiding or ignoring knowledge iin pursuit of an
ideological goal. As such they are wildly impractical, and that
impracticality becomes more apparent as more knowledge becomes
available. The Soviet Union fell because, in order to enforce
their restrictions on knowledge, they had to put photocopy
machines under lock and key and require forms to be filled out
every time someone wanted to make a copy. You can imagine the
effect that would have on a modern competitive business. The
invention of the personal computer was their complete downfall.
It became apparent that they could not have a modern economy if
they did not have person computers, fax machines, and the like.
But, of course, that meant that everyone was a publisher. If
everyone is a publisher, sooner or later the truth is going to
get out. </p>

<p> Computers and the Internet will be the key elements which
bring down the drug war. Political systems based on ignorance
will come down because of the information which can be made
available to anyone through computers. That is also the
fundamental idea behind the CD ROM -- widespread public education
of the facts. We will win our struggle as soon as the public
knows the facts. We have taken the first steps with the formal
establishment of our org. </p>

<p> <img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">#1
PRIORITY -- GET THE KNOWLEDGE ASSEMBLED </h2>

<p> Our Number One Priority at this point should be to locate all
of the information on drug policy that we can find, convert it to
computer format, and post it in a commonly accessed place on the
web. We should set up an interlinked network of web pages
accessible from a single web page which serves as a directory.
Behind these web pages should be all of the information we can
get. Remember all the times that people on the net have asked
questions or argued about some aspect of the drug issue? No more.
Any time anyone has a question, we should be able to point
directly to documents on-line which provide an immediate answer. </p>

<h3>WHAT KIND OF INFORMATION? </h3>

<p> Anything relevant to the subject. We have nothing at all to
fear from the truth and you will notice that, on my web pages, I
will include materials which are propaganda of the opposition.
Ultimately, we gain the most from the broadest range of
information. We should scan, retrieve, enter by hand, or do
whatever we can to build the best library anyone has ever seen on
the subject. We have to make our web sites an absolute must-see
for any member of the media who wants to do anything on the
subject. (Please note that, even while the public as a whole may
not be on the net yet, the media is far more likely to be
connected to the net. This is an issue on which we can, in
effect, force their behavior. If our web pages have enough
information, they will be forced to come to us.) </p>

<p> Think of it this way. In the course of these conversations we
have passed back and forth a lot of good solid information to
each other, such as the information put forth on hemp, or the
backgrounds of Voth and Nahas. That kind of information should be
posted so it is available to anyone who wants it, any time they
need it. The only real difference is that we should use a less
conversational style. That is, when we post the information to
the library, it should be in &quot;encyclopedia style&quot; </p>

<h3>A CENTRAL ENTRY POINT - The World's Best Library on Drug
Policy. </h3>

<p> Right now, if we want to tell the media about our growing
library of on-line information, we would have to give them the
names of a multitude of web sites and tell them to go poke around
on their own. We need one main menu page to give them for the
library. </p>

<p> We should establish a central entry point to all the web
sites of interest. This one home page would list all of the other
web pages which have factual information of interest on the
subject. This will make it easy for us to give the media a single
access point where they can find all of the information. That is
important in uniformly advertising it to the media around the
world. </p>

<p> That central point should have an index (updated once a month
perhaps) which will point to each of the web sites and provide
some sort of explanation as to what kind of materials are behind
it. </p>

<h3>MAKE SURE THE MEDIA KNOWS WHERE TO GO FOR INFO </h3>

<p> Then we will have to make sure that ALL the media knows that
they have to go to our page if they are going to discuss the drug
issue. That will require a dedicated campaign to publish the
location of our unified home page to all media sources. Our next
priority will be to make sure that everyone in the media knows
where to look. We will each have to contact our local news
sources and make sure they know. It should be mentioned as a
standard reference in every letter to the editor, for example. We
should mention our unified home page everywhere we go. Print it
on your letterhead and business cards. </p>

<p> <img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h3>TASKS TO BE DONE </h3>

<h4><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">Top Items
to be Put on the Web </h4>

<p> This is a list, somewhat incomplete as yet, of the top items
we intend to put on the web pages as soon as we can. We ask
everyone to help us by contributing this information in
electronic form. If you have it, you can e-mail it to
schaffer@smartlink.net. And thanks! </p>

<p> If all you have is a paper copy, we would appreciate that
too. You can send stuff to Dave Borden at Drug Policy Foundation,
4455 Connecticut Ave., N.W., Suite B-500, Washington, DC
20008-2302. </p>

<p> You can snail-mail stuff to me at: <b>Cliff Schaffer, P.O.
Box 1430, Canyon Country, CA 91386-1430</b> </p>

<p> 1. Information for Dave Bordens &quot;Tour of the War on
Drugs&quot;. Use your imagination here, but if you were going to
give someone a tour of the War on Drugs, what would you include?
It should have lots of interesting facts, graphics, documents,
etc. </p>

<p> 2. A video file which contains a good quality copy of
&quot;Hemp for Victory&quot;. We would like to put in online
where it can be distributed to the world. If you already have a
computer and a VCR, the cost of the video capture board is
currently running around $500 to $700. Or maybe you know someone
who has one . . . </p>

<p> 3. The full text of any of the reference sources listed in
the <a href="../LIBRARY/studlist.html">Biggest Studies of Drug
Policy</a>. We much prefer the electronic format but if all you
have is a good paper copy, we will try to work with it. </p>

<p> 4. The full text of the Congressional Record for the portions
relevant to both the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914 and the
Marijuana Tax Act of 1937. </p>

<p> 5. Charts, pictures, etc., which show the current statistics
for all of the issues related to drug policy. </p>

<h4><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">SCANNING </h4>

<p> We have a huge task ahead of us. We must convert tens of
thousands of pages of information to computer format. Most of the
information, such as the major studies of drug policy, never was
in computer format and some of the documents are quite large. The
task will probably take man years of scanning effort to be
properly accomplished. The only way we will get it done (with our
limited financial resources) is if everyone does a little bit. I
strongly recommend that you get a scanner as soon as possible.
You don't need much, a simple gray scale scanner with OCR will do
the trick. Shop around and you can install a minimum page-feed
scanner in an existing computer system, with OCR for about $250.
A good quality flat-bed color scanner with a page feed option
currently runs about $1,000. I have found from my own experience
that the handheld scanners are not adequate to the task. </p>

<p> Does anyone know where we can get scanners cheaply (free) to
distribute to volunteers who will commit to using them? </p>

<h4><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">GETTING
THE WORD OUT TO THE MEDIA </h4>

<p> We will need volunteers who will help us get the word out to
the lawmakers and the media when we are ready to launch. Anyone
can help here, if they have a telephone, a stamp, or an e-mail
address. </p>

<h4><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">FORMATTING
AND ORGANIZING </h4>

<p> We will also need people to specialize in the librarian
function. That is, we must have people who are willing to spend
the time to: </p>

<p> Organize the data so it has a logical structure and is easy
to find. </p>

<p> Establish links from references in one document to the actual
text of the cited documents. </p>

<p> Format good looking web pages according to a standard format </p>

<p> We will need standards for how the web pages will be
constructed and their overall look. (Please understand, it is not
that I want to limit your creativity with web pages, it is just
that we want to present to the public the look of a uniform,
organized library.) I recommend that anyone who is interested in
working on this end of the task should buy a copy of Teach
Yourself Web Publishing With HTML In A Week, by Laura Lemay from
Sams Publishing. I just got a copy and found it quite helpful. </p>

<h4><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">READING
AND SUMMARIZING </h4>

<p> There will be a lot of information on line. We will need
people to read through volumes of information and prepare
accurate summaries on a chapter by chapter basis. </p>

<h4><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">PROGRAMMING
</h4>

<p> Someone will have to program the membership forms and other
stuff required by this little venture. </p>

<h4><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">WHERE TO
GO TO GET THE DATA </h4>

<p> 1. Information from other on-line services. We must
accumulate all of the information in a place we control and
organize. </p>

<p> 2. Government sources. A lot of the government agencies are
now publishing information in computer format, including CD-ROM.
We should make it a point to get all of this information we can
and bring it together in a logical organization which makes it
easy for people to find. </p>

<p> 3. Historical records. A good project for anyone would be to
go to the library and browse through the newspapers of anywhere
from 1860 to the present and get copies of all the articles they
can find relating to drugs. </p>

<p> 4. Private collections of documents. I have already contacted
a number of prominent people to ask them if we can get their
personal records which relate to drug policy. We want to develop
a depth of information which cannot be challenged and the private
records of individuals involved in the drug war is a good way to
do it. </p>

<p> 5. NIDA research. The National Instiute on Drug Abuse has
published volumes of data on all sorts of issues. We should start
with the most interesting stuff. </p>

<p> 6. The Congressional Record. We need to get on-line the
entire text of the Congressional Record relating to all of our
current drug laws. Most important-- we must get the text of the
original proceedings behind these laws. Harry Anslinger's words
should be posted in a place where all the world can read them. </p>

<p> 7. Current Media. Scan and/or summarize articles from your
local newspaper. Include the full citations of the name of the
newspaper, the headline of the article and the date it was
published. Also include a summary, length as appropriate, of the
major points made in the article. If we can get permission to
reprint, we should do so. If not, we will publish a summary of
the points made in the article, but retain the scanned text in a
private library for backup. </p>

<p> 8. Videos and movies. We should convert things such as Hemp
for Victory to computer format. This can be done with a computer,
a VCR, and a video capture board (now down to as low as $179.00) </p>

<h4><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">WEB PAGE
STANDARDS </h4>

<p> I suggest the following as a preliminary suggestion for web
page standards. More complete standards, including a template,
should be developed by a committee working on the formatting and
organizing team. </p>

<p> 1. All web pages should include both the name of the current
page plus the name of the central home page. This will make sure
that anyone who prints out the information will know where it
came from. The name of the central home page should also be
included as a header in all text files on the net. </p>

<p> 2. All menus should contain links back to your own home page
as well as the central home page. </p>

<p> 3. All menu pages should include the title of the document,
and a description of the author and the contents of the work. </p>

<p> 4. All web pages under your own home page should have a
consistent layout. The layout should be simple and without
excessive graphics, so it doesn't take a month to download them. </p>

<h4><img src="../GRAPHICS/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">COPYRIGHTS
</h4>

<p> Under current copyright law we cannot post anything which is
copyrighted without the permission of the copyright owner. Here
is how to get around this restriction and still have a complete
on-line library. </p>

<p> 1) Any material produced by any government agency, or the
texts of official statements by public officials is in the public
domain and may be posted without any problems. </p>

<p> 2) The current copyright law is that copyrights are effective
for the life of the creator plus fifty years. The old law was
that copyrights were valid for 28 years with a renewal of 28
years. What this means is (with some exceptions) materials
published before about 1940 have probably fallen into the public
domain. </p>

<ol>
    <li>I have a feeling that, if some people or organizations
        were asked, they would grant us permission to post their
        materials, or at least excerpts from the materials. If we
        cannot get permission, we will post our own written
        summaries of the materials -- reviews of the essential
        points made by the document. </li>
</ol>

<p> </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>