
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B08-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA062-000351-B044-98</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www.falkland-malvinas.com:80/snif.html 207.32.88.17 19970115195805 text/html 10052
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wed, 15 Jan 1997 19:51:07 GMT
Server: Apache/1.0.3
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 9881
Last-modified: Sun, 29 Dec 1996 07:31:34 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Mercosur News Full Version</title>
</head>

<body background="images/backm.gif">

<p align="center"><img src="images/titulonews.gif"
alt="Mercopress Header" width="200" height="63"><br>
<img src="images/speckledgradient.gif" width="500" height="4"></p>
<div align="center"><center>

<table border="0" width="100%">
    <tr>
        <td width="33%"><p align="center"><font face="Arial">&nbsp;</font><a
        href="mailto:uy3386@antel.com.uy"><img
        src="images/morton1.gif" alt="Thomas Morton" border="1"
        width="200" height="70"></a></p>
        </td>
        <td width="34%"><p align="center"><font face="Arial"><strong><img
        src="images/globe.gif" width="20" height="16"> Mercosur
        News</strong></font></p>
        </td>
        <td width="33%"><p align="right"><font size="2"
        face="Arial"><strong>Mercopress Agency 1/1/97</strong></font></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</table>
</center></div>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><b><img src="images/red.gif"
width="15" height="15"> </b></font><font color="#000080" size="3"
face="Arial"><strong><b>THE SOUTHERN CROSS, SEAL OF MERCOSUR </b></strong></font></p>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><strong><img
src="images/mercosurlogo.gif" align="right" hspace="0"
width="200" height="155"></strong></font><font size="3"
face="Arial"><strong>FORTALEZA. (MP).- </strong>After long
discussions, a blue southern cross with a green under stroke on a
clear background was finally chosen as the seal of the Mercosur
trade block and officially inaugurated during the presidential
summit held in the north of Brazil on December 17th. Argentine
delegates objected the seal because the southern cross has
basically four stars and could be interpreted as a closed
organisation with only its four original members (Argentina,
Brazil, Uruguay and Paraguay), leaving aside new associate
members such as Chile and from next May, Bolivia. Uruguayan and
Brazilian delegates on the other hand argued that the southern
cross is a constellation of stars with the four brightest
representing the original country members. Finally it was agreed
that the seal, &quot;<em>if necessary could be modernised in the
future</em>&quot;, as more stars (countries) are definitively
incorporated to the group. The seal was chosen by a jury of eight
(two for each member country) among 1.412 presentations with a
10.000 US dollars prize for the winner, an Argentine artist. </font></p>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><b><img src="images/red.gif"
width="15" height="15"></b></font><font color="#000080" size="3"
face="Arial"><b> </b><strong>BOLIVIA BECOMES AN ASSOCIATE MEMBER </strong></font></p>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><strong><img
src="images/lapaz.gif" align="right" hspace="0" width="136"
height="184"></strong></font><font size="3" face="Arial"><strong>FORTALEZA.
(MP).-</strong> Bolivia became an associate member of Mercosur
and the official integration will take place as of next May once
the different parliaments ratify the agreements reached in the
presidential summit held in the Brazilian city of Fortaleza. Last
minute negotiations opened the doors to an understanding which in
the previous days seemed hard to reach because of the differences
with Argentina over a long list of products the Bolivians wanted
to privilege with a long term reduction of tariffs such as
textiles and agricultural commodities. &quot;<em>We're happy with
what was agreed, otherwise we wouldn't have signed</em>&quot;,
said Bolivian president Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada, in spite of
having to step back in many of his country's original demands.
After Chile last October, and Bolivia in May, the next candidate
for an association with Mercosur is oil rich Venezuela, which has
already requested to become a member and is quiet advanced in the
negotiations. Brasilia is particularly interested in Venezuela
since Mercosur so far has only benefited the southern states of
Brazil next to Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay. With Venezuela,
(in the north of South America), many of the poor states of
north-east Brazil could have direct access to an important market
for industrial goods. Brazil is aggressively promoting industrial
investments in the area to combat poverty and also wants to
diversify its oil dependency by increasing imports from
Venezuela. </font></p>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><b><img src="images/red.gif"
width="15" height="15"> </b></font><font color="#000080" size="3"
face="Arial"><strong>OPEN SKIES, A DEVELOPMENT BANK AND THE
SECRETARIAT IN MONTEVIDEO </strong></font></p>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><strong>FORTALEZA. (MP).- </strong>The
creation of a development bank for Mercosur countries, a policy
of open skies for small and medium cities of the area and the
location of the Secretariat in Montevideo, were some of the very
important decisions taken in the Fortaleza summit. A special
group of experts was given five months to elaborate a report on
how to set up a non bureaucratic financial institution, which
must help in structural development investments such as the
improvement of land and fluvial communications systems to
facilitate trade and cut costs. Aid for the new bank has been
promised by the World Bank, the Interamerican Development Bank
and the Japanese government. Deregulation of regional flights was
decided to promote direct links between medium and small cities
of the six countries which at present can only be reached by step
flying through the main international airports of the area in
never ending trips. Direct scheduling between regional airports
will not interfere the main bilateral agreements. Finally
Montevideo was confirmed as the permanent location for the
Mercosur Secretariat, which will have an initial budget of 1,2
million US dollars and will be headed until 1999 by Uruguayan
Ambassador Jorge Fernández Reyes. </font></p>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><b><img src="images/red.gif"
width="15" height="15"></b></font><font color="#000080" size="3"
face="Arial"><b> </b><strong>TRADE UNIONS COORDINATE FIRST EVER
STOPPAGE IN THE REGION </strong></font></p>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><strong>BRASILIA. (MP).-</strong>
Integration spirit is not only limited to government and business
decisions: trade unions of the six Mercosur countries have a
supranational co-ordinating committee and coinciding with the
Fortaleza presidential summit they organised a relatively
successful general stoppage of several hours. Besides the 17th of
December was declared the &quot;<em>International Day for the
struggle of the human rights of the Mercosur Workers</em>&quot;,
and will be celebrated annually. During the presidential summit,
representatives of the main eight Mercosur workers unions, plus
an American representative for the American Workers Federation
and the Congress of Industrial Organisations, held a meeting in
Fortaleza and released a document with a list of common demands.
Top of the list was the creation of mechanisms for collective
negotiations on working conditions and salaries at Mercosur
level, plus more legal space in the block's decision making
process, for social organisations including non government
organisations (NGO). Secondly a Bill of Rights, based on
regulations and agreements of the International Labour
Organisation (ILT); thirdly a policy for promoting jobs,
productive reconversion and retraining in new trades. In spite of
growing economies, unemployment has become one of the worst fears
and threats for workers in Mercosur countries: the official rates
are as follows: Argentina 17%, Brazil 14%, Uruguay 12%, Chile 8%.</font></p>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><b><img src="images/red.gif"
width="15" height="15"> </b></font><font color="#000080" size="3"
face="Arial"><strong>THE MAGNIFICENT &quot;</strong><em><strong>OMBU</strong></em><strong>&quot;,
SYMBOL OF MERCOSUR CULTURE </strong></font></p>

<p><font size="3" face="Arial"><strong><img src="images/ombu.gif"
align="right" hspace="0" width="166" height="218"></strong></font><font
size="3" face="Arial"><strong>MONTEVIDEO. (MP).- </strong>The
&quot;<em>ombú</em>&quot;, the magnificent tree which grows and
outstands solitarily in the pampas and Southamerican grasslands,
has been selected as the symbol of cultural integration for
Mercosur.<b> </b>The Education and Culture Ministers of the four
founding countries agreed on the ombú sketch during a meeting in
Uruguay and decided it will be used to identify all cultural
assets, facilitating their circulation through Customs and Post
Offices of the different country members. The cultural logotype
includes two &quot;<em>ombú</em>&quot; outlines, one blue and
red, another green and yellow, which overlap, on a white
background and with the inscription Mercosur Cultural in black.
The novelty of the symbol is that when the two outlines are
overlapped into a single figure the inscription can become
Mercosul, which is the Portuguese translation of Mercosur. So the
new cultural symbol includes several integration factors such as
the colour of the banners and the two languages, Spanish and
Portuguese. Ministers also decided on an agenda of activities for
the next semester which will begin with a show of pictures from
the world famous Jesuit Missions and the first of a series of
stamp editions dedicated to outstanding artists of Mercosur. </font></p>

<p><a href="sni.html"><img src="images/atras.gif" align="middle"
border="0" width="50" height="50"></a></p>

<p align="center"><img src="images/harvestleaves.gif" width="492"
height="19"></p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>