
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B036-137</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/ophs.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124912 text/html 91308
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:49:00 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:59 GMT
Content-length: 91090
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>History of Legislative Control Over Opium, Cocaine, and
Their Derivatives</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<p><b>THE HISTORY OF LEGISLATIVE CONTROL OVER OPIUM, COCAINE, AND
THEIR DERIVATIVES</b> </p>

<p><b>by</b> </p>

<p><b>David F. Musto, MD</b> </p>

<h1><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> <br>
</h1>

<p>Legislative control over dangerous drugs may be dated from
attempts in the nineteenth century to prevent acute poisoning by
certain substances that might be purchased in ignorance of their
lethal potential or might be too easily available to would-be
suicides. Opium was being sold in a crude form containing about
10 percent morphine, as well as in concoctions derived from crude
opium: paregoric, laudanum, and a solution in acetic acid known
as &quot;black drop.&quot; Morphine had been isolated from opium
in 1805 by the German pharmacist, F. W. Serturner, but production
of the powerful active ingredient of opium on a large scale was
delayed until the 1830s.1 From that time onward, in factories in
Germany, Great Britain, and the United States, morphine was
produced in great quantities. Thus when in 1868, Great Britain
came to enact pharmacy laws to control dangerous substances,
&quot;opium and all preparations of opium or of poppies&quot; was
listed alongside such substances as oxalic acid as commodities
that could not be sold without being labeled &quot;poison.&quot;'
</p>

<p>The Pharmacy Act of 1868 is an important symbol of legislative
control in a Western country. The act was not the most strict
among nations; perhaps the Prussian regulations were stricter and
more comprehensive, but establishment by the British of some
limitation on the availability of dangerous drugs-drugs that
would eventually become more serious a problem for society as
addictive agents than as tools for suicide-was a policy also
followed by other European nations. It had an apparently
discouraging effect on the per capita consumption of opium,
opiates, and cocaine in the late nineteenth century and
contributed to the low level of British consumption (at least
compared to the American) right up to the 1960s.3 </p>

<p>The experience of the United States stands in contrast to
Britain's. The Pharmacy Act of 1868 was regulated in large part
by the organized association of pharmacists, the Pharmaceutical
Society (established 1841). In order to retail, dispense, or
compound &quot;poisons,&quot; or to assume the title of chemist,
druggist, pharmacist, or dispensing druggist or chemist, the
individual had to be registered by the Pharmaceutical Society. As
well as being the testing and registering body, the Society was
also given the initial responsibility for adding new drugs to the
poison list. Thus the law, which ultimately would be enforced in
British courts, was monitored by local members of the
Pharmaceutical Society as a tool in competition with unregistered
druggists, grocers, and anyone else who might attempt to purvey
these drugs to the public. </p>

<p>While the act presumably aided the public health by having
dangerous drugs sold or dispensed by individuals knowledgeable
about their qualities, it was also a convenient aid to the trade
of registered pharmacists. Although the drugs could be obtained
with no specific restraint on the amount or frequency of sale,
the bottles had to be labeled &quot;poison.&quot; A stricter
category of substances also required that the purchaser be an
acquaintance of the pharmacist or someone the pharmacist knew.
This list included arsenic and &quot;strychnine and all poisonous
alkaloids and their salts.&quot; The impact of this modest
obstacle to the acquirement of dangerous drugs should not be
underestimated. Further, the self-interest that would motivate
registered pharmacists to monitor breaches of the law provided an
unpaid, but interested, drug enforcement cadre scattered
throughout Great Britain. &quot;Patent medicines&quot; were
excepted from these controls, and this led to a campaign against
them later in the century, but the pure forms of the drugs, e.g.,
morphine suitable for injection, were restricted in availability
from the time of the Pharmacy Act onward.' In the United States,
throughout the nineteenth century, both medicine and pharmacy
remained essentially unorganized, although there were some
physicians and pharmacists attempting to organize their
professions. The American Medical Association, which was founded
in 1847 and which we now might think of as the dominant medical
organization, was a small and nationally unrepresentative group
until about World War 1.5 The American Pharmaceutical
Association, founded four years later, grew slowly and, like the
AMA, lacked the authority to license practitioners. The pharmacy
establishment was divided sharply among drug manufacturers,
wholesalers, and retailers, whose divergent interests the APhA
tried to coordinate, but each segment of the profession came to
work through its own organization: the National Wholesale
Druggists' Association (1882), the National Association of Retail
Druggists (1898), and many other groups.6 There was no national
group for the health professions to which government could turn
for regulation, even if the American constitutional system had
permitted such an arrangement. </p>

<p>Licensing of pharmacists and physicians, which was the central
government's responsibility in European nations, was, in the
United States, a power reserved to each individual state. In the
era of Andrew Jackson, any form of licensing that appeared to
give a monopoly to the educated was attacked as a contradiction
of American democratic ideals. State after state repealed the
medical licensing laws adopted in earlier days. Practical
concerns also supported repeal: Legislators preferred to leave it
to the patients to decide which of the many competing theories of
medicine was the best. Instead of moving toward a national system
of licensing for health professionals, therefore, individual
states were deregulating the professions. American medical
schools were similarly unregulated, and many flourished-some no
better than diploma mills. The states did not begin
reestablishment of medical licensing until the 1880s, and even
then the movement was spotty, with a wide range of standards.'
Pharmacists, also seeking to raise standards and limit
competition, likewise fought at the state level for licensing,
since the U.S. Constitution placed in the hands of states the
regulation of the health professions. Although some requirements
for labeling of over-the counter medicines would come with the
Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 as an exercise of the federal
right to regulate interstate commerce, in general, the nineteenth
and early twentieth century interpretation of the Constitution
favored a strict division between state and federal powers. </p>

<p>The status of legislative control of dangerous drugs during
the nineteenth century may be summed up as follows: The United
States had no practical control over the health professions, no
representative national health organizations to aid the
government in drafting regulations, and no controls on the
labeling, composition, or advertising of compounds that might
contain opiates or cocaine. The United States not only proclaimed
a free marketplace, it practiced this philosophy with regard to
narcotics in a manner unrestrained at every level of preparation
and consumption. </p>

<p>Through a slower pace of professional development, the United
States also lagged behind Britain and other European countries in
establishing broadly based organizations representing the
nation's physicians or pharmacists to which the central
government could turn for regulation. Second, the form of
government adopted in the United States, a federation of partly
independent states, was a conscious attempt to prevent
establishment of an all-powerful central government
characteristic of Europe. In the nineteenth century, this
remarkably successful form of government entailed each state
making its own regulation if it wished to; the result was an
array of controls that varied from one state to another. In fact,
states made little attempt to control addictive drugs until quite
late in the last century, and those efforts did not prove very
effective. </p>

<p>During the first part of the nineteenth century, the amount of
opiates used in the United States may have been comparable to
that used in Britain, where some areas, notably the fen counties,
had a fairly large per capita consumption. Inhabitants there
often took a dose of laudanum or some form of opium daily to keep
away the fevers associated with the marshlands.8 More generally,
parents reputedly purchased one or another form of opium to rub
on the gums of teething infants or to spoon-feed a child to
induce sleep so that the mother without provision for child care
could work in the local factory. These accounts are anecdotal,
but recent historical studies do suggest that the taking of some
form of opium for pain, sleep, or to ward off illness was not
uncommon. The occasional death of an infant from an overdose of
opium or the suicide of an adult by means of opium prompted
parliamentary interest in the distribution and labeling of the
drug. In large measure, the 1868 Pharmacy Act was the result. One
should note however, that through the provisions of the act and
the designation of the Pharmaceutical Society as the most
responsible body, the pharmacists also achieved some control over
the profession and a lead on the other health professions. A
somewhat similar victory for U.S. pharmacy would be found in the
details of the Harrison Narcotic Act in 1914.9 </p>

<p>In nineteenth-century America, the unimpeded importation of
opium and the free economy in opiates do give an advantage to the
historian, for estimates of per capita consumption are more
reliable when there are few restrictions on the importation,
sale, and consumption of a product. Because the growth of poppies
within the country and preparation of opium from them seem to
have been a minor contributor to American use, the import
statistics, begun in 1840 and continued to the present day, are
reliable as a guide to domestic consumption until the Harrison
Act of 1914. Certainly the minimum level and the trend can be
observed. After the Harrison Act, these statistics grew less
reliable, for smuggling becomes a more uncertain variable, but we
can say that at least during the nineteenth century the annual
per capita consumption rose steadily from about 12 grains in 1840
(an average single dose being one grain) until the mid-1890s,
when it reached 52 grains annually per capita. Then statistics
show that average individual consumption gradually subsided up to
1914, by which time the per capita rate had fallen back to the
level of about 1880.&quot; In Great Britain, the per capita
consumption declined during the latter half of the nineteenth
century.&quot; During that same period, opium use in the United
States rose dramatically. The peak of opiate addiction in the
United States occurred about the turn of the century, when the
number probably was close to 250,000 in a population of 76
million, a rate so far never equaled or exceeded. 12 Heroin had
been introduced into the pharmacy in 1898 and had contrasting
impacts in Britain and the United States. In New York City, the
addiction capital of the United States, heroin became the drug of
choice for recreational addicts, and the number of addicts was
measured in the tens of thousands by 1920. In Britain, the
addiction rate for heroin addicts by 1920 was minuscule. 13 Of
course, the use of drugs is determined by many factors, but I
would like to suggest that the contrast in easy availability of
narcotics in America and Britain-created by political and social
factors removed from considerations of addiction-underlay the
strikingly different rates of addiction each country experienced
well into this century. The rise in addiction with which we are
more familiar, that of the 1950s and more recently, appears to be
associated with additional factors that will be discussed later. </p>

<p>Americans have something to learn from their earlier and
extensive consumption of opiates, including heroin, and also
massive consumption of cocaine, which occurred before World War
I. This era is forgotten. We commonly act as if the heroin
&quot;epidemic&quot; of the 1960s or the current cocaine
&quot;epidemic&quot; is a new phenomenon in the United States,
that the widespread use of a drug implies that legalization or
&quot;decriminalization&quot; is the only reasonable response.
The history of attempts at legislative control in the United
States suggests that other courses may be effective and that
these alternatives to legalization appear to have reduced
enormous opiate and cocaine consumption in the United States
earlier in this century. Therefore, it is worthwhile to consider
these early efforts at narcotic limitation if we are to approach
contemporary policy issues with an appreciation of the range of
policy options that reduce or encourage ingestion of these
substances. For in spite of the great difference in addiction
rates between the United States and Great Britain in 1920, the
United States did reduce its addiction rate to a relatively small
number. On the other hand, the low heroin addiction rate in Great
Britain prior to the 1950s did not prove a protection against
drug problems in that nation, although the level of use in
Britain has not reached the proportions to which we are
accustomed in the United States. Clearly the social and legal
factors affecting drug use are complex, and there is no single
influence that determines a particular level of drug use and
abuse. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>AMERICAN LEGISLATIVE CONTROL OVER OPIUM AND OPIATES TO 1914</b>
</p>

<p>The role of opium and its derivatives in the United States can
be traced independently from cocaine until 1914, when these
substances were linked together as &quot;narcotics&quot; through
the Harrison Act. Technically, only the opiates are narcotics,
that is, sleep-inducing, and they all have different effects.
Nevertheless, most dangerous drugs, including cannabis, were
grouped under the rubric &quot;narcotics&quot; from at least the
1920s until the 1960s. </p>

<p>As mentioned above, opium was available in many forms derived
from crude opium long before the nineteenth century. In America,
the two developments that spurred both consumption and concern
about opium were (1) the isolation of morphine and its injection
into the body with hypodermic syringes and (2) the introduction
of smoking opium, which had been brought to the United States
mainly by a feared minority, Chinese laborers imported to help
build western railroads. The much greater ease of addiction
through use of morphine compared to the more dilute forms
employed previously focused attention on the drug, medical
practitioners, and modern technology in the form of the
hypodermic syringe. </p>

<p>Consumption of opium in the United States rose steadily before
and after the Civil War. There had been complaints before the war
about &quot;opium drunkards&quot; by such prominent and
progressive physicians as Oliver Wendell Holmes, but in the
second half of the century, physicians, as well as the general
public, widely deplored opium and morphine addiction. To be
addicted to morphine was to harbor a shameful secret to be hidden
from others at whatever cost, a point illustrated in Eugene
O'Neill's moving play about his own family, Long Day's Journey
into Night. Written in his later years, it was based on his
mother's addiction by a thoughtless physician, and the pain of
this memory had remained so great that O'Neill would not permit
the play's production during his lifetime. The leading American
surgeon and the first professor of surgery at The Johns Hopkins
Hospital, William Stewart Halsted, was a morphine addict for the
last several decades of his life. His secret was kept hidden
carefully until the publication of Sir William Osler's private
diary in 1969.&quot; Osler had been Halsted's physician while
Osler was on the Hopkins faculty. Halsted's addiction did not
appear to interfere with his work. </p>

<p>Americans received opium and morphine not only from their
physicians for pain; they could receive what they wanted, for
whatever reason they chose, over the counter or from mail order
catalogues. The American free enterprise system, coupled with the
federal system of government, meant that a bottle heavily laced
with morphine could be sold across state lines as an
&quot;addiction cure&quot; and affirmed on the label to contain
no morphine whatsoever, quite within the law. States could pass
laws restricting such advertising, but they were not inclined to
do so. Patent medicine companies were the leading advertisers in
American newspapers. They developed an ingenious protection from
prying investigations or public pressure to reveal secret
formulas, or from any state requirement to make only valid claims
for effectiveness: The proprietary manufacturers included in
their lucrative contracts with newspapers a proviso that the
advertising agreement would be void if the state in which the
newspaper was published enacted any laws affecting the sale or
manufacture of the nostrums. 11 </p>

<p>In the nation's capital, the manufacturers also fought off
requirements that their nostrums be labeled as to contents. Bills
to enact such a law under the interstate commerce clause of the
Constitution were defeated repeatedly, but in the 1890s a new
reforming spirit was evident in the nation. These reforms were
extensive, ranging from control over the use of forest land, to
government inspection of meat and other comestibles and laws
relating to adulterants in foods, and to drugs considered unsafe.
Attention to the danger of narcotics using the term
broadly-accompanied the peak of per capita consumption in the
United States. It is clear that what were regarded as the most
negative aspects of drug use led to the passage of the new
legislation. The simplest reform, correct labeling, was part of
the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. Any over-the-counter medicine
- commonly these would be &quot;patent medicines&quot;-had to be
labeled correctly as to inclusion of any of the following drugs:
morphine, cocaine, cannabis, or chloral hydrate. A long-desired
reform, it simply informed the purchaser whether any of these
drugs were present; it did not prevent purchase or restrict the
amount of the drug. 16 Nevertheless, reports at the time indicate
that the amount of these substances dropped from a third to a
half as a response to public concern.17 Although the newspapers
remained quiet, widely read magazines such as Collier's and
Ladies Home Journal railed against patent medicines, especially
against morphine and cocaine. Even after passage of the
truth-in-labeling laws, the magazines continued their exposes
unabated until the next major step, which was restriction on the
availability of the drugs themselves.&quot; </p>

<p>Tracing the movement to restriction, as opposed to labeling
accuracy, requires a step back to the mid-nineteenth century.
Patent medicines are thought to have created some addiction, but
the number of addicts is difficult to estimate. That physicians
addicted or assisted in the addiction of patients is more
certain. The problem of iatroaddiction initially was approached
by limiting renewal of prescriptions for opiates. These legal
controls were mostly in the form of additions to the health
statutes and depended for their efficacy on the judgments of
physicians and pharmacists. These controls would not, of course,
affect interstate commerce in narcotics or the familiar patent
medicines, which still could be bought over the counter. No
consistent police efforts to enforce these laws appear to have
been undertaken.18 </p>

<p>As the public and leaders of the health professions became
more aware of the growing number of those addicted to opiates,
chiefly morphine, state laws were amended to be more stringent,
and the police occasionally staged crackdowns. As will be
recalled, however, the professions were pretty much unorganized
and struggling to achieve mandatory licensing; a threat to take
away a license could not hold much fear until a license was
required to begin with. Legislators also felt, or at least
claimed, a helplessness when neighboring states did not enact
strict laws-a circumstance more familiar to us with variations
in- the legal drinking age between states-with the result that
enforcement was weak. This circumstance, combined with a poorly
trained medical profession, a lack of professional organization,
and an absence of laws controlling either patent medicine or
interstate commerce in drugs, left local controls more symbolic
than effective. </p>

<p>The nineteenth century's last decade brought the rise of what
would come to be called the Progressive Movement, a set of
reforms usually taking the form of federal laws affecting the
entire nation with the ostensible purpose of improving the
nation's morals or resisting the selfish actions of the rich and
powerful. Alongside it grew a temperance, soon a prohibition,
movement that would eventuate in the Eighteenth Amendment
mandating prohibition of alcohol distribution for nonmedical
purposes in the United States. In many ways, of course, the
antialcohol movement was part of the Progressive Era; its
startling success and later dramatic repeal have given the
alcohol issue a somewhat separate development in our minds, but
the interrelation between the battles against alcohol and against
narcotics is an important one. The antialcohol crusade helped
establish the attitude that there could be no compromise with the
forces of evil, that &quot;moderation&quot; was a false concept
when applied to alcohol: Prohibition was the only logical or
moral policy when dealing with this great national problem. By
the nineteenth century a new wave of state prohibition laws was
enacted. These were tempered by the contemporary constitutional
understanding that a state prohibition law did not prevent
purchase of liquor from a &quot;wet&quot; state, for that would
be a form of interstate commerce and not subject to the states'
powers. This assumption helped placate some doubters about
prohibition, but the staunch fighters against alcohol also sought
to remove that loophole. This they did through the Webb-Kenyon
Act of 1913. Without going into the details of the broad and
involved movement that led to national prohibition, we should
note that the significance for the control of narcotics is that
another dangerous substance, over which there was even more
dispute as to the means of control, progressed inexorably toward
a policy of &quot;no maintenance&quot; and no compromise. The
moral question of how to deal with a dangerous substance was
being fought out over alcohol, but the case would be stronger
even with narcotics when that issue was brought to national
deliberation. </p>

<p>The means by which the narcotics issue arose at the federal
level was accidental. Certainly it would have come to the
attention of Congress and the president eventually as a corollary
to the alcohol prohibition movement or as a way of controlling
addiction, which was becoming a target of journalist reformers
and physicians. It was acquisition of the Philippines through the
Spanish-American War that occasioned action by the federal
government. </p>

<p>Again, in order to understand how the Philippines forced the
central government to take action on opium, it is necessary to
appreciate the divisions between federal and state powers that
were so marked until the last half-century. The Philippines,
unlike a state, came directly and wholly under the control of the
federal government. At last, Congress could not avoid making
decisions on such matters as the local availability of opium.
Opium had been provided to Chinese on the Philippine Islands
through a Spanish government monopoly. Civil Governor William
Howard Taft considered whether the monopoly should be
reinstituted. It was his judgment that this would be reasonable
and that the profits from the opium monopoly could be used to
help educate Filipinos, a task the United States eagerly accepted
as it sought to provide a model government for its first colony.
20 </p>

<p>It was at the point in 1903, when this reinstitution was
passing through the Philippine government under the eye of Civil
Governor Taft, that the moral question of compromising with
&quot;evil&quot; affected the future of opium's legal
availability in that land. Missionaries in Manila and in the
United States had learned that &quot;tainted money&quot; from
opium sales was to be employed for education, and they besought
President Theodore Roosevelt to prevent this moral wrong. He
ordered Taft to stop the bill, and that was the end of it. The
mood of moral leaders in the United States was sufficient during
the first few years of this century to prevent any such
&quot;maintenance&quot; program, even if it was restricted, as
promised, to the Chinese in the Philippines. This immediate
reaction to allowing opium to be used for purely
&quot;recreational&quot; purposes, coming even before the Food
and Drug Act, gave a signal as to how the federal government
would respond to later questions regarding the legal supply of
opium to individuals, not for medical reasons but for enjoyment
or to satisfy their addiction. </p>

<p>In response to the veto from Washington, Governor Taft
appointed an Opium Investigation Committee to consider how other
Asian territories handled the opium problem. This committee
introduces us to Bishop Charles Henry Brent, the Protestant
Episcopal bishop of the Philippines, who had come out with Taft
to help in Americanization of this new possession. Bishop Brent
later would become world famous for his pioneer efforts to launch
the ecumenical movement among Christian churches, but his second
claim to fame was as a world leader against nonmedicinal uses of
narcotics. He was appointed to the committee, which traveled to
Japan, Formosa, Shanghai, Saigon, and Singapore examining how
other nations dealt with the opium user. He and the other members
of the committee found the Japanese policy in Formosa, a Japanese
possession since its seizure from China in 1895, to be the most
effective and enlightened. Japan opposed smoking opium but did
not try to stop confirmed addicts abruptly from indulging in
their habit. Japan, hoped to &quot;mature out&quot; the opium
smokers and leave an opium-free colony. In Japan, itself, opium
use was controlled stringently by the government, rare even among
Chinese aliens, and strongly deprecated by Japanese society. </p>

<p>The Philippine Opium Investigation Committee recommended that
(1) male opium smokers over 21 should be registered in order to
receive opium from a reinstituted government monopoly and (2)
after a three-year period, the amount provided the smokers be
reduced gradually until the smokers had been completely weaned
from the drug. 1 But Congress reacted more sternly. Congress
decreed immediate opium prohibition, except for medicinal
purposes, for all native Filipinos; non-Filipinos-mostly
Chinese-were allowed a three-year period of use. Over 12,000
non-Filipino opium users were registered, and their usual dosage
was maintained for two-and-onehalf years. During the final six
months of the three-year leniency period ending March 1908, the
opium provided was gradually reduced to zero. For official
purposes, opium smoking had stopped in the Philippine Islands.
One additional point: The opium dispensing stations established
under these laws were the first American narcotic clinics,
although their goal was not long-term maintenance but rather
registration and detoxification. </p>

<p>The Philippine situation forced the federal government to take
a stand on opium use for nonmedicinal purposes, and the decision
was to prohibit. To Congress, once the question was posed,
compromise with narcotics was not a politically practical
alternative. The Philippines also gave the United States
leadership of the international control of narcotics, a role it
still holds. It was apparent to the Opium Investigating Committee
that the solution to the Philippine opium problem lay in the
control of international trafficking in opium, as well as in the
curtailment of opium production in the original producing states,
such as India, China, Burma, Persia, and Turkey, to name some of
the most prominent sites for the cultivation of the opium poppy. </p>

<p>At the time that the Philippines were perceived to be a victim
of external sources of opium, the United States was having
increasing problems with the Chinese Empire. Owing to
maltreatment of Chinese in the United States, merchants in China
planned a voluntary embargo on American goods. This worried
American industrialists, wholesalers, exporters, and the federal
government. China had also embarked on a vigorous effort to rid
itself of opium use and, employing draconian methods, was having
some success. As a means to indicate good will to China, to aid
the Philippine opium problem, and to take an international
leadership position on a moral issue of the times, the United
States proposed, following Bishop Brent's suggestion to President
Roosevelt, to convene an international meeting at Shanghai to
consider the opium traffic among nations and to suggest ways in
which China's antiopium campaign might be aided. </p>

<p>Thus, the Shanghai Opium Commission came into being. It would
meet during February 1909, with Bishop Brent as its elected
president. The group was designated a &quot;commission&quot;
because the United States was unable to gain approval for a more
powerful convocation, a &quot;conference,&quot; which under
international law could draft a treaty that would, if ratified,
bind the signatory states. A &quot;commission,&quot; on the other
hand, could make findings of only fact or opinion. In addition to
the United States and China, those who accepted invitations to
Shanghai were Great Britain, France, the Netherlands, Persia,
Japan, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Germany, Portugal, Siam, and
Russia. Turkey accepted but did not send a representative. Persia
was represented by a local merchant. </p>

<p>The resolutions adopted by the commission were merely
recommendations and, even as such, had a comfortable vagueness
that allowed a latitude of interpretations. For example,
Resolution Three, taking cognizance of the near unanimous
agreement that opium for nonmedicinal uses should be prohibited
or &quot;carefully regulated,&quot; called upon nations to
&quot;reexamine&quot; their laws. This could hardly be considered
a clarion call for prohibition of nonmedical uses, but it was
Brent's goal to achieve a series of resolutions that at least
pointed in the direction of action to control traffic in
narcotics, with the hope that a future conference would enact a
treaty initiating such control.&quot; </p>

<p>The road from the Shanghai Opium Commission to the Hague Opium
Conference, which convened in December 1911 and resulted in the
Opium Convention of 1912, was a tortuous one, but after the
Shanghai meeting, the United States continued to press for a
second and more significant gathering. Eventually, the nations
gathered in The Hague, and once again Bishop Brent was elected
the presiding officer. </p>

<p>The Hague Opium Convention (which concerned cocaine as well as
opium) placed the burden of narcotic control on the domestic
legislation of each nation. Chapter Three of the convention
called for control of each phase of the preparation and
distribution of medicinal opium, morphine, heroin, cocaine, and
any new derivative that could be shown to have similar properties
.24 </p>

<p>The convention was not put into force by the dozen nations who
attended the First Opium Conference, for it was agreed that the
requirements would be held in abeyance until all forty-six world
powers had signed and ratified the convention. Eventually three
conferences were held, the second in 1913 and the third in 1914,
only weeks before the outbreak of World War 1. A compromise was
reached regarding the implementation of the treaty: Any ratifying
nation was permitted to put the treaty into effect in 1915, even
if ratification had not been unanimous. But only seven nations
did this by the end of the World War and the beginning of the
Versailles treaty negotiations in 1919. The United States
supported incorporating the Hague Convention into the Versailles
treaty, so that ratification of the treaty ending World War I
would at the same time bring the nation under the requirements of
the Hague Convention, which required national and domestic
legislation to control the preparation and distribution of
opiates and cocaine. Of course, the United States never did
ratify the Versailles treaty, but it had already ratified the
Hague Convention in 1913 and had put it into effect in 1915. One
significant result of the inclusion of the Hague Convention in
the Versailles treaty was the passage in Britain of the Dangerous
Drugs Act of 1920, an action taken not because of any serious
problem with addiction but because, by ratifying the Versailles
treaty, Britain had committed itself to comprehensive domestic
legislation. 25 </p>

<hr>

<p><b>DOMESTIC NARCOTIC LEGISLATION IN THE UNITED STATES</b> </p>

<p>During the year or so prior to the Shanghai Opium Commission,
the United States suggested topics to be discussed in 1909, and
one of the topics was a report on domestic antinarcotic
legislation. Americans understood that strong and enforced
domestic legislation in other nations would result in diminishing
the flow of drugs into the United States, but would other nations
understand why the United States had no national antinarcotic
legislation whatsoever? Americans knew that federal-state
separation of powers made a national antinarcotic law rather
difficult, but the State Department decided that something should
be on the books when the U.S. delegation arrived in Shanghai. </p>

<p>The simplest law that could be framed and stand a chance of
passage by the U.S. Congress before the commission opened was one
that excluded from the United States opium not intended for
legitimate medical uses or, in other words, opium prepared for
smoking. Here there was an ironic combination of political
factors. The United States hoped one of the major effects of the
Shanghai Commission would be to placate China with regard to the
poor treatment given Chinese nationals in the United States. Such
treatment was in violation of our treaty obligations with China.
The impetus for banning smoking opium from the United States,
however, had developed from the fear and loathing of the Chinese,
who were associated intimately with this particular manner of
ingesting opium. Thus, the negative American attitude toward
Chinese aliens gave the push that passed a &quot;face
saving&quot; law designed to show China the good will of the
United States. </p>

<p>After the law was enacted on February 9, 1909, it was
announced dramatically in Shanghai to the other nations as proof
of American sincerity.26 And yet no one in the American
delegation or within the State Department had any illusions that
this law would control domestic narcotic use. Additional
legislation was seen as imperative both to curtail the American
narcotics problem and to display an American example to other
nations where the implementation of narcotics control programs
was essential to the solution of the American domestic problem. </p>

<p>Dr. Hamilton Wright, a physician with political interests who
had been appointed opium commissioner by the State Department in
1908, oversaw the State Department's preparation for the Shanghai
meeting, which included culling information from police
departments, physicians, pharmaceutical houses, etc., regarding
the narcotic problem and consumption in the United States. Bishop
Brent was the chairman of the delegation, but after his elevation
to the commission's presidency, Wright became the acting head.
Back in Washington after the commission meeting, Wright took up
the battle for an international meeting that could frame a treaty
and played a leading role in the preparation of domestic
antinarcotic legislation. He had opposition within the State
Department on both questions, but he finally won the assent of
Philander C. Knox, the secretary of state, and moved ahead. </p>

<p>Wright, who combined an aggressive personal style with
self-righteousness and a thirst for political preferment, was
less effective than he otherwise might have been. He never got
the prize plum for which he yearned, the ministry to China, and
his chief claim for notability, the Anti-Narcotic Act of 1914,
known even then as the &quot;Harrison&quot; Act, left him at the
moment of achievement with almost no further role in the
antinarcotic movement. Eventually, he volunteered to help the
wounded on the western front during World War 1, was injured 27
there in an automobile accident, and died in 1917 in Washington.
His indomitable wife, Elizabeth Washburn Wright, carried on his
28 battle for world control of narcotics until her death in 1952.
</p>

<p>In late 1909 Dr. Wright proposed a domestic law that would be
based on the federal government's power of taxation. The
alternative federal power was that over interstate commerce, but
Wright believed that taxation would result in a detailed
accounting of narcotics from their introduction into the United
States to their distribution to manufacturers, wholesalers, and
retailers, including pharmacists and physicians. Heavy fines
would be levied on anyone not keeping records accurately or
selling and transferring these products without proper reporting
and payment of taxes. </p>

<p>Wright tried to solve the federal/state dichotomy in this
manner: The information obtained by this proposed law would be
made available to state boards of pharmacy and medicine, which
would then take appropriate action to ensure that &quot;the
proper relations . . . should exist between the physician, the
dispensing druggist, [and] those who have some real need of the
drugs.' &quot;29 So it is evident that at this early stage, two
years before the Hague Convention, Wright and the State
Department did not envision a federal role in policing the
relationships between, say, an addict and his or her supplying
pharmacist or physician. The sanctity of the state's police
powers would be maintained; the federal government would supply
only information. Reformers believed that the information,
however, could lead a responsible state agency to take only one
action, that is, to curb the supply of narcotics to those who did
not have a medical need for it-and &quot;mere&quot; addicts did
not fall into that category. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>The Foster Anti-Narcotic Bill (1910-1911)</b> </p>

<p>Republican Congressman David Foster of Vermont introduced
Wright's bill in April 1910. In addition to opium and cocaine, as
in the eventual Harrison Act, the bill was aimed at cannabis
(marijuana) and chloral hydrate, the same substances the Food and
Drug Act of 1906 required to be revealed on labels. It did not
allow small amounts of the drugs in mild remedies such as cough
syrup to be exempt from the stringent reporting requirements and
their severe penalties. Druggists feared the multitude of stamps
and labels at each stage; the fines, which would range from $500
to $5,000; and the one-to-five-year jail sentences. The word
&quot;knowingly&quot; did not qualify the prohibited actions,
making it likely that simple errors without any intention to
deceive would result in horrendous punishments. Although support
for the bill could be found, the individuals in the drug trade
would not endorse the detailed and hazardous provisions of the
Foster Bill. It never came to a vote in the Sixty-first Congress,
which ended in March 1911.30 </p>

<p>The next Congress was marked by a significant change: For the
first time in almost two decades, the Democrats gained control of
the House of Representatives. The South now had achieved new
importance, in that committee chairmanships changed hands. In the
Sixty-second Congress the Foster Bill became the Harrison Bill,
named after Francis Burton Harrison, a New York City Democrat who
served on the Foreign Relations Committee. Dr. Wright continued
his difficult task of trying to obtain the most stringent bill
consistent with winning essential political support from the
medical and pharmaceutical interests and now from the Democratic
Party. In order to mitigate the severity of the original Foster
Bill, the drug trades established the National Drug Trade
Conference, which would represent the major trade associations
and try to reach a compromise position on the complex
antinarcotic bill. The NDTC, which first met in Washington, D.C.,
in January 1913, provided the most powerful influence on the
writing of what would become known as the Harrison Act.&quot; </p>

<p>The attitude of the newly influential southern Democrats
toward any potential invasion of states' rights now had to be
taken more seriously. These politicians feared an interference
with the South's local laws, which enforced racial segregation
and Negro disenfranchisement. They remembered the era of
&quot;reconstruction,&quot; when the North ruled the South
following 1865, and wanted to maintain the authority the white
citizenry had subsequently won with the withdrawal of troops and
&quot;carpetbaggers.&quot; The narcotic control proposals
threatened to intrude federal authority into the states,
affecting local pharmacists and physicians and threatening to
reach right into a neighborhood and send an individual to federal
prison. Furthermore, this example of using the federal tax power
primarily to achieve a moral end-for the taxes were not intended
to bring in a significant revenue but rather to force disclosure
and compliance with rules of narcotics distribution-could be a
precedent for other concerns brewing in the United States, such
as protecting Negro voting rights in the South. </p>

<p>Dr. Wright, therefore, faced a new set of attitudes in the
Democratic-controlled House. He reacted by stressing the impact
of narcotics, especially cocaine, on Negroes. He attributed
attacks on whites to the crazed Negro cocaine fiend. He also
argued that many poor Negroes would not have the energy or
knowledge to send away for the cocaine, so the conclusion must be
that northern businessmen who did not care about the South's
concerns were shipping-via interstate commerce-cocaine to
Negroes. Further, unscrupulous or ignorant employers were said to
be supplying cocaine to their Negro workers .32 </p>

<p>One further concern about the precedent the antinarcotic law
would provide related to the flourishing prohibition movement. As
prohibition was achieved in state after state, the loophole for
at least the upper and middle classes was that alcohol could be
ordered across state lines and shipped into a dry state, for
interstate commerce was regulated by the federal government,
which so far was not teetotal. The Webb-Kenyon Act of 1913,
however, was passed to close this loophole, survived President
Taft's veto, and, much to the surprise of many, was declared
constitutional by the Supreme Court. This occurrence removed one
of the stumbling blocks to the Harrison Bill, for now a national
antinarcotic law could not serve as a precedent for curtailing
interstate commerce in a dangerous substance. </p>

<p>In the course of all this maneuvering, no one rallied to the
defense of any of the drugs named for control except that
occasionally cannabis was described by someone as not
habit-forming or not as serious as opium or cocaine. Perhaps
because the cannabis problem was not seen to be serious or
because the drug did not seem so dangerous, it was dropped from
the proposed law. Chloral hydrate, a sleeping medicine, was also
dropped. The attitude toward opium and cocaine, however, was
almost totally condemnatory. The only question was how to control
their distribution most efficiently, since they had medicinal
value but were also considered dangerously addicting. This was in
sharp contrast with alcohol; its use divided the nation, and huge
legitimate industries depended upon its continued consumption. </p>

<p>The government and the trades eventually reached agreement on
the proposed law by moderating the record-keeping provisions,
reducing penalties, and allowing the sale of patent medicines
with small amounts of narcotics in them. Representative Harrison
introduced it in June 1913, and it was passed quickly by the
House. In the Senate some amendments were offered, a few with an
apparent goal of destroying the bill's chances of passage. In
August of 1914, though, the Senate passed the bill, albeit with a
few modifications that were compromised in Conference Committee.
Finally, on December 17, 1914, President Wilson signed it into
law, to become effective March 1, 1915. At last the United States
had redeemed its pledge to other nations that it would enact a
stringent law, as it had urged every other nation to do. </p>

<p>The significance of the Harrison Act to strategists like Dr.
Wright, though, was more than just the satisfaction of redeeming
pledges made to questioning representatives of other nations. For
him, the Harrison Act was the implementation of the Hague
Convention of 1912, which called upon signatories to enact
domestic legislation controlling narcotics supplies and
distribution. Understood as the fulfillment of treaty
obligations, the Harrison Act would have the authority to usurp
the states' police powers, for the Constitution in Article Six
gives treaties concluded by the United States supremacy over the
laws of states. This would resolve the problem of states' rights
interfering with the ability of a national law to require a
uniform compliance with strict narcotics control .33 </p>

<p>Unfortunately, the Supreme Court at first did not give a very
strict interpretation to the Harrison Act. In the first Jin Fuey
Moy case (1916), the Court declared by a six-to-two majority that
the Harrison Act could not be understood as having been required
by the Hague Convention and that physicians could prescribe as
they saw fit, even to simple addicts. 34 This decision was a
stunning blow to federal enforcement, which, from the first day
of the act's implementation, was directed at pharmacists and
physicians who sold prescriptions or treated addicts without any
intent to cure them. </p>

<p>World War 1, arriving at almost the same time as the Harrison
Act, profoundly affected American attitudes, creating an intense
desire to purify the nation as it girded itself to fight for
democracy against the barbarism of the Kaiser. The fall of Russia
and the spread of Bolshevism intensified fears of contagion and
the desire to be sure that the United States remained pure and
strong. Prohibition took giant strides during World War 1. The
Prohibition Amendment in an early form nearly passed the House in
December 1914, a week after the passage of the Harrison Act. In
1916 it did pass, and by January 1919 Prohibition had become part
of the Constitution as the Eighteenth Amendment. Earlier,
Congress had passed wartime prohibition, which was intended to
save grain for the war effort as well as to promote efficiency in
war production plants. Similarly, a battle was being fought to
overturn the Jin Fuey Moy decision, which had weakened the
government's intention for the Harrison Act. A Treasury
Department committee reported that the number of addicts in the
nation was over a million.&quot; These exaggerated figures, as
well as a fear about returning veterans having become addicted on
the battlefield and the specter of alcohol prohibition, which
might drive alcoholics to morphine and cocaine, led to a new
attempt to put teeth into the Harrison Act. This time the
government was successful. </p>

<p>In March 1919, two months after the ratification of the
Eighteenth Amendment (which would go into effect a year later),
the Supreme Court ingeniously decided, five to four, that to call
a prescription for narcotics intended to supply a
&quot;mere&quot; addict with maintenance doses was an error, for
such a script could not be considered a true prescription given
in the proper conduct of medical practice. Since it was not a
prescription, the issuing physician had conveyed narcotics
without the required tax; he had therefore violated the Harrison
Act and could be arrested. The four dissenting justices were the
conservatives, who argued that this was an invasion of states'
police powers, while the majority, including Holmes and Brandeis,
felt that more power had to be given the government if it was to
carry out its duty to protect the public from such an insidious
evil .36 At last, the intent of the reformers had been achieved:
Simple maintenance was outlawed, and the federal government could
take action nationwide to arrest and convict health professionals
who practiced it. Narcotics now had a no-maintenance policy,
which a few months later would also be the policy for alcohol.
Enforcement of both prohibitions would be the responsibility of a
unit in the Bureau of Internal Revenue, reflecting the similarity
of the two conceptions. </p>

<p><b>Enforcement During the 1920s</b> </p>

<p>Several additional laws completed the early legislative
structure of American control of opium and cocaine. Some were
minor, such as a stipulation that no finished products such as
heroin or morphine could be imported into the United States.37
The law stated that only coca leaves and crude opium could be
imported and that the finished products, cocaine, morphine,
heroin, codeine, etc., were to be manufactured in American
pharmaceutical factories, which were given a monopoly to produce
these substances. This may have made up for revenues lost, as the
amounts sold legally in the United States fell after the Harrison
Act. Other laws dealt with transshipment of drugs 38 across the
United States for foreign markets. </p>

<p><b>Heroin</b> </p>

<p>Perhaps the most important addition to the Harrison Act's
control of opiates and cocaine came in 1924, when the United
States banned the importation of opium to be used for the
manufacture of heroin.39 The observance of federal-state
boundaries is evident in this law, for it does not ban the
manufacture of heroin altogether but only the importation of
crude opium for that purpose. Just that much seemed to be within
the power of the federal government. Also, this did not require
the seizure of heroin legally available in the United States for
cough medicines (the original claim for heroin's value) or for
certain other purposes, chiefly pain control or &quot;twilight
sleep&quot; during child birth. </p>

<p>Heroin had been made available commercially by the Bayer
Company of Germany in 1898 as a superior cough suppressant.40 The
Bayer Company believed that the addition of acetyl groups to the
basic molecule would make morphine more palatable, and this
product, diacetylmorphine, the company named Heroin, a trademark
that was protected until Germany lost such protections as a
result of losing the First World War. Similarly, by adding an
acetyl group to salicylic acid to make it less irritating to the
stomach when taken for joint pains, the Bayer Company launched
another successful venture. In 1899 the company named sodium
acetyl salicylic acid Aspirin, which similarly was protected by
trademark until World War 1. Few pharmaceutical firms can take
credit for naming and distributing two drugs that remain among
the most popular in Western society even after nearly a hundred
years. </p>

<p>Heroin essentially had been unrestricted in the United States
prior to the Harrison Act, and by 1912 in New York City it had
replaced morphine as the drug of recreational choice among
youthful males, according to the records of Bellevue Hospital.
The addictive nature of heroin had been recognized rather
quickly, for the AMA issued a warning in 1902. Heroin was popular
because it could be inhaled by sniffing, like cocaine, as well as
injected by needle. When injected into the bloodstream, heroin
crossed the blood-brain barrier more quickly than morphine and
therefore gave a more intense, but briefer, &quot;high.&quot;
During the years of intense concern over social control, which
began with the First World War, heroin became linked with male
gang violence and the commission of crimes. Some believed that
heroin stimulated the user to commit crimes or at least provided
the courage to pull off a bank robbery or mugging. In the early
1920s most of the crime in New York City was blamed on drug use,
chiefly the opiates, including heroin.41 </p>

<p>The preference for heroin over morphine by recreational users,
and the belief that other opiates could fulfill heroin's role as
a painkiller and cough suppressant, led to a move to ban heroin
for medical purposes. The heroin problem also contributed to
American fear of foreign nations after World War 1, for the drug
was being manufactured in other countries and then smuggled into
the United States. The Swiss drug industries, for example,
produced large amounts of heroin, which found its way into this
country. Heroin's image as a foreign product popular with feared
domestic groups helped support an isolationist stance,
illustrated by the American refusal to join or even recognize the
League of Nations. Influential congressmen, such as Stephen G.
Porter, Republican chairman of the House Committee on Foreign
Relations, urged that all heroin production in the United States
be stopped. As an example he would try to get other nations 42 to
follow at the Geneva Opium Conferences of 1924 and 1925. </p>

<p>The United States did enact the legislation sought by
Congressman Porter, but it failed to achieve its goals at the
meetings in Geneva. In fact, in disgust at the refusal of other
nations to agree to curb production of poppies and coca bushes,
the ultimate source of heroin 43 and cocaine, the United States
walked out of the conference. The United States, which had
founded the world antinarcotic movement in Shanghai and The
Hague, now saw it taken over by the League of Nations (as the
Versailles treaty had mandated) and controlled by the very
nations the United States sought to shame or force into a
narcotics policy that the United States viewed as responsible.
American participation in the worldwide effort then fell to a low
point until the 1930s, when participation was resumed in
international meetings. By the outbreak of World War II, the
United States was again achieving significant participation in
international antidrug activities. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>AMERICAN DOMESTIC CONTROL TO THE MARIJUANA TAX ACT OF 1937</b>
</p>

<p>The use of cocaine, which had been in &quot;soft&quot; drinks
like Coca-Cola until 1903 and was available easily to sniff as a
treatment for sinusitis or hay fever, fell precipitously after
reaching a peak somewhere around 1905. By the 1930s cocaine use
had receded, and during the 1950s physicians and narcotics agents
alike described cocaine use as a problem that once was serious in
the United States but now was practically absent. Several reasons
for its reduced use can be suggested. The drug had been
introduced as a wonder substance-Freud had called it the first
medicine that worked as an antidepressant. The Parke-Davis
Company manufactured it after 1885 in many forms for drinking,
smoking, inhaling, or rubbing on the skin. Within about a decade,
warnings surfaced. Consumption peaked about twenty years after
its initial distribution, and around the same time the accounts
of its effect on the lives of its users and its popularly
believed-although questionable-special link with southern blacks
created in the public's mind an image so fearful that cocaine's
effects became the extreme against which other drugs would be
compared. Cocaine's association with violence, paranoia, and
collapsed careers made laws against it by 1910 a popular matter.
The first strict antinarcotic law in New York State was passed in
1913 and was directed at cocaine. Al Smith, later to be an
anti-Prohibition candidate for president and critic of
Prohibition in his state while he was governor, drew the strict
anticocaine measure in his early years as a state assemblyman.44
The combination of strict laws and intense public support of
control measures brought on a reduction in consumption, which, at
the peak of its popularity, must have seemed most unlikely if not
impossible. </p>

<p>The effect of the Harrison Act, its court interpretations, and
supplementary legislation also appear to have reduced greatly the
number of opiate addicts. The medical and pharmacy professions
were denied an easy way of providing drugs. Although it is clear
that only a fraction of either profession was liberal in their
provision, this nevertheless had been enough to maintain a large
number of users. It had been argued recently that the
recreational users began to stand out more prominently, as the
medically addicted and more sedate group declined in numbers, and
that the relatively small number of addicts in the United States,
about 50,000 in 1940, would have had an &quot;underworld&quot; or
unsavory character even without the Harrison 45 Act's
criminalization of drug use. This point of view contrasts sharply
with the argument that the Harrison Act changed citizens who were
normal except for their addiction into criminals who had 46 to
violate the law to obtain their daily supply of opiates. Whatever
the reason, the number of those addicted fell from about a
quarter million around 1900 to much less than half that number by
World War II. The war effectively reduced supplies of narcotics
to the United States, and in 1945 the United States probably had
its lowest number of opiate addicts since the mid-nineteenth
century. The rise of addiction after World War 11 may have built
on the core of addicts left in the nation, but the dynamics of
the addiction epidemic that began in the 1960s appear in certain
respects to have had a different character. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>NARCOTIC CLINICS, 1913-1925</b> </p>

<p>In order to close the story of the decline in addiction after
1900, it is necessary to consider the legendary narcotic clinics
that, like the Philippine opium dispensaries, were intended to
deal with addicts who no longer could receive opiate or cocaine
supplies from local physicians .47 The first in the United States
was opened in 1912 by Charles Terry, the public health officer of
Jacksonville, Florida, where he provided both opiates and cocaine
to men and women, blacks and whites. Dr. Terry went on to become
a student of the opium problem in the United States and compiled
a classic book of reports, excerpts from articles, and
statistical information in <a
href="../Library/studies/op/opmenu.htm">The Opium Problem</a>,
published in 1928 and co-authored by Mildred Pellens. </p>

<p>Other clinics followed, particularly after the Treasury
Department, in enforcement of the Harrison Act, prosecuted or
threatened with prosecution health professionals who supplied
addicts indefinitely. A series of clinics in New England were
established at the suggestion of officials of the Internal
Revenue Bureau. In New York State, the crackdown on druggists and
physicians emanated from state law, and clinics were established
in upper New York State through state planning and authorization.
Registration of addicts was permitted so that physicians would
restrict maintenance to those already addicted. </p>

<p>In New York City, the Health Department did not wish to
provide opiates, morphine, and heroin on an indefinite basis but
did open a clinic at the city Health Department headquarters.
This clinic provided heroin, but only as an inducement to
registration and eventual detoxification and rehabilitation.
About 7,500 addicts registered, received their drug of choice in
dosages gradually decreased until uncomfortably small, usually
three to eight grains of morphine daily, and were offered
curative treatment. Most declined to be cured. Those who did
receive treatment, at North Brother Island, seemed both
unappreciative and very liable-the estimate was 95 percent - to
return to narcotics available on the street or from a physician
or druggist. </p>

<p>The Treasury Department, armed with fresh Supreme Court
decisions of March 1919, started to close down the clinics, along
with prosecuting the dispensing physicians and druggists. One
argument was that the availability of easy maintenance inhibited
cures and also that giving legal permission for maintenance
clinics undercut the Treasury Department's position when it
brought action against a professional for reckless provision of
drugs. From a legal point of view, the &quot;reckless&quot;
provider was obeying the tax laws, as was the clinic, unless the
federal government wanted to get into the question of medical
competence, which was a state, not a federal, concern. </p>

<p>Gradually the clinics were closed, the last one in 1925 in
Knoxville, Tennessee. Some had been operated poorly, others quite
responsibly with community support. Yet, because of the
intricacies of the tax powers under which the federal law
operated, all were closed, even if unfair harassment was
necessary to discourage the operation. The number of registrants
was not large, about 3,000 if we exclude the New York City
clinic, which was not intended for maintenance but for bait to
get addicts into detoxification. The number of addicts registered
under the New York State law, which provided for maintenance not
only in clinics but also from private physicians and pharmacists,
eventually totaled about 13,000 in 1920. It can be assumed,
therefore, that the clinics were not a major element in the
maintenance of addiction in the United States. One side note: The
13,000 addicted registrants in New York State in 1920 add up to
the largest number of legally supplied addicts recorded in any
Western country this century, a number not approached yet by
Britain under the socalled &quot;British System.&quot; Although
the &quot;American System&quot; preceded and surpassed in size
any scheme attempted then or subsequently in Britain, it was in
fact the large number of addicts in America that made maintenance
so unwieldy and unpopular. </p>

<p>The demise of the clinics left drug peddlers and individual
members of the health professions as the major targets of the
federal government. Generally, the physicians did not wish to
treat addicts, nor did they have any sympathy with addicts. Those
physicians who, for whatever reason, did continue to treat
addicts with maintenance doses were threatened and arrested,
unless the maintenance had been approved by the local narcotic
agent. Some maintenance was permitted, but only on a case-by-case
evaluation. From reports prepared by agents upon investigating
narcotic clinics, it appears that an acceptable life-style was a
requirement for permission to be maintained.48 </p>

<p>A theory had been advocated, mostly among maintaining
physicians in New York City, that longstanding addiction changed
the body's physiology in such a way that opiates were necessary
for the patient to remain normal.49 Too little opiate and the
patient would experience withdrawal, too much and the patient
would be &quot;high,&quot; but just the right amount would allow
normal feelings and behavior. </p>

<p>This, of course, is close to the argument made in the 1950s by
Drs. Dole and Nyswander to justify methadone maintenance. After a
series of scientific studies shortly after World War 1, the
government concluded otherwise .50 Those physicians who insisted
on maintaining patients without approval from a narcotics agent
ran a serious risk of arrest and, if convicted, loss of a medical
license and time in a federal penitentiary. In spite of the
danger, of course, some physicians supplied narcotics without
restraint or with very poor judgment, but evidence shows that
other, responsible physicians were entrapped without good reason
in order to boost the number of an agent's arrests and thereby
bolster his chances for promotion.51 An aura of fear, therefore,
accompanied a physician's decision to give an opiate to a
patient, especially a new patient. On the other hand, the
casualness with which physicians once handed out morphine or some
other opiate was reduced considerably. </p>

<p>Along with the rejection of maintenance, physicians
unfortunately had no effective medical cure available for
addiction. Several had been promoted in many forms in the
nineteenth and early twentieth century, but each had been found
to have no scientific merit .52 The problem devolved into a
decision of whether to stop opiates abruptly and thereby cause
the patient to go directly into full Withdrawalthe so-called
&quot;cold turkey&quot; approach-or gradually to reduce the
opiate over a few days or a few weeks. Because the addicted
person frequently has a threshold of average daily consumption
below which the user becomes acutely uncomfortable, and because a
yearning for heroin or morphine often persists for months or
years after the beginning of withdrawal, the decision to detoxify
abruptly or gradually usually was a difficult path for the
patient. Nevertheless, detoxification was the preferred route for
legal reasons. Two ancient warnings about detoxification, that
the patient would die in withdrawal, or that a supply cutoff
would precipitate a rash of suicides, did not materialize. </p>

<p>During the 1920s and 1930s the number of addicts diminished in
the United States. Grossly exaggerated estimates came from
antidrug entrepreneurs like Captain Richmond Pearson Hobson, who
had been a Prohibition advocate before unleashing his energies
against heroin and later marijuana as the head of several
national and international voluntary groups.&quot; Captain Hobson
attacked heroin in a most melodramatic manner, claiming there
were 4 million addicts in the United States and comparing them
all to lepers. In spite of Hobson, the concern over opiate
addicts and cocaine users declined during the two decades after
World War I. </p>

<hr>

<p><a href="../hemp/taxact/taxact.htm"><b>MARIJUANA TAX ACT OF
1937</b></a> </p>

<p>With the battle against opiate addiction apparently at a more
stable, less alarming level in the 1930s and the use of cocaine
having declined dramatically, a new dangerous drug appeared on
the American horizon: marijuana. Marijuana smoking arrived in the
United States with Mexican farm workers who had crossed the
border, mostly to labor in agricultural fields in the Southwest
and in sugar beet fields as far north as Montana and Michigan.
During the prosperous 1920s, about half-a-million farm workers
came to the United States, but as the Depression's widespread
unemployment laid an increasingly heavy burden on the country's
citizens, the Mexicans became an unwelcome group, encouraged in
all ways to return to Mexico. Entwined with the troubles they
were said to cause local citizens was the Mexicans' custom of
growing marijuana for their own use. Hence, marijuana was linked
to violence, dissolute living, and Mexican aliens.53 </p>

<p>The greatest fear of marijuana in the United States lay in the
West and Southwest. The government was importuned to take action,
but the recent experience with alcohol prohibition (which had
ended in 1933) made the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) and its
head, Harry J. Anslinger, formerly of the Prohibition Bureau,
hesitant to get involved in a drug that grew domestically and
prolifically. Cocaine and heroin were both foreign imports and
therefore, at least theoretically, could be regulated more
easily, but marijuana appeared to be almost impossible to curb,
let alone eradicate. The FBN tried to address this drug by
including it in a recommended uniform state narcotic law that
would leave to localities the question of prosecution and
allocation of enforcement resources. Then a curious law intended
to reduce the number of machine guns provided the federal
government with a mechanism to attack marijuana nationally and at
the federal level. </p>

<p>The Firearms Act of 1934 decreed that a machine gun could not
be transferred in any way without the payment of a transfer tax
(from which law enforcement personnel were exempted). As odd as
this mechanism may sound, the law was upheld by the Supreme Court
in 1937 as a legitimate use of the power of taxation for a moral
objective. Within weeks of this decision, the Treasury
Department, which housed the FBN, appeared before Congress asking
for a transfer tax for marijuana. Without a stamp permit and the
proper tax stamps, marijuana could not be sold, bartered, or
given away. Congress quickly approved the bill, and President
Franklin Roosevelt signed it into law later in 1937.
Unfortunately for the enforcement of this law, the FBN did not
receive any more money or agents. Therefore, the FBN relied on
obnoxious descriptions of marijuana to do the job. The substance
was described to the public as a danger at least equal to cocaine
or morphine, and the penalties for its illegal use or possession
were severe. Because use of marijuana does not seem to have been
great in the 1930s, the law's extraordinary severity did not
concern the general public until the 1960s, when thousands of
users were arrested as marijuana's popularity burgeoned.
Furthermore, the contrast between the effects of marijuana
observed in the 1960s and the longstanding claims of the FBN
regarding marijuana led to a problem concerning the credibility
of official statements, which still affects popular perceptions. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>WORLD WAR II TO THE PRESENT</b> </p>

<p>The Second World War ended with relatively few opiate addicts
and very little use of cocaine or marijuana in the United States.
The only closely controlled drug rising in use was alcohol,
consumption of which had increased in per capita rates since the
repeal of Prohibition. During all this period, sleeping pills and
other barbiturates were prescribed widely but did not appear to
be a similar problem. The same holds true for the amphetamines,
which had been made available in the 1930s and continued to be
manufactured and prescribed without restriction. </p>

<p>Treatment of hard-core addicts did take place at the two
federal narcotics hospitals in Lexington, Kentucky, and Fort
Worth, Texas. Each was, in fact, a prison in which addicts were
treated and forced to detoxify, but the patients/prisoners
frequently resumed their drug habits when they returned to their
previous environments. Around 1950 a younger age group began to
be admitted for heroin addiction, an abuse that reached a very
high level in 1970 and remains high today. This threat elicited
two responses. First, the federal government enacted more severe
laws that levied mandatory sentences for conviction of dealing in
narcotics. The laws, enacted in 1951 and 1956, are the peak of
legal penalties against narcotics, including marijuana, in the
United States.55 </p>

<p>The second response reflected the domestic and international
tensions of the time. The heroin menace-and it should be
reemphasized that cocaine and marijuana were not seen as anything
but potentially major problems in the 1950s-was ascribed to the
infiltration of the drug trade by Chinese Communists who had
taken over the China mainland in 1949. The Red Chinese
purportedly sent heroin to the United States to undermine our
democracy and at the 56 same time obtain specie, for which they
had a desperate need. By the 1970s, however, the United States
was defending the People's Republic of China against the same
charge, now levied by Soviet newspapers.57 Such are the vagaries
of international relations and the domestic drug problem. </p>

<p>Heroin addicts in the 1950s mainly were young males
concentrated in black and Hispanic urban ghettos. These addicts
concerned the federal government, as well as reform-minded
lawyers, academics, and physicians. The latter groups found the
harsh penalties and the loathing attitude toward the addicts to
be inhumane. Leaders of this countermovement included sociologist
Professor Alfred Lindesmith and the attorney Rufus King. They
believed a more relaxed approach would be much more successful,
as well as more kind. Rather than depriving addicts of heroin,
heroin should be provided them. Rather than jailing addicts, they
should be hospitalized, if necessary, or just left alone.58</p>

<p>This alternative view competed with the more hard-line style
of law enforcement exemplified by Commissioner Anslinger. After
forty or more years, treating addicts medically, which had been
popular before World War I and had then been found inadequate to
the task of reducing addiction, became part of public policy in
the 1960s. Methadone, a synthetic opiate developed in Germany in
World War 11, was used by Dole and Nyswander to provide
maintenance under theories similar to those which had justified
maintenance prior to the restrictive Supreme Court decisions in
1919. This marked a major break in American narcotic control
policies; maintenance again was legal, although not with heroin
or morphine. </p>

<p>Along with the possibility of maintenance, other milder forms
of control were invoked by the federal government. Civil
commitment to a narcotic treatment center,, thought more humane
than prison sentences, became possible legally in 1966, although
in subsequent years this did not prove a practical method either
to reduce addiction or to cure addicts in any marked number.59 </p>

<p>Also in the 1960s, an enthusiasm for drug consumption of all
kinds, polydrug abuse, replaced the habitual use of one or two
drugs, which had been more common in the past. Marijuana became
very popular with young people, and then gradually its popularity
expanded in both directions to even younger and to older ages.
Psychedelic drugs, such as LSD, appeared on the scene, along with
injectable methedrine or &quot;speed.&quot; Drugs came to
symbolize opposition to the government and older mores. The
turmoil and dissension caused by the Vietnam War added to the
sense of alienation many young people already felt from the older
generation, which frowned on drug use other than alcohol and
tobacco. In addition to cultural alienation and the rapid
increase in multidrug use, the drug problem in the 1960s was
intensified by the extraordinarily large number of young people
in the ages most likely to experiment with drugs; the post-World
War 11 &quot;baby boom&quot; generation had reached the teenage
years. </p>

<p>By 1970, marijuana was used commonly, and research was showing
that it did not have the awful effects ascribed to it from the
1930s onward. Various groups and individuals initiated movements
to legalize the substance, perhaps along the lines of tobacco.
The drug situation was perceived by the public and the federal
government to be so bad and yet so difficult to control that this
seemed a good time to reevaluate the nation's entire policy. A
National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse was established
in 1971. </p>

<p>In general, the members of the commission reflected
traditional views on the subject of drug control, and therefore
it was with even greater impact that the commission recommended
in its first report, &quot;Marijuana: A Signal of
Misunderstanding,&quot; that the substance be
&quot;decriminalized.&quot; By decriminalization was not meant
legalization but a step short of that position: Marijuana
possession for individual use no longer would be a crime, but its
sale and distribution would be against the law. The purpose of
control at this stage would be to relieve law enforcement
agencies of the nuisance of arresting individual users and
thereby allow more resources to be concentrated on investigating
large-scale crime and more dangerous drugs.6o The notion of
&quot;decriminalization&quot; proved difficult for all to
understand. Some foreign nations considered it to mean
legalization. President Nixon refused to receive the report in
public or to comment on it except to affirm that marijuana was
not going to be legalized if he had anything to say about it. </p>

<p>The second and final report, published in 1973, dealt with
drugs more broadly.60 It attempted to draw attention to the
actual, measurable damage done by drugs, reflected in hospital
admissions and drug-related deaths, as opposed to the myths that
had evolved around many of them. Heroin, for example, was
misperceived as causing more deaths annually than barbiturates.
This approach intended to make more rational the discussion over
drug policy, but it also laid the groundwork for the inclusion of
cigarettes and alcohol in the antidrug crusade. It de-emphasized,
however, the effects a drug such as cocaine has on judgment and
efficiency, the less quantifiable but still real aspects of drug
use. </p>

<p>The enforcement of laws against individual possession or use
of marijuana has fallen in the United States to a very low level.
Moreover, dealers in relatively small amounts are reportedly not
prosecuted either, because the largest dealers and smugglers, who
are involved with tons, not ounces or pounds of marijuana,
require all the time of officials. There has been a de facto
decriminalization throughout large parts of the country, even if
laws against individual use remain on the books. Possession of
marijuana in some states is a small-scale misdemeanor, and the
penalty is a ticket, like a parking violation. Yet, the frequency
of marijuana use by high school seniors has been dropping since
1978, and this reduction, coupled with a more conservative
national mood, has slowed further moves toward formal federal
decriminalization or more liberality in the drug laws. </p>

<p>The rise in cocaine's availability and popularity, for the
second time this century, has further complicated the control of
drugs in the United States. The fact that first millions should
use marijuana, then millions more take cocaine raises questions
about the ability of local and national governments to control
narcotics. The corruption that follows the drug traffic and the
restraints on resources that may be allocated to drug control
combine to leave a sense of frustration with enforcement policy.
What will be the result of these trends? It all remains
uncertain. We appear to be in an era of widespread drug use that
would seem to make reasonable the revocation of antidrug
statutes. We should recall, however, that a similar condition
prevailed around 1900, shortly before an onslaught against drug
use led to a substantial reduction in the use of opiates, heroin,
cocaine, and alcohol. That such a national response could occur
must make us pause before offering predictions for the future. </p>

<hr>

<h2>Footnotes</h2>

<p>1. Rudolf Schmitz, &quot;Friedrich Wilhelm Serturner and the
Discovery of Morphine,&quot; Pharmacy in History 27 (1985):
61-74. </p>

<p>2. 31 and 32 Vict. ch. 121, 1868: Act to Regulate the Sale of
Poisons and Alter and Amend the Pharmacy Act 1852 (1868 Pharmacy
Act). </p>

<p>3. Virginia Berridge and Griffith Edwards, Opium and the
People: Opiate Use in Nineteenth-Century England (New York: St.
Martin's, 1981), pp. 147-49, 227, 254. </p>

<p>4. Ibid., pp. 113-31. </p>

<p>5. James G. Burrow, AMA: Voice of American Medicine
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1963), pp. 51-52, 62ff. </p>

<p>6. Glenn Sonnedecker, Krerners and Urdang's History of
Pharmacy, 4th ed. (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1976), pp. 198-212. </p>

<p>7. R. H. Shryock, Medical Licensing in America, 1650-1965
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1967), p. 32ff. </p>

<p>8. Virginia Berridge, &quot;Fenland Opium Eating in the
Nineteenth Century,&quot; British Journal of Addiction 72 (1977):
275-84. </p>

<ol>
    <li>David F. Musto, The American Disease: Origins of Narcotic
        Control (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973), p.
        54ff. </li>
</ol>

<p>10. Ibid., p. 3 </p>

<p>11. Berridge and Edwards, Opium and the People, p. 14517f. </p>

<p>12. Musto, American Disease, p. 5; David T. Courtwright, Dark
Paradise: Opiate Addiction in America before 1940 (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1982), chap. 1, &quot;The Extent of
Opiate Addiction,&quot; pp. 9-34. Opiate addiction is the regular
use of opiates to prevent painful and uncomfortable bodily and
psychic symptoms that would occur if the drug's use were abruptly
stopped. Estimates of the number of addicts in the United States
have often been susceptible to ideological and political
influences. After carefully considering contemporary surveys,
importation statistics, and other estimates, and subjecting his
findings to modern statistical analysis, Professor Courtwright
concluded that the highest rate of addiction in the United States
occurred in the 1890s at the maximum rate of 4.59 per 1,000.
Today that rate would result in 1. I million addicts, about twice
the current official estimate. </p>

<p>13. Musto, American Disease, p. 236. </p>

<p>14. Wilder Penfield, &quot;Halsted of Johns Hopkins: The Man
and His Problem as Described in the Secret Records of William
0sler,&quot; Journal of the American Medical Association 210
(1969): 2214-18. </p>

<p>15. James Harvey Young, The Toadstool Millionaires: A Social
History of Patent Medicines before Federal Regulation,
(Princeton, N.J.: PrincetonUniversity Press,1961), p. 21 1 ff. </p>

<p>16. Public Law No. 384, 59th Congress, Session 1, 30 June
1906. Section 8 names the drugs that need to be listed on the
label. </p>

<p>17. J. P. Street, &quot;The Patent Medicine Situation,&quot;
American Journal of Public Health 7 (1917):1037-42. </p>

<ol>
    <li>Young, Toadstool Millionaires, p. 213ff. </li>
</ol>

<p>19. Martin 1. Wilbert and Murray Gait Metter, Digest of Laws
and Regulations in Force in the United States Relating to the
Possession, Use, Sale and Manufacture of Poisons and
Hahit-Forming Drugs, Public Health Bulletin no. 56, Nov. 1912
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1912). </p>

<p>20. Musto, American Disease, p. 25ff. </p>

<p>21. Report of the Committee Appointed by the Philippine
Commission to Investigate the Use of Opium and the Traffic
Therein .... Bureau of Insular Affairs, War Department, 1905. </p>

<p>22. Musto, American Disease, pp. 261-62. </p>

<p>23. Arnold H. Taylor, American Diplomacy and the Narcotics
Traffic, 1900-1939 (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1969),
pp. 47-81. </p>

<p>24. Ibid., p. 82ff. </p>

<p>25. Berridge and Edwards, Opium and the People, p. 268. </p>

<p>26. United States 60th Congress, Public Law No. 221. An Act to
prohibit the importation and use of opium for other than
medicinal purposes. Approved 9 February 1909. </p>

<p>27. Musto, American Disease, pp. 31-37, 40-45, 61-62. </p>

<p>28. Ibid., pp. 31, 198, 202. </p>

<p>29. Ibid., p. 41. </p>

<p>30. Ibid., pp. 40-48. </p>

<p>31. Ibid., pp. 54-68. </p>

<p>32. Hamilton Wright, &quot;Report on the International Opium
Question as Seen within the United States and Its
Possessions,&quot; in Opium Problem: Message from the President
of the United States, Senate Document no. 377, 61st Congress, 3rd
Session, 21 February 1910, p. 49. </p>

<p>33. Hamilton Wright to Charles Evans Hughes, 28 June 1916, in
Papers of Dr. Hamilton Wright, U.S. National Archives, Record
Group 43, entry 36. </p>

<p>34. U.S. v. Jin Fuey Moy, 241 U.S. 394 (1916). </p>

<p>35. Special Committee of Investigation, Appointed March 25,
1918, by the Secretary of the Treasury: Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
(Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1919). </p>

<p>36. Webb et al. v. U.S., 249 U.S. 96 (1919); U.S. v. Doremus,
249 U.S. 86 (1919). </p>

<p>37. 67th Congress, Public Law No. 227. To amend the act of
February 9, 1909, as amended, to prohibit the importation and use
of opium for other than medicinal purposes. Approved 26 May 1922.
</p>

<p>38. 68th Congress, Public Law No. 274. Prohibiting the
importation of crude opium for the purposes of manufacturing
heroin. Approved 7 June 1924, Section 2. </p>

<p>39. Ibid., Section 1. </p>

<p>40. David F. Musto, &quot;Early History of Heroin in the
United States,&quot; in P. G. Bourne, ed., Addiction (New York:
Academic Press, 1974), pp. 175-85. </p>

<p>41. Gerhard Kuhne, &quot;Statement of Gerhard Kuhne, Head of
the Identification Bureau, New York City Department of
Correction,&quot; in Conference on Narcotic Education: Hearings
before the Committee on Education of the House of
Representatives, December 16, 1925 (Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Office, 1926), p. 175. </p>

<p>42. Prohibiting the Importation of Opium for the Manufacture
of Heroin: Hearings on HR 7079, House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means, 68th Congress, Ist Session, 3 April
1924 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1924), p.
41ff. </p>

<p>43. Taylor, American Diplomacy and Narcotics Traffic, p.
2OOff. </p>

<p>44. Musto, American Disease, pp. 6-8; Laws of New York, 1913,
ch. 470, pp. 9984-91, approved 9 May 1913. </p>

<p>45. Courtwright, Dark Paradise, pp. 146-47. </p>

<p>46. Alfred R. Lindesmith, The Addict and the Law (New York:
Vintage Books, 1965), pp. 3-34. </p>

<p>47. Musto, American Disease, pp. 151-81. </p>

<p>48, Ibid., p. 167ff. </p>

<p>49. Ernest Bishop, The Narcotic Drug Problem (New York:
Macmillan, 1920); see also, David F. Musto, &quot;Social and
Political Influences on Addiction Research,&quot; in Seymour
Fisher and Alfred M. Freedman, eds., Opiate Addiction: Origins
and Treatment (Washington, D.C.: Winston, 1973), pp. 93-98. </p>

<p>50. David F. Musto, &quot;The American Antinarcotic Movement:
Clinical Research and Public Policy,&quot; Clinical Research 19
(1970): 601-5. </p>

<p>51. H. T. Nugent, Field Supervisor of the Fl3N, Fourth Annual
Conference of Pharmaceutical Law Enforcement Officials, Toronto,
Canada, 25 August 1932, Stenographic typescript of Proceedings,
Archives of the American Pharmaceutical Association, Washington,
D.C., box 31, pp. 86-87. </p>

<p>52. Musto, American Disease, pp. 69-90. </p>

<p>53. Ibid., pp. 190-94. </p>

<p>54. David F. Musto, &quot;Marijuana Tax Act of 1937,&quot;
Archives of General Psychiatry 26 (1972):101-8. </p>

<p>58. Lindesmith, Addict and the Law; Rufus King, The Drug
Hang-up: America's Fifty Year Folly (New York: Norton, 1972). </p>

<p>59. Narcotic Addict Rehabilitation Act of 1966, Public Law
89-273, 89th Congress, approved 8 November 1966. </p>

<p>55. 82nd Congress, Public Law No. 255, approved 2 November 195
1; 84th Congress, Public Law No. 728, approved 18 July 1956. </p>

<p>56. H. J. Anslinger and W. F. Tomkins, Traffic in Narcotics
(New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953), pp. 69-116. </p>

<p>57. For example, &quot;Poisoners: How the Maoists Smuggle
Opium,&quot; Literaturnaya gazeta, 19 March 1969, translated and
reprinted in Current Digest of Soviet Press (Ann Arbor, Mich.:
Joint Committee on Slavic Studies, 1969), vol. 21, p. 7. </p>

<p>60. <a href="../Library/studies/nc/ncmenu.htm">Marijuana: A
Signal of Misunderstanding</a>: First Report of the National
Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1972), p. 150ff. </p>

<p>61. <a href="../Library/studies/duapip/pipmenu.htm">Drug Use
in America: Problem in Perspective</a>, Second Report of the
National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse (Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1973).<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>