
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-42</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B015-216</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/denfcpr.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121146 text/html 44055
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:11:36 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:48 GMT
Content-length: 43837
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<h1></h1>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990</h1>

<p> U.S. Department of Justice </p>

<p> Office of Justice Programs </p>

<p> Bureau of Justice Statistics </p>

<h1><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h1>

<p> Bulletin </p>

<p> Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 </p>

<p> July 1992 </p>

<p> NCJ-134724 </p>

<p> Full text with tables available from: </p>

<p> BJS Justice Statistics Clearinghouse </p>

<p> 1-800-732-3277 </p>

<p> Box 6000 </p>

<p> Rockville, MD 10850 </p>

<p> This study examines how State and Federal correctional
facilities seek to </p>

<p> stop the entry and use of illegal drugs. Based on the 1990
Census of State </p>

<p> and Federal Correctional Facilities, the report indicates
that nearly 9 in </p>

<p> 10 institutions conduct urine surveillance among the inmate
population, </p>

<p> usually on a random basis or on suspicion of use. Marijuana
and cocaine </p>

<p> were the drugs most commonly detected--in Federal facilities
about 1 in 100 </p>

<p> of the tests for marijuana and 1 in 250 tests for cocaine
were positive </p>

<p> while in State facilities about 1 in 16 tests were positive
for marijuana </p>

<p> and 1 in 28 were positive for cocaine. </p>

<p> I want to express my deep appreciation to the employees in
the 957 State </p>

<p> prisons, 80 Federal prisons, and the 250 community-based
facilities who </p>

<p> participated in the census. The 100-percent response rate is,
I believe, </p>

<p> important testimony to the utility and significance of
national data on the </p>

<p> operations of our Nation's correctional facilities. </p>

<p> Steven D. Dillingham, Ph.D. </p>

<p> Director </p>

<p> Drug Enforcement and Treatment in Prisons, 1990 </p>

<p> By Caroline Wolf Harlow, Ph.D. </p>

<p> BJS Statistician </p>

<p> About 7 of every 8 prisons in the Nation tested an estimated
total of </p>

<p> 565,500 inmates for one or more illegal drugs between July 1,
1989, and </p>

<p> June 30, 1990. In State facilities, 3.6% of the tests for
cocaine, 1.3% </p>

<p> for heroin, 2.0% for methamphetamines, and 6.3% for marijuana
found </p>

<p> evidence of drug use. In Federal prisons, 0.4% of the tests
for cocaine, </p>

<p> 0.4% for heroin, 0.1% for methamphetamines, and 1.1% for
marijuana were </p>

<p> positive. </p>

<p> This report uses information provided to the Census of State
and Federal </p>

<p> Adult Correctional Facilities. Data were collected from 957
State prison </p>

<p> facilities, 250 State community-based facilities, and 80
Federal prisons </p>

<p> operating on June 29, 1990. Censuses were also conducted in
1984, 1979, </p>

<p> and 1974, but the 1990 census was the first to gather
information on drug </p>

<p> interdiction practices, drug testing of inmates and staff,
and inmate drug </p>

<p> treatment programs. </p>

<p> Other findings from the 1990 census include the following: </p>

<p> *Ninety-eight percent of State community-based
facilities--those in which </p>

<p> at least half of the residents may leave the facility
daily--tested </p>

<p> residents. All Federal prisons and 83% of State prisons
reported that they </p>

<p> tested inmates for drug use. </p>

<p> *Seventy-six percent of institutions reported testing inmates
for drugs </p>

<p> when drug use was suspected. Twenty percent tested all
inmates at least </p>

<p> once during confinement. </p>

<p> *At State confinement facilities 1.4% of tests for cocaine,
1.0% for </p>

<p> heroin, 2.3% for methamphetamines, and 5.8% for marijuana
indicated drug </p>

<p> use. </p>

<p> *At State community-based facilities 8.9% of tests for
cocaine confirmed </p>

<p> the presence of the drug, as did 2.2% for heroin, 1.1% for </p>

<p> methamphetamines, and 8.1% for marijuana. </p>

<p> *State confinement facilities that only tested inmates
suspected of drug </p>

<p> use had higher positive rates than facilities that tested all
or random </p>

<p> groups of inmates (6% for cocaine and 14% for marijuana
versus 1.5% for </p>

<p> cocaine and 5% for marijuana). </p>

<p> *State and Federal facilities used a variety of methods to
prevent drugs </p>

<p> from being brought into the institution, including
ques-tioning, patdowns, </p>

<p> clothing exchanges, and body cavity searches. </p>

<p> *At admission inmates were required to exchange clothing in
88% of the </p>

<p> Federal prisons and 59% of State prisons; inmates were patted
down in 88% </p>

<p> of Federal prisons and 78% of the State prisons. </p>

<p> *In the facilities using the most intrusive interdiction
technique, body </p>

<p> cavity searches, positive drug test results among inmates
tested were lower </p>

<p> than in facilities using other methods of interdiction. </p>

<p> *Questioning and search of belongings were widely used for
visitors to both </p>

<p> Federal and State facilities. </p>

<p> *Federal confinement facilities reported that they could
provide drug </p>

<p> treatment for an estimated 7,800 inmates; State confinement
facilities, for </p>

<p> 114,000; and State community-based facilities, for 9,400. </p>

<p> *Federal facilities were using an estimated 62% of total drug
treatment </p>

<p> capacity on June 29, 1990; State confinement facilities, 78%;
and </p>

<p> community-based facilities, 66%. </p>

<p> Introduction </p>

<p> The Census of State and Federal Adult Correctional
Facilities, conducted </p>

<p> periodically by the Bureau of the Census on behalf of the
Bureau of Justice </p>

<p> Statistics (BJS), included a new series of questions in 1990.
(See </p>

<p> Methodology on page 12 for further information about the
census and the </p>

<p> questionnaire.) This addendum--designed with the assistance
of the </p>

<p> National Institute on Drug Abuse and the Office of National
Drug Control </p>

<p> Policy--asked how facilities interdict drugs and
paraphernalia among </p>

<p> inmates, visitors, and staff and who was chosen for each
method of </p>

<p> interdiction. </p>

<p> In addition, the addendum gathered information on drug
testing policies, </p>

<p> practices, and outcomes. The questionnaire asked facilities
to estimate </p>

<p> the number of inmates in need of drug treatment programs and
the capacity </p>

<p> of currently available programs. </p>

<p> Methods of drug interdiction </p>

<p> Different facilities have a variety of policies and practices
related to </p>

<p> interdiction of drugs from inmates, visitors, and staff. </p>

<p> Facilities may physically check persons entering the
facility. Inmates may </p>

<p> be checked for drugs or other contraband when they enter a
facility for the </p>

<p> first time or reenter after an absence. The checks may be
relatively </p>

<p> nonintrusive, such as verbal questioning or pat-downs, or
more intrusive, </p>

<p> such as body cavity searches and clothing exchanges or
searches of </p>

<p> belongings. These checks may be conducted among all entering
persons, </p>

<p> random groups, or only those suspected of carrying drugs.
Many prisons may </p>

<p> use all of the approaches at different times. </p>

<p> The figure below shows a general typology for the range of
methods for each </p>

<p> type of drug interdiction. A plus sign (+) indicates the use
of a method </p>

<p> and a minus sign (-) means no reported use. Type 1
facilities, for </p>

<p> example, reported using all three methods to choose persons
for an </p>

<p> interdiction activity. Type 4 facilities reported performing
an </p>

<p> interdiction activity on all persons but not choosing random
or suspected </p>

<p> subjects. </p>

<p> Interdiction All Random Suspected </p>

<p> Type 1 + + + </p>

<p> Type 2 + + - </p>

<p> Type 3 + - + </p>

<p> Type 4 + - - </p>

<p> Type 5 - + + </p>

<p> Type 6 - + - </p>

<p> Type 7 - - + </p>

<p> Type 8 - - - </p>

<p> Interdiction activities: </p>

<p> Most prison facilities patted down inmates and required them
to exchange </p>

<p> clothes upon admission or any reentry </p>

<p> Prison facilities perform many activities to prevent drugs
and other </p>

<p> contraband from entering. Correctional authorities commonly
question </p>

<p> inmates, pat them down, require changing into
prison-furnished clothes, and </p>

<p> search body cavities. Eighty-eight percent of Federal
facilities reported </p>

<p> that they patted down new admissions and required them to
replace their </p>

<p> clothes (table 1). Seventy-eight percent of State confinement
facilities </p>

<p> and 71% of community-based facilities patted down newly
admitted inmates. </p>

<p> (Community-based facilities are those in which half or more
of the </p>

<p> residents are permitted to leave unaccompanied by staff for
work or study. </p>

<p> Because inmates regularly leave community-based facilities,
drug-related </p>

<p> problems in these facilities are different from those in
secured </p>

<p> facilities.) </p>

<p> Fifty-nine percent of State confinement facilities and 26% of
community- </p>

<p> based facilities required them to substitute prison clothes.
At least </p>

<p> three-quarters of both State and Federal facilities
questioned new </p>

<p> admissions about drugs. </p>

<p> When looking for the presence of hidden drugs, facilities
were less likely </p>

<p> to perform body cavity searches than take other interdiction
measures. </p>

<p> Sixty-one percent of Federal facilities, 45% of State
confinement </p>

<p> facilities, and 14% of State community-based facilities
reported that they </p>

<p> conducted body cavity searches among inmates at admission. </p>

<p> Institutions could apply an interdiction activity to all
inmates, to groups </p>

<p> of inmates selected at random, or to suspected drug users or
couriers. </p>

<p> Patting down new and returning inmates and requiring them to
exchange </p>

<p> clothes generally applied to all inmates (table 2). Over 80%
of Federal </p>

<p> facilities patted down all inmates and required an exchange
of clothing. </p>

<p> Almost 78% of State confinement facilities frisked all
inmates, and 57% </p>

<p> substituted prison clothes. </p>

<p> In 46% of Federal facilities and in 20% of State facilities,
body cavity </p>

<p> searches were conducted among all entering inmates. About 39%
of State </p>

<p> confinement facilities reported that a body cavity search
would be </p>

<p> conducted when the staff suspected inmates of carrying drugs.
</p>

<p> Most facilities searched the belongings </p>

<p> of visitors </p>

<p> Staff checked visitors' belongings for drugs in 93% of
Federal </p>

<p> institutions, 87% of State confinement facilities, and 76% of
the </p>

<p> community-based (table 3). Visitors were patted down for
drugs in 51% of </p>

<p> Federal prisons, 69% of State confinement institutions, and
40% of </p>

<p> community-based facilities. </p>

<p> All visitors were generally subjected to searches of their
belongings </p>

<p> (table 4). About 83% of Federal facilities and 57% of State
facilities </p>

<p> looked through the personal possessions of all visitors.
Frisking visitors </p>

<p> for drugs and checking body cavities occurred primarily if
visitors were </p>

<p> suspected of carrying drugs or paraphernalia. Five in ten of
Federal </p>

<p> prisons and 4 in 10 of State facilities patted down visitors
on suspicion. </p>

<p> About 28% of Federal Facilities and 18% of State facilities
searched body </p>

<p> cavities of visitors if the visitors were suspected of
smuggling drugs. </p>

<p> Staff were also subject to drug interdiction activities: </p>

<p> When reporting to work, staff were patted down in about half
of State </p>

<p> confinement facilities and in more than a fifth of Federal
confinement and </p>

<p> State community-based facilities (table 5). In over 50% of
Federal </p>

<p> facilities and 40% of State facilities staff were questioned.
Most </p>

<p> interdiction activities involving staff were conducted on
suspicion of </p>

<p> smuggling drugs. About 45% of Federal facilities and 23% of
State </p>

<p> facilities interrogated staff if they were suspected of drug
involvement </p>

<p> (table 6). About 19% of Federal facilities also patted down
staff on </p>

<p> suspicion, compared to 14% of State facilities. About 23% of
State </p>

<p> facilities frisked staff members at random. </p>

<p> Maximum security facilities took more stringent drug
interdiction measures </p>

<p> than other facilities </p>

<p> Staff in Federal maximum security prisons were more likely
than those in </p>

<p> medium or minimum security facilities to search body cavities
and to </p>

<p> require all inmates to exchange clothing (table 7). All
Federal maximum </p>

<p> security institutions required all inmates to put on new
prison-issued </p>

<p> clothes upon entry or reentry. Nearly 55% of Federal maximum
security </p>

<p> facilities, compared to 38% of minimum security prisons,
conducted body </p>

<p> cavity searches of all newly admitted or returning inmates. </p>

<p> In maximum security prisons staff were less likely than in
other Federal </p>

<p> facilities to question all of the inmates or to pat them
down. All inmates </p>

<p> were interrogated in 64% of maximum security prisons and
frisked in 73%, </p>

<p> while all inmates were questioned in 94% of minimum security
facilities and </p>

<p> patted down in 81%. </p>

<p> The staff in State maximum and medium security prisons were
more likely </p>

<p> than those in minimum security facilities to make all
entering or returning </p>

<p> inmates exchange clothes (over 60% of maximum or medium
security prisons, </p>

<p> compared to 47% of minimum security prisons). In nearly 1 in
5 maximum </p>

<p> security State prisons, staff searched the body cavities of
all new or </p>

<p> returning prisoners. Staff performed body cavity searches on
suspected </p>

<p> inmates in over half of State maximum security facilities. </p>

<p> State community-based facilities were less likely than State
confinement </p>

<p> facilities to search residents to interdict drugs. Staff in
about 59% of </p>

<p> State community-based facilities patted down all inmates. In
22% of </p>

<p> community-based facilities, the staff required all inmates to
change to </p>

<p> facility clothing, and in 15%, searched body cavities of
residents </p>

<p> suspected of having drugs. </p>

<p> Interpreting measures of drug testing </p>

<p> Prevalence of drug use in prisons is difficult to estimate.
Part of the </p>

<p> difficulty occurs with record keeping and reporting. A drug
test </p>

<p> determines the presence of a specific drug at a specific
level. A single </p>

<p> urine sample can be used for a single drug test or for
multiple tests for </p>

<p> different drugs. Correctional authorities were asked to
report the number </p>

<p> of tests for each drug and the number of positive tests.
However, some </p>

<p> authorities may have reported the number of urine samples
taken if their </p>

<p> records included only those figures. </p>

<p> Other difficulties in estimating the amount of drug use in
prison include </p>

<p> the following: </p>

<p> *Prisons differ in the selection of whom to test. Most
facilities do not </p>

<p> choose inmates for testing using a sample with a known
probability of </p>

<p> selection: One cannot say that the selected inmates represent
all inmates </p>

<p> in the institution. </p>

<p> * Prisons differ in what drugs they test for. Prison
authorities may not </p>

<p> suspect the use of a drug and not test for it, even though
the drug is used </p>

<p> in their facility. Other prisons may conduct repeated tests
for a drug </p>

<p> seldom used. </p>

<p> * A single urine specimen can have more than one positive
drug test from an </p>

<p> individual using multiple drugs. Describing positive rates by
type of drug </p>

<p> will overstate the number of inmates with at least one
positive test. </p>

<p> *Prisons differ in how often they test inmates. Drug testing
may be rare </p>

<p> in some prisons and frequent in others. </p>

<p> *Urine tests only detect the presence of most drugs 48 to 72
hours after </p>

<p> use, except for PCP and marijuana, which may be detected up
to 30 days </p>

<p> after use. </p>

<p> This varying span, when combined with lack of random
sampling, distorts any </p>

<p> estimation of overall drug use. </p>

<p> * Depending on various factors, the presence of
methamphetamines may not be </p>

<p> distinguished from amphetamines; therefore, the test results
for these two </p>

<p> drugs should be considered together. </p>

<p> *Prisons may differ in the types of tests used. Some types
are more </p>

<p> accurate than others, producing lower numbers of false
positives and false </p>

<p> negatives. Facilities may or may not perform confirmatory
tests, and they </p>

<p> were not asked to estimate the number of false positives and
false </p>

<p> negatives. </p>

<p> For the above reasons, drug test results in this report are
not a measure </p>

<p> of the extent of the problem in the various kinds of
facilities. Positive </p>

<p> results should be interpreted only as indicating the
percentage positive </p>

<p> for the specific tests given. </p>

<p> Testing urine for drug use </p>

<p> Most correctional facilities tested some inmates for illegal
drug use </p>

<p> About 87% of all correctional facilities tested inmates for
illegal drug </p>

<p> use (table 8). All Federal prisons, 83% of State confinement
facilities, </p>

<p> and 98% of State community-based facilities reported testing
inmates </p>

<p> between July 1, 1989, and June 30, 1990. </p>

<p> Authorities in facilities which reported data (85% of all
facilities) </p>

<p> indicated that they collected 598,000 urine specimens from
468,500 inmates. </p>

<p> When these figures are projected to all facilities, including
those which </p>

<p> did not respond to these questions, an estimated 565,500
inmates provided </p>

<p> 721,800 specimens from July 1, 1989, through June 30, 1990.
(See </p>

<p> &quot;Estimation procedure&quot; in Methodology.) </p>

<p> State minimum and medium security and community-based
facilities were more </p>

<p> likely than maximum security institutions to test inmates.
About 85% of </p>

<p> the lower security facilities and 98% of community-based
facilities tested </p>

<p> inmates, compared to 76% of the maximum security prisons. </p>

<p> Most State facilities testing inmates for drugs performed the
tests when </p>

<p> the staff suspected particular inmates of drug use; 76% of
the institutions </p>

<p> reported checking inmates based on suspicion of use.
Forty-two percent </p>

<p> tested both suspected inmates and random groups, and an
additional 14% </p>

<p> tested all inmates (type 1). Relatively few facilities (20%)
tested all </p>

<p> inmates at least once during confinement (types 1-4). </p>

<p> Most large State confinement facilities tested for drugs </p>

<p> About 92% of State prisons with a population of 2,500 or more
tested </p>

<p> inmates, compared to around 83% of facilities with fewer than
1,000 inmates </p>

<p> and 77% of facilities with a population between 1,000 and
2,499 (table 9). </p>

<p> Over half of the largest facilities tested inmates on
suspicion only. Over </p>

<p> half of facilities with a population between 250 and 2,499
tested all </p>

<p> inmates or random groups of inmates in addition to inmates
suspected of </p>

<p> drug use. About 70% of community-based facilities tested
either all </p>

<p> inmates or random groups and inmates suspected of using
drugs. </p>

<p> Almost all work release facilities tested </p>

<p> for drugs </p>

<p> About 92% of facilities that provided special work release or
prerelease </p>

<p> programs tested inmates for drugs (table 10). Ninety-three
percent of </p>

<p> facilities that separately handled offenders reincarcerated
for violating </p>

<p> some condition of their supervised release also checked
inmates for drugs. </p>

<p> Over 90% of facilities that performed &quot;other&quot;
functions, such as </p>

<p> presentence, psychiatric, or geriatric services also tested
their </p>

<p> residents. Nearly 60% of facilities for youthful offenders
tested inmates. </p>

<p> For all inmates tested, State prisons reported higher
positive rates than </p>

<p> Federal prisons </p>

<p> Nationwide, 3.1% of the tests for cocaine in the 12 months
before June 30, </p>

<p> 1990, were positive, as were 1.2% of the tests for heroin,
1.5% for </p>

<p> methamphetamines, and 5.6% for marijuana. State facilities
reported higher </p>

<p> positive rates for drug tests than Federal facilities (table
11). In State </p>

<p> institutions, 3.6% of tests for cocaine were positive,
compared to 0.4% in </p>

<p> Federal prisons. State facilities found 2.0% of the tests
showing recent </p>

<p> methamphetamine use and 6.3% showing marijuana use; Federal
prisons found </p>

<p> 0.1% and 1.1%, respectively. </p>

<p> I </p>

<p> Same percentage of State and Federal facilities reported
positive drug </p>

<p> tests </p>

<p> When facilities rather than individual drug tests are
considered, Federal </p>

<p> and State facilities were about equally likely to have found
drug use in </p>

<p> their institutions. Around 6 in 10 of both Federal and State
facilities </p>

<p> which tested for cocaine had at least one positive test. In
over 2 in 10 </p>

<p> facilities testing for methamphetamines, the use of the drug
was </p>

<p> discovered. Marijuana was detected in about 8 in 10
facilities testing. </p>

<p> Community-based facilities found higher rates of drug use
than confinement </p>

<p> facilities </p>

<p> Tests had positive outcomes for 8.9% of the cocaine tests and
8.1% of the </p>

<p> marijuana tests administered by community-based facilities,
compared to </p>

<p> 1.4% of the cocaine tests and 5.8% of marijuana tests in
confinement </p>

<p> facilities (table 12). Methamphetamines, however, were found
more often in </p>

<p> confinement facilities (2.3% tested positive) than in
community-based </p>

<p> facilities (1.1% positive). </p>

<p> Among State confinement facilities, positive test results
were highest in </p>

<p> those testing on suspicion only. </p>

<p> How inmates were selected for testing affected the rate of
positive </p>

<p> results. Those State confinement facilities testing only when
drug use was </p>

<p> suspected recorded higher rates of positive results than
other facilities </p>

<p> that tested randomly or comprehensively. When facilities
tested only on </p>

<p> suspicion of drug use, 6% of cocaine tests and 14% of
marijuana tests were </p>

<p> positive, compared to 1.5% or less for cocaine and 5% or less
for marijuana </p>

<p> when facilities tested everyone or at random. </p>

<p> The results for State community-based facilities were
opposite those of </p>

<p> confinement facilities. Testing on suspicion only produced a
lower </p>

<p> percentage of positive results than testing everyone or a
random selection. </p>

<p> In community-based facilities which tested on suspicion only,
4.8% were </p>

<p> positive for cocaine and 6.4% for marijuana; in
community-based facilities </p>

<p> using other selection methods, around 9% of tests for cocaine
and 8% for </p>

<p> marijuana were positive. </p>

<p> The percentages of positive tests were higher in large
facilities </p>

<p> Large prisons, whether Federal or State, had higher rates of
positive drug </p>

<p> tests. In Federal facilities with 1,000 or more inmates, 1.4%
of the </p>

<p> marijuana tests, 0.6% of the cocaine, and 0.6% of the heroin
tests were </p>

<p> positive (table 13). In Federal facilities holding fewer than
500 inmates, </p>

<p> the percentages were 0.5% for marijuana, 0.2% for cocaine,
and none for </p>

<p> heroin. Among State prisons, the largest facilities with
2,500 or more </p>

<p> inmates had the highest percentages of positive tests for
amphetamines, </p>

<p> cocaine, and heroin. </p>

<p> The facilities holding 1,000 to 2,499 inmates had the highest
rates for </p>

<p> marijuana and methamphetamines. Among Federal prisons, the
maximum </p>

<p> security facilities had higher rates for positive drug tests
than minimum </p>

<p> security facilities. In maximum security prisons, 2.5% of the
tests for </p>

<p> marijuana, .7% of the tests for cocaine, and 1.4% of the
tests for heroin </p>

<p> were positive. In minimum security, 0.3% for marijuana, 0.3%
for cocaine, </p>

<p> and none for heroin were positive. </p>

<p> State medium security facilities generally had higher
positive rates than </p>

<p> maximum or minimum security prisons. For each drug in medium
security </p>

<p> facilities, the percentage positive was as follows: 6.8% for
marijuana, </p>

<p> 4.2% for methamphetamines, 1.7% for cocaine, and 1.4% for
heroin. In </p>

<p> maximum and minimum facilities, the equivalent findings were
5.0% or less </p>

<p> for marijuana, 0.6% or less for methamphetamines, 1.4% or
less for cocaine, </p>

<p> and 0.8% or less for heroin. </p>

<p> Positive results from drug tests varied among facilities
performing </p>

<p> different functions </p>

<p> Facilities which confined inmates returned to custody for
parole violations </p>

<p> had relatively high percentages of positive drug tests (table
14). More </p>

<p> than 9% of tests for marijuana were positive, as were 6.2% of
tests for </p>

<p> methamphetamines, 3.5% for cocaine, and 2.9% for heroin.
Facilities </p>

<p> holding inmates who participated in work release programs or
who were </p>

<p> preparing for discharge also had relatively high positive
test rates: 7% </p>

<p> for cocaine, 6.9% for marijuana, and 1.8% for heroin. Drug/
alcohol </p>

<p> treatment in facilities was associated with relatively high
positive </p>

<p> results on tests for cocaine and marijuana use--3% for
cocaine and 7.6% for </p>

<p> marijuana. </p>

<p> Facilities handling youthful offenders generally had
relatively low </p>

<p> positive test results: 2.1% for marijuana and 1.5% for
cocaine. </p>

<p> Positive drug tests were linked to interdiction activities </p>

<p> The State confinement facilities that questioned and frisked
inmates but </p>

<p> did not exchange clothes or search body cavities had higher
rates of </p>

<p> positive drug tests than facilities doing all these measures
(table 15). </p>

<p> The tests in the facilities using less stringent measures
were 5.2% </p>

<p> positive for cocaine, 13.5% for marijuana, and 16.2% for
methamphetamines. </p>

<p> Tests in facilities performing all types of specific drug
interdiction </p>

<p> activities were 1.2% positive for cocaine, 4.6% for
marijuana, and 0.6% for </p>

<p> methamphetamines. Facilities which performed all types of
interdiction </p>

<p> activities had higher positive drug test rates than
facilities which did </p>

<p> body cavity searches and/or clothing exchanges. The
facilities doing all </p>

<p> types of interdiction may have adopted more measures as a
reaction to </p>

<p> relatively high test rates. The reported rates were from
results over the </p>

<p> 12 months before the census, while the interdiction measures
were those in </p>

<p> place on June 29, 1990. </p>

<p> Facilities that did not question, frisk, or search visitors
had the </p>

<p> following positive test results: 8.3% for marijuana and 7.4%
for cocaine. </p>

<p> Facilities that inspected visitors' belongings and searched
body cavities </p>

<p> when indicated, but did not both question and pat down
visitors, had the </p>

<p> following positive test percentages: 2.9% for heroin, 2.6%
for cocaine, and </p>

<p> 12% for methamphetamines. </p>

<p> Facilities that reported not making special efforts to
interdict the supply </p>

<p> of drugs from the staff had 2.6% positive tests for cocaine,
2.2% for </p>

<p> heroin, and 6.6% for methamphetamines. Facilities that
questioned staff, </p>

<p> patted them down, and took other actions such as drug
testing, when needed </p>

<p> had 1.0% positive tests for cocaine and 0.9% for heroin and </p>

<p> methamphetamines. </p>

<p> Drug testing of staff was highest </p>

<p> in Federal facilities </p>

<p> While 83% of Federal facilities reported they tested their
staff for drugs, </p>

<p> 42% of State confinement facilities and 32% of
community-based facilities </p>

<p> checked their employees (table 16). About 55% of Federal
confinement </p>

<p> facilities tested all staff, as did 30% of State confinement
facilities and </p>

<p> 19% of community-based facilities. </p>

<p> Seventy-six percent of Federal facilities and about 23% of
State facilities </p>

<p> tested employees, the primary staff category tested. </p>

<p> A higher percentage of Federal than State facility staff were
tested for </p>

<p> drugs. Fifteen percent of Federal facility staff were tested
compared to </p>

<p> 4% of those working in State confinement facilities and 10%
in community- </p>

<p> based facilities. </p>

<p> A positive test was grounds for dismissal </p>

<p> in over a third of facilities that tested staff </p>

<p> for drugs </p>

<p> In over a third of facilities, policies required that staff
testing </p>

<p> positive for drugs be dismissed. In over a seventh, affected
staff were </p>

<p> suspended (table 17). Sixty percent of State confinement
facilities and </p>

<p> 44% of community-based facilities referred positive drug
detection cases to </p>

<p> internal affairs. Fifty-nine percent of Federal facilities
referred the </p>

<p> case to a departmentally operated program -- generally an
employee </p>

<p> assistance counselor who could refer the employee for outside
treatment. </p>

<p> Federal facilities were more likely than State facilities to
keep their </p>

<p> staff and continue to check them for drugs or to reassign
them. Twenty- </p>

<p> four percent of Federal facilities continued monitoring staff
with drug </p>

<p> tests, compared to 10% of State confinement facilities and
12%of community- </p>

<p> based facilities. </p>

<p> Inmate/resident drug treatment programs and capacities </p>

<p> Facilities provided estimates of the number of
inmates/residents who could </p>

<p> be treated in each of their drug treatment and intervention
programs and </p>

<p> estimates of the enrollment in each program. Facilities also
estimated </p>

<p> their total capacity for drug treatment and their total
enrollment. These </p>

<p> totals were generally lower than the sum of all the
separately listed </p>

<p> programs and interventions, possibly for the following
reasons: </p>

<p> *some programs listed were not considered true drug
&quot;treatment&quot; programs; </p>

<p> *an individual program might have several of the components
listed on the </p>

<p> addendum--for example, counseling, education, and urine
surveillance--and </p>

<p> hence be counted several times in the specific listings; </p>

<p> *inmates could be participating in more than one program; </p>

<p> *facilities could have some treatment slots which could be
allocated to </p>

<p> more than one program and therefore were counted more than
once. </p>

<p> Drug treatment/intervention on June 29, 1990 </p>

<p> Among the 1,287 State and Federal facilities, 1,024 reported
their own </p>

<p> estimates of total capacity and enrollment in programs they
considered to </p>

<p> be for drug treatment. Facility capacities and enrollments
for drug </p>

<p> treatment were-- </p>

<p> Among those Federal facilities that reported, administrators
indicated that </p>

<p> on a single day the facilities could treat about 6,100
inmates and had an </p>

<p> enrollment of about 3,800. For reporting State facilities,
both </p>

<p> confinement and community-based, the estimated capacity was
90,900 and </p>

<p> enrollment was 69,900. </p>

<p> Prisons could treat an estimated </p>

<p> 131,900 inmates for drug addiction </p>

<p> If the reported capacity is projected to all prisons, Federal
confinement </p>

<p> facilities could treat an estimated 7,800 inmates; State
confinement </p>

<p> facilities, 114,000; and State community-based facilities,
9,400. (See </p>

<p> &quot;Estimation procedure&quot; in Methodology.) </p>

<p> (Treatment capacity and enrollment were estimated from the
77.7% of Federal </p>

<p> inmates in reporting facilities, 72.9% of State inmates in
reporting </p>

<p> confinement facilities, and 83.3% of State inmates in
reporting community- </p>

<p> based facilities.) </p>

<p> Federal confinement facilities had the capacity to treat for
drug abuse 14% </p>

<p> of the inmate population; State confinement facilities, 18%;
and community- </p>

<p> based facilities, 55%. </p>

<p> Prisons were treating approximately 100,200 inmates </p>

<p> If the reported enrollment figures are projected to cover all
facilities, </p>

<p> the Federal prison system was treating an estimated 4,800
inmates; the </p>

<p> State prisons, an estimated 88,700; and community-based
facilities, an </p>

<p> estimated 6,200. (See &quot;Estimation procedure&quot; in
Methodology.) </p>

<p> (Treatment capacity and enrollment were estimated from the
77.7% of Federal </p>

<p> inmates in reporting facilities, 72.9% of State inmates in
reporting </p>

<p> confinement facilities, and 83.3% of State inmates in
reporting community- </p>

<p> based facilities.) </p>

<p> Enrollment in drug treatment was below capacity) </p>

<p> Federal inmates were using 62% of the drug treatment capacity
on June 29, </p>

<p> 1990. State prisoners were using 66% of the capacity in
community-based </p>

<p> facilities and 78% in confinement facilities. </p>

<p> Many factors play a role in these utilization figures.
Inmates may refuse </p>

<p> to participate or may have already completed the program.
Inmates may not </p>

<p> qualify--too new to the institution, not near enough to the
end of their </p>

<p> sentence, rule breakers, under administrative segregation, or
in the wrong </p>

<p> custody level. Facilities also may keep some slots open to
gain </p>

<p> flexibility to deal with unexpected situations. </p>

<p> Prisons offered a variety of programs </p>

<p> Prisons may offer many types of drug intervention or
treatment: </p>

<p> detoxification, counseling, education and/or awareness
programs, urine </p>

<p> surveillance, and treatment in special residential units
within the </p>

<p> facility. Federal facilities reported they could test 33% of
inmates for </p>

<p> drugs; State confinement facilities, 10%; and community-based
facilities, </p>

<p> 57% (table 18). Counseling was available for 14% of inmates
in Federal </p>

<p> facilities, 12% in State confinement facilities, and 48% in
community-based </p>

<p> facilities. Residential treatment program capacity was from
1% to 2% of </p>

<p> inmate population for all types </p>

<p> of institutions. </p>

<p> Of all Federal inmates, 9% were enrolled in some form of drug
treatment on </p>

<p> June 29, 1990. Among State prisoners, 14% in confinement
facilities and </p>

<p> 37% in community-based facilities were enrolled. The two most
common types </p>

<p> of programs for both Federal and State correctional
facilities were </p>

<p> education and counseling. </p>

<p> Drug education programs enrolled 13% of Federal prisoners, 7%
of State </p>

<p> confinement inmates, and 25% of residents in community-based
facilities. </p>

<p> Six percent of those in Federal facilities were being
counseled, as were 9% </p>

<p> of State confinement facility inmates and 32% of those in
community-based </p>

<p> facilities. </p>

<p> Methodology </p>

<p> The 1990 Census of State and Federal Adult Correctional
Facilities was the </p>

<p> fourth enumeration of State institutions and the first of
Federal </p>

<p> institutions sponsored by the Bureau of Justice Statistics
and conducted by </p>

<p> the Bureau of the Census. Earlier censuses were completed in
1974, 1979, </p>

<p> and 1984. </p>

<p> Census universe </p>

<p> The facility universe was developed from the Census of State
Adult </p>

<p> Correctional Facilities conducted in 1984. This list was
revised using the </p>

<p> 1990 American Correctional Association Directory and
information obtained </p>

<p> from State correctional administrators and the Federal Bureau
of Prisons. </p>

<p> The census included: prisons; prison farms; reception,
diagnostic and </p>

<p> classification centers; road camps; forestry and conservation
camps; </p>

<p> youthful offender facilities (except in California);
vocational training </p>

<p> facilities; correctional drug and alcohol treatment
facilities; and State- </p>

<p> operated local detention facilities in Alaska, Connecticut,
Delaware, </p>

<p> Hawaii, Rhode Island, and Vermont. </p>

<p> Facilities were included in the census if they: </p>

<p> *were staffed with State or Federal employees </p>

<p> *housed primarily State or Federal prisoners </p>

<p> *were physically, functionally, and administratively separate
from other </p>

<p> facilities </p>

<p> *were operational on the reference date, June 29, 1990. </p>

<p> The census also included, for the first time, 67 private
facilities that </p>

<p> were under exclusive contract by State governments to house
prisoners. </p>

<p> Specifically excluded were-- </p>

<p> *privately operated facilities that were not exclusively for
State or </p>

<p> Federal inmates </p>

<p> *military facilities </p>

<p> *Immigration and Naturalization Service facilities </p>

<p> *facilities operated and administered by local governments,
including those </p>

<p> housing State prisoners </p>

<p> *facilities operated by the U.S. Marshals Service </p>

<p> *hospital wings and wards reserved </p>

<p> for State prisoners. </p>

<p> Questionnaire administration </p>

<p> Questionnaires were mailed to facility respondents at the end
of June 1990. </p>

<p> Second and third request forms and telephone followups went
out in the </p>

<p> fall, resulting in a final response rate of 100%. </p>

<p> Definitions of community-based and confinement facilities </p>

<p> Correctional facilities were classified as community-based if
50% or more </p>

<p> of the residents were regularly permitted to leave the
facility </p>

<p> unaccompanied for work or study. These facilities included
halfway houses, </p>

<p> restitution centers, and pre-release, work release, and study
release </p>

<p> centers. Correctional facilities in which less than 50% of
the inmates </p>

<p> regularly left the facility unaccompanied were classified as
confinement </p>

<p> institutions. </p>

<p> Drug addendum </p>

<p> An addendum on drug control activities in State and Federal
facilities was </p>

<p> included for the first time in the 1990 census. Facilities
were asked to </p>

<p> provide information on the following: </p>

<p> *activities they used with inmates, visitors, and staff to
keep out illegal </p>

<p> drugs and drug paraphernalia </p>

<p> *inmate drug testing practices, including the criteria for
testing inmates, </p>

<p> the number of inmates tested in total and by specific drug,
and the number </p>

<p> positive </p>

<p> *staff drug testing, including groups and basis for testing,
number tested, </p>

<p> and procedures when tests were positive </p>

<p> *capacity and enrollment in various types of drug treatment
and </p>

<p> intervention programs. </p>

<p> Estimation procedures </p>

<p> When all prisons in the census did not provide data on
particular </p>

<p> variables, estimated figures were used where indicated. Total
figures were </p>

<p> estimated by multiplying the known or reported numbers by the
ratio of the </p>

<p> total relevant population to the reported population. All
figures were </p>

<p> estimated independently and total estimates were therefore
larger than the </p>

<p> sum of all subgroup estimates. The total population figure
used in the </p>

<p> projections varied, depending upon which figure was most
appropriate. The </p>

<p> two available population figures are the average daily
population and the </p>

<p> prison count on the reference day for the census, June 29,
1990. For drug </p>

<p> testing, table 8, the basis for estimation was the average
daily </p>

<p> population, and for drug treatment capacity and enrollment,
the basis was </p>

<p> the 1-day count. </p>

<p> Because the census was a complete enumeration, the results
were not subject </p>

<p> to sampling error. </p>

<p> Public use data tapes for each Census of Adult Correctional
Facilities in </p>

<p> the series, conducted in 1974, 1979, 1984, and 1990, are
available from the </p>

<p> National Criminal Justice Archive, P.O. Box 1248, Ann Arbor,
MI 48106. 1- </p>

<p> 800-999-0960. </p>

<p> Caroline Wolf Harlow wrote this report under the supervision
of Allen J. </p>

<p> Beck. Corrections statistics are prepared under the general
direction of </p>

<p> Lawrence A. Greenfeld. Tom Hester edited this report, and
James Stephan, </p>

<p> Danielle Morton, and Dorothea Proctor provided statistical
review. Marilyn </p>

<p> Marbrook administered production, assisted by Betty Sherman
and Jayne Pugh. </p>

<p> July 1992, NCJ-134724 </p>

<p> The Bureau of Justice Statistics is a component of the Office
of Justice </p>

<p> Programs, which also includes the National Institute of
Justice, the Bureau </p>

<p> of Justice Assistance, the Office of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency </p>

<p> Prevention, and the Office for Victims of Crime. </p>

<p> ************************************************ </p>

<p> . <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>