
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B008-241</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/testmny.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040212 text/html 48804
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:02:00 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:48 GMT
Content-length: 48586
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Testimony of Marc Mauer of the Sentencing Project</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#f2f2f2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->

<p><b>THE SENTENCING PROJECT</b> </p>

<p><b>TESTIMONY OF MARC MAUER</b> , <b>ASSISTANT DIRECTOR,</b> <b>THE
SENTENCING PROJECT</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>Before the SUBCOMMITTEE ON LEGISLATION AND NATIONAL SECURITY
and the </p>

<p>SUBCOMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT INFORMATION, JUSTICE AND
AGRICULTURE </p>

<p>of the HOUSE GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS COMMITTEE </p>

<p>May 2, 1990 </p>

<p>Washington, D.C. </p>

<p>918 F St., N.W. * Suite 501 * Washington, D.C. 20004 * (202)
628-0871 * FAX (202) 628-1091 </p>

<p>Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to speak before
the Subcommittee today on these important issues. </p>

<p>The drug problem in our society is clearly one which is very
serious and which concerns all Americans. Although substance
abuse cuts across, all class and racial lines, the impact of the
drug problem has probably been greatest among low-income and
minority communities. In my testimony today, I would like to
focus in particular on the impact of the war on drugs as it
affects Black and Hispanic communities. </p>

<p><b>YOUNG BLACK MEN AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM</b> </p>

<p>In February of this year, my organization released a report on
race and the criminal justice system. The report, &quot;Young
Black Men and the Criminal Justice System: A Growing National
Problem,&quot; received extensive attention and shocked much of
the nation. The report documented that almost one out of four
Black men in the age group 20-29 is under the control of the
criminal justice system -- prison, jail, probation or parole.
This contrasts with one in sixteen white males and one in ten
Hispanic males. </p>

<p>These figures for Black males, shocking as they are, actually
understate the extent of the problem since our study only did a
one-day count of the criminal justice system. If we were able to
calculate the rates for an entire year, or ten-year period, the
number of Black males under criminal justice control would be
considerably higher than one in four. </p>

<p>There is also strong reason to believe that the figures for
Hispanics represent an undercount. There has been a great deal of
inconsistency in the way in which Hispanics are counted in
criminal justice populations, and for many categories, there
exist a large number of offenders for whom no data exist on
ethnicity. Because of this, it is reasonable to conclude that the
rate of criminal justice control for young Hispanic males is
higher than one in ten. Also, since Hispanics are counted in the
white criminal justice populations, the rate of criminal justice
control for non-Hispanic whites is therefore less than the one in
sixteen which we were able to document. </p>

<p>Our report further found that the number of young Black men in
the criminal justice system -- 609,690 -- far exceeded the number
of Black men of all ages enrolled in higher education -- 436,000.
These two figures taken together paint a very disturbing picture.
</p>

<p>As we noted in our report: </p>

<p>For the Black community in general, nearly one-fourth of its
young men are under the control of the criminal justice system at
a time when their peers are beginning families, learning
constructive life skills, and starting careers .... Unless the
criminal justice system can be used to assist more young Black
males in pursuing these objectives, any potential positive
contributions they can make to the community will be delayed, or
lost forever. </p>

<p>Our report estimated that the direct costs to the criminal
justice system for the control of the 609,000 Black men in their
twenties was $2.5 billion. Each offender who is incarcerated in a
state prison costs the taxpayers at least $16,000 a year.<u> l</u>/
Corrections costs have now reached the point where they are
having a serious impact on state funding for necessary social
services. In Michigan, for example, state spending for
corrections increased from 2.8 percent of the budget in 1984 to
7.2 percent in 1988.<u>2</u>/ The National Conference of State
Legislators reports that state spending on corrections increased
by an average of 14.2 percent last year, contributing to
&quot;serious budget problems&quot; that more than half the
states will face in 1990.<u>3/</u> </p>

<p>1<u> The Corrections Yearbook</u>, George M. and Camille
Graham Camp, Criminal Justice Institute, 1989. </p>

<p>2 &quot;Drug Cases Clog the Courts,&quot; Debra Cassens Moss, <u>ABA
Journal</u>, April 1990. </p>

<p>3 <u>The State Fiscal Outlook: 1990 and the Coming Decade</u>,
National Conference of State Legislators, February 1990. </p>

<p><b>WHY ARE SO MANY YOUNG BLACK MALES UNDER THE CONTROL</b> </p>

<p><b>OF THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM?</b> </p>

<p>It is important to analyze the factors which have led us to
this distressing situation. The reasons behind this are complex.
Many are long-standing problems; others are a result of more
recent criminal justice policies. I would like to outline some of
the primary causes of this problem, and then to discuss the
impact which the war on drugs has had. </p>

<p>1. <u>&quot;Get Tough&quot; Sentencing Policies</u> </p>

<p>The U.S. Sentencing Commission and legislatures in almost all
fifty states have adopted a variety of increasingly harsh
sentencing laws in the past decade. In addition, parole release
policies have become more restrictive in many states. The
combined impact of these policies is that our prison and jail
populations have doubled in the past decade, to the point where
there are now more than one million Americans behind bars.
Prisons in 41 states are under court order regarding overcrowding
and conditions of confinement. Record numbers of offenders are
now also straining our probation and parole systems. </p>

<p>Mandatory minimum drug sentencing laws have played a
significant role in leading to these higher rates of criminal
justice control, particularly in regard to prison populations.
Two recent highly publicized cases illustrate this: </p>

<p>The <u>American Lawyer</u> reported on the case of Susana
Sanchez-Robles, a migrant worker and mother of five whose husband
had left her, leaving the family on welfare. Ms. Sanchez-Robles
drove a drug-laden van across the border from Mexico, and
received a mandatory ten-year prison term. Her five-year old
cries every evening. Says Ms. Sanchez-Robles: &quot;I try to feel
strong, but my strength is just totally defeated when I remember
my children.<u>4/</u> </p>

<p>Richard Winrow is a 22-year old Los Angeles man who was
abandoned by his father as a boy. He and his seven siblings grew
up poor, and Winrow ended up dropping out of high school and
working at low-wage jobs. A recent conviction for possession of 5
1/2 ounces of cocaine, a relatively small amount, was his third
drug offense. Under new federal drug laws, Winrow was sentenced
to life without the possibility of parole.<u>5/</u> </p>

<p>The dramatic increases in incarceration, parole and probation
rates resulting from our &quot;get tough&quot; policies have
affected all segments of society. The increase, however, has been
most significant for Blacks and other minorities, who were
already disproportionately represented in the system. </p>

<p>The rise in criminal justice populations has occurred without
any clear-cut relationship to the crime rate. FBI reports for the
past decade indicate that crime rates have had periods of both
decline and increase during these years, but that overall there
was only a 2 percent increase in crime rates between 1979-88.
Crime rates rose again in 1989, even though the nation recorded
the highest increase ever in its prison population. </p>

<p>4 &quot;Scott Wallace, &quot;Mandatory Minimums, Mandatory
Mess,&quot; <u>The Champion</u>, May 1990. </p>

<p>5 Henry Weinstein and Charisse Jones &quot; 'Guinea Pig' for
Drug War or a<b> </b>Hardened Criminal?&quot;<u> The Los Angeles
Times</u>, March 11, 1990. </p>

<p>2. <u>Criminal Justice Focus on Crimes of the Poor</u> </p>

<p>The criminal justice system has historically been focused much
more on &quot;crime in the streets&quot; than &quot;crime in the
suites.&quot; Although we have seen some change in recent years
in the prosecution of white collar offenses, crimes of the poor
have always received greater attention from the criminal justice
system. Since Blacks and Hispanics are disproportionately
represented among low-income people, this has contributed to
their over-representation in the criminal justice system. This
does not imply that crimes of the poor are necessarily either
more or less serious than crimes of the wealthy, but rather, that
we have a system that functions at least in part in a very
discretionary manner. </p>

<p>3. <u>Race and the Criminal Justice System</u> </p>

<p>There has been a good deal of debate about the extent to which
race influences criminal justice decision making. A recent study
by the RAND Corporation concludes that race was not a factor in
sentencing decisions in California.<u>6</u>/ It is important to
note, though, that California has a relatively rigid determinate
sentencing system, which allows for less variability in
sentencing outcomes than in many other states. </p>

<p>6 &quot;Race and Imprisonment Decisions in California,&quot;
Stephen Klein, Joan Petersilia, Susan Turner, <u>Science</u>,
February 16, 1990. </p>

<p>Our report found evidence that the criminal justice system may
be treating Black offenders differently than white offenders. The
number of young white males who are incarcerated, 247,000,
slightly exceeds the number of incarcerated Black males, 212,000.
The number of white males receiving probation, though, 697,000,
vastly exceeds the figure for Black males, 305,000. While the
nature of the offense or prior criminal history may explain these
figures, a close examination of this disparity should be
undertaken to determine to what extent racial bias is a factor. </p>

<p>As the authors of the RAND study point out, as well as many
others, race may play a more prominent role at the level of
arrest and prosecution, where greater discretion may be exercised
by police and prosecutors. This discretion may not always be
racially motivated, but it may have a racial impact. To the
extent that this is the case, a task for the courts is to attempt
to offset any disparity that may have occurred through
appropriate sentencing. </p>

<p>4. <u>Declining Social and Economic Support in Black
Communities</u> </p>

<p>The relationship between social and economic conditions and
individual crime rates is a complex one. Not all poor people or
unemployed people commit crimes, nor do all wealthy or employed
persons refrain from committing crimes. Personality traits,
family support, community constraints, and other factors all
influence individual behavior and the propensity to commit crime.
</p>

<p>Yet, as criminologist Elliott Currie has noted, &quot;The
evidence for a strong association, between inequality and crime
is overwhelming ... It isn't, accidental, then, that among
developed countries, the United States is afflicted
simultaneously with the worst rates of violent crime, the widest
spread of income inequality, and the most severe public policies
toward the disadvantaged.&quot;7/ </p>

<p>The stresses, strains, and lack of opportunity present in so
many minority communities increase the likelihood, that
individuals within that community will engage in criminal
activities, whether as a means of obtaining money, to support a
drug habit, for a challenge, or for other reasons. </p>

<p>Given these factors, we need to look at the deteriorating
social and economic support in the Black community. Essentially,
we find that on a broad range of variables, the situation of
Blacks in our society has declined over the past decade. The
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities reports that total
appropriations for low income programs that are not entitlements
fell by 54 percent from FY 81 to FY 88, when adjusted for
inflation. This included support for job training, health and
social services, and housing programs. Also, although the number
of Americans living below the poverty line increased by 3.2
million during this period, spending for food stamps decreased by
15 percent when adjusted for inflation. Black households make up
36 percent of all households receiving food stamps. Overall,
these cuts affect Blacks and other minorities disproportionately,
since they are disproportionately poor.<u>8</u>/ </p>

<p>5. <u>Lack of Opportunity and Sense of Hopelessness</u> </p>

<p>An additional factor contributing to this situation is the
most difficult to quantify, yet in some ways the most
significant. In many communities today, young people growing up
have little hope for the future. It is one thing for a college
student to work at a fast food restaurant as a summer job. It is
entirely different for a young person to take on this kind of job
when there is little, expectation of rising above this entry
level. </p>

<p>The numbers in our report were not as shocking to most people
in the Black community. Instead they confirmed what many have
recognized for years: for Black males, the criminal justice
system has become almost an inevitable aspect of growing up. This
is not to say that it is a &quot;rite of passage,&quot; or an
event that is welcomed, but merely, that it is viewed as a part
of the life cycle which is almost unavoidable. This is a very sad
commentary on our society. </p>

<p>7 Elliott Currie, <u>Confronting Crime</u>, Pantheon, NY,
1985, pp. 146, 171. </p>

<p>8 <u>Still Far from the Dream: Recent Developments in Black
Income, Employment, and Poverty</u>. Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities, Washington, D.C., October 1988. </p>

<p><b>THE &quot;WAR ON DRUGS&quot; AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM</b> </p>

<p>A final factor contributing to increased involvement in the
criminal justice system, particularly, among Black Americans, is
the war on drugs, and the means by which this war is being waged.
This has been the result of two factors. </p>

<p>First, the drug problem has been defined basically as a law
enforcement problem, and not a social problem. In terms of our
political rhetoric, our<b> </b>funding priorities, and our policy
discussions, we have primarily chosen an approach which
emphasizes police and prisons over prevention and treatment. This
is not a new approach, or one which Mr. Bennett's office has
initiated unilaterally. Most states and localities have taken
this approach for many years, with unfortunately, little impact
on either drug use, availability or drug-related crime. </p>

<p>Second, although drug use and abuse occurs among all groups in
society, drug law enforcement is disproportionately weighted
toward inner city, low-income drug use, again primarily affecting
Blacks and Hispanics. A few statistics, illustrate this problem.
FBI data indicate that Blacks make-up an increasing percentage of
drug arrests, having increased from 30 to 38 percent of the total
between 1984 and 1988. According to the National Institute on
Drug Abuse, Blacks make up only 12 percent of those who use
illegal drugs.9/ </p>

<p>In Florida, Blacks now make up 73.3 percent of all prison
admissions for drug offenses, compared to 53.6 percent for all
other offenses.10/ </p>

<p>If the war on drugs continues in its present fashion, our
prisons will become increasingly filled with Black youth. The
plight of young Black men and the Black community which we
described in our report will only worsen. </p>

<p><b>POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS</b> </p>

<p>I do not believe that, the large number of Black males within
the criminal justice system necessarily represents an intended
consequence of our crime control policies. Unfortunately,
however, as an <u>unintended</u> consequence of scores of
individual sentencing laws, use of discretion in the criminal
justice system, and funding priorities, we have created a true
crisis for the Black community, for the criminal justice system,
and for a nation that hopes to provide freedom and opportunity
for all citizens. A continuation of the war on drugs in the
manner in which it has been fought, no matter how well-intended,
will only exacerbate this situation. </p>

<p>If we wish to address this problem in a serious manner,
policymakers and criminal justice leaders need to respond in a
comprehensive manner. Elements of such a strategy include: </p>

<p>9 Sam Meddis, &quot;Drug arrest rate is higher for blacks; <u>USA
Today</u>, December 20, 1989. </p>

<p>10 Austin, James and Aaron David McVey, &quot;The Impact of
the War on Drugs,&quot; National Council on Crime and
Delinquency, San Francisco, 1989. </p>

<p>1. <u>Increase Diversion from the Criminal Justice System</u> </p>

<p>Many young and minor offenders are only stigmatized by their
contact with the criminal justice system, without necessarily
receiving either appropriate supervision or support.
Opportunities exist to divert many of these offenders to
organizations and individuals who can better focus on the
problems of Black, Hispanic, and poor youth. </p>

<p>*As a result of our report, for example, Black community
leaders in Memphis have formed a chapter of the 100 Black Men
Incorporated. The group's goal is to reduce the number of Black
men going into the criminal justice system. Its activities will
include establishing mentor programs, developing mechanisms for
keeping Black youth in school, and working with young offenders
in the juvenile justice system. </p>

<p>Policymakers can encourage development of programs such as
these, and court officials can divert more defendants into them,
thereby beginning to reduce the extent of criminal justice
control in many communities. </p>

<p>2. <u>Sentencing to Ameliorate Racial Disparities</u> </p>

<p>Judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and probation officers
all have a unique and important opportunity to lessen the drastic
impact which the justice system has had on Blacks and Hispanics.
That opportunity comes at the time of sentencing. The courtroom
sentencing process should include a full examination of the
circumstances of both victim and offender, and an analysis of
community support and supervision mechanisms which may be able to
contribute to appropriate sentencing options. The goals of this
process should be several: to assess public safety concerns; to
restore victims to the extent possible; to order appropriate and
constructive sanctions in the community; and, to reduce the
chances that offenders will return to the system. As an
organization familiar with sentencing programs and sentencing
reform efforts throughout the country, our staff knows that these
are attainable goals. </p>

<p>Court officials should also establish mechanisms to monitor
whether minority offenders are appropriately represented in
non-incarcerate sentencing alternatives, such as community
corrections programs, house arrest and electronic monitoring. If
disparities exist, an analysis of the reasons for this should be
undertaken. In the juvenile justice area, The National Council of
Juvenile and Family Court Judges is currently developing policy
recommendations to respond to the disproportionate incarceration
of minority youth. These may serve as a model which could be
adopted for the criminal justice system. </p>

<p>3. <u>Restore Appropriate Judicial Discretion</u> </p>

<p>White collar offenders such as Ivan Boesky and Oliver North
receive a full consideration of appropriate sentencing options.
For many of the indigent defendants filling up our nation's
prisons, mandatory and guideline sentencing virtually prohibit
any consideration of alternative sentencing options. Abuse of
judicial discretion needs to be carefully monitored, but use of
judicial discretion to respond to individual and community needs
at sentencing should be encouraged. </p>

<p>4. <u>Encourage Courts to Make Greater Use of Alternatives to
Incarceration</u> </p>

<p>Incarceration is by far the most costly component of the
criminal justice system. It has also not proved to be very
productive as a means of reducing crime. A variety of
community-based sanctions exist which have been demonstrated to
be appropriate punishments for a wide range of offenders. These
include restitution to victims, community service work, intensive
probation supervision, and provisions for treatment programs,
education, and employment. </p>

<p>My organization, The Sentencing Project, has helped develop
many programs that offer courts alternatives to prison in a range
of cases, and we have seen courts accept these alternatives in
well over half the cases presented. We know that judges can and
will make more use of alternatives, if given the opportunity to
do so at sentencing. </p>

<p>5. <u>Reduce Lengthy and Inefficient Prison Terms</u> </p>

<p>Mandatory sentencing laws and lengthier prison terms have
resulted in high costs, with only relatively modest gains in
crime control. Prisoners are prevented from committing crimes in
the community while they are locked up but this represents only a
small fraction of all crimes. A 1978 report by the National
Academy of Sciences concluded that to achieve a 10 percent
reduction in crime, New York would have had to increase its
prison population by 263 percent and Massachusetts by 310
percent.<u>11</u>/ </p>

<p>The massive increase in incarceration and lengthening of
prison terms provides almost no long-term benefits in reduction
of recidivism. The most recent Justice Department study of this
issue shows that recidivism rates, while very high, are virtually
identical for prisoners who serve anywhere from one to five
years.<u>12/</u> Therefore, &quot;getting tough&quot; results in
high corrections costs, but leaves us with offenders who are no
less likely to commit future crimes. </p>

<p>Reducing lengthy prison terms by itself is not the answer to
crime. What it would accomplish though, is to relieve the burden
on an overcrowded system to reduce the impact of the system on
minorities, and to free up tax dollars to be used for prevention,
a more effective means of crime control. </p>

<p>11 National Research Council, <u>Deterrence and
Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects of Criminal Sanctions on
Crime Rates</u>, National Academy of Sciences, Washington, 1978. </p>

<p>12 Bureau of Justice Statistics, &quot;Recidivism of Prisoners
Released in 1983,&quot; Washington, D.C., April 1989. </p>

<p>6. <u>Require Racial/Ethnic Impact Statements from the Office
of National Drug Control Policy</u> </p>

<p>Given the serious impact of drugs and the drug war on minority
communities, I would suggest that the Office of National Drug
Control Policy be required to submit an annual report on the
impact of its policies and funding priorities on racial and
ethnic communities. Such a report might include the degree to
which funding is made available to minority communities and
organizations, the impact of prosecution and incarceration on
these communities, and the number of persons receiving drug
treatment services. This type of analysis would help to provide a
focus for policy considerations regarding minority communities. </p>

<p>7. <u>Develop More Accurate Reporting Methods for Hispanics</u>
</p>

<p>As noted above, there is reason to believe that Hispanics are
undercounted in the criminal justice system due to
inconsistencies in reporting methods and lack of data. It is
important to develop policies and procedures that are consistent
nationwide in order to assess the impact of criminal justice
policies on Hispanic communities, and to enable the criminal
justice system to respond more appropriately to its varied
populations. </p>

<p>8. <u>Restore a Balanced Perspective on the Relative Role of
Criminal Justice Sanctions and Social and Economic Supports</u> </p>

<p>The criminal justice system does not necessarily provide the
best forum for reducing crime. As the American Bar Association
Criminal Justice Section's Special Committee on Criminal Justice
in a Free Society reported, of approximately 34 million serious
crimes committed against persons or property in 1986, 31 million
never resulted in arrest and only several hundred thousand
resulted in felony convictions and imprisonment. Simply put, law
enforcement and court officials could, under the best of
conditions, effectively prosecute and punish only a small portion
of overall criminal activity.13/ </p>

<p>Our continued excessive emphasis on a law enforcement strategy
to fight drugs fails to address the root causes of the drug
problem. Our emphasis on punitive criminal justice remedies
distracts us from more fundamental and potentially far-reaching
questions: why is it that citizens of one of the wealthiest
nations and of all social classes use illegal substances to the
extent that Americans do today? </p>

<p>For inner city and low-income communities, these root causes
are certainly more closely tied to poverty, lack of opportunity,
poor education and health care, and lack of hope for the future,
than to any lack of jail and prison cells. </p>

<p>At the same time we have been waging a law enforcement war,
with its own negative effects upon young Black males, conditions
for Black communities have worsened on other fronts as well. A
new study by the National Center for Children in Poverty of
Columbia University documents that half of Black children and 40
percent of Hispanic children under the age of six now live in
poverty.<u>14</u>/ It should be clear to those of us within the
criminal justice system as well as others, that unless we
effectively address issues of poverty immediately, we are likely
to see the next generation of Black males enter the criminal
justice system at a rate even higher than one in four. </p>

<p>We have a choice. We can spend money on prisons, and on
policies that are guaranteed to fill them with people who don't
need to be in them, including many young Black men, <u>or</u> we
can spend more time, energy, creativity and money to keep more
people out of the system entirely. Funding for poverty-fighting,
crime-preventing programs should be viewed from the long-term
perspective, as a preventive measure which will reduce criminal
justice costs in the future. </p>

<p>13 <u>Criminal Justice in Crisis</u>, American Bar Association
(Chicago 1988) pp. 4,5. </p>

<p>14 Spencer Rich, &quot;Report Says Children Under 6 Have
Highest Poverty Rate,&quot;<u> The Washington Post</u>, April<b> </b>15,
1990. </p>

<p><b>CONCLUSION</b> </p>

<p>Of the scores of editorials which appeared in response to our
report (see Appendix) almost all uniformly endorsed the range of
policy recommendations I have suggested here. This reaction shows
that the public may be much more ready for change than many
policymakers have led us to believe. </p>

<p>The funding and policy decisions we make today regarding our
approach to the drug problem will have a direct impact on the
next generation of Black men. As an editorial in the <u>Charleston
(S.C.) Post/Courier</u> noted, &quot;If the festering cycle of
poverty, violence and hate is not broken, more black men will be
doomed to lives of crime and years behind bars.&quot; </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><b>APPENDIX</b> : <b>SELECTED NEWSCLIPPINGS</b> </p>

<p><b>&quot;YOUNG BLACK MEN AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM:</b> <b>A
GROWING NATIONAL PROBLEM&quot;</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h3><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22">BEHIND
BARS </h3>

<h5><i>The numbers point to a need for preventive programs </i></h5>

<p>DETROIT FREE PRESS/THURSDAY, MARCH 1, 1990 </p>

<p>It is a haunting snapshot: </p>

<ul>
    <li>One million persons in U.S. jails and prisons, a number
        matched only by the Soviet Union. </li>
</ul>

<ul>
    <li>Almost one in four black men between 20 and 29 in prison
        or jail, on probation or parole on a single day in, 1989.
        (Over the course of the year, the number of individuals
        under the criminal justice system's control would be a
        good bit higher.) Comparable figures for white men are
        one in 16 and for Hispanic males one in 10. </li>
</ul>

<ul>
    <li>The number of young black men under the control of the
        criminal justice system - 609,690 - exceeds the total
        number of black men enrolled in college in 1986 -
        436,000. For white males, the figures are 4.6 million in
        higher education and just more than one million in the
        criminal justice system. </li>
</ul>

<p>Those and other facts are contained in a new report by the
Sentencing Project, which argues persuasively that it's time for
a look at hard goals and means in the criminal justice system.
Even if the cost of incarcerating or otherwise controlling young
black males weren't an astronomical 2.5 billion, even if prison
overcrowding weren't a national scandal, even if the prison
buildup in Michigan and elsewhere weren't diverting attention
from other problems that would be true. The need for a
reassessment is made more compelling by the nationwide phenomenon
that more and longer sentences have come at a time of declining
crime rates. </p>

<p>The importance that the report by the Washington-based,
nonprofit organization places on the racial and ethnic
disparities that exist is appropriate. In assessing the impact of
the present system on the black community, though, it seems to
ignore that the vast majority of the victims of these youthful
black offenders were black as well. The current, &quot;get
tough&quot; stance of the system is popular among blacks, who
long saw crime in their communities ignored. </p>

<p>The report, however, reasonably suggests a look at
alternatives to incarceration, as well as more treatment programs
and greater use of victim restitution programs. </p>

<p>For some time - including 1986 when our year-long emphasis was
a &quot;generation worth saving&quot; - we've written about the
need for a long term strategy for intervening early to help
salvage the lives of young people. </p>

<p>Ten or 20 years from now, we'll be decrying similar - or worse
- findings if prevention, rather than reaction, doesn't emerge as
our top priority. </p>

<h3><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22">BLACKS
IN PRISON </h3>

<p>THE BIRMINGHAM NEWS, BIRMINGHAM, ALA., D. 169,060, AL-144, FEB
28, 1990 </p>

<p>It would be easy to jump to conclusions about a new study that
indicates one in four black men between the ages of 20 and 29 is
either in prison or jail on probation or parole. See, some will
say, I told you blacks were more likely to be criminals. </p>

<p>That's not what the study says. What it does say is that young
black men make up a much higher percentage of the prison
population than they should. </p>

<p>Lack of education, lack of job opportunities, a welfare system
that has weakened families without curing poverty and a drug
culture that has taken root in poor neighborhoods all have more
to do with why people become criminals than skin color. </p>

<p>The statistics in <u>The Sentencing Project</u> report raise a
number of questions. For example, in 1989 there were 247,930
whites in state prisons, jails and federal prisons, compared to
212,252 blacks. </p>

<p>With blacks comprising only about 12 percent of the entire
U.S. population, those numbers should not be so close to equal.
But they are. Why then, given a nearly equal number of blacks and
whites in prison, are there more than twice as many whites on
probation or parole (806,578) than blacks (397,438)? </p>

<p>Crime rates nationally rose only 2 percent between 1979 and
1988, yet the number of prison inmates doubled during that time.
In other words, there hasn't been more crime, but there has been
a tougher attitude toward criminals. More of them are being sent
to jail and more of those being sent are black. </p>

<p>As a result, 23 percent of all young black men (609,690) are
to some degree<b> </b>under the control of the criminal justice
system, compared to 6 percent of young white men (1,054,508).
More young black men are getting their higher education in the
criminal justice system than in college (436,000). </p>

<p>The Sentencing Project said the cost of incarcerating or
monitoring convicted young black men has reached $2.5 billion a
year. Then it pointed out that although the prison population has
tripled since 1973, victimization rates have only dropped 5
percent. </p>

<p>The Project suggests more alternative sentencing - victims
restitution, community service, etc. - as a cost-effective way to
keep young blacks out of prison. We agree. But those actions only
address the problem after it has become a problem, which is the
shortcoming of the U.S. criminal justice system. </p>

<p>This nation needs a more effective system that interacts with
public education and social services to reach young people, black
and white, before they become criminals. </p>

<p>Locking them up is a belated and costly answer. </p>

<h3><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22">A
LOST GENERATION </h3>

<p>The San Diego Union, San Diego, Calif., D. 252,686, March 1,
1990, BURRELLE'S </p>

<p>It is a national tragedy that one of every four black American
men in their 20's has been convicted of a crime. This disturbing
statistic has complex roots in a drug-ridden society where
incentives to work for a better life have been steadily
undermined. </p>

<p>According to a study released by the Sentencing Project, a
Washington-based nonprofit group, 25 percent of black men in
their 20s are in jail, in prison or on probation or parole. This
number refers only to those actually convicted of does not
include suspects who are arrested and released. By contrast only
about 6 percent of white men in their 20s are being held or
supervised by criminal courts. </p>

<p>Marc Mauer, author of the re port, rightly points out that
America now faces the frightening prospect of &quot;writing off
an entire generation of black men, from leading productive
lives.'' </p>

<p>The implications of the report are ominous. From almost every
standpoint - education, health, income, mortality and family
unity - black men are one of the nation's most troubled groups.
Health and Human Services Secretary Louis W. Sullivan , who is
known for alarmist statements, puts it aptly: &quot; Not since
slavery has so much calamity and ongoing catastrophe been visited
on black males.&quot; </p>

<p>The causes of the crisis are many and varied. Drug abuse
obviously is a prime factor. Poverty and lack of employment add
to the problem. Well-intentioned welfare programs have eroded
traditional values and helped create a permanent underclass.
Despite the best efforts of legislators, discrimination still
exists. Most of these causes are exacerbated by inadequate
education, poor self-esteem and resultant feelings of despair. </p>

<p>Herb Cawthorne, chairman of San Diego's Black Federation,
agrees that better education and more job opportunities would
reduce the crime rate among young black men. But he also
perceives the need to address what he calls &quot; this serious,
systemic problem&quot; in a practical way by urging blacks to
stand up and help themselves. </p>

<p>&quot;They must not think their situation is hopeless,&quot;
he says. &quot;When that happens, anger and resentment build up
toward society and irresponsible behavior results.&quot; </p>

<p>The Sentencing Project report makes no attempt to explain why
so many black men run afoul of the law but contends that it is
counterproductive merely to lock them up. Mr. Mauer recommends
alternatives such as forcing criminals to repay their victims or
work on community projects. </p>

<p>The report's main contribution is to spur national debate on a
subject that has become too critical to neglect. We as a nation
must recognize that far too many young black men are in deep
trouble. A battle must be waged to break the festering cycle of
violence and hate that dooms so many to lives of crime and years
behind bars. </p>

<h3><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22">GENERATION
OF BLACK MALES NOW AT RISK </h3>

<p>Rockford Register Star, Rockford, Il, Saturday March 3, 1990 </p>

<p>There are truly shocking implications in a new study report
showing that nearly one in every four American black males in
their 20s is behind bars or on probation or parole. This terrible
statistic suggests, as one of the authors of the study puts it,
that the nation now risks &quot; the possibility of writing off
an entire generation of black men from leading productive
lives.&quot; </p>

<p>The causes of this frightening situation are of both recent
and long-standing issue. Obviously, the familiar factor of
grinding poverty in the black underclass is involved. Widespread
disintegration of black families, for a number of reasons, is
another cause. The growth of the crack-cocaine culture in urban
ghettos is yet another. </p>

<p>On top of all that, there has been in recent years the spread
of get-tough policies in dealing with street crime - more
prisons, longer sentences, more mandatory sentences. If the
product of this popular strategy is the loss of a whole
generation of black men, it would seem to merit rethinking. </p>

<p>That's also the attitude of The Sentencing Project, the
nonprofit organization that sponsored the study report. It calls
for reforms in the criminal justice system calculated to make
first-time lawbreakers less likely to become repeat offenders. </p>

<p>The point is well made. For 20 years, the popular approach to
crime has been to hire more police, build more prisons, appoint
tougher judges, hand down sterner sentences - and for all of that
we find that crime rates have only increased. Alternatives along
the lines suggested by the Sentencing Project merit exploration. </p>

<p>These would include alternative punishments (restitution to
victims, community service) and programs of drug treatment,
employment training and education for first-time offenders.
Prison should be last resort after alternatives have failed, as
the study report recommends. </p>

<p>In recent decades, this nation has spent hundreds of billions,
even trillions, of dollars to defend itself against the menace of
international communism. With that threat now on the wane,
perhaps it is time that we devote more of our resources to saving
the country from the awful consequences that are sure to accrue
from the moral and economic incapacitation of an entire
generation of black men by lives of crime. </p>

<h3><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22">A
GENERATION IS UNDER ARREST </h3>

<p>DURHAM MORNING HERALD, DURHAM, NC, DAILY 46,324, TUESDAY MAR
6, 1990, BURRELLE'S </p>

<p>One black man behind bars, on probation or on parole is an
individual; two-thirds of a million is a statistic. That's how
we've looked at the growing plight of young black males, as
statistics rather than individuals. </p>

<p>A study released a few days ago by the Sentencing Project, a
non-profit organization that promotes alternative punishments and
sentencing reform, helps put the problems of black males in
stunning perspective. </p>

<p>Analyzing figures obtained from the U.S. Justice Department,
researchers concluded that one in four black males between the
ages of 20 and 29 is in trouble with the law. He is either in
jail, on probation or on parole. </p>

<p>If these figures are accurate - the Justice Department didn't
dispute them - they reveal the outline of a social disaster whose
repercussions will be with us for a long time. Consider: </p>

<ul>
    <li>609,690 young blacks were under control of the criminal
        justice system in mid 1989. That's 23 percent of the
        entire black male population aged 20-29. </li>
    <li>Although 1,054,058 white men in the same age category
        were under control of the criminal justice system, they
        represented only 6.2 percent of the 20-29 age group. </li>
    <li>The number of black men in college was roughly 436,000. </li>
</ul>

<p>In other words, more young black men face officers of the law
than face professors of English. It's hard not to agree with Marc
Mauer, author of The Sentencing Project study, when he says,
&quot;We now risk the possibility of writing off an entire
generation of black men from leading productive lives.&quot; </p>

<p>Indeed, that already may be happening. Young black men are 10
times more likely to be murdered than their white counterparts.
Murder is the primary cause of death among black males aged 15 to
44 - a death rate so high it has become the major factor in the
falling life expectancy of American blacks as a whole. </p>

<p>Mr. Mauer argues against building more prison cells, the
approach generally favored in North Carolina, and putting more
stress on counseling, dispute resolution and other alternatives
to prison. He would also give judges broad sentencing guidelines
that would allow them to tailor a criminal's punishment to his
situation. </p>

<p>Mr. Mauer's recommendations address only the surface tension
of a much deeper pool of problems. The driving forces behind the
failure of so many young black men to thrive in today's society
can be traced to an environment of crime, drugs and family
disintegration. </p>

<p>There is no simple answer to what is happening to them, but
one place to start looking for it is in jobs. The federal
government's Job Corps program now takes about 65,000 youngsters
a year, a figure that could be doubled by Congress at the cost of
two B-2 bombers. Congress should also consider some form of
voluntary national service, perhaps along the lines of the
Depression-era Civilian Corps, to teach job skills and foster a
sense of self- achievement. </p>

<p>Business can help through innovative hiring practices and by
supporting school reform. Professionals and other well-educated
people can give a few hours a month to tutoring programs. Only
when the young black male emerges as a whole person rather than a
statistic in such endeavors will we see not only the measure of
his problems, but also the opportunities to help him. </p>

<h3><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22">WASTING
A GENERATION OF YOUNG BLACKS IN PRISONS </h3>

<p>CALIFORNIAN, EL CAJON, CA, DAILY 22,337, SATURDAY MAR 3, 1990 </p>

<p>More depressing news is difficult to imagine: One in every
four black men in their 20s is in jail, in prison, on probation
or parole. At a time when they should be graduating from colleges
and universities, settling into good jobs, getting married and
raising families, many of them sit in fetid prison cells, doing
nothing constructive for themselves or for society. </p>

<p>Martin Luther King chanted the refrain &quot;Free at
last,&quot; but loosing the shackles of bondage caused by
discriminatory practices unfortunately did not improve by much
the status of what has been called the vast
&quot;underclass&quot; of blacks with no jobs, little education,
and no future. </p>

<p>&quot;We now risk the possibility of writing off an entire
generation of black men from leading productive lives,&quot; said
Marc Mauer, author of a report by <u>The Sentencing Project</u>,
a Washington based group lobbying for alternatives to
incarceration. &quot;This has ominous implications for the black
community. We really don't know what it will mean for the future
because we have never had a situation like this before.&quot; </p>

<p>A quarter of a century, more or less, has passed since the
civil rights marches of the 1960s, the burning of Watts and the
rage of probably a dozen cities in this country. How far have we
come? Not far at all. </p>

<p>Although blacks make up only about 12 percent of the nation's
population, there are more black inmates in state prisons than
whites. Among the young males, 23 percent of the blacks end up in
prison or on probation or parole; 6 percent of the whites in the
same age category are in that predicament. </p>

<p>At the beginning of the conservative era with the inauguration
of Ronald Reagan, there was much talk of establishing
&quot;enterprise zones&quot; in the ghettos of large cities. This
was to be the Republican answer to &quot;throwing money at
problems.&quot; </p>

<p>If there are any models of &quot;enterprise zones&quot; that
have brought economic vitality to the most depressed areas of
large cities, they must be the best-kept secrets of the
Reagan-Bush and Bush-Quayle administrations. With unemployment at
high levels, black youths turn to drug trade for their
livelihood. </p>

<p>A completely separate report prepared for the University of
California reveals that the number of blacks entering the UC
system is low - only 4.5 percent of black high school graduates
in California are eligible compared to 14.1 percent of the white
graduates. </p>

<p>One more door is closed that, if opened, would change the
picture for the future of young blacks. </p>

<p>It should come as no surprise that the cost of incarcerating
the large numbers of blacks in prison, and supervising them while
they are on probation or parole, is staggering. It's put at $2.5
billion. </p>

<p>What a colossal waste when so much could be done with that
money to teach young blacks the skills necessary for good-paying
jobs or improve their educational levels so they could go on to
college and be rewarded with positions that offer prestige and
compensation equal to what their white counterparts receive. </p>

<p>We are preparing for a blighted future when so many young
blacks view entry into the drug trade as their only way out of
poverty and squalor. It will require a national administration
with a more realistic grasp of what is needed to reverse this
ominous trend than the platitudes and empty symbolism offered by
the Bushes and the Qualyes. (dch) <br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>