
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-86</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B002-179</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032155 text/html 13368
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:21:49 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:24:21 GMT
Content-length: 13150
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Expanded Military Surveillance Not Justified by Measurable
Goals </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2><a name="OLE_LINK2">Expanded Military Surveillance Not
Justified by Measurable Goals or Results</a> </h2>

<p> <b>Statement of Louis J. Rodrigues, Director, </b> </p>

<p> <b>Systems Development and Production Issues, National
Security and International Affairs Division</b> </p>

<p> GAO/T-NSIAD-94-14 </p>

<p> October 5, 1993 </p>

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <u>United States General Accounting Office</u> </p>

<p> GAO Testimony </p>

<p> Before the Legislation and National Security Subcommittee,
Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives </p>

<p> Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: </p>

<p> I am pleased to be here today to discuss the military's
surveillance of the drug-smuggling threat. My testimony today is
based on a series of reports concerning DOD's role in drug
interdiction that we have issued to the House Government
Operations Committee over the past several years. </p>

<p> <u>RESULTS IN BRIEF</u> </p>

<p> The Department of Defense (DOD) has significantly expanded
the nation's capability to detect and monitor cocaine
smugglers--the principal targets of the military's surveillance
efforts. However, we found that although this expanded capability
has become increasingly more costly, it has not led to any
reduction in the estimated flow of cocaine onto American streets.
</p>

<p> The fact is, Mr. Chairman, the budget increases that have
allowed DOD to expand its surveillance capabilities have not been
based on measurable goals and results. Consequently,
decision-makers have lacked critical information needed to assess
the costs and benefits of military surveillance. </p>

<p> The nation's continuing failure to reduce the cocaine flow is
not an indictment of DOD's surveillance efforts. But in the
absence of measurable goals for DOD's mission, we believe it is
the best evidence available for objectively assessing the
contribution that military surveillance has made to the drug war.
And that evidence strongly indicates that military surveillance
is not producing results commensurate with its costs. </p>

<p> <u>BACKGROUND</u> </p>

<p> The National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 1989
made DOD the lead agency for detecting and monitoring air and
maritime shipments of illegal drugs to the United States. The
mission is part of a multi-agency effort, under the Office of
National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP), to deter smuggling and
reduce drug supplies by interdicting shipments to the United
States. Most interdiction efforts have been concentrated on
cocaine from South America, which ONDCP has designated the
primary drug threat in the United States. </p>

<p> Interdiction involves two broad functions: surveillance (that
is, detection and monitoring) and apprehension. DOD's
surveillance mission supports the U.S. and foreign law
enforcement agencies that apprehend suspects and seize their
cargo, both in the source countries where cocaine is produced and
in the transit zones between South America and the United States.
Law enforcement agencies participate in both the surveillance and
apprehension phases. DOD is generally precluded from the
apprehension phase (the so-called &quot;end game&quot;) because
of laws restricting military participation in law enforcement
activities. </p>

<p> Funding for DOD's surveillance mission grew from about $212
million in fiscal year 1989 to an estimated $844 million in
fiscal year 1993. DOD has requested $890 million for fiscal year
1994. </p>

<p> <u>DOD HAS EXPANDED SURVEILLANCE CAPABILITIES BUT AT A COST</u>
</p>

<p> Before 1989, the limited surveillance assets of civilian law
enforcement agencies allowed only intermittent and sporadic
coverage of key cocaine-smuggling zones in the Caribbean and the
eastern Pacific. Since becoming the lead agency for detection and
monitoring, DOD has improved that coverage by providing the
resources to conduct extensive surveillance of primary smuggling
routes. With this expanded coverage, DOD has contributed to drug
seizures by detecting suspects early, monitoring them
continually, and handing them off to law enforcement agencies
near expected arrival zones. </p>

<p> However, this increased capability has been expensive. DOD's
extensive surveillance requires a major commitment of aircraft,
ships, and personnel. To put the costs of that commitment into
perspective, the commander of one joint task force testified in
1992 that they are equivalent to what would be &quot;expended
over a year on a Sixth Fleet deployment into the Mediterranean--a
substantial commitment.&quot; Some of those costs would have to
be incurred for training exercises even if DOD were not involved
in counterdrug operations--but some would not. Some aircraft and
ship crews engaged in counterdrug operations receive little
training related to the military's traditional war-fighting
mission. </p>

<p> <u>FUNDING INCREASES NOT BASED ON MEASURABLE GOALS OR RESULTS</u>
</p>

<p> This substantial commitment has been made through a series of
funding increases since DOD became the lead agency in 1989, even
though drug-war planners have never established specific goals or
valid effectiveness measures for the surveillance mission. In the
absence of such measures: </p>

<p> the success or failure of military surveillance cannot be
assessed quantitatively, </p>

<p> the resources required for military surveillance cannot be
objectively determined, and therefore </p>

<p> Congress and the executive branch are denied the kinds of
objective assessments needed to evaluate alternatives and make
policy decisions. </p>

<p> <u>INCREASED SURVEILLANCE HAS NOT PRODUCED COMMENSURATE
RESULTS</u> </p>

<p> Despite the increased surveillance capabilities that DOD is
providing, interdiction success remains elusive and progress
toward national supply-reduction goals remains negligible. </p>

<p> A key goal of the National Drug Control Strategy has been to
reduce cocaine supplies on the streets of American cities.
According to sources in the intelligence community, however, the
estimated volume of cocaine entering the country has not
appreciably declined since DOD was given its lead-agency mission.
This failure to reduce the drug flow into America cannot be
attributed to the efficiency of DOD's surveillance efforts or any
single initiative in the national strategy, but the inability to
interdict shipments in decisive numbers is a contributing factor.
</p>

<p> Interdiction has had limited successes. Seizures have
increased, and traffickers have been forced to adopt new, and
presumably more expensive, smuggling methods. But these successes
have not made a difference in terms of deterring smugglers and
reducing the flow of cocaine. Interdiction assessments that have
been made indicate that most smugglers are not apprehended. And
the price, purity, and availability of cocaine on American
streets has remained relatively stable. </p>

<p> The capability of military surv eillance to rectify this
situation is limited. The limitation is that surveillance of
suspect ships and planes is not the weak link in the interdiction
process. The weak link is the inability to apprehend suspected
smugglers in transit countries and at our borders. </p>

<p> <u>INTERDICTION SUCCESS REQUIRES APPREHENSION CAPABILITIES</u>
</p>

<p> Simply stated, the capability to detect and monitor drug
smugglers does not assure interdiction success--no matter how
extensive that capability may be. Success ultimately depends on
the capability to apprehend smugglers--arresting people and
seizing their cargo and equipment. However, DOD's surveillance
capabilities exceed the apprehension capabilities of law
enforcement agencies, especially in the countries that U.S.-bound
cocaine transits. </p>

<p> Cocaine traffickers have been able to remain relatively
immune to apprehension by adopting new tactics. Instead of flying
cocaine directly into the United States, for example, they fly it
into Central America and Mexico--where U.S. law enforcement
agencies lack jurisdiction and host-nation apprehension
capabilities are limited. The traffickers then move the cocaine
up near our Southwest border by various means and transport it
into the United States in cars, trucks, and other conveyances.
Traffickers also transport cocaine in shipping containers and in
the numerous, difficult-to-find hiding places aboard large
vessels. </p>

<p> Without more law enforcement assistance in the transitting
countries and without improved search technology at U.S. ports
and border crossings, traffickers can continue to ship cocaine
via these methods with relative impunity. Sustaining or
increasing DOD's surveillance capabilities will not do the job. </p>

<p> <u>DRUG PROFITS</u> <u>MAKE INTERDICTION</u> <u>SUCCESS
DOUBTFUL</u> </p>

<p> According to the National Drug Control Strategy, the real
value of interdiction lies in the disruption of trafficking
organizations, thus raising their cost of doing business.
However, this is difficult to achieve, even with the increased
surveillance capability provided by DOD. Part of the problem is
that the enormous profits in cocaine trafficking make
interdiction losses relatively inconsequential, especially in
light of the fact that production and smuggling costs account for
such a small part of street prices. In 1988, for example, the
RAND Corporation reported that only 10 percent of cocaine's final
price is attributable to production and smuggling costs.' </p>

<p> Most of the price growth occurs after cocaine crosses U.S.
borders. Our 1991 report noted that the price for enough cocoa
leaf to produce one kilogram (2.2 pounds) of cocaine was between
$65 and $370. The finished product that entered the country was
valued at $800 to $5,000 per kilogram. After being diluted, the
street price equated to between $70,000 and $300,000 a kilogram.
Therefore, the profit margin--after cocaine has passed beyond
DOD's surveillance and the threat of interdiction in route or at
our borders--could range from about 6,000 to 8,600 percent. Given
this huge profit margin, it appears unlikely that interdiction
will be a significant cost deterrent to traffickers, regardless
of the surveillance support that DOD provides. </p>

<p> <u>CONCLUSIONS</u> </p>

<p> In summary, Mr. Chairman, military surveillance has not
demonstrated that it can make a contribution--to either drug
interdiction or to the national goal of reduced drug
supplies--that is commensurate with its cost. The portion of the
federal drug budget allocated to military surveillance has nearly
quadrupled over the last 5 years, without measurable goals or
results to show that the increases were warranted. Moreover, the
available evidence indicates that they were not warranted. Even
with DOD's increased surveillance support to interdiction,
cocaine remains affordable and readily available in the United
States. The continuing failure to reduce the amount of cocaine
entering the country can undoubtedly be attributed to many
factors. But the fact is that adding military surveillance to the
nation's interdiction efforts has not made a difference in our
ability to reduce the flow of cocaine to American streets. </p>

<p> 'Peter Reuter, Gordon Crawford, Jonathan Cave, et al., <u>Sealing
the Borders: The Effects of Increased Military Participation in
Drug Interdiction</u>. The RAND Corporation (January 1988). </p>

<p> The National Drug Control Strategy has noted that
interdiction efforts should be viewed, not in isolation, but as
merely one of the fronts on which the drug war is being waged.
The same can reasonably be said of DOD's part in the interdiction
process. Some level of surveillance is an essential part of the
interdiction program called for in the National Drug Control
Strategy. However, the level of that effort should be
commensurate with the relative contribution that it makes--and
can be expected to make--to the national war on drugs. We believe
that contribution has not been demonstrated by expanded military
surveillance. We also believe that continuing failures to
interdict decisive numbers of cocaine shipments and to reduce the
cocaine flow into the U.S. indicate that the government is not
getting a reasonable return on the increased funding provided for
military surveillance. </p>

<p> Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement. I will be happy to
answer any questions you or members of the Subcommittee may have.
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>