
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-65</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-154</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/downs2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043835 text/html 14789
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:38:21 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:40 GMT
Content-length: 14571
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hugh Downs commentary on hemp</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<h2>Hugh Downs commentary on hemp </h2>

<p><b>ABC News, NY, 11/90:</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>Voters in the state of Alaska recently made marijuana illegal
again for the first time in 15 years. If Alaska turns out to be
like the other 49 states, the law will do little to curb use or
production. Even the drug czar himself, William Bennett, has
abandoned the drug war now that his &quot;test case&quot; of
Washington, D.C., continues to see rising crime figures connected
with the drug industry. </p>

<p>Despite the legal trend against marijuana, many Americans
continue to buck the trend. Some pro-marijuana organizations in
fact tell us that marijuana, also known as hemp, could, as a raw
material, save the U.S. economy. That's some statement. Not by
smoking it--that's a minor issue. Would you believe that
marijuana could replace most oil and energy needs? That marijuana
could revolutionize the textile industry and stop foreign
imports? Those are the claims. </p>

<p>Some people think marijuana, or hemp, may be the epitome of
yankee ingenuity. Mr. Jack Herer, for example, is the national
director and founder of an organization called HEMP (that's an
acronym for &quot;Help End Marijuana Prohibition&quot;) located
in Van Nuys, California. Mr. Herer is the author of a remarkable
little book called, &quot;The Emperor Wears No Clothes,&quot;
wherein, not surprisingly, Mr. Herer urges the repeal of
marijuana prohibition. </p>

<p>Mr. Herer is not alone. Throughout the war on drugs, several
organizations have consistently urged the legalization of
marijuana. &quot;High Times&quot; magazine for example, The
National Organization to Reform Marijuana Laws or NORML for
short, and an organization called BACH-the Business Alliance for
Commerce in Hemp. </p>

<p>But the reason the pro-marijuana lobby want marijuana legal
has little to do with getting high, and a great deal to do with
fighting oil giants like Saddam Hussein, Exxon and Iran. The
pro-marijuana groups claim that hemp is such a versatile raw
material, that its products not only compete with petroleum, but
with coal, natural gas, nuclear energy, pharmaceutical, timber
and textile companies.[1] </p>

<p>It is estimated that methane and methanol production alone
from hemp grown as biomass could replace 90% of the world's
energy needs.[2] If they are right, this is not good news for oil
interests and could account for the continuation of marijuana
prohibition. The claim is that the threat hemp posed to natural
resource companies back in the thirties accounts for its original
ban. At one time marijuana seemed to have a promising future as a
cornerstone of industry. When Rudolph Diesel produced his famous
engine in 1896, he assumed that the diesel engine would be
powered by a variety of fuels, especially vegetable and seed
oils. Rudolph Diesel, like most engineers then, believed
vegetable fuels were superior to petroleum. Hemp is the most
efficient vegetable. </p>

<p>In the 1930s the Ford Motor Company also saw a future in
biomass fuels. Ford operated a successful biomass conversion
plant, that included hemp, at their Iron Mountain facility in
Michigan. Ford engineers extracted methanol, charcoal fuel, tar,
pitch, ethyl-acetate and creosote. All fundamental ingredients
for modern industry and now supplied by oil-related
industries.[2] </p>

<p>The difference is that the vegetable source is renewable,
cheap and clean, and the petroleum or coal sources are limited,
expensive and dirty. By volume, 30% of the hemp seed contains oil
suitable for high-grade diesel fuel as well as aircraft engine
and precision machine oil. </p>

<p>Henry Ford's experiments with methanol promised cheap, readily
renewable fuel. And if you think methanol means compromise, you
should know that many modern race cars run on methanol. About the
time Ford was making biomass methanol, a mechanical device[3] to
strip the outer fibers of the hemp plant appeared on the market.
These machines could turn hemp into paper and fabrics[4] quickly
and cheaply. Hemp paper is superior to wood paper. The first two
drafts of the U.S. constitution were written on hemp paper. The
final draft is on animal skin. Hemp paper contains no dioxin, or
other toxic residue, and a single acre of hemp can produce the
same amount of paper as four acres of trees.[5] The trees take 20
years to harvest and hemp takes a single season. In warm climates
hemp can be harvested two even three times a year. It also grows
in bad soil and restores the nutrients. Hemp fiber-stripping
machines were bad news to the Hearst paper manufacturing
division, and a host of other natural resource firms.
Coincidentally, the DuPont Chemical Company had, in 1937, been
granted a patent on a sulfuric acid process to make paper from
wood pulp. At the time DuPont predicted their sulfuric acid
process would account for 80% of their business for the next 50
years. </p>

<p>Hemp, once the mainstay of American agriculture, became a
threat to a handful of corporate giants. To stifle the commercial
threat that hemp posed to timber interests, William Randolph
Hearst began referring to hemp in his newspapers, by its Spanish
name, &quot;marijuana.&quot; This did two things: it associated
the plant with Mexicans and played on racist fears, and it misled
the public into thinking that marijuana and hemp were different
plants. </p>

<p>Nobody was afraid of hemp--it had been cultivated and
processed into usable goods, and consumed as medicine, and burned
in oil lamps, for hundreds of years. But after a campaign to
discredit hemp in the Hearst newspapers, Americans became afraid
of something called marijuana. </p>

<p>By 1937, the Marijuana Tax Act was passed which marked the
beginning of the end of the hemp industry. In 1938, &quot;Popular
Mechanics&quot; ran an article about marijuana called, &quot;New
Billion Dollar Crop.&quot;[6] It was the first time the words
&quot;billion dollar&quot; were used to describe a U.S.
agricultural product. &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot; said, . . . a
machine has been invented which solves a problem more than 6,000
years old. . . . The machine . . . is designed for removing the
fiber- bearing cortex from the rest of the stalk, making hemp
fiber available for use without a prohibitive amount of human
labor. Hemp is the standard fiber of the world. It has great
tensile strength and durability. It is used to produce more than
5,000 textile products ranging from rope, to fine laces, and the
woody &quot;hurds&quot; remaining after the fiber has been
removed, contain more than seventy-seven per cent cellulose, and
can be used to produce more than 25,000 products ranging from
dynamite to cellophane. </p>

<p>Well since the &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot; article appeared
over half a century ago, many more applications have come to
light. Back in 1935, more than 58,000 tons of marijuana seed were
used just to make paint and varnish (all non-toxic, by the way).
When marijuana was banned, these safe paints and varnishes were
replaced by paints made with toxic petrochemicals. In the 1930s
no one knew about poisoned rivers or deadly land-fills or
children dying from chemicals in house paint. </p>

<p>People did know something about hemp back then, because the
plant and its products were so common. </p>

<p>All ships lines were made from hemp and much of the sail
canvas. (In fact the word &quot;canvas&quot; is the Dutch
pronunciation of the Greek word for hemp, &quot;cannabis.&quot;)
All ropes, fozzers (sp?) and lines aboard ship, all rigging,
nets, flags and pennants were also made from marijuana stalks.
And so were all charts, logs and bibles. Today many of these
items are made, in whole or in part, with synthetic
petro-chemicals and wood. All oil lamps used to burn hemp- seed
oil until the whale oil edged it out of first place in the mid-
nineteenth century. And then, when all the whales were dead,
lamplights were fueled by petroleum, and coal, and recently
radioactive energy.[7] </p>

<p>This may be hard to believe in the middle of a war on drugs,
but the first law concerning marijuana in the colonies at
Jamestown in 1619, ordered farmers to grow Indian hemp.
Massachussetts passed a compulsory grow law in 1631. Connecticut
followed in 1632. The Chesapeake colonies ordered their farmers,
by law, to grow marijuana in the mid-eighteenth century. Names
like Hempstead or Hemphill dot the American landscape and reflect
areas of intense marijuana cultivation. </p>

<p>During World War II, domestic hemp production became crucial
when the Japanese cut off Asian supplies to the U.S. American
farmers (and even their sons), who grew marijuana, were exempt
from military duty during World War II. A 1942 U.S. Department of
Agriculture film called &quot;Hemp For Victory&quot; extolled the
agricultural might of marijuana and called for hundreds of
thousands of acres to be planted.[8] Despite a rather vigorous
drug crackdown, 4-H clubs were asked by the government to grow
marijuana for seed supply. Ironically, war plunged the government
into a sober reality about marijuana and that is that it's very
valuable. </p>

<p>In today's anti-drug climate, people don't want to hear about
the commercial potential of marijuana. The reason is that the
flowering top of a female hemp plant contains a drug. But from
1842 through the 1890s a powerful concentrated extract of
marijuana was the second most prescribed drug in the United
States. In all that time the medical literature didn't list any
of the ill effects claimed by today's drug warriors.[9] </p>

<p>Today, there are anywhere from 25 to 30 million Americans who
smoke marijuana regularly. As an industry, marijuana clears well
more than $4 billion a year. [This must have been a misreading of
his notes--for 1990, the minimum figure would have been at least
$40 billion for the entire nation. (phone interview with Jack
Herer)] Obviously, as an illegal business, none of that money
goes to taxes. But the modern marijuana trade only sells one
product, a drug. Hemp could be worth considerably more than $4
[$40] billion a year, if it were legally supplying the 50,000
safe products the proponents claim it can. </p>

<p>If hemp could supply the energy needs of the United States,
its value would be inestimable. Now that the drug czar is in
final retreat, America has an opportunity to, once and for all,
say farewell to the Exxon Valdez, Saddam Hussein and a
prohibitively expensive brinkmanship in the desert sands of Saudi
Arabia. </p>

<p>This is Hugh Downs, ABC News, New York. </p>

<p>----- </p>

<p>Footnotes: </p>

<p>[1] If you are unfamiliar with the facts about hemp, the
world's premier renewable natural resource, a great place to
start is Jack Herer's information-compressed, &quot;Hemp and the
Marijuana Conspiracy: The Emperor Wears No Clothes,&quot; (c)
1985, 1986, 1990, 1991, 1992, available in many bookstores, or
from H.E.M.P., 5632 Van Nuys Blvd., Suite 210, Van Nuys, CA
91401. From the Introduction: </p>

<p>The purpose of this book is to revive the authoritative
historical, social and economic perspective needed to ensure
comprehensive legal reforms, abolish cannabis hemp/marijuana
prohibition laws, and save the Earth's life systems. </p>

<p>Another book going to press at this time is &quot;Hemp:
Lifeline To The Future, Unexpected Answers To Our Environment And
Economic Crises,&quot; written by Chris Conrad, the founder and
international director of BACH, the Business Alliance for
Commerce in Hemp, Box 71093, LA, CA 90071-0093, 213/288-4152. </p>

<p>[2] &quot;About 6% of contiguous United States land area put
into cultivation for biomass could supply all current demands for
oil and gas.&quot; </p>

<p>Very few people know what &quot;biomass conversion&quot; or
&quot;pyrolysis&quot; mean-not only in terms of their dictionary
definitions, but in terms of what they mean as alternative
sources of energy, to the limited, expensive and dirty
petro-chemical, nuclear, or coal sources. The only reason the
U.S.--and every other nation on earth--can't once again become
energy independent and smog free is because people are not
educated concerning the facts about solutions to the
environment/energy &quot;crises&quot; continuously lamented and
tepidly addressed &quot;leaders,&quot; claiming they are the best
informed to decide what to do. The knowledge exists right now for
our lifeline to the future and the health and well-being of the
Seventh Generation yet unborn. Everyone of us must learn about
this existent lifeline and teach everyone else we know what the
facts are for THE way out of the current &quot;crisis&quot;. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>