
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-62</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B021-178</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/mjdrive.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103630 text/html 31544
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:36:21 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:09:00 GMT
Content-length: 31326
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Marijuana and Actual Driving Performance</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38171" -->

<p><font size="3">MARIJUANA AND ACTUAL DRIVING PERFORMANCE</font></p>

<p><font size="3">NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION</font></p>

<p><font size="3">BY HINDRIK W.J. ROBBE AND JAMES F. O'HANLON</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Institute for Human Psychopharmacology
University of Limburg Abstract 2A 6211 LS Maastricht -- The
Netherlands</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Sponsoring Agency: U.S. Department of
Transportation National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 400
Seventh Street, S.W. Washington, DC 20590</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Published November, 1993</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(Government disclaimer)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This publication is distributed by the U.S.
Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, in the interest of information exchange. The
opinions, findings and conclusions expressed in this publication
are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
Department of Transportation or the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration. [No Kidding] The United States Government
assumes no liability for its contents or use thereof. If trade or
manufacturers' name or products are mentioned, it is because they
are considered essential to the object of the publication and
should not be construed as an endorsement. The United States
Government does not endorse products or manufacturers.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Abstract: This report concerns the effects of
marijuana smoking on actual driving performance. It presents the
results of one pilot and three actual driving studies. The pilot
study's major purpose was to establish the THC dose current
marijuana users smoke to achieve their desired &quot;high&quot;.
From these results it was decided that the maximum THC dose for
subsequent driving studies would be 300 mcg / kg (0.3 mg / kg).
The first driving study was conducted on a closed section of a
primary highway. After smoking marijuana delivering THC doses of
0, 100, 200, and 300 mcg / kg, subjects drove a car while
maintaining a constant speed and lateral position. This study was
replicated with a new group of subjects, but now in the presence
of other traffic. In addition, a car following test was executed.
The third driving study compared the effects of a modest dose of
THC (100 mcg / kg) and alcohol )BAC of 0.04 g %) on city driving
performance. This program of research has shown that marijuana,
when taken alone, produces a moderate degree of driving
impairment which is related to the consumed THC dose. The
impairment manifests itself mainly in the ability to maintain a
steady lateral position on the road, but its magnitude is not
exceptional in comparison with changes produced by many medicinal
drugs and alcohol. Drivers under the influence of marijuana
retain insight in their performance and will compensate where
they can, for example, by slowing down or increasing effort. As a
consequence, THC's adverse effects on driving performance appear
relatively small.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">EXECUTIVE SUMMARY</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This report concerns the effects of marijuana
smoking on actual driving performance. It presents the results of
one pilot and three actual driving studies which were conducted
between April 1990 and March 1992. The program was funded by the
U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), with
the exception of the alcohol part of the city driving study which
was sponsored by the Dutch Ministry of Transport and Public
Works. The project was conducted by the Institute for Drugs,
Safety and Behavior of the University of Limburg, Maastricht, The
Netherlands. The major objectives of the program were to
determine the dose-response relationship between
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), marijuana's main constituent,
and objectively and subjectively measured aspects of real-world
driving; and, to determine whether it is possible to correlate
driving performance impairment with plasma concentrations of the
drug or a metabolite. A variety of driving tests were employed,
including: maintenance of a constant speed and lateral position
during uninterrupted highway travel, following a leading car with
varying speed on a highway, and city driving. The purpose of
applying different tests was to determine whether similar changes
in performance under the influence of THC occur in all, thereby
indicating a general drug effect on driving ability.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Chapter One provides background information
about the drug, its pharmacological properties, the prevalence of
its use, and a review of marijuana smoking and traffic safety.
THC's effects on the ability of drivers to operate safely in
traffic situations have traditionally been determined in two
ways: from epidemiological surveys of users' involvement in
traffic accidents and from empirical studies to measure the
drug's influence on skills related to driving, or driving itself.
Epidemiology shows that people drive after marijuana use and that
drivers involved in accidents often show the drug's presence. The
results are, however, inconclusive because of the high proportion
of cases which also involve alcohol use and the lack of proper
control groups. There, the extent marijuana contributes to
traffic accident causality remains obscure. Results from driving
simulator and closed-course tests show that THC in single inhaled
doses up to about 250 mcg / kg has relatively minor effects on
driving performance, certainly less than blood alcohol
concentrations (BAC's) in the range of 0.08-0.10 g %.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Chapter Two describes the studies of the
program and certain procedures that were common to all. These
were subject recruiting, compliance with ethical and legal
standards, screening for the presence of other illicit drugs and
alcohol, blood sampling procedures and quantitative analyses.
Subjects in all studies were recreational users of cannabis, i.e.
smoking marijuana or hashish more than once a month but not
daily. They were all healthy, between 21 and 40 years of age, had
normal weight and binocular acuity, and were licensed to drive an
automobile. Subjects were accompanied in every driving test by a
licensed driving instructor, experienced in supervising subjects
who operated under the influence of medicinal drugs in previous
studies. Redundant control system in the test vehicle was
available for controlling the car if emergency situations should
arise. Marijuana and placebo marijuana cigarettes were supplied
by the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA). [Isn't it
curious that a study done in the Netherlands used NIDA supplied
marijuana? It is nearly IMPOSSIBLE to get NIDA supplied marijuana
in the U.S. for these kind of studies or medical studies.]</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Chapter Three presents the results of the pilot
study. It was conducted in a hospital under strict medical
supervision to identify THC doses that recreational marijuana
users were likely to consume before driving. Twenty-four
subjects, twelve males and twelve females, participated. They
were allowed to smoke part or all of the THC content in three
cigarettes until achieving the desired psychological effect.
Cigarettes were smoked through a plastic holder in a manner
determined by the subjects. The only requirement was to smoke
continuously for a perod not exceeding 15 minutes. When subjects
voluntarily stopped smoking, cigarettes were carefully
extinguished and retained for subsequent gravimetric estimation
of THC consumed. Six subjects consumed one cigarette, thirteen
smoked two and four smoked three. The average amount of THC
consumed was 20.8 mg, after adjustment for body weight, 308 mcg /
kg [of body weight]. There was no significant difference between
males and females with respect to the weight adjusted preferred
dose. It was decided that the maximum dose for subsequent driving
studies would be 300 mcg / kg. This is considerably higher than
doses that have usually been administered to subjects in
experimental studies (typically, 100-200 mcg / kg THC).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The study provided the opportunity for
obtaining valuable information about THC's pharmacokinetics and
its pharmacodynamic effects after marijuana smoking. Blood
samples were repeatedly taken for measuring plasma concentrations
of THC and its major inactive metabolite, THC-COOH. The subjects
repeatedly performed certain simple laboratory tests, estimated
their levels of intoxication and indicated their willingnes to
drive under several specified conditions of urgency. Heart rate
was measured at these times. The secondary purpose of the pilot
study was that of specifying relationships between (THC) and
(THC-COOH) with changes in the other physiological, performance
or subjective variables. Other results from the pilot study
showed that perceived &quot;high&quot; and heart rate are very
sensitive measures of marijuana intoxication which confirms prior
findings. Impairments in laboratory tests performance were found
at the time of peak subjective feelings but generally, objective
impairment dissipated more rapidly than lthe feelings themselves.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The first driving study, described in Chapter
Four, was conducted on a highway closed to other traffic. One
objective of the study was to determine whether it would be safe
to repeat the study on a normal highway in the presence of other
traffic. The second objective was to define the dose-effect
relationship between inhaled THC dose and driving performance.
The same twelve men and twelve women who participated in the
pilot study served again as the subjects. They were treated on
separate occasions with THC doses of 0, 100, 200, 300 mcg / kg.
Treatments were administered double-blind and in a
counterbalanced order. On each occasion, subjects performed a
road tracking test beginning 40 minutes after initiation of
smoking and repeated one hour later. The test, developed and
standardized by O'Hanlon et al. (1982, 1986), involved
maintaining a constant speed at 90 km / h (56 mph) and a steady
lateral position between the delineated boundaries of the traffic
lane. Subjects drove 22 km (13.6 mi) on a primary highway and
were accompanied by a licensed driving instructor. The latter was
charged with responsibility for ensuring safety at all times and
was able to intervene, if necessary, using redundant vehicular
controls. The primary dependent variable was the standard
deviation of lateral position (SDLP), which has been shown to be
both highly reliable and very sensitive to the influence of
sedative drugs and alcohol. Other dependent variables were mean
speed, and standard deviation of speed and steering wheel angle.
Blood samples were taken prior to each driving test; and,
performance in critical tracking and hand steadiness tests, heart
rate, and blood pressure were measured after its termination.
Questionnaires were repeatedly administered to estimate the
&quot;high&quot; and other subjective feelings. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">All subjects were willing and able to finish
the driving tests without great difficulty. The study
demonstrated that marijuana impairs driving performance as
measured by an increase in SDLP; all three THC doses
significantly affected SDLP relative to placebo. The driving
performance decrement after smoking marijuana persisted almost
undiminished for two hours after smoking while drug plasma
concentrations, perceived &quot;high&quot; and heart rate
elevation had decreased. Marijuana's effects on SDLP were
compared to those of alcohol obtained in a very similar study by
Louwerens et al. (1985, 1987). It appeared that THC's effects on
SDLP were equivalent to those associated with BAC's in the range
of 0.03-0.07 g %. Other driving performance measures were not
significantly affected by THC. Intersubject correlations between
plasma concentrations of the drug and driving performance after
every dose were essentially nil. Thus, driving impairment cannot
be predicted by prevailing plasma concentrations of THC or
THC-COOH. Driving impairment was also not related to performance
in the laboratory tests. Both the observed degree of driving
impairment, and what subjects said and did, indicated that normal
safeguards would be sufficient for ensuring safety in further
testing. Hence, the final conclusion was to repeat this study on
a normal highway in the presence of other traffic.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The second driving study, described in Chapter
Five, was conducted to come a step closer to driving reality than
its predecessor. Driving tests were now conducted on a highway in
the presence of other traffic. The major objective of this study
was to confirm the relationship between inhaled THC dose and
lateral position variability in the context of a standard road
tracking test. A secondary objective was to measure performance
in another actual driving test, i.e. car following. The third
objective was to continue efforts to correlate plasma
concentrations of THC and THC-COOH with driving performance
impairment as measured in both tests.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A new group of sixteen subjects, equally
comprised of men and women, participated in this study. A
conservative approach was chosen in designing the present study
in order to satisfy the series design where both active drug and
placebo conditions were administered, double-blind, at each of
three THC dose levels. THC doses were the same as those used in
the previous study, namely 100, 200, and 300 mcg / kg. Cigarettes
appeared identical at each level of treatment conditions and were
smoked through a plastic holder in a fashion determined by the
subject within a time limit of 10 minutes. If any subject would
have reacted in an unacceptable manner to a lower dose, he / she
would not have been permitted to receive a higher dose.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Two subjects at a time commenced smoking.
Thirty minutes after onset of smoking the subjects performed a
battery of laboratory tests (tracking, hand steadiness and body
sway), yielded a blood sample, and rated their &quot;high&quot;
and other subjective feelings. They were then transported to a
primary highway where the driving tests were performed. Two
instrumented vehicles were employed. The subjects performed the
car following test on a 16 km (9.9 mi) segment of the highway for
about twelve minutes. After conclusion of the car following test,
both subjects then commenced the road tracking test in separate
instrumented vehicles. The highway was the same as for the car
following test. Subjects drove 64 km (40 mi) without stopping in
about 50 minutes. At the conclusion of this test, both subjects
participated again in the car following test. Subjects were then
transported back to the laboratory where they rated subjective
feelings, yielded a blood sample, and repeated the test battery.
The subjects' heart rate was registered continuously during both
driving tests.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The road tracking test was the same as in the
previous study except for its duration and the presence of other
traffic. Subjects were instructed to maintain a constant speed of
95 km / h (59 mph) and a steady lateral position between lane
boundaries in the right traffic lane. They were allowed to
deviate from this only if it would become necessary to pass a
slower vehicle in the same lane. Data from the standart test were
analyzed to yield the same performance measures as in the
previous study; i.e. SDLP, mean and standard deviation of speed,
and standard deviation of steering wheel angle. The car following
test measures drivers' ability to perceive changes in a preceding
vehicle's speed and to react in a manner maintaining a constant
headway. It began as the preceding and the following vehicle,
respectively driven by one of the driving instructors and the
subject, operated in tandem on the slower traffic lane while
travelling at a speed of 100 km / h (62 mph). The subject was
instructed to maintain a 50 m (164 ft) headway however the
preceding vehicle's speed might vary. After driving in this
manner for about one minute, the operator of the preceding
vehicle released the accelerator pedal allowing its speed to fall
to 80 km / h (50 mph). Immediately thereafter, the operator of
the preceding vehicle accelerated to 100 km / (62 mph). The
duration of one deceleration and acceleration maneuver was
approximately 50 seconds and six to eight, depending upon traffic
density, were executed during one test. The subject's average
reaction time to the movements of the leading vehicle, mean
headway and coefficient of variation of headway during maneuvers
were taken as the dependent variables from this. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">All subjects were able to complete the series
without suffering any untoward reaction while driving. Road
tracking performance in the standard test was impaired in a
dose-related manner by THC and confirmed the results obtained in
the previous closed highway study. The 100 mcg / kg dose produced
a slight elevation in mean SDLP, albeit nearly significant. The
200 mcg / kg dose produced a significant elevation, of dubious
practical relevance. The 300 mcg / kg dose produced a highly
significant elevation which may be viewed as practically relevant
but unexceptional in comparison with similarly measured effects
of many medicinal drugs. Following marijuana smoking subjects
drove with an average speed that was only slightly lower than
after placebo and very close to the prescribed level.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In the car following test, subjects maintained
a headway of 45-50 m (148-164 ft) while driving in the successive
placebo conditions. They lengthened mean headway by 8, 6 and 2 m
(26.2, 19.7 and 6.6 ft) in the corresponding THC conditions after
100, 200 and 300 mcg / kg, respectively. The initially large
drug-placebo difference and its subsequent decline is a
surprising result. Our explanation for this observation is that
the subjects' caution was greatest the first time they undertook
the test under the influence of THC and progressively less
thereafter. Reaction time to changes in the preceding vehicle's
speed increased following THC treatment, relative to placebo. The
administered THC dose was inversely related to the change in
reaction time, as it was to headway. However, increased reaction
times were partly due to longer headway. Statistical adjustment
for this confounding resulted in smaller and non-significant
increases in reaction time following marijuana treatment, the
greatest impairment (0.32 s) being observed in the first test
following the lowest THC dose. Headway variability followed a
similar pattern as mean headway and reaction time; the greatest
impairment was found following the lowest dose.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">An important practical objective of this study
was to determine whether degrees of driving impairment can be
accurately predicted from either measured concentrations of THC
in plasma or performance measured in potential roadside
&quot;sobriety&quot; tests of tracking ability or hand and
posture stability. The results, like many reported before,
indicate that none of these measures accurately predicts changes
in actual driving performance under the influence of THC.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The program then proceeded into the third
driving study, presented in Chapter Six, which involved tests
conducted in high-density urban traffic. There were logical and
safety reasons for restricting the THC dose to 100 mcg / kg. It
was given to a group of regular cannabis users, along with
placebo. For comparative purposes another group of regular
alcohol users were treated with a modest dose of their preferred
recreational drug, and again placebo, before undertaking the same
city driving test. Two groups of sixteen new subjects apiece,
equally comprised of men and women, participated. Subjects in the
alcohol group were regular users of alcohol but not marijuana.
Both groups were treated on separate occasions with active drug
and placebo. Active marijuana was administered to deliver 100 mcg
/ kg THC. The driving test commenced 30 minutes after smoking.
The alcohol dose was chosen to yield a BAC approaching 0.05 g %
when the driving test commenced 45 minutes after onset of
drinking. Active drug and placebo conditions were administered
double-blind and in a counterbalanced order in each group.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Driving tests were conducted in daylight over a
constant 17.5 km (10.9 mi) route within the city limits of
Maastricht. Subjects drove their placebo and active drug rides
through heavy, medium and low density traffic on the same day of
the week, and at the same time of day. Two scoring methods were
employed in the present study. The first, &quot;molar&quot;
approach, required the driving instructor acting as the safety
controller during the tests to retrospectively rate the driver's
performance using a standard scale. The second, a more
&quot;molecular&quot; approach, involved the employment of a
specially trained observer who applied simple and strict criteria
for recording when the driver made or failed to make each in a
series of observable responses at predetermined points along a
chosen route. Immediately prior to and following the driving
tests subjects performed hand steadiness and time perception
tests, yielded a blood sample, and were administered the same
subjective questionnaires used in the previous studies. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The study showed that a modest dose of alcohol
(BAC = 0.04 g %) produced a significant impairment in city
driving as measured by the molar approach, relative to placebo.
More specifically, alcohol impaired vehicle handling and traffic
maneuvers. Marijuana, administered in a dose of 100 mcg / kg THC,
on the other hand, did not signifcantly change mean driving
performance as measured by this approach. Neither alcohol nor
marijuana significantly affected driving performance measures
obtained by the molecular approach indicating that it may be
relatively insensitive to drug-induced changes. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Driving quality as rated by the subjects
contrasted with observer ratings. Alcohol impaired driving
performance according to the driving instructor but subjects did
not perceive it; marijuana did not impair driving performance but
the subjects themselves perceived their driving performance as
such. Both groups reported about the same amount of effort in
accomplishing the driving test following placebo Yet only
subjects in the ;marijuana group reported significantly higher
levels of invested effort following the active drug. Thus, there
was evidence that subjects in the marijuana group were not only
aware of their intoxicated condition but were also attempting to
compensate for it. These seem to be important findings. They
support both the common belief that drivers become overconfident
after drinking alcohol and investigators' suspicions that they
become more cautious and self-critical after consuming low THC
doses by smoking marijuana. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The laboratory performance tests also
discriminated between the drugs' effects. Hand steadiness was
impaired following THC and improved following alcohol, relative
to placebo. The difference between the drugs' effects was
significant, both before and after the driving test. Impairment
after THC was about as much as that produced by the same dose in
the previous study, indicating equivalent sensitivities of the
present and previous groups. Production of time intervals was not
affected by alcohol, but THC significantly shortened interval
production, relative to placebo.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Drug plasma concentrations were neither related
to absolute driving performance scores nor to the changes that
occurred from placebo to drug conditions. With respect to THC,
these results confirm the findings in previous studies. They are
somewhat surprising for alcohol but may be due to the restricted
range of ethanol concentrations in the plasma of different
subjects. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Chapter Seven concludes the report with a
general discussion of the results of the program and ends with
list of conclusions and recommendations. It starts with a
discussion of the THC dose which marijuana users actually prefer
for achieving their desired &quot;high.&quot; Several questions
are raised and discussed, such as: how do people regulate their
THC consumption, what role plays familiarization with the drug,
and what would the preferred dose have been if marijuana of much
higher potency were smoked. The discussion then continues with a
description of the differences between the driving tests in terms
of the type of information processing each requires, automatic vs
controlled, and the relevance of each to traffic safety.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Attention is further focussed on the effects of
THC on driving performance. The results of the studies
corroborate those of previous driving simulator and closed-course
tests by indicating that THC in single inhaled doses up to 300
mcg /kg has significant, yet not dramatic, dose-related impairing
effects on driving performance. Standard deviation of lateral
position in the road tracking test was the most sensitive measure
for revealing THC's adverse effects. This is because road
tracking is primarily controlled by an automatic information
processing system which operates outside of conscious control The
process is relatively impervious to environmental changes but
highly vulnerable to internal factors that retard the flow if
information through the system. THC and many other drugs are
among these factors. When they interfere with the process that
restricts SDLP, there is little the afflicted individual can do
by way of compensation to restore the situation. Car following
and, to a greater extent, city driving performance depend more on
controlled information processing and are therefore more
accesible for compensatory mechanisms that reduce the decrements
or abolish them entirely.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">It appears that performance is more affected by
THC in laboratory than actual driving tests. Several reasons that
may account for the apparent discrepancy are discussed. First,
laboratory tests are experimentally controlled by drastic
simplification which may affect a subjects motivation to perform
the test by making it appear &quot;unreal.&quot; Secondly, the
restriction of response options in laboratory performance tests
leave fewer possibilities for compensation. In real life, drivers
always apply numerous skills in parallel and series. Should one
become deficient, they are often able to compensate in a number
of ways to achieve a satisfactory level of proficiency. Finally,
after learning to drive, subjects possess such skills in
abundance and one can only demonstrate how they vary with drug
effects in the real task or a very close approximation thereof.
Profound drug impairment constituting an obvious traffic safety
hazard could as easily be demonstrated in a laboratory
performance test as anywhere else. But THC is not a profoundly
impairing drug. It does affect automatic information processing,
even after low doses, but not to any great extent after high
doses. It apparently affects controlled information processing in
a variety of laboratory tests, but not to the extent which is
beyond the individual's ability to control when he is motivated
and permitted to do so in real driving.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Marijuana's effects on driving performance were
compared to those of many other drugs. It was concluded that
THC's effects after doses up to 300 mcg / kg never exceed
alcohol's at BAC's of 0.08 g %; and were in no way unusual
compared to many medicinal drugs'. Yet THC's effects differ
qualitatively from many other drugs, especially alcohol. Evidence
from the present and previous studies stronly suggests that
alcohol encourages risky driving whereas THC encourages greater
caution, at least in experiments. Another way THC seems to differ
qualitatively from many other drugs is that the former's users
seem better able to compensate for its adverse effects while
driving under the influence. Still one can easily imagine
situations where the influence of marijuana smoking might have an
exceedingly dangerous effect; i.e., emergency situations which
put high demands on the driver's information processing capacity,
prolonged monotonous driving, and after THC has been taken with
other drugs, especially alcohol</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Finally, the relation between driving
impairment following marijuana smoking and plasma concentrations
of THC and THC-COOH is discussed. It appears not possible to
conclude anything about a driver's impairment on the basis of his
/ her plasma concentrations of THC and THC-COOH determined in a
single sample. </font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38171" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>