
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-23</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B041-195</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/subjects.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130655 text/html 12296
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:06:47 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:52 GMT
Content-length: 12078
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LaGuardia Committee Report - Subjects Selected for the
Study</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<h1>Subjects Selected for the Study</h1>

<hr>

<p>For the purpose of establishing a uniform plan of procedure to
be followed throughout the study, a test group of 5 individuals
who had had no previous experience with marihuana was selected.
These were volunteers who were paid for their services. They were
of a low socio-economic level, but classified as of better than
average intelligence. Only one of the group came within the range
of what is considered normal personality. They represented the
type of person who would readily take to marihuana were the
opportunity offered. </p>

<p>The main group, 72 subjects, was drawn from the inmates of the
penitentiaries at Riker's and Hart Islands and the House of
Detention for Women, all of which are under the supervision of
the Department of Correction of New York City. There were two
advantages in selecting subjects from this particular group;
first, they could be kept under continuous observation throughout
the period desired, and second, they constituted an excellent
sample of the class in New York City from which the marihuana
user comes. The subjects all volunteered for the study after
having its purpose and the part they were to take in it fully
explained to them. </p>

<h3>Race, Sex and Age.</h3>

<p>Of the group, 65 were males and 7 were females; 35 were white,
26 were Negroes, and 11 were Puerto Ricans. The ages ranged from
21 to 37 years except for one who was 45 and another who was 43.
Of the women, 6 had been opium addicts for a number of years. </p>

<h3>Previous Experience with Marihuana.</h3>

<p>Forty-eight of the group, including 6 of the women, gave a
history of marihuana smoking. The extent of the usage was
variable- for some it was occasional, while others had indulged
in the habit fairly steadily over a period of years. Of the 48
users, those who were sellers of marihuana were probably the most
consistent smokers, as in carrying on the traffic they would
endeavor to keep a stock on hand. But in any instance, the number
of cigarettes smoked during any stated period would vary
according to circumstance. Thus one user stated that he smoked
from 2 to 6 marihuana cigarettes a day, another from 10 to 15 a
day, another 3 or 4 a week, and another 5 or 6 a month. Those who
smoked daily are here classified as steady users, those who
smoked when opportunity was offered but not daily, as occasional
users.<br>
</p>

<p>(TABLE 1)<br>
</p>

<p>The users had all been deprived of marihuana from the time of
their arrest, the shortest period being two weeks, the longest,
one year and ten months. They all stated that the habit had often
been interrupted voluntarily and the enforced discontinuation of
it had caused no discomfort. </p>

<h3>Health Record.</h3>

<p>The subjects were individually selected by Dr. Allentuck as
suitable for the study. A physical and neurological examination
at the hospital showed no evidence of disease. However, the
Wassermann and Kline tests gave positive results for 6 subjects
and the Kline test alone was positive for 2 and doubtful for 2.
These figures are consistent with those of the population from
which the group was selected. Of the 12,000 inmates of the
Riker's Island Penitentiary in 1940 and the 8,000 in 1941, 10 per
cent reacted positively to serological tests. </p>

<h3>Intelligence Record.</h3>

<p>Sixty subjects (40 users and 20 nonusers ) to whom the
Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test was given had an average I.Q. of
99.3, range 70 to 124. The average I.Q. of the user group was
96.7, range 70 to 124, while that for the non-user group was
104.5, range 93 to 114. </p>

<p>When analyzed according to racial distribution, the two groups
were even better equated intellectually than the total results
indicate. Of the 28 white subjects examined, the average I.Q. of
the 13 users was 106.1, range 77 to 124, and that of the 15
non-users was 106.3, range 96 to 114. The 19 Negro users had an
average I.Q. of 92.6, range 70 to 112, and the 5 Negro non-users
averaged 98.8, range 93 to 101. Although in the colored group the
non-users averaged 6.2 points higher than the users, it must be
taken into account that the number of Negro non-users tested was
small. The average I.Q. of the 8 Puerto Rican users was 91.0,
range 72 to 100; that is, they were very similar in mental
ability to the Negro users. From the results obtained from the
Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test, one may conclude that neither
the users nor the nonusers were inferior in intelligence to the
general population.<br>
</p>

<h3>Marihuana Used<br>
</h3>

<p>The marihuana that was used for oral administration was
supplied by Dr. H. J. Wollner, Consulting Chemist of the United
States Treasury Department. It was in the form of an alcohol
fluid concentrate, the alcohol content ranging from 55 to 67.3
per cent and the content of solids from 22.9 to 33.6 Sm. per 100
cc. </p>

<p>According to the bio-assay made by Dr. S. Loewe of the
Department of Pharmacology of the Cornell University Medical
School, the strength of the fluid concentrate was found to be
from 71 to 90 per cent of that of the U.S.P. fluid extract for
cannabis marketed by Parke, Davis and Company. The fluid extract
was not miscible with water and had a characteristic,
disagreeable taste which made it easily recognized. For these
reasons the concentrate was evaporated to a viscid consistency
and made into pill form, with glycyrrhiza as the excipient. Each
pill was equivalent to 1 cc. of the concentrate. </p>

<p>For controls, glycyrrhiza pills without marihuana were used.
Several products prepared by Dr. Roger Adams in his investigation
of the chemistry of marihuana were used. A comparison of their
action with that of the concentrate will be found below. In
addition to the concentrate, marihuana cigarettes were used.
These were obtained from supplies confiscated by the New York
City Police. Each contained approximately from .4 to .8 gm. of
marihuana. As the quality of the marihuana varied and the amount
of active principles taken in with the smoke was unknown, there
was no exactness in dosage. In general, however, it appeared that
smoking 2 cigarettes was equivalent to taking 1 pill. </p>

<p>The minimal dose of the concentrate which produced clearcut
effects was 2 cc. During the repeated observations on each member
of the group larger doses were given, commonly up to around 8 cc.
and in one instance up to 22 cc. For smoking, from one to as many
as eleven cigarettes were used. </p>

<h3>The Active Principles.</h3>

<p>Determination of relative potencies of drugs having similar
action can be made on human beings to a limited extent only. The
comparison is based on easily measurable effects on some organ or
system on which the drug has a highly selective action, but the
existing state of the system influences greatly the ensuing
result. </p>

<p>Marihuana effects come mainly from action on the central
nervous system. The type and degree of response of this system to
stimuli of various origins vary in different individuals and in
the same individual at different times. When marihuana is given
the pre-existing state cannot be classified but it has influence
in determining the response, and the same dose of marihuana does
not produce identical effects in different subjects or in one
subject at different times. In general, however, when the dose
given is definitely effective the responses are of a fairly
uniform character. </p>

<p>For this reason the relative potency of the active principles
supplied by Dr. Roger Adams could be determined only
approximately. The principles used were the natural
tetrahydrocannabinol, the synthetic isomer, and the synthetic
hexylhydrocannabinol. These all brought on effects similar to
those of the marihuana concentrate. The estimate of their
relative potency is as follows: 1 cc. of the concentrate,
representing the extraction from 1 Gm, of marihuana, had as its
equivalent 15 mg. of the natural tetrahydrocannabinol, 60 mg. of
the synthetic hexylhydrocannabinol, and 120 mg. of the synthetic
tetra compound. In explaining the differences in the estimated
potencies, the rates of absorption must be taken into account
since the action of marihuana depends on the amount of active
principle absorbed and its concentration in the brain at a
certain time. </p>

<p>The main conclusion is that the action of the marihuana
concentrate is dependent on its tetrahydrocannabinol content and
that the synthetic compounds retain the action of the natural
principle. </p>

<h3>Procedure<br>
</h3>

<p>The procedure for examining the main group of subjects was
adopted in the light of the experience gained from the
preliminary study. </p>

<p>The subjects were brought to the hospital in groups of from
six to ten, and they stayed there from four to six weeks. Each
subject had his history taken and was given a physical
neurological, and psychiatric examination on the day of
admission. </p>

<p>Since it has been shown that pulse variation is the most
constant index of marihuana action, the pulse rate was recorded
every half hour during the day with the subjects at rest for five
minutes before each reading. </p>

<p>During the following days, through careful observation by the
Director, the general make-up of the subject, his personality,
the character of his responsiveness, and his behavior in new
surroundings were determined both before and while he was under
the influence of marihuana. Additional information came through
the nurses' reports. </p>

<p>In addition, each subject was given a series of tests before
and after the administration of marihuana in order that the
changes brought about by the drug might be measured. Included
among these tests were psychological tests for mental functioning
and emotional reactions, psychomotor tests for both simple and
complex psychophysical functions, tests to determine such
abilities as musical aptitude and the perception of time and
space, and laboratory examinations to test the functioning of the
various organs and systems of the body.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>