
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B10-77</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA054-000906-B046-321</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://ivf.com:80/socendo.html 206.185.60.251 19970123213333 text/html 17544
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Thu, 23 Jan 1997 21:35:07 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 17372
Last-modified: Sat, 30 Mar 1996 21:11:11 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
   <title>THE SOCIAL SUPPORT EXPERIENCES OF WOMEN WITH ENDOMETRIOSIS </title>
     <META NAME="The Social Support Experiences of Women with Endometriosis" CONTENT="A Report on Endometriosis by Martha Whitney">  
</head>
<body text="#46385D" bgcolor="#FFFFFF" link="#0000E4" vlink="#930000" alink="#005000">

<p><img src="newarhc.gif" border=0  height=32 width =32 ></p>
   <h2 align=center><IMG SRC="bluegreline.gif"></h2>




                    
<CENTER><H1 ALIGN=center CLEAR=all>The Social Support Experiences of Women with Endometriosis</H1></CENTER>
       <H2>An Overview</H2>
 <BYLINE>by <a href="mailto: MWHITNEY@VTVM1.CC.VT.EDU">Martha Whitney</a> </BYLINE><p>
<hr>
                               <H3 ALIGN=left>Introduction</H3>
     I want to share with you a few of the findings from my
research  into the social support experiences of women with
endometriosis.  First, I want to give you some background.  I was
diagnosed with endometriosis about 10 years ago.  Over the years I
have kept informed about the disease and heard many stories of
women who have the disease.  I became interested in how women coped
with this chronic and typically progressive condition.<p>
     We developed a questionnaire to study the social support
experiences of women coping with endometriosis.  I then asked for
volunteers from WITSENDO,  which is an Internet Listserv that
serves as a support network for coping with endometriosis.  Fifty-
nine women with endometriosis volunteered and were sent a
questionnaire.  Forty-six women or 81% completed and returned the
survey.  In general, the research participants were from the United
States, white, in their thirties, well educated and affluent.  I
hope to convey some flavor of the struggles these women live with
and their experiences with social support.<p>
     Endometriosis is a disease in which the endometrial cells,
which normally line the uterus, grow outside the uterus.  Among
other things, these endometrial growths often cause pain and/or
infertility.  The women in my study shared their struggles with the
disease as a backdrop to their experiences of social support.  This
is a typical comment:  "A woman with endometriosis often feels her
life is a battleground: she must fight with pain simply to meet her
obligations each day, fight to maintain her dignity in the work
place despite numerous absences and sick leaves, constantly fight
with physicians who are uninformed, etc."  This disease can only be
diagnosed through a surgical procedure and often goes undiagnosed.
As this woman relates, "My biggest problem was getting it diagnosed
in the first place."<p>
     I asked women how many years they have experienced symptoms of
the disease and how many years it had been since it was first
diagnosed.  The results are telling.  These women on average had 7
years between when the symptoms first appeared and a formal
diagnosis was made.  One woman wanted her support network to know
that,  "Endo is an UNSOLVED problem and that women today are still
being misdiagnosed and suffering from horrible and ineffective
treatments."<p>
     Most of these women experienced pain and/or either infertility
or the threat of infertility.  One women related that:  "Even
though I'm not trying to get pregnant, I feel a great fear and
sadness that I will never be able to conceive."  Another
participant advised others to:  "Try to keep in mind that endo is
a chronic disease that we deal with every day, not just a one time
pain."  This is the backdrop of endometriosis that these women live
with.<p>
     The survey asked about 4 categories of relationships.  Rated
as most supportive was other women with endometriosis, next was
spouse or partner, next friends or extended family, and rated as
the least supportive was health care providers.<p>
<H3>Others with Endometriosis</H3>
     The participants shared what they wanted from other women with
endometriosis.  They wanted to network, commiserate,  be informed,
not focus on misery and be recognized as an individual.  I
illustrate some of these themes with the participants' own words.<p>
     The participants wanted to network and commiserate with other
women with endometriosis, as illustrated with the following
comments:  "The fact knowing that there are other people with the
same problems as you is really one of the best supports available
because you don't feel alone"; "In what they said, I heard my
'past' and was able to see my 'future' because they had already
been through it before me. It validated what I believed my problem
was and was a relief because I could see some hope down at the end
of the tunnel."<p>
     Another theme was the support provided by sharing information.
Examples of this them include: "The best support I feel I've got
from others with endometriosis is information";  "I've been more
educated by other women with the disorder, than by any medical
person ;  the help from being able to compare notes with others in
the same medical boat has been invaluable"; and "The fact that we
all share with each other our experiences of what happened when we
went through this test or that test, what we had to do etc.
Someone will sometimes share some trick or hint that helps them
cope with the pain, or someone will share a book that offers good
advice on diet and exercise.<p>
     The study participants wanted other women with endometriosis
to recognize that they are individuals.  One participant comments:
"It MUST be remembered that the disease produces erratic symptoms
-- one woman will be incapacitated while another feels nothing.  It
produces a wide variety of symptoms and concerns, none of which
duplicate in any two women.  ANY woman with ANY amount of endo is
going to be suffering somehow, whether it's occasional bouts of IBS
[Irritable Bowel Syndrome], repeated miscarriage, or debilitating
pain.  We might all be in different parts of the boat, but *it's
the same boat nonetheless*."<p>
<H3 ALIGN=left>Spouse/Partner</H3>
     Next, the relationship category of spouse or partner is
examined.  The participants shared what they want in the way of
support from spouses or partners.  They want to be listened to, to
be believed, to be understood, they want the partner to be
knowledgeable about the disease, they want the partner to be
committed, patient, caring, to express feelings, to not try to fix
the problem,  to not judge or blame and to recognize the impact on
the sexual relationship.<p>
     Again I use the participants own words to illustrate these
themes with typical comments.  This woman represents some of those
themes, "He (my husband) reassured me that he loves me and that my
having endo doesn't change his feelings for me. He stayed with me
in the hospital, feeding me ice chips and holding my hand after a
very difficult surgery. He runs interference for me, and is my
'second self' when dealing with doctors, family etc. He knows the
information and asks the questions right along with me. He has been
immensely understanding and patient with my limitations, and tries
to be gentle with sex, which is painful for me."<p>
     The participants want their spouses or partners to listen,
believe and understand, as illustrated by the following comments:
"He listens and accepts.  While it's difficult for him to
understand sometimes, he makes the attempt and does his best.  He
always goes to appointments with me if I ask him to.  He's my rock
of support"; and  "The best thing to do is listen and then ask what
you can do to make life easier or more comfortable."<p>
     The participants find it supportive when the spouse or partner
is knowledgeable.  Examples of this include: "I guess I would
encourage partners to learn all they can about endo, so they can
really understand what it is we are dealing with"; and "Understand
that the pain is real, that it is tough to live with, and any
decision on dealing with the disease helps to be talked out with
the significant other."<p>
     Commitment is a source of support for the participants.
Representative comments include: "BE THERE FOR THEM!!! There is
nothing worse than feeling like hell and then having no support at
all from the one you love"; and "My spouse helps me by reminding me
that he married 'a packaged deal.'  Problems and all, and that 'in
sickness and in health' is just as real to him now as it was ...
when we married."<p>
     Participants do not expect spouses or partners to solve the
problems of endometriosis.  As this participants relates, "It's OK
not to fix things! Men (in my experience and in what I've read)
love to fix things and sometimes get frustrated when they can't be
Mr. Fix-It.  Even though they can't fix it, don't give up - just
being there, listening and being supportive is a big help."<p>
     Participants want spouses or partners to recognize the impact
on the sexual relationship.  Pain with intercourse is a possible
symptom of endometriosis, as this women relates: "I find the whole
concept of sex when I'm having symptoms really alien.  Very private
parts of me hurt in odd and very personal ways... and he wants to
touch them????  Sex is nice when it doesn't hurt, but it's almost
unimaginable when it hurts... and my mental attitude about not
wanting to be touched lingers after the real pain has gone.
Partners have to understand and be VERY careful."<p>
<H3 ALIGN=left>Friends/Extended Family</H3>
     The third relationship category is friends and extended
family.  The participants related their experiences of receiving
support from friends and extended family.  From friends and
extended family they want to be listened to and believed, they want
others to be knowledgeable about endometriosis, they in general
want some sympathy and empathy, they want support with their
disease struggles and they want to not be blamed, their experiences
minimized or they do not want to be worried over.<p>
     The participants want friends and extended family to listen.
As one participant noted, "Listening!  That is the best gift my
friends have given me.  (Who must be so sick of hearing about this,
but you wouldn't know it by their responses)."<p>
     Having friends or extended family who are knowledgeable and
understanding is supportive for the participants.  A representative
comment is: "Being more informed about the disease helps to be more
understanding towards the people suffering from the pain (physical
and/or emotional) of endometriosis."<p>
     The participants want support with disease struggles.  One
woman gives this advice to friends and extended family: "Remind her
that a chronic disease is draining, and that she should give
herself credit for having so many good days."<p>
     The participants advise friends and extended family members to
not blame or minimize.  The following comments represent
participants' advice to friends and extended family: "Accept that
this is a chronic condition and that I have very little control
over its progress.  Don't place the burden of curing myself on me.
Ask how I am- but when I respond that things are worse do not say
'but I thought that last (drug, treatment, surgery, test) would
help'"; and "Listen without diminishing the experience of the woman
(e.g. with "gee, so-and-so had it worse because ...").  Understand
that each woman's experience is real and valid, that you need to be
careful to listen without being judgmental."<p>
<H3 ALIGN=left>Health Care Providers</H3>
     Finally, the relationship category of health care providers
was studied.  The participants wanted health care providers to
listen to them, believe them, be knowledgeable about endometriosis,
provide information, not have a condescending attitude, and to
recognize that each woman is an individual.  These themes are
reflected in the following comment about support from a physician:
"My GYN [gynecologist] has been very sympathetic and has never
questioned whether my pain really exists or not.  He has given me
articles from med. journals and has answered all my questions.  He
has treated me like an intelligent person and has told me what he
can do, and what he CAN'T do.  Being kept informed about my
condition has given me a feeling of some control over this
problem."  <p>The themes are also reflected in this advice to health
care professionals: <UL TYPE=disc><LI>Listen<LI>Believe <LI>Educate themselves
about endo.</UL><p>
     I was especially struck by the poignant stories these women
told about their health care providers, physicians in particular.
With a chronic and incurable condition like endometriosis, the
physician-patient relationship is particularly important.  Instead
of organizing this section by themes, I have organized it by what
participants found supportive, what participants did not find
supportive and what advice they give to health care providers to be
more supportive.<p>
     The following comments reflect supportive behavior: "All my
doctors recognize that endometriosis is a real disorder, and that
I am not merely a hypochondriac. That in and of itself is
reassuring"; and "My RE [reproductive endocrinologist] takes my
disease and my symptoms very seriously - which in itself can be
tremendously supportive when so many health care professionals
don't acknowledge the disease's impact."<p>
     Participants also outlined what is not supportive from health
care providers.  The power behind these non-supportive comments is
quite striking.  The following comments reflect what was not
supportive from health care providers: "I feel victimized by the
physicians -- which is not helpful given all that the disease has
put me through. I don't feel it should be my job to convince them
that endo is never cured, to justify my pain in order to 'earn'
their assistance!"; "The urologist asserted that only 'career gals
who put off having their babies' get endo -- I was insulted, angry
and hurt"; "He [physician] also made some astoundingly inaccurate
medical statements about the disease which made me furious that I
had read more medical journals than he had. I felt as though I had
to 'educate' him and yet he has the 'power' to help me or not."<p>
     The participants have the following advice for health care
providers: "Take their symptoms seriously. This is not a disease
that is in their heads"; "Don't minimize their problem and/or
feelings"; "When a woman comes to you complaining of severe
menstrual pain, don't tell her it's stress. Most women aren't going
to complain unless it's really bad because we've all grown up
believing that pain during menstruation is 'normal'"; "I want them
to do their reading, keep up with journals, go to conferences, and
stop blaming patients for diseases which as yet are idiopathic"; "I
think information is the key.  Doctors need to explain WHY they are
recommending or not recommending treatments of various kinds.  I
think many health care professionals feel that the patient does not
have the necessary background to understand all the issues and err
on the part of not giving the patient credit for understanding and
having input into decisions made which directly (and intimately)
concern her health"; "I think it is crucial that physicians let
women have a say in the care they are given.  Give them the
options, tell them the pros and cons (and for crying out loud be
HONEST about it!) and let them decide which option is best for
them."<p>
     These 46 participants shared many compelling and poignant
stories with me and I have tried to give you a sense of their
experiences.  I want to let a participant's words summarize my
findings:<p>
   <B>Good help can be:</B> <BLOCKQUOTE>'I know a doctor who specializes in that,
     maybe you should call her.' or, 'I have a friend who has that,
     would you like me to introduce you?' or, 'If you need someone
     to talk to, I'll listen. You aren't upsetting me by talking
     about it, and it isn't too gross for me.', or, 'Let's go for
     a walk and get some hot cocoa.' or, 'I'm going to the store,
     would you like me to bring you something?'</BLOCKQUOTE><p>

     <B>Bad help is: </B><BLOCKQUOTE>'I think my cousin had that, she's been perfectly
     healthy ever since she had the twins.' or, 'My boss had that
     surgery - she almost died and she was in the hospital for 8
     weeks because the doctor screwed up!' or, 'What you need is
     wheat grass juice enemas!' or, 'You should talk to my
     psychiatrist to try to find out what it is about you that
     makes you cling to pain.' <I>(Yes, I've really heard people say
     these things! Can you believe it?!?)</I>
</BLOCKQUOTE>
   <h2 align=center><IMG SRC="bluegreline.gif"></h2>
<H2><A HREF="endohtml.html">Return To ARHC Endometriosis Homepage</A><p></H2>
<a href="index.html"><img align=bottom src="home.gif"></a> <a href="mailto:mperloe@mindspring.com"><img align=bottom src="mail.gif"></a><a href="quest.html"><img align=bottom src="question.gif"></a><a href="phone.html"><img align=bottom src="phone.gif"></a>  
<font size="-2"><a href="mailto:mperloe@mindspring.com">mperloe@mindspring.com</a>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>