
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B001-101</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/amhab/amhabc6a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122031746 text/html 76612
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:17:32 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:58 GMT
Content-length: 76394
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Interdiction - marijuana, cocaine, heroin</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter VI Part 2: Interdiction </h2>

<p>Introduction </p>

<p>Our National Strategy consists of five &quot;major
elements,&quot; each of which in turn is comprised of numerous
programs and strategies. Interdiction, just one of these
sub-components, presently consumes one-third of the entire
Federal drug abuse outlay for the fiscal year. Measured just in
terms of outlays designated for law enforcement activities,
interdiction's portion swells to almost one-half of the Federal
funds being spent to combat drug abuse. By Commission
calculation, Federal funds devoted to interdiction have increased
100 percent over the last five years. </p>

<p>Despite this massive dedication of funds, drugs of primarily
foreign origin - cocaine, heroin, and marijuana - continue to be
widely available in this country. Many observers, including some
leading drug enforcement officials, readily acknowledge that
interdiction can only serve a limited role in increasing risks to
smugglers while this government pursues other programs. Frank
Monastero, former Assistant Administrator for Operations of the
Drug Enforcement Administration, summed up this view in a recent
interview: </p>

<p>[Interdiction] is important, but it is the least effective
thing you can do . . . it's like the patrolman on the beat . . .
It is preventing [some drugs] from getting into the trafficking,
and that's something. But we can continue that ad infinitum. If
we don't do something at the source or don't do something before
that or don't do something at the end of the trail in the
prevention area, we will never change the situation. </p>

<p>It is the view of this Commission that interdiction is not
going to end drug use or availability in this country. It will,
however, continue to discourage some potential smugglers. This
deterrent effect is often overlooked or denied by many critics,
but not by smugglers themselves. According to Adler B. Seal, an
experienced drug smuggling pilot, in response to a question
concerning the difficulty of recruiting smuggling pilots: </p>

<p>Well, it used to be easy. However, now it has become a little
less attractive for some of the younger pilots. Some of the older
pilots, as myself, have been indicted. </p>

<p>We've been cognizant of law enforcement techniques and the
improvements in it; and the younger pilots are seeing the
newspaper reports of the older pilots and the amount of time that
they are being convicted on and serving, and it's not as
attractive a proposition as it used to be. </p>

<p>Successful interdiction not only discourages some new members
from joining smuggling enterprises, but also encourages some
already in the field to get out of it. This was confirmed by the
firsthand experience of smuggler Seal: </p>

<p>I think that the more flights that are interdicted, the word
gets around. </p>

<p>For instance, I have absolutely - or had in my capacity - no
desire whatsoever to go into and would do anything to stay out of
the south Florida area simply due to the fact that that is where
the concentrated interdiction efforts are being made due to the
Vice Presidential Task Force, which has been highly publicized
and which has taken its toll on the paranoia of the drug
smuggler. </p>

<p>It also appears to this Commission to be consistent with the
view of the Commissioner of Customs, William von Raab: </p>

<p>We are always asked what is a good measure of success against
smuggling. It is always quoted in terms of how much we seize. </p>

<p>I have always maintained that a good measure of success is to
reach a point at which a pilot doesn't want to fly into the
United States anymore; and I have always suggested that there may
be a percentage. </p>

<p>For example, if he has a one-out-of-ten chance of getting
caught, he might run in; but certainly if he had a
nine-out-of-ten chance of being caught, he's not going to do it. </p>

<p>In summary, this Commission recognizes that interdiction is
and should continue to be a vital component of our National
strategy, as a complement to other approaches to reduce drug
supply. Any analysis that defines success in the area of
interdiction as apprehending all, or nearly all, smuggled drugs
is unrealistic and counter-productive. To the extent that is a
very costly approach, additional expenditures must be weighed
very carefully, particularly if they have the effect of reducing
funds available for other efforts to reduce supply and demand.
There are, however, improvements to our interdiction efforts
which can be made without any significant increase in funding.
These steps, which generally involve reordering of priorities or
redefinition of interagency responsibilities, are discussed
below. </p>

<p>It is crucial to note that the single most important need in
the interdiction field is leadership. If innovation and increased
commitment are to be pursued successfully and expeditiously, both
by foreign governments and agencies of our own, a strong leader
orchestrating a single comprehensive plan is the key. That role
to date has been played by the Vice President, and it is one in
which he should continue. The weight of his office has produced
results when other officials might have been ignored. While the
National Drug Enforcement Policy Board necessarily includes
several Cabinet-level officers, they serve as peers. Only the
Vice President brings to the interdiction effort sufficient rank
to lead them. His central role should be preserved and promoted
within the context of the National Drug Enforcement Policy
Board's leadership in drug enforcement. Recognition by the Board
of the Vice President's leadership in interdiction activities
holds the promise of singularly promoting success in that key
area, preserving the momentum and continuity of existing
interagency interdiction efforts, and putting to rest the
confusion that has already begun to surface concerning the Vice
President's relationship to the Board. </p>

<p>Air Interdiction </p>

<p>The United States Customs Service has the lead responsibility
for air interdiction. To combat drug smugglers, some of whom have
the most sophisticated and expensive communications and
navigational equipment available today, Customs has increased its
airborne capabilities significantly in the recent past. At the
time of this report, the Service had just received $11 million in
a supplemental fiscal year 1985 appropriation for its air
operations, bringing the agency's total fiscal year budget for
air operations to $55.4 million. Customs' most significant need,
apart from more aircraft and more sophisticated electronics, is
the support of other Federal agencies with related jurisdictions.
</p>

<p>One example of the need for support is on the diplomatic
front. Customs has for some time found itself frustrated by its
inability to pursue suspected smuggler aircraft into Mexican
airspace after detection on the American side of the border.
Although this has been the subject of numerous diplomatic
discussions, there has been little progress to date. Giving this
matter an extremely high priority in our bilateral negotiations
with Mexico is the type of assistance another agency, in this
case the state Department, can and should provide to Customs in
recognition of the critical importance of the fight against drug
smuggling. </p>

<p>Another Customs' Services critical need is intelligence, both
tactical and strategic. While &quot;cold hits&quot; -
apprehension of smugglers in a random, uninformed basis - have an
important role to play in deterring smugglers by their very
randomness, intelligence is the key to effective interdiction.
According to former Drug Enforcement Administrator Francis
Mullen, every major seizure of drugs from South America made by
his agency has been made on the basis of prior intelligence, and
it is no less critical to the Customs Service. While the topic of
intelligence-gathering is the subject of a separate analysis in
this report, it is important to note in connection with this
discussion on inter-agency support that Customs and the Drug
Enforcement Administration have made considerable progress in the
area of information sharing. Customs has for some time had an
analyst stationed in DEA's Office of Intelligence, and a program
is currently underway to place Customs intelligence analysts in
country teams abroad to analyze data gathered by DEA. This
program should be pursued aggressively. Simultaneously, the
Customs Service should scrutinize its Customs Attache program to
determine to what extent it can play a larger role in
intelligence-gathering concerning smugglers. With its close
liaison with host government customs officials, this program may
be of particular significance with regard to smuggling involving
containerized and other commercial cargo. As interdiction
capabilities improve in the areas of pleasure craft and general
aviation, it is almost certain that commercial cargo will be used
increasingly for concealing illicit drug shipments. This has
already been observed in some cases. Such a Customs effort would
be complemented by the private sector initiatives Customs has
been able to bring about, such as the agreements now in effect
with the Airline Transport and International Airline Transport
Associations. </p>

<p>An active intelligence gathering role for Customs is now
blocked by the 1973 Reorganization Plan. The current recognition
by Customs and DEA of the former's need for time-sensitive
intelligence is of vital importance however, and should be
actively cultivated by the two agencies and the Policy Board.
That this would require modification or elimination of certain
provisions of the 1973 Reorganization Plan should not be an
obstacle. </p>

<p>The area of inter-agency support currently in need of the most
attention is the relationship between the Customs Service and the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The latter, which has
primary jurisdiction over entry into United States air space,
maintains a number of programs, which lend themselves to support
of Customs operations. While the FAA has to date given
significant support to Customs in a number of instances, more is
needed. To this end, the Customs Service has recently proposed
omnibus legislation, currently entitled the Customs Enforcement
Act of 1985, which contains provisions that address such
sensitive topics as restricted entry points and minimum altitudes
for air entry. Among other things, this Act would require all
vessels and aircraft entering the United States to report
immediately for Customs inspection, and would increase the fines
for failure to report entry. Fines would also be substantially
increased for smuggling controlled substances, and such
violations would be punishable by imprisonment. All assets seized
by Customs, including planes, vessels, and cash, would be subject
to forfeiture. The Act would prohibit airdrops to vessels, make
it unlawful to operate an aircraft without lights, and prohibit
the installation of all illegal fuel tanks in planes. In
addition, commercial carriers would be subject to more stringent
regulations under the Act. While this legislation may be
unpopular with private aviation, it is a collection of important
anti-smuggling measures which go directly to some of the most
frequently encountered drug smuggling techniques. It is worthy of
support. </p>

<p>Similarly, proposals advanced by both Customs and DEA that
aircraft identification numbers, now required to be twelve inches
high and displayed on the fuselage or tail, be displayed on an
upper and a lower wing surface as well are entirely consistent
with anti-smuggling requirements. DEA pilots have been fired upon
from the ground as they tried to fly low enough to read tail
numbers. Although the FAA has stated that an increase in required
number size has no &quot;aviation safety basis,&quot; it is this
Commission's position that needless exposure of Federal agents to
hostile fire should be considered an &quot;aviation safety&quot;
concern sufficient to justify remedial action. Again, reports
that a change in required number size or location would be very
unpopular with the general aviation community seem frivolous in
the context of issues as grave as those under discussion here.
There are a number of additional aviation-related proposals being
advanced by Customs today, concerning such matters as pre-filing
of &quot;border flight plans,&quot; advanced notice of entry into
U.S. air space, and improvements in pilot identification
certificates, which appear to this Commission to be worthy of
adoption, absent some compelling opposition. </p>

<p>There are other promising areas for Customs/FAA cooperation.
Customs reports, for example, that the FAA, in undertaking its
long-term buildup of the approach radar system, is working
closely with Customs to accommodate the latter's needs. This is
to be encouraged, particularly by the Policy Board, which has
both Customs and the FAA on its Coordinating Group. </p>

<p>One legal issue which would benefit from careful analysis by
the Board is the extent to which current asset forfeiture
provisions need revision to enable seizure of aircraft and other
equipment which is rented or leased by traffickers for the
purpose of avoiding forfeiture. </p>

<p>Another area worthy of study is the extent to which Customs'
air interdiction capabilities could be enhanced by Coast Guard
aviation components. Although such a concept might be contrary to
existing understandings, it would be a grave omission if
substantial Coast Guard aviation assets were overlooked,
particularly at a time when fiscal considerations threaten the
Customs air operations budget. </p>

<p>Maritime Operations </p>

<p>In the area of maritime interdiction, the Coast Guard serves
as lead agency. Its success has been remarkable and is limited
only by shortages in resources. New tactics and innovative forms
of assistance by the Navy have significantly improved the Coast
Guard's capabilities. There is no question that not only maritime
traffickers but air smugglers as well are intimidated by the
seaborne detection capabilities of Coast Guard vessels. Inasmuch
as the most critical limitation on Coast Guard capabilities is
the lack of budgeted resources, the single most pressing concern
is the augmentation of the Coast Guard budget to permit more
extensive participation in interdiction operations. A proposal,
which has surfaced annually but to no avail as yet, is the
imposition of user fees for various Coast Guard services now
provided to the boating community gratis. As with the aviation
community in connection with the FAA discussed above, there is
considerable opposition to maritime measures that would
inconvenience the user community or cost it money. However, given
the inescapable facts of the drug invasion this country is
experiencing, the nominal costs of various user fees would seem
to be a small price for boaters to pay as their contribution to
what must be seen as a national effort to defeat a deadly enemy. </p>

<p>In-shore operations of the Customs Service bolster Coast Guard
maritime interdiction operations. Having received over $12
million for maritime operations in its fiscal year 1985
supplemental appropriation, Customs has begun to get fast, state
of the art pursuit boats in the water off the coast of Florida.
These have been used to great effect, and more such craft should
be deployed. </p>

<p>One innovation for which the Customs Service and the
leadership of the National Narcotics Border Interdiction System
(NNBIS) are to be commended is the highly effective integration
of State and local authorities in the recent operation &quot;Blue
Lightning.&quot; It is clear and has been stressed throughout
this report that comprehensive, coordinated multi-agency
operations are absolutely essential to effective anti-drug
programs. On the Federal level, this typically means
&quot;horizontal integration,&quot; i.e., the careful combination
of equal Federal agencies. Blue Lightning is a fine example of
the equally important concept of &quot;vertical
integration,&quot; the well-planned and complementary cooperation
of Federal, State, and local resources aimed at a specific
trafficking activity. The Customs Service and NNBIS are
rightfully proud of this accomplishment and are encouraged to
pursue similar successes in operations to come. </p>

<p>Consolidated Efforts </p>

<p>The evolution of interdiction in recent years has been in the
direction of consolidation of intelligence and operations. This
is a trend characteristic of anti-drug efforts generally, and it
is a proper response to the breadth of the drug smuggling
situation. In the area of interdiction, the most prominent joint
efforts in addition to NNBIS are the National Drug Enforcement
Policy Board (the Board) and the El Paso Intelligence Center
(EPIC). All are described in detail elsewhere in this report. </p>

<p>The following is a proposed realignment of these
organizations, based on this Commission's review. </p>

<p>First, our proposal recognizes the leadership role of the
Board. That important topic is the subject of a separate analysis
in this report. Within the Board and as a part of its coordinated
program, we propose the combination of the functions of EPIC and
NNBIS into a single, all-source intelligence facility. In the
critical early stages of designing and implementing such an
operation, the Vice President's leadership will be invaluable.
The combined intelligence center will incorporate the input of
all intelligence-gathering components at the Federal level,
including those sources already feeding into EPIC and NNBIS, as
well as new sources still to be developed, as outlined below. </p>

<p>The present duplication between the various functions
performed by EPIC and NNBIS has been acknowledged by such
authorities as David Westrate, Assistant Administrator for
Operations of the Drug Enforcement Administration, the parent
agency of EPIC. Although it is true there are certain functions
being performed by each of the two activities, which are not
duplicated by the other, this should not prevent effective
integration of their functions. Everywhere in the current Federal
response, we find a movement toward consolidation and
coordination. Intelligence and planning should not be exceptions.
</p>

<p>A combined all-source intelligence center would require at
least two features not found in either NNBIS or EPIC. One is a
physically secure headquarters facility. EPIC is presently
located in a private office building in El Paso. It has neither
the space nor the necessary physical security to accommodate the
comprehensive input advocated here. NNBIS headquarters is in the
Old Executive Office Building in downtown Washington, and its
regional facilities are located in various Federal buildings
around the country. While such quarters might provide adequate
physical security, they are not equipped to provide for the scope
of the proposed undertaking. A secure facility with sufficient
physical dimensions is crucial, as are secure communications with
participating agency and military headquarters. Ft. Bliss, Texas,
is a potential site, as it provides the necessary physical
security and is located near the present EPIC facility. This and
similar locations should be considered. </p>

<p>The second requirement of the facility proposed here is
enhanced intelligence input. Thorough, &quot;real-time&quot;
intelligence is absolutely vital to effective interdiction, and
it is almost as critically important to other areas of
enforcement operations as well. The importance of intelligence is
such that it is treated as a separate topic below. At this point,
it is sufficient to note that the design of a new center must
from the very outset include the most thorough provisions for the
maximum intelligence contribution permitted by law and physical
and technological capabilities. </p>

<p>Military Support for Interdiction </p>

<p>Perhaps the single most valuable development in the area of
interdiction in recent years has been the assistance rendered by
components of the Department of Defense. Such activities were
constrained somewhat by the Posse Comitatus Act until certain
exemptions to the Act were passed in December 1981. Since that
time the assistance rendered by the military has grown
dramatically. In calendar year 1984 the military provided
assistance to interdiction efforts worth $100 million by Pentagon
calculations. Such assistance is typically in the form of aerial
surveillance, transport of enforcement personnel, and loans of
equipment and personnel as permitted by law. </p>

<p>The role of the Defense Department has become steadily more
active, more innovative, and more flexible. The quality and
quantity of such assistance, however, continue to be limited by
the constraints found in the Posse Comitatus exemptions: military
assistance to law enforcement cannot include direct participation
by military personnel in arrest or seizure activities, and it can
be provided only if it does not affect military preparedness.
Furthermore, law enforcement authorities will be required by the
Economy Act to reimburse the Department of Defense for assistance
provided, unless such assistance is incidental to existing
military operations or provides &quot;equivalent training.&quot;
Reimbursement may also be waived, if such waiver does not
adversely impact military preparedness. In this regard, as in
other, the Department of Defense has been increasingly flexible.
One example of this is the expanded delegation of authority to
waive reimbursement, as found in the January 2, 1985,
modifications to the applicable Departmental directive. Another
is the increasingly positive liaison role being played by the
Department of Defense Task Force on Drug Enforcement. </p>

<p>There are grounds for concern that the military's role
continues to be too narrowly defined. There appears to be a
fundamental misconception at the very top of the Department
concerning the permissible scope of the military's role. Writing
to the Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee in June
1985, Secretary of Defense Casper Weinberger stated that direct
military participation in drug seizures outside United States
territory would do violence to &quot;the historic separation
between military and civilian spheres of activity . . . one of
the most fundamental principles of American democracy. This
Commission has been unable to find the basis for such a
&quot;fundamental principle&quot; of co-equal &quot;spheres of
activity.&quot; The fact is that the military, rather than being
a parallel entity, has traditionally been subject to the
direction of the civilian &quot;sphere.&quot; Indeed, the
military's Commander-in-Chief is a civilian. The Posse Comitatus
Act does no more than prohibit use of military forces to enforce
civilian laws on the territory of the United States. The
Constitution was in existence for approximately a century before
such a law was passed by Congress. The Act has been amended once
since then, and it can be amended again if appropriate.
Furthermore, there is nothing in the laws of the United States
forbidding an active enforcement role by the military outside
United States territory, except the requirement of reimbursement.
This in turn hinges upon the definition of &quot;military
preparedness.&quot; However, nowhere in the debate over the
military's role in this area has this Commission found a
discussion of this term. The definition of the military's role
has been left to the military itself, which, through the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, has declared that the military shall be prepared
to serve national security by providing: </p>

<p>a defense posture capable of successfully resisting hostile or
destructive action from within or without, overt or covert. </p>

<p>As described in Chapter 3 of this report, international drug
traffickers have regularly formed alliances with insurgent and
terrorist forces in certain countries. In a few instances these
alliances may actually threaten friendly governments. In many
more countries such a combination at least drains resources from
constructive goals and inhibits efforts to build or maintain a
stable democracy. Even where the threat is more remote, it is
clear that the smuggling techniques in use are the very same ones
that are or could be used to move personnel, weapons, and other
supplies for insurgent groups. For these reasons alone, the
activities of traffickers should bring them squarely within the
national security concerns of the Department of Defense. This
fact has already been recognized by the Vice President, who has
stated clearly that &quot;success against drug smuggling is
intimately tied to the continuation of freedom and democracy in
the hemisphere.&quot; Recognition of this fact would permit the
Defense Department much greater latitude in conducting military
operations aimed at disrupting trafficking organizations.
Examples of such programs include a wide range of activities,
such as expanded and focused intelligence gathering, security
assistance to receptive host governments, expanded deployment of
tethered aerostat radar sites, and joint research and development
between military and law enforcement agencies to provide greater
operation compatibility. </p>

<p>Beyond threats to friendly democracies, international drug
traffickers should be considered a threat to our national
security because they comprise a direct attack on the physical
and social well-being of our country. The costs of this invasion,
which comes by air, sea, and land, is thoroughly documented in
this report. Recognition of this attack as a &quot;. . .
destructive action from without . . .&quot; which is within the
meaning of the Joint Chiefs' definition, would bring the
Department of Defense squarely into the war in which we presently
find ourselves. This may be further than present policy makers
are prepared to go, but it is surely time to bring the issue into
the debate so that it can be decided on the basis of what is
actually permitted or proscribed by the laws and Constitution of
the United States. </p>

<p>Domestic Investigations and Prosecutions </p>

<p>Domestic investigative and prosecutive activity is only one
facet of drug law enforcement. As with all other approaches
designed to reduce the supply of drugs, proper assessment of
their effectiveness requires that realistic goals be established.
As this report has demonstrated, it is unrealistic to expect that
domestic law enforcement alone will solve, or even substantially
reduce, the Nation's drug abuse problem. Rather, its goal must be
a more limited one: to increase the arrests and successful
prosecutions of drug traffickers, whether they be importers,
wholesalers, or retailers, and those who assist them, including
pilots, bankers, and attorneys, and the forfeiture of their
properties accumulated from criminal activity. </p>

<p>The attainment of this objective would contribute to the
ultimate national policy goal of eliminating drug use in several
ways. First, it would directly reduce the supply of drugs by
removing from the illicit drug market those drugs that are seized
along with the arrested traffickers. Second, it would reduce the
supply of drugs indirectly by disrupting the networks that make
it possible to distribute drugs efficiently. Finally, the
traffickers would likely raise the price of their product to
reflect the increased risks, which theoretically should cause a
reduction in the overall consumption of drugs. </p>

<p>In a recent study prepared by the Rand Corporation the authors
concluded that prevention programs, not intensified domestic law
enforcement, were the best approach to control adolescent drug
use. The Commission agrees with the Rand Corporation's
conclusions concerning adolescent drug use and believes that they
are equally valid with respect to adult drug use. However, such
conclusions should not be interpreted as a call for a reduction
in domestic law enforcement efforts against drug trafficking.
Without effective domestic law enforcement, the drug abuse
problem, and its concomitant organized crime effects, would be
immeasurably worse. </p>

<p>Although domestic law enforcement has a limited, albeit
essential, role to play in the national effort against drug
abuse, the Commission has concluded, on the basis of its
investigations, hearings, and study, that changes in focus and
attitudes and a rearrangement of priorities must be undertaken to
achieve the maximum effect of domestic law enforcement. Before
discussing these matters, it is necessary first to address two
fundamental issues: (1) Do organized crime policy and drug abuse
policy conflict? and (2) What, if any, should be the level of
interaction and cooperation between Federal law enforcement
agencies on the one hand and State and local agencies on the
other? </p>

<p>Professor Mark H. Moore, a former Special Assistant to the
Administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration, has
described the objectives of U.S. organized crime policy as
follows: </p>

<p>[T]o suppress the provision of illegal goods and services that
constitute the core of organized crime, to prevent the violence
and corruption that is more characteristic of organized crime
groups than other kinds of criminal activity, and to prevent the
emergence of very large, durable organizations with well
developed capacities for violence and corruption. </p>

<p>This Commission believes that the Nation's drug policy must
have as its goal the elimination of illegal drug use. Domestic
law enforcement contributes to this goal by reducing the supply
of drug in the illegal market and by increasing the prices of
drugs that remain available for purchase. It has been suggested
that the pursuit of the Nation's drug policy, without regard for
its impact on organized crime, may exacerbate the country's
organized crime problem by enriching organized crime groups,
eliminating their competitors, and encouraging trafficking
organizations to become organized crime groups if they are not
already. Although agreeing that such a concern is legitimate,
this Commission has concluded that drug and organized crime
policies do not inherently conflict. Indeed, there is
substantial, if not complete, overlap in the goals of the two
policies because, as the Commission has found, drug trafficking
is a principal activity of organized crime groups. In light of
this, the Commission recommends that targeting high-level
organized-crime trafficking groups, whether they be foreign,
multinational or domestic, should be the top priority of Federal
domestic law enforcement. As Professor Moore has stated: </p>

<p>What is not in conflict, however, is the need of both drug
abuse policy and organized crime policy to develop and use
tactics that are successful in attacking large, entrenched
criminal organizations. This is useful to drug policy, and
essential to organized crime policy. </p>

<p>The Commission is aware that some commentators have criticized
the Federal Government's bias in favor of enforcement against
high-level dealers to the virtual exclusion of lower- or
street-level enforcement. However, the Commission's
recommendation that targeting organized crime trafficking groups
should be the top priority of Federal domestic law enforcement
should not be construed to mean that lower-level enforcement is
not useful and therefore has no place in the Nation's drug
policy. On the contrary, such lower-level enforcement is
essential to achieve the goal of eliminating drug use for several
reasons. As discussed earlier, the arrest of the customers of
drug retailers may result in a direct and immediate reduction in
the demand for drugs. In addition, successful enforcement efforts
directed at lower-level dealers will reduce the supply of illegal
drugs and raise the price of drugs available for purchase, thus
resulting in lower drug consumption. Finally, lower-level
enforcement operations are useful in providing information that
will be invaluable to those involved in investigating high-level
organized crime trafficking groups. The absence of vigorous
lower-level domestic law enforcement could encourage organized
crime groups to remain in drug trafficking, and quite possible
spawn more such groups. High-level enforcement efforts could be
crippled, if not completely undermined, by a lack of a
complementary, lower-level effort. </p>

<p>A fundamental question remains: Which agencies should be
responsible for the various facets of domestic law enforcement?
The investigation of high-level organized crime trafficking
groups, whose activities are generally regional, national or
international in scope, is expensive, time consuming, and
requires special skills and sophisticated tools. The Federal
government, through its agencies, is best equipped to undertake
such investigations. State and local agencies, because of their
unique knowledge of local conditions and expertise in the
required techniques, are more qualified to conduct lower-level
domestic law enforcement, including street operations and
investigations of certain smaller and geographically-restricted
trafficking organizations. </p>

<p>The conclusions and recommendations set forth in the preceding
paragraph are not intended to suggest that Federal domestic law
enforcement and that of State and local agencies should be
completely separate and independent. The drug problem facing the
United States is a national one, and the efforts of all law
enforcement agencies must be coordinated and interrelated to some
extent, if we are to deal successfully with the problem. The
required level of cooperation in some instances may be more than
the routine exchange of drug intelligence or the suppression of
interagency rivalries and jurisdictional disputes. In this
regard, the Commission endorses generally the view expressed
recently by a Federal prosecutor concerning drug enforcement
efforts in New York City: </p>

<p>[O]ne can not compartmentalize the narcotics enforcement
effort, and leave the streets entirely to state and local
enforcement and the conspiracy cases entirely to the federal
government. While each may have a primary area, each must do some
of both. The ideal combination may be some federal prosecution of
state and local arrests, and a significant state and local
participation in joint Task Forces, aimed at dismantling of drug
networks through the conspiracy law. </p>

<p>Examples of successful joint ventures involving Federal, State
and local personnel include the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement
Task Force Program, Operation Pressure Point, and the New York
Drug Enforcement Task Force, which was formed in 1970. These
programs can serve as useful models for any future cooperative
domestic law enforcement arrangements that might be needed. </p>

<p>Federal Domestic Law Enforcement </p>

<p>As a result of its investigation and study, the Commission has
concluded that the tools and techniques needed to permit Federal
law enforcement agents to prosecute their portion of the war
against drug traffickers successfully are for the most part
currently available. The need is not for sweeping new legislative
initiatives but for further changes in attitudes and a greater
commitment to cooperation and coordination among the Federal
agencies involved in drug law enforcement. Balkanization and
jurisdictional disputes between agencies are the most serious
obstacles to success in the struggle against drug trafficking.
The personnel of each Federal agency involved in domestic law
enforcement, from the chief executive to the newest employee,
must understand that their agency alone cannot solve the Nation's
drug problem. Acceptance of this reality will go a long way in
eliminating the destructive competition that in the past has
hampered Federal law enforcement. </p>

<p>As discussed above, the Commission has concluded that the
targeting of high-level organized crime trafficking groups should
be the top priority of Federal drug law enforcement efforts.
Because of the sophistication and complexity of such
organizations and their operations, the Federal response must be
equally sophisticated and complex. The Reagan Administration's
establishment of the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force
Program (OCDETF Program) in late 1982 was an attempt to create a
mechanism for attacking high-level organized crime trafficking
groups; by their own account, the multiagency Task Forces,
drawing on the resources of a broad spectrum of Federal, State
and local agencies, have achieved an encouraging degree of
success. The success that has been achieved was not the result of
the development of new techniques but of the efficient use of
existing ones: </p>

<p>The OCDE Task Force Program can lay claim to no new inventions
in the fields of investigative and prosecutorial techniques. It
can, however, be justifiably proud of its creative utilization of
existing tools. </p>

<p>The Commission applauds the OCDETF Program and those who
designed and have implemented it. It strongly favors the
Programs's continuation and expansion, to the extent that it is
desirable and feasible to do so, for several reasons: the Program
has resulted in the elimination of interagency disputes to a
substantial extent; the disruption of large and sophisticated
trafficking groups requires large, efficient and strongly
supported enforcement organizations; and multiagency task forces
are particularly suited to use the Federal conspiracy, Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO), Continuing Criminal
Enterprise (CCE), and forfeiture statutes to the maximum and
optimum extent possible. In addition, the different investigative
techniques used by the participating agencies increases the
probability of successful infiltration of trafficking
organizations. However, the effectiveness of the OCDETF Program
could be enhanced if the following changes were made. </p>

<p>In creating the OCDETF Program, its designers concluded that
to insure the maximum support of the participating agencies, a
consensus-based decision-making process was necessary. In this
regard, no single agency was designated as the lead Task Force
agency. Although participants in the OCDETF Program have been
able to reduce interagency competition and conflict to a
substantial and significant extent, the Commission believe that
further improvement is both desirable and feasible. Such
improvements would flow naturally from a renewed, unambiguous
commitment to the Program and its goals by participating
agencies. Increased cooperation and coordination might also
result, if DEA or the FBI were designated as the lead Task Force
agency, or if the United States Attorneys were given greater
authority with respect to the operations of the Task Force. The
Commission recommends that those in charge of the OCDETF Program
should consider whether a lead agency should be designated or a
U.S. Attorney be given greater authority to achieve even greater
coordination of effort. </p>

<p>Law enforcement agencies that participate in the OCDETF
Program have other missions in the struggle against drug
trafficking. For this reason, each &quot;agency must balance its
commitment to the Task Force concept with its fundamental
mission. Because the targeting of high-level organized crime
trafficking groups should be the top priority and because the
OCDE Task Forces are the best available devices for infiltrating
and disrupting such groups, the Commission is concerned that, in
allocating manpower and other resources between the program and
other missions, the participating agencies should not shortchange
the Task Forces in any way. The top echelon of each participating
agency must be strongly committed to the OCDETF Program and its
goals and must be actively involved in assuring its success. The
required commitment and involvement are not satisfied by
abdicating responsibility for insuring the success of the program
to those heading field offices. Indifference at the headquarters
level will be reflected eventually in field offices. </p>

<p>To signal their commitment to the program and to encourage
their best agents to participate in it, the top executives of
each participating agency should adopt an unambiguous policy that
salary increases and career advancement within the agency for an
agent who participates in an OCDE Task Force will not be
adversely affected in any way by that participation. Such a
policy would require that the evaluation of an agent assigned to
a Task Force be based not on such criteria as the number of
arrests or cases made or the amount of drugs seized. Evaluations
should assess that agent's qualitative performance in complex
financial and conspiracy cases, which may last more than two
years and which may result in the arrest of few, albeit
high-level and important traffickers. </p>

<p>The OCDETF Program is only one facet of the Federal effort
against drug trafficking. The effective functioning of the other
facets of Federal domestic law enforcement, i.e., Organized Crime
Strike Forces, the South Florida Task Force, the FBI, DEA,
Customs, and U.S. Attorneys, is also essential if the Nation's
drug problem is ever to be contained and eventually eliminated. </p>

<p>That the OCDE Task Forces are and should be primarily
responsible for disrupting high-level organized crime trafficking
groups does not mean that the other Federal efforts should be
devoted to, or focused upon, lower -or street-level traffickers
or purely local drug problems. For the reasons discussed above,
these enforcement concerns are rightfully and almost exclusively
those of State and local law enforcement. However, there will be
cases against organized crime trafficking groups that will be
deemed inappropriate for OCDETF treatment, and these will then
have to be handled by some other Federal agency; this is also
true with respect to large trafficking organizations that are not
organized crime controlled and that may or may not be
multi-jurisdictional. </p>

<p>As a result of its investigation and study, the Commission has
concluded that the non-OCDETF Program segments of Federal
domestic drug law enforcement are for the most part functioning
well and that the variety of investigative techniques that these
agencies bring to the Federal effort to reduce the supply of
drugs is a great benefit. The use of financial expertise,
undercover, sting and reverse sting operations, informants,
electronic and other kinds of surveillance, preselected target
and target of opportunity approaches to initiating
investigations, and buy-bust transactions are all useful ways of
infiltrating trafficking organizations. However, the Commission
is concerned that the healthy competition among enforcement
agencies that the current organizational structure is supposed to
encourage often degenerates into jurisdictional conflicts that
harm the overall Federal effort against traffickers. This will
continue to occur unless top agency officials instill in their
agents and employees the sense that genuine cooperation and
coordination with other agencies are essential to the ultimate
success of the Nation's drug effort. In this regard, the National
Drug Enforcement Policy Board has an important and unique role to
play insuring that healthy and constructive competition does not
become destructive and petty conflict. </p>

<p>The Board could take one important step to eliminate
jurisdictional disputes, as well as to avoid duplication of
investigative efforts and to provide maximum safety to drug
agents. This would be to require the establishment of a system
whereby an agency would file a report with a central reporting
repository, once it has opened an investigation of an individual
believed to be a part of a trafficking operation. If two or more
agencies were investigating the same individual, they would be
notified of that fact, and they would be required to decide,
after negotiations, the best way for conducting the
investigation, a single agency or an ad hoc task force. Such a
system would work at its optimal level only if all law
enforcement agencies, including State and local units,
participated. The Commission believes that such a reporting and
control system is highly desirable and, because of existing
technology, feasible. The Commission also believes that this
system could be incorporated easily into the all-source
intelligence and operations center, recommended elsewhere in this
report. </p>

<p>As result of the 1973 reorganization plan, the Customs Service
was prohibited from conducting investigative, intelligence, and
law enforcement functions, relating to the suppression of drug
trafficking, at locations away from ports of entry or borders.
This aspect of the plan has been controversial and as elicited
much criticism on the ground that is weakened the &quot;Nation's
capability to interdict the flow of narcotics into the United
States.&quot; </p>

<p>The Commission has no objections to that feature of the 1973
reorganization plan that created a lead agency in Federal drug
law enforcement, and indeed believes that it remains a valid
concept today. However, the Commission has concluded that it is
an appropriate time to study whether the functions of the Customs
Service with respect to drug trafficking should be expanded to
include investigative, intelligence, and law enforcement
functions within this country, beyond the borders and ports of
entry, where appropriate and subject to the oversight and
supervision of the lead agencies. In this respect, the Commission
notes that the 1973 reorganization plan was modified somewhat
when, on January 5, 1984, the Attorney General signed the
&quot;Request for Assistance and Authorization Respecting Drug
Enforcement Activities of Certain Customs Officers in Domestic
Drug Investigations.&quot; This action granted authority to the
DEA Administrator to endow specific Customs agents, for a
designated period of time, with the power, among others, to
conduct investigative, intelligence, and law enforcement
functions relating to drug trafficking. Because this arrangement
appears to have worked well, a broader expansion of Customs'
functions may be warranted at this time in an effort to improve
domestic law enforcement. </p>

<p>In addition to the attitudinal and organizational matters
discussed above, the Commission proposes substantial expansion of
the use of one particular investigative technique because of the
magnitude of illicit drug production in this country. All of the
PCP (phencyclidine), almost all of the methamphetamine, and an
estimated 80 percent of injectable amphetamine available
illicitly in the United States in 1984 were produced in domestic
clandestine laboratories. In addition, an increasing amount of
cocaine in being processed in this country. In fact, the number
of cocaine laboratories seized by law enforcement authorities in
the United States between 1983 and 1984 nearly doubled. </p>

<p>To combat both the domestic and foreign production of illicit
drugs, law enforcement officials have, in some instances,
targeted the chemicals used to manufacture the drugs. For
example, through its &quot;Operation Chem-Con,&quot; DEA tracks
the movement of chemicals used to process cocaine from the
principal manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers to their final
destinations. According to the chief of the DEA's cocaine
section, Johnny Phelps: </p>

<p>Through cooperation gained by DEA from the world's ether
industry and foreign law enforcement elements, we now have
voluntary restrictions on sales to known trafficking groups and
are able to seize shipments of chemicals after purchase causing
great financial losses to cocaine producing consort[ia]. </p>

<p>In addition to the voluntary compliance of chemical companies
in Operation Chem-Con, reporting requirements are sometimes used
to control chemicals used to manufacture illicit drugs.
Piperidine, a chemical used to manufacture the hallucinogen PCP,
is subject to reporting requirements under the Controlled
Substances Act. The provision requires that any person selling
piperidine report to the Attorney General information concerning
the sale, including identifying information about the purchaser,
and the quantity, form and intended use of the piperidine. This
system has worked well and permits DEA to investigate any
suspicious sales of piperidine. Since 1984 DEA has seized four
clandestine PCP laboratories and has located at least ten other
operations, which obtained chemicals for PCP manufacture by
posing as legitimate businesses. </p>

<p>Chemicals used to manufacture illicit drugs can be regulated
in the same manner as controlled substances. Under the Controlled
Substances Act, the Attorney General may place an immediate
precursor in the same schedule as the controlled substance for
which it is a precursor. </p>

<p>Although the regulation of chemicals used to manufacture
illicit drugs can thwart efforts to produce these drugs and can
help law enforcement officials to locate clandestine
laboratories, several factors limit the effectiveness of such
approaches. First, many of these chemicals have widespread
legitimate uses in industry, and tracking their sales would be
impractical. Even tracking a limited number of these chemicals
would be costly, requiring adequate computer resources and
individuals to review and analyze chemical sales information.
Second, controls on chemicals may have only short-term effects.
In the case of the reporting of piperidine, both use of PCP and
clandestine laboratory activity appeared to decline from 1979 to
1981. However, by 1982, trafficking in and abuse of PCP had
increased. Third, some chemicals can be obtained illicitly. For
example, a shortage of P2P (phenyl-2-propanone), which is used to
manufacture methamphetamine, resulted from the placement of P2P
in Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act. Traffickers
responded by increasing illicit manufacture of P2P in 1982. </p>

<p>Despite these limitations, controlling a limited number of
these chemicals has merit. The United Nations International
Narcotics Control Board has identified the following chemicals as
suitable targets for control: ether, used to process cocaine;
acetic anhydride, (heroin); P2P, (methamphetamine); ergotamine
(LSD); anthranilic acid (methaqualone); and piperidine (PCP).
This United Nations Board has called on countries in which
illicit drug manufacture occurs to impose a licensing system and
quotas for supplying and importation of these chemicals. </p>

<p>For the foregoing reasons, the Commission recommends that DEA
should determine which chemicals currently used to manufacture
illicit drugs should be subject to reporting requirements or
placed in a schedule of the Controlled Substances Act. This
review should included a consideration of which drugs are most
abused, which have the most serious consequences, and which
precursor chemicals are essential to the production process. In
addition, DEA should identify the resources needed for the
computerization, analysis and follow-up of reports concerning
chemicals selected for monitoring. </p>

<p>The Commission's final recommendations concerning Federal
domestic law enforcement relate to the Federal agents and
employees who are most involved in the Federal effort against
drugs. This country owes these agents the greatest possible
amount of protection and assistance against the vicious and
ruthless participants in organized crime trafficking
organizations. As the testimony of drug pilot Adler Barriman Seal
before this Commission revealed, because of the massive amounts
of money involved, high-level traffickers are able to procure and
use the products of the latest technological advances to
facilitate their trafficking operations. Drug agents must also be
given access to such state of the art equipment and weapons. In
this regard, the research and development operations of Federal
drug law enforcement agencies should work closely with field
agents to produce the equipment and tools needed to defeat drug
traffickers. </p>

<p>Finally, this Commission has made several recommendations
designed to improve Federal domestic law enforcement. However,
the men and women involved in the day-to-day effort against drug
trafficking have the most incentive and are the best qualified to
offer suggestions as to how to improve domestic law enforcement.
These &quot;experts&quot; should be encouraged to make
recommendations and should be rewarded for the ones that are
successful. </p>

<p>State and Local Domestic Law Enforcement </p>

<p>The role of State and local agencies in the national campaign
against drugs has been described above: they have the primary
responsibility for lower- and street-level enforcement because of
their proximity to the affected areas and because they possess or
can adopt the tools necessary for carrying out their mission. The
successful accomplishment of the mission of State and local law
enforcement agencies is a desirable end, in and of itself,
because harassment and disruption of drug retailers and smaller
or geographically-restricted distribution networks could lead to
a reduction in the supply of drugs, an increase in the price of
the drugs remaining in the marketplace, and discouragement of
non-drug users from experimenting with drugs. Successful
completion of this mission will also permit State and local
authorities to provide Federal law enforcement agencies with
information that will be invaluable to the latter in infiltrating
and disrupting high-level organized crime and other large
trafficking organizations. The leaders of State and local
agencies must constantly reiterate to their agents that their
efforts cannot be viewed in isolation and that they are part of
much larger national campaign against drugs. Such indoctrination
will result in the kind of cooperation and coordination essential
to the success of the overall national effort. </p>

<p>Effective State and local domestic drug law enforcement will
undoubtedly require increased expenditures, including the
expansion of prison facilities. Although the drug problem is
quite correctly denominated a National one, its devastating
effects are most pronounced at the State and local levels.
Therefore, the Commission recommends that State and local
governments determine what is necessary to permit their law
enforcement agencies to carry out their drug mission successfully
and do all they can to convince their citizens that any required
increase in expenditures is absolutely essential. Such a campaign
will be considerably more palatable if it includes a large
segment of funding from seized drug revenues and assets, as
described below. </p>

<p>The Commission has concluded that if a State is serious about
responding to the drug problem within its jurisdiction it must
provide its law enforcement agencies with certain tools that are
available to their Federal counterparts. The Commission therefore
recommends that those States, which do not already have such
statutes, consider enacting legislation patterned after the
following Federal statutes: Bail Reform Act of 1984, the
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act;
statutory use and derivative use immunity for witnesses;
statutory criminal and civil forfeiture provisions; the
Continuing Criminal Enterprise (CCE) statute; Title III of the
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (electronic
surveillance); and the Currency and Foreign Transactions
Reporting Act. In addition, the Commission recommends that, where
appropriate, States consider adopting statewide grand juries,
with public reporting authority, to improve their investigations
of drug trafficking organizations and eliminating accomplice
corrobation statutes or rules. Although the Commission is
cognizant that there may be legitimate State constitutional
objections to the adoption of some provisions and devices, the
Commission nevertheless believes that each has increased the
effectiveness of Federal domestic law enforcement and would
similarly increase the effectiveness of State and local law
enforcement agencies in infiltrating and disrupting trafficking
groups. </p>

<p>Foreign Assistance </p>

<p>Because the majority of drugs consumed in the United States is
produced abroad, a primary component of our national strategy is
international cooperation to control drugs. A prerequisite of
this strategy is the cooperation of drug producing and
trafficking nations. While this has proved difficult or even
impossible in some situations, due to the political, economic or
social instability of some drug producing countries,
international cooperation can contribute to our national effort
to reduce drug consumption. </p>

<p>The United States provides various forms of assistance to
other countries to help them in their anti-drug efforts,
including both economic and military aid. According to the 1984
National Strategy For Prevention of Drug Abuse and Drug
Trafficking, the objectives of the U.S. international strategy
are: </p>

<p>. . . strengthening U.S. efforts to assist foreign governments
in stopping the production and transportation of illicit drugs
and improving interdiction efforts in transit nations;
encouraging and assisting governments of producer nations to
undertake crop control programs as the most effective means of
curbing production; developing innovative mutual assistance
treaties with foreign governments, directed at facilitating
judicial actions against the drug trade, seizing assets derived
from drug trafficking, eliminating banking procedures which hide
illicit drug transactions, and extradition and other legal
arrangements; encouraging other nations to support international
narcotics control programs, financially and with other resources,
including developmental assistance linked with crop control and
cooperative law enforcement efforts; encouraging international
organizations and development banks to link their assistance with
narcotics control objectives, where appropriate; and curtailing
the diversion of pharmaceuticals and chemicals from legitimate
international commerce. </p>

<p>Indications are increasing that the concern over drug-related
problems is becoming universal. This growing concern is due
largely to recognition by governments in both developed and
less-developed countries, that the illicit production,
trafficking and abuse of drugs pose serious problems to their
nations' development, their societies, and in some cases, to
their national security. The multiple effects of drug trafficking
are increasingly felt in Latin America, Southeast Asia, and
Southwest Asia. These effects include crime, corruption, economic
destabilization, political manipulation, and epidemic drug abuse.
Much of the increased anti-drug activity in South American
countries in the past two years correlates directly to the
emergence of domestic drug problems in those countries, and their
awareness of their own vulnerability to the myriad problems
related to drug abuse. </p>

<p>At a time when drug traffickers rule segments of some
countries, and dominate local economies in others, an increasing
number of nations are realizing that passivity is not the answer.
This realization is encouraging efforts for more cooperation with
the United States in its multilateral enforcement and demand
reduction programs. Reduction in the demand for drugs in the
United States and abroad is beginning to be perceived by drug
producing and trafficking nations as a vital component in the
fight against drug abuse. It is an objective that has greater
long term potential for producing action by source nation
governments than do efforts perceived as benefiting the United
States exclusively. </p>

<p>The Commission recognizes the importance of existing
international drug control efforts. Because drug trafficking and
production are threats to the stability of existing democracies,
a primary goal of the United States and its allies should be to
enhance the security of drug producing and transshipment regions.
Because some source countries are promoting drug control in the
interests of their own national security and public welfare more
actively than they have in the past, it is an opportune time for
the United States to intensify its international drug control
efforts. The success of these efforts requires the political and
financial support of a much broader coalition within the
international community. </p>

<p>The United States offers assistance to numerous countries
around the world with drug abuse and trafficking problems,
primarily through the Department of State's Bureau of
International Narcotics Matters, the Agency for International
Development, and the United States Information Agency. The United
States currently supports crop eradication programs in 14
countries and is working to develop such programs in several
others. These control efforts are vitally enhanced by the public
adareness programs sponsored by the Department of State, the
Agency for International Development, and the United States
Information Agency. </p>

<p>There has been an ongoing debate in this country concerning
the wisdom of making foreign assistance, both general and
drug-related, conditional on the progress of drug control
efforts. Proponents of utilizing existing authority to suspend
aid to any nation not taking steps to control drug production
claim that the United States should employ this leverage as a
final step in forcing nations to stop drug production. Opponents
feel that sustained aid is necessary to achieve U.S.-supported
drug control objectives and that an aid cut-off might undermine
other U.S. interests in some cases. </p>

<p>The National Drug Enforcement Policy Board is now in a central
position in this area, as in all others in the anti-drug effort.
It should carefully evaluate the data used in the President's
annual decision whether to suspend aid to drug producing or
transshipment countries, and make a suitable recommendation to
the President for his ultimate decision. </p>

<p>Extradition and mutual assistance treaties can also contribute
to international drug control efforts by enhancing diplomatic
initiatives and providing leverage in United States' foreign
policy decisions. Clauses in several existing treaties are
particularly innovative and worthy of inclusion in future
agreements. The willingness of a country to engage in and
actively implement drug-related extradition and mutual assistance
treaties should be a primary consideration in ultimate U.S.
policy decisions regarding foreign assistance to a country, and
should be weighed in the deliberations of the President and the
policy Board described above. </p>

<p>The Department of State, in conjunction with the Department of
Defense, should continue its program of expanded economic
assistance with emphasis on assisting those foreign governments
making concerted efforts to control their drug problems. At the
same time, a recognition that drug trafficking has become a
national security issue should lead to the availability and use
of security assistance funds. The effectiveness of such
assistance is, of course, dependent upon the political will of
the host government. To encourage this, the United States should
raise the drug issue to the highest level possible in bilateral
relations with producer and trafficker nations. Similarly, the
United States should raise the drug issue in terns of
international security with its industrialized allies. This
should occur not only in the United Nations, but also on a
bilateral and multilateral basis. This would provide incentive in
urging those nations to increase their assistance and cooperation
within the region and in urging those nations to raise the issue
as a high priority in their bilateral relations with the producer
and trafficking nations. </p>

<p>In addition to these efforts to reduce the supply of drugs,
international efforts to reduce the demand for drugs are an
important component of U.S. strategy. The United States should,
therefore, continue to help producer nations develop prevention
and education programs aimed at drug abuse within the producer
and trafficker nations. </p>

<p>Indications are overwhelming that the world community in
general realizes the dangers inherent in drug use. In the past,
many nations regarded drug abuse as aberrational social behavior,
and relegated governmental reaction, if there was any at all, to
law enforcement or social/health ministries. As international
awareness of the actual nature and scope of the threat of drug
abuse increases, however, nations are placing the issue where it
belongs: within the realm of national security. </p>

<p>Source Country Crop Control </p>

<p>Strategies to control drug trafficking and drug abuse in the
United States have traditionally included measures designed to
eliminate illicit drug supplies at their source. These
&quot;source country eradication&quot; measures, primarily the
manual elimination or uprooting of illicit drug crops and the use
of herbicides to kill illicit plants, remain a central focus of
this country's anti-drug efforts. The 1984 National Strategy for
the Prevention of Drug Abuse and Drug Trafficking clearly states
U.S. policy in this regard: </p>

<p>Fundamental to the overall supply reduction effort is
eliminating illegal drugs as close to their source as possible.
The major gains will be realized in the longer term reduction in
the availability of illicit drugs. </p>

<p>Since 1978 the Department of State's Bureau of International
Narcotics Matters (BINM) has had primary responsibility for
overseeing and implementing foreign drug production control
efforts. BINM provides bilateral assistance for crop control and
interdiction programs in drug source countries in the form of
equipment, training and technical advisory services. BINM's
stated objective is: </p>

<p>to control production simultaneously in all key sectors of
illicit drugs exported to the United States so that significant
and lasting reductions in availability are achieved . . . .
Preventing cultivation and destroying illicit narcotics at their
source will prove to be the most effective means of reducing
availability. . . . BINM's first priority is on crop control -
government bans on cultivation production, enforced by manual or
chemical crop eradication. </p>

<p>In a successful crop control system drugs would be stopped at
their source, thereby alleviating the &quot;chain reaction&quot;
associated with drug trafficking and drug abuse in this country.
In fact, crop reduction efforts have at best enjoyed limited
success. Despite the fact that nearly all drug producing and
transit countries are signatories to a 1961 agreement that
restricts production and distribution of certain drugs to only
medical and scientific uses, drug production has escalated in
most source countries in the past 20 years. Increased production
has resulted in decreased prices and wider availability of most
illicit drugs in the United States. Accordingly, domestic
consumption of many drugs has increased. </p>

<p>The effectiveness of efforts to control illicit drug crops in
source countries is inherently limited. First, many source
country governments are not motivated to reduce crop production,
either because the profits obtained from the illicit crops are
essential to the economic and/or political stability of the
country, or because they view drug consumption as an exclusively
American problem. In addition, many drugs that are illegal in the
United States are traditionally consumed in milder forms by
source country natives and are viewed as necessities of life or
an essential part of their culture. </p>

<p>Secondly, in many cases farmers do not have an easily
available alternative crop. In any case, an illicit drug crop can
provide a farmer with far more income than any legitimate crop
and is therefore likely to be selected above any other crop for
cultivation. </p>

<p>Third, the governments in many producing areas are weak and do
not exert control over growers. The Thai and Burmese governments
have long been fighting insurgent groups in the Northwest
Frontier Provinces, where most of the Golden Triangle opium is
grown. The Peruvian government has had little effective control
in remote coca producing regions controlled by that country's
Shining Path Guerrillas. Even where governments aggressively
pursue crop eradication programs, difficulties are sometimes
overwhelming. </p>

<p>Fourth, some major source countries are controlled by
governments hostile to the United States, who while adopting
policies to reduce domestic consumption, have no hesitation about
importation of illicit drugs to the United States. Because many
source country governments are politically and economically
unstable, United States diplomatic relations with even nonhostile
source country governments are often very complex. </p>

<p>Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the set of source
countries is not fixed. When a crop is successfully reduced in
one country, production begins or increases in another country.
New producers constantly emerge. This shifting has been observed
repeatedly throughout the history of source country control
efforts, even where the United States has claimed major crop
eradication successsses. This has been the most serious obstacle
to total crop reduction efforts. </p>

<p>U.S. and Mexican efforts provide an example. The crop
eradication program conducted in the mid-1970's in Mexico is
often cited as a successful model. Through the program, the
United States supplied equipment, herbicide and funds for the
eradication of opium poppies, primarily in Northern Mexico. While
Mexican heroin production declined after the program's
implementation, heroin production in and export from the Golden
Triangle and the Golden Crescent accelerated, and within five
years, total heroin available in the United States reached levels
equal to those attained before the Mexican eradication program.
Mexican heroin production has increased every year since 1980,
and in 1984 that country provided an estimated 21 percent of the
total U.S. supply. </p>

<p>Despite the limitations of source country control programs,
the efforts to reduce international illicit drug crops are
essential to the overall U.S. drug strategy. Implemented
selectively and judiciously, crop control programs could
effectively reduce the availability of targeted illicit drugs in
the United States, if only on a temporary basis. As viewed by the
Select Committee on Narcotics, </p>

<p>Effective action in relatively few countries, against the
production and trafficking of opium, heroin, coca, cocaine,
marijuana and hashish would have a great impact on the drug abuse
problem in the United States by dramatically curtailing supplies
available to users and potential users . . . </p>

<p>The United States, through the Department of State, should
focus crop control efforts in those countries where political and
economic climates will make the success of crop eradication
programs probable. Particular crop control opportunities could
best be determined if the State Department established a cadre of
professional drug officers. Currently, international drug
programs are often managed by contract personnel or by Foreign
Service Officers not especially interested in drug issues.
Narcotics Assistance Unit positions within the Foreign Service
often remain unfilled for long periods of time because Foreign
Service Officers often view them as a detriment to their careers.
The absence of a specialized drug group within the Foreign
Service structure thus impacts negatively on the overall
international drug effort. The Department of State should
recognize Narcotics Assistance Unit positions as priority
assignments, and integrate them into the career advancement
structure. </p>

<p>BINM should also examine the possibility of introducing source
country farmers to more imaginative and feasible alternatives to
illicit drug cultivation. The available options are currently
limited to cultivating licit replacement crops but could possibly
include the mining of indigenous minerals and the introduction of
light industry to a traditional growing region. </p>

<p>Finally, the importance of international crop controls in the
context of the overall drug reduction strategy should be
reevaluated. The limitations inherent in these programs, the
majority of which are beyond the control of the United States,
make them a less likely success than other strategies discussed
elsewhere in this report. In addition, the problems associated
with international controls, most notably the relentless shifting
of drug crop cultivations to non-targeted countries, underscores
the ultimate importance of reducing the demand for drugs in this
country. History has shown that as long as consumer demand for an
illicit drug is strong, some country, somewhere, will become a
source country.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>