
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-62</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B019-181</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/medpaper.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052850 text/html 39307
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:28:42 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:59 GMT
Content-length: 39089
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Introduction to Marijuana: Medical Papers</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p align="center">Introduction from<br>
<font size="5"><em>Marijuana: Medical Papers<br>
</em></font><font size="4">by Todd Mikuriya, M.D.<br>
<b>Medi-Comp Press, 1973, pp. xiii-xxvii</b> </font></p>

<p align="center"><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif"
width="562" height="19"> </p>

<p>Medicine in the Western World has forgotten almost all it once
knew about therapeutic properties of marijuana, or cannabis. </p>

<p>Analgesia, anticonvulsant action, appetite stimulation,
ataraxia, antibiotic properties and low toxicity were described
throughout medical literature, beginning in 1839, when
O'Shaughnessy introduced cannabis into the Western pharmacopoeia.
</p>

<p>As these findings were reported throughout Western medicine,
cannabis attained wide use. Cannabis therapy was described in
most pharmacopoeial texts as a treatment for a variety of disease
conditions. </p>

<p>During the second half of the 1800s and in the present
century, medical researchers in some measure corroborated the
early reports of the therapeutic potential of cannabis. In
addition, much laboratory research has been concerned with
bioassay, determination of the mode of action, and attempts to
solve the problems of insolubility in water and variability of
strength among different cannabis specimens. </p>

<p>&quot;Recreational&quot; smoking of cannabis in the twentieth
century and the resultant restrictive federal legislation have
functionally ended all medical uses of marijuana. </p>

<p>In light of such assets as minimal toxicity, no buildup of
tolerance, no physical dependence, and minimal autonomic
disturbance, immediate major clinical reinvestigation of cannabis
preparations is indicated in the management of pain, chronic
neurologic diseases, convulsive disorders, migraine headache,
anorexia, mental illness, and bacterial infections. </p>

<p>Recently declassified secret U.S. Defense Department studies
reconfirm marijuana's congeners to have therapeutic utility. </p>

<p>Cannabis indica, Cannabis sativa, Cannabis americana, Indian
hemp and marijuana (or marihuana) all refer to the same plant.
Cannabis is used throughout the world for diverse purposes and
has a long history characterized by usefulness, euphoria or
evil--depending on one's point of view. To the agriculturist
cannabis is a fiber crop; to the physician of a century ago it
was a valuable medicine; to the physician of today it is an
enigma; to the user, a euphoriant; to the police, a menace; to
the traffickers, a source of profitable danger; to the convict or
parolee and his family, a source of sorrow. </p>

<p>This book is concerned primarily with the medicinal aspects of
cannabis. </p>

<p>The Chinese emperor Shen-nung is reported to have taught his
people to grow hemp for fiber in the twenty-eighth century B.C. A
text from the period 1500-1200 B.C. documents a knowledge of the
plant in China- -but not for use as fiber. In 200 A.D., the use
of cannabis as an analgesic was described by the physician
Hoa-tho.[44] </p>

<p>The Chinese emperor Shen-nung is reported to have taught his
people to grow hemp for fiber in the twenty-eighth century B.C. A
text from the period 1500-1200 B.C. documents a knowledge of the
plant in China- -but not for use as fiber. In 200 A.D., the use
of cannabis as an analgesic was described by the physician
Hoa-tho.[44] </p>

<p>In India the use of hemp preparations as a remedy was
described before 1000 B.C. In Persia, cannabis was known several
centuries before Christ. In Assyria, about 650 B.C., its
intoxicating properties were noted.[44] </p>

<p>Except for Herodotus' report that the Scythians used the smoke
from burning hemp seeds for intoxication, the ancient Greeks
seemed to be unaware of the psychoactive properties of cannabis.
Dioscorides in the first century A.D. rendered an accurate
morphologic description of the plant, but made no note of
intoxicating properties.[10] </p>

<p>In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, Arabic writers
described the social use of cannabis and resultant cruel but
unsuccessful attempts to suppress its non-medical use.[44] </p>

<p>Although Galen described the use of the seeds for creating
warmth, he did not describe the intoxicating qualities of hemp.
Of interest is the paucity of references to hemp's intoxicating
properties in the lay and medical literature of Europe before the
1800s.[44] </p>

<p>The therapeutic use of cannabis was introduced into Western
medicine in 1839, in a forty-page article by W. B. O'Shaughnessy,
a thirty- year-old physician serving with the British in
India.[27] His discussion of the history of the use of cannabis
products in the East reveals an awareness that these drugs had
not only been used in medicine for therapeutic purposes, but had
also been used for recreational and religious purposes. </p>

<p>O'Shaughnessy is not primarily known for his discovery of hemp
drugs, but rather for his basic studies on intravenous
electrolyte therapy in 1831, and his introduction of the
telegraph into India in the 1850s.[26] </p>

<p>After studying the literature on cannabis and conferring with
contemporary Hindu and Mohammedan scholars O'Shaughnessy tested
the effects of various hemp preparations on animals, before
attempting to use them to treat humans. Satisfied that the drug
was reasonably safe, he administered preparations of cannabis
extract to patients, and discovered that it had analgesic and
sedative properties. O'Shaughnessy successfully relieved the pain
of rheumatism and stilled the convulsions of an infant with this
strange new drug. His most spectacular success came, however,
when he quelled the wrenching muscle spasms of tetanus and rabies
with the fragrant resin. Psychic effects resembling a curious
delirium, when an overdose was given, were treated with strong
purgatives, emetics with a blister to the nape of the neck, and
leeches on the temples.[27] </p>

<p>The use of cannabis derivatives for medicinal purposes spread
rapidly throughout Western medicine, as is evidenced in the
report of the Committee on Cannabis Indica of the Ohio State
Medical Society, published in 1860. In that report physicians
told of success in treating stomach pain, childbirth psychosis,
chronic cough, and gonorrhea with hemp products.[25] A Dr.
Fronmueller, of Fuerth, Ohio, summarized his experiences with the
drug as follows: </p>

<p>I have used hemp many hundred times to relieve local pains of
an inflammatory as well as neuralgic nature, and judging from
these experiments, I have to assign to the Indian hemp a place
among the so-called hypnotic medicines next to opium; its effects
are less intense, and the secretions are not so much suppressed
by it. Digestion is not disturbed; the appetite rather increased;
sickness of the stomach seldom induced; congestion never. Hemp
may consequently be employed in inflammatory conditions. It
disturbs the expectoration far less than opium; the nervous
system is also not so much affected. The whole effect of hemp
being less violent, and producing a more natural sleep, without
interfering with the actions of the internal organs, it is
certainly often preferable to opium, although it is not equal to
that drug in strength and reliability. An alternating course of
opium and Indian hemp seems particularly adapted to those cases
where opium alone fails in producing the desired effect.[25] </p>

<p>Because cannabis did not lead to physical dependence, it was
found to be superior to the opiates for a number of therapeutic
purposes. Birch, in 1889, reported success in treating opiate and
chloral addiction with cannabis,[5] and Mattison in 1891
recommended its use to the young physician, comparing it
favorably with the opiates. He quoted his colleague Suckling: </p>

<p>With a wish for speedy effect, it is so easy to use that
modern mischief-maker, hypodermic morphia, that they [young
physicians] are prone to forget remote results of incautious
opiate giving. </p>

<p>Would that the wisdom which has come to their professional
fathers through, it may be, a hapless experience, might serve
them to steer clear of narcotic shoals on which many a patient
has gone awreck. </p>

<p>Indian hemp is not here lauded as a specific. It will, at
times, fail. So do other drugs. But the many cases in which it
acts well, entitle it to a large and lasting confidence. </p>

<p>My experience warrants this statement: cannabis indica is,
often, a safe and successful anodyne and hypnotic.[23] </p>

<p>In their study of the medical applications of cannabis,
physicians of the nineteenth century repeatedly encountered a
number of difficulties. Recognizing the therapeutic potential of
the drug, many experimenters sought ways of overcoming these
drawbacks to its use in medicine, in particular the following: </p>

<p>Cannabis products are insoluble in water. </p>

<p>The onset of the effects of medicinal preparations of cannabis
takes an hour or so; its action is therefore slower than that of
many other drugs. </p>

<p>Different batches of cannabis derivatives vary greatly in
strength; moreover, the common procedure for standardization of
cannabis samples, by administration to test animals, is subject
to error owing to variability of reactions among the animals. </p>

<p>There is wide variation among humans in their individual
responses to cannabis. </p>

<p>Despite these problems regarding the uncertainty of potency
and dosage and the difficulties in mode of administration,
cannabis has several important advantages over other substances
used as analgesics, sedatives, and hypnotics: </p>

<p>The prolonged use of cannabis does not lead to the development
of physical dependence. [11, 13, 14, 24, 39, 44] </p>

<p>There is minimal development of tolerance to cannabis
products. (Loewe notes a slight &quot;beginner's
habituation&quot; in dogs, during the first few trials with the
drug, as the only noticeable tolerance effect.[20]) [11, 13, 14,
24, 44] </p>

<p>Cannabis products have exceedingly low toxicity.[9, 21, 22,
24] (The oral dose required to kill a mouse has been found to be
about 40,000 times the dose required to produce typical symptoms
of intoxication in man.)[21] </p>

<p>Cannabis produces no disturbance of vegetative functioning,
whereas the opiates inhibit the gastrointestinal tract, the flow
of bile and the cough reflex.[1, 2, 24, 44, 46] </p>

<p>Besides investigating the physical effects of medicinal
preparations of cannabis, nineteenth-century physicians observed
the psychic effects of the drug in its therapeutic
applications.[4, 27, 33] They found that cannabis first mildly
stimulates, and then sedates the higher centers of the brain.
Hare suggested in 1887 a possible mechanism of cannabis'
analgesic properties: </p>

<p>During the time that this remarkable drug is relieving pain a
very curious psychical condition manifests itself; namely, that
the diminution of the pain seems to be due to its fading away in
the distance, so that the pain becomes less and less, just as the
pain in a delicate ear would grow less and less as a beaten drum
was carried farther and farther out of the range of hearing. </p>

<p>This condition is probably associated with the other well-
known symptom produced by the drug; namely, the prolongation of
time.[16] </p>

<p>Reynolds, in 1890,[33] summed up thirty years of his clinical
experience using cannabis, finding it useful as a nocturnal
sedative in senile insomnia, and valuable in treating
dysmenorrhea, neuralgias including tic douloureux and tabetic
symptoms, migraine headache and certain epileptoid or choreoid
muscle spasms. He felt it to be of uncertain benefit in asthma,
alcoholic delirium and depressions. Reynolds thought cannabis to
be of no value in joint pains that were aggravated by motion and
in cases of true chronic epilepsy. </p>

<p>Reynolds stressed the necessity of titrating the dose of each
patient, increasing gradually every third or fourth day, to avoid
&quot;toxic&quot; effects: </p>

<p>The dose should be given in minimum quantity, repeated in not
less than four or six hours, and gradually increased by one drop
every third or fourth day, until either relief is obtained, or
the drug is proved, in such case, to be useless. With these
precautions I have never met with any toxic effects, and have
rarely failed to find, after a comparatively short time, either
the value or the uselessness of the drug.[33] </p>

<p>Concerning migraine headache, Osler stated in his text:
Cannabis indica is probably the most satisfactory remedy.[11, 28]
</p>

<p>In his definitive survey of the literature and report of his
own studies, deceptively titled &quot;Marihuana, America's New
Drug Problem,&quot; Walton notes that cannabis was widely used
during the latter half of the nineteenth century, and
particularly before new drugs were developed: </p>

<p>This popularity of the hemp drugs can be attributed partly to
the fact that they were introduced before the synthetic hypnotics
and analgesics. Chloral hydrate was not introduced until 1869 and
was followed in the next thirty years by paraldehyde, sulfonal
and the barbitals. Antipyrine and acetanilide, the first of their
particular group of analgesics, were introduced about 1884. For
general sedative and analgesic purposes, the only drugs commonly
used at this time were the morphine derivatives and their
disadvantages were very well known. In fact, the most attractive
feature of the hemp narcotics was probably the fact that they did
not exhibit certain of the notorious disadvantages of the
opiates. The hemp narcotics do not constipate at all, they more
often increase than decrease appetite, they do not particularly
depress the respiratory center even in large doses, they rarely
or never cause pruritis or cutaneous eruptions and, most
important, the liability of developing addiction is very much
less than with opiates.[44] </p>

<p>The use of cannabis in American medicine was seriously
affected by the increased use of opiates in the latter half of
the nineteenth century. With the introduction of the hypodermic
syringe into American medicine from England in 1856 by Barker and
Ruppaner, the use of the faster acting, water-soluble opiate
drugs rapidly increased. The Civil War helped to spread the use
of opiates in this country; the injected drugs were administered
widely--and often indiscriminately--to relieve the pain of maimed
soldiers returning from combat. (Opiate addiction was once called
the &quot;army disease.&quot;[41]) As the use of injected opiates
increased, cannabis declined in popularity. </p>

<p>Cannabis preparations were still widely available in legend
and over-the-counter forms in the 1930s. Crump (Chairman,
Investigating Committee, American Medical Association) in 1931
mentioned the proprietaries &quot;Piso's Cure,&quot; &quot;One
Day Cough Cure&quot; and &quot;Neurosine&quot; as containing
cannabis.[44] In 1937 Sasman listed twenty-eight pharmaceuticals
containing cannabis.[36] Cannabis was still recognized as a
medicinal agent in that year, when the committee on legislative
activities of the American Medical Association concluded as
follows: </p>

<p>. . . there is positively no evidence to indicate the abuse of
cannabis as a medicinal agent or to show that its medicinal use
is leading to the development of cannabis addiction. Cannabis at
the present time is slightly used for medicinal purposes, but it
would seem worthwhile to maintain its status as a medicinal agent
for such purposes as it now has. There is a possibility that a
re-study of the drug by modern means may show other advantages to
be derived from its medicinal use.[32] </p>

<p>Meanwhile, in Mexico, the poor were smoking marijuana to relax
and to endure heat and fatigue. (Originally marijuana was the
Mexican slang word for the smoking preparation of dried leaves
and flowering tops of the Cannabis sativa plant--the indigenous
variety of the hemp plant.) </p>

<p>The recreational smoking of marijuana may have started in this
country in New Orleans in about 1910, and continued on a small
scale there until 1926, when a newspaper ran a six-part series on
the use of the drug.[44] The fad subsequently spread up the
Mississippi and throughout the United States, faster than local
and state laws could be passed to discourage it. The use of
&quot;tea&quot; or &quot;muggles&quot; blossomed into a minor
&quot;psychedelic revolution&quot; of the 1920s. Narcotics
officers encouraged the enactment of local prohibitory laws and
eventually succeeded in bringing about restrictive Federal
legislation. In 1937 Congress passed the Marihuana Tax Act, the
finale to a series of prohibitory acts in the individual states.
Under the new laws, the already dwindling use of cannabis as a
therapeutic substance in medicine was brought to a virtual halt.
In 1941, cannabis was dropped from the &quot;National Formulary
and Pharmacopoeia.&quot; </p>

<p>Around the time of the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act,
Walton postulated sites of action for cannabis drugs. Cortical
areas, he found, are affected at low dosage, while at high dosage
there seems to be a depressant effect on the thalamo-cortical
pathways. Hyperemia of the brain appears to be a local
phenomenon, unless centers controlling vasodilation might be
located in the thalamo-cortical region. Similar possible
mechanisms are suggested for the phenomenon of mild hypoglycemia,
usual hunger and thirst and occasional lacrimation and
nausea.[44] </p>

<p>Despite restrictive legislation, a few medical researchers
have had the opportunity to continue the investigation of the
therapeutic applications of cannabis in recent years. In his
study of the medical applications of cannabis for Mayor La
Guardia's committee, Dr. Samuel Allentuck reported, among other
findings, favorable results in treating withdrawal of opiate
addicts with tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a powerful purified
product of the hemp plant.[1, 24] </p>

<p>An article in 1949, buried in a journal of chemical abstracts,
reported that a substance related to THC controlled epileptic
seizures in a group of children more effectively than
diphenylhydantoin (Dilantin(R)), a most commonly prescribed
anticonvulsant.[9] </p>

<p>A number of experimenters, believing that cannabis products
might be of value in psychiatry, have investigated the
applications of various forms of them in the treatment of mental
disorders. Cannabis had been used in the nineteenth century to
treat mental illness.[19, 25, 45, 46] However, aside from some
rather equivocal clinical studies, primarily in the treatment of
depression,[29, 30, 35, 39] and another report of success in
treating withdrawal from alcohol and opiate addiction,[42] no
significant contemporary psychiatric studies involving cannabis
therapy have been reported to date. </p>

<p>Many current &quot;authoritative&quot; publications
unequivocally state that there is no legitimate medical use for
marijuana. As compared with the 1800s, this century has seen very
little medical research on the array of some twenty chemicals
that are found in the hemp plant.[37] </p>

<p>Today's readers may tend to be skeptical about a report of a
cure for gonorrhea published over a century ago.[19, 25] Such
findings may bear reinvestigation, however, in the light of a
report from Czechoslovakia in 1960 that cannabidiolic acid, a
product of the unripe hemp plant, has bacteriocidal
properties.[7] Some of the therapeutic applications reported in
the early medical papers have been corroborated by later
investigators, but for the most part the therapeutic aspects of
cannabis remain to be re-explored under modern clinical
conditions. </p>

<p>In the past twenty years, clinical and basic research on
cannabis have dwindled to practically nothing. The record of tax
stamps issued by the Federal Bureau of Narcotics for cannabis
research, as compared with those for research on narcotic drugs,
tells the story of the twenty-year &quot;drought&quot; in the
investigation of cannabis products:[43] </p>

<pre>
<font size="2">                      Users for Purposes of Research,
                          Instruction, or Analysis

       Year                       Narcotic Drugs     Marijuana

       1938 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...               5
       1941 . . . . . . . . . . . . .    94              ..
       1943 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...              43
       1946 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   323              ..
       1948 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...              87
       1951 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1078              ..
       1953 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...              18
       1956 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   284              ..
       1958 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   ...               6
       1961 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   344              ..
       1965 . . . . . . . . . . . . .   431              16


</font>
</pre>

<p>The rising non-medical use of marijuana both floated and was
buoyed by the &quot;psychedelic revolution&quot; of the mid
1960s. The panicked reaction included a renewed scientific
interest in the drug. </p>

<p>Eleven studies funded by the National Institute of Mental
Health 1967 concerning cannabis were either specialized animal
experiments, part of an observational sociologic study of a
number of drugs, or explorations of chemical detection methods.
No human studies were included. </p>

<p>Of the fifty-six projects funded during the next fiscal years
1968-69 only two used humans.[52] The next year was somewhat less
cautious with eight out of thirty-five projects devoted to
clinical studies.[53] </p>

<p>Some of the preliminary results are in from these studies.
Much is still unpublished. </p>

<p>According to Harris, the toxicity factor of marijuana
derivatives is over two hundred and that chronic smoking of
marijuana is less harmful to the lungs than tobacco
cigarettes.[49] </p>

<p>Domino described the cross tolerance of THC and alcohol in
pigeons[47] corroborating Jones' clinical observations.[50, 51]
These rediscoveries demand therapeutic trial. </p>

<p>In August 1971 certain secret Defense Department documents
were declassified. While at NIMH as a consulting research
psychiatrist in 1967 I had become aware of the existence of
clandestine research at Edgewood Arsenal in Maryland. </p>

<p>From 1954-59 Dr. Van M. Sim was in charge of the project. He
reported to &quot;Medical World News:&quot; &quot;Marijuana . . .
is probably the most potent anti-epileptic known to medicine
today.&quot;[49] </p>

<p>Dr. Harold F. Hardman, then with the Defense contracting group
at the University of Michigan's Department of Pharmacology
reported effects of profound hypothermia and felt marijuana
derivatives to be potentially quite useful in brain and traumatic
surgery.[48] </p>

<p>The principal focus was, however, on the possible use of THC
homologs as incapacitating agents. Besides the aforementioned
government agency and university, the private sector was
represented by the Arthur D. Little Company of Cambridge,
Massachusetts.[55] </p>

<p>Recently in the course of a study of effects on driving, it
was incidentally discovered that cannabis lowers intraocular
pressure, thus being possibly useful in the treatment of
glaucoma.[56] </p>

<p>Thus, a helix is made. Modern technologic methods confirm
O'Shaughnessy's observations 130 years ago. After swinging away
from the knowledge of marijuana's properties through the worship
of new synthetics, an unrelated rise of marijuana use socially,
illegalization and removal from availability for clinical use,
medicine rediscovers marijuana. </p>

<p>The flame of knowledge is at a low ebb, kept alive by isolated
scientists and clinicians; it is now being rekindled by these
recent circumscribed revelations. </p>

<p>Unless existing restrictive state and federal laws governing
marijuana are changed, there will be no future for either modern
scientific investigation or controlled clinical trial by
present-day methods. </p>

<p>The tide is turning. The Federal Bureau of Narcotic and
Dangerous Drugs, National Institute of Mental Health and The Food
and Drug Administration Joint Committee recently authorized human
therapeutic trial of cannabis products. We may now look forward
to reinvestigation of the numerous possible medical uses of
marijuana.[54] </p>

<p>A concerted effort is indicated for full-scale investigations
where knowledge is lacking. Acute and chronic effects of cannabis
should be restudied by modern methods. Metabolic pathways of
action and detoxification need exploration by the pharmaceutical
means of today. Chronic toxicity studies must be undertaken to
examine possible long- term effects of cannabis use. (Cunningham
in 1893 found no gross central nervous system changes with
chronic administration of hemp drugs to primates over several
months.[8]) </p>

<p>Medical science must again confront the problems of cannabis'
insolubility in water and its variable strength. Since human and
animal responses vary a great deal, individual doses must be
titrated. The popular &quot;double blind&quot; type of study
methods will require revision. The reporting of personal drug
experience was once acceptable to the scientific community.[15,
22, 25, 29, 34, 39, 44] Humans who are drug
&quot;sophisticates&quot; will again become indispensable to
psychoactive drug research, as wine tasters are to the wine
industry, for only humans can verbally report the subtle and
complex effects of these substances. </p>

<p>Government agencies having stimulated little significant
clinical research in this field, the pharmaceutical industry
should take the initiative in starting basic research and
clinical studies into the purified congeners of cannabis for
their chemical properties, pharmacologic qualities and
therapeutic applications. </p>

<p>&quot;Possible Therapeutic Applications of
Tetrahydrocannabinols and Like Products&quot; </p>

<p>Analgesic-hypnotic [16, 18, 19, 23, 25, 27,33, 45]<br>
Appetite stimulant [18, 25, 27]<br>
Antiepileptic-antispasmodic [9, 18, 27, 33, 40, 45, 49]<br>
Prophylactic and treatment of the neuralgias, including migraine
and tic douloureux [3, 16, 17, 18, 19, 23, 25, 28, 31, 33, 38,
40, 45]<br>
Antidepressant-tranquilizer [6, 16, 18, 19, 23, 25, 31, 33, 40,
45]<br>
Antiasthmatic [18, 25, 45]<br>
Oxytocic [25, 45]<br>
Antitussive [3, 16, 25, 38, 45]<br>
Topical anesthetic [8]<br>
Withdrawal agent for opiate and alcohol addiction [5, 23, 24, 38,
42, 45, 47, 50, 51]<br>
Childbirth analgesic [12]<br>
Antibiotic [7]<br>
Intraocular hypotensive [56]<br>
Hypothermogenic [48]<br>
</p>

<p>Medicine, being an empiric art, has not hesitated in the past
to utilize a substance first used for recreational purposes,
(Morton &quot;discovered&quot; ether for anesthetic purposes
after observing medical students at &quot;ether frolics&quot; in
1846. [Howard W. Haggard: &quot;Devils, Drugs and Doctors,&quot;
Harper and Row, New York, 1929, p. 99.]) in the pursuit of the
more noble purposes of healing, relieving pain and teaching us
more of the workings of the human mind and body. The active
constituents of cannabis appear to have remarkably low acute and
chronic toxicity factors and might be quite useful in the
management of many chronic disease conditions. More reasonable
laws and regulations controlling psychoactive drug research are
required to permit significant medical inquiry to begin so that
we can fill the large gaps in our knowledge of cannabis. </p>

<p>REFERENCES </p>

<p>1. Adams, Koger: &quot;Marihuana,&quot; &quot;Bulletin of the
New York Academy of Medicine,&quot; 18:705-29, Nov. 1942. </p>

<p>2. Ames, Frances: &quot;A clinical and metabolic study of
acute intoxication with cannabis sativa and its role in the model
psychoses,&quot; &quot;J. of Mental Science,&quot; 104:972-99,
Oct. 1958. </p>

<p>3. Anderson, G. S. D.: &quot;Remarks on the remedial virtues
of cannabis indica, or Indian hemp,&quot; &quot;Boston Med. and
Surg. J.,&quot; 67:427-30, 1863. </p>

<p>4. Bell, John: &quot;On the haschisch or cannabis
indica,&quot; &quot;Boston Med. and Surg. J.,&quot; 56:209-16,
229-36, 1857. </p>

<p>5. Birch, Edward A.: &quot;The use of Indian hemp in the
treatment of chronic chloral and chronic opium poisoning,&quot;
&quot;Lancet,&quot; 1:625, 30 Mar. 1889. </p>

<p>6. Boyd, E. S., and Merritt, D. A.: &quot;Effects of a
tetrahydrocannabinol derivative on some motor systems in the
cat,&quot; &quot;Arch. Internat. de Pharmacodynamie et de
Therapie,&quot; 153:1-12, 1965. </p>

<p>7. CIBA Foundation Study Group, &quot;Hashish--Its Chemistry
and Pharmacology,&quot; 1964, pp. 45, 49. </p>

<p>8. Cunningham, D. D.: Report by Brigade-Surgeon--Lieut. Col.
D. D. Cunningham, F.R.S., C.I.E., on the nature of the effects
accompanying the continued treatment of animals with hemp drugs
and with dhatura; &quot;from&quot; &quot;Report of the Indian
Hemp Drugs Commission,&quot; 1893-4, Government Central Printing
Office, Simla, India, 1894, Vol. 3, pp. 192-96. </p>

<p>9. Davis, J. P., and Ramsey, H. H.: &quot;Antiepileptic action
of marihuana-active substances,&quot; &quot;Federat. Proc.,&quot;
8:284-85, Mar. 1949. </p>

<p>10. Dioscorides, Pedanius: &quot;The Greek Herbal of
Dioscorides,&quot; Edited by Robert T. Gunther, Hafner Publishing
Co., New York, 1959, pp. 390- 91. </p>

<p>11. Eddy, N. B., Halbach, H., Isbell, H., and Seevers, M. H.:
&quot;Drug dependence: its significance and characteristics.
&quot;Psychopharmacology Bull.,&quot; 3:1-12, July 1966. </p>

<p>12. &quot;Effects of alcohol and cannabis during labor,&quot;
&quot;JAMA,&quot; 94:1165, 1930. </p>

<p>13. Goodman, L. S., and Gilman, A.: &quot;The Pharmacological
Basic of Therapeutics,&quot; 2nd Edition, Macmillan, New York,
1955. </p>

<p>14. Goodman, L. S., and Gilman, A.: &quot;The Pharmacological
Basis of Therapeutics,&quot; 3rd Edition, Macmillan, New York,
1965. </p>

<p>15. Hamilton, H. C., Lescohier, A. W., and Perkins, R. A.:
&quot;The physiological activity of cannabis sativa. Comparison
of extracts from Indian and American-grown drug upon human
subjects,&quot; &quot;J. Amer. Pharm. Assoc.,&quot; 2:22-30,
1913. </p>

<p>16. Hare, Hobart Amory: &quot;Clinical and physiological notes
on the action of cannabis indica,&quot; &quot;Therap. Gaz.,&quot;
11:225-28, 1887. </p>

<p>17. Hare, H. A., and Chrystie, W.: &quot;A System of Practical
Therapeutics,&quot; Lee Brothers and Co., Philadelphia, 1892,
Vol. 3. </p>

<p>18. &quot;Indian Materia Medica,&quot; edited by A. K.
Nadkarni, Popular Book Depot, Bombay, 1954. </p>

<p>19. &quot;Lilly's Hand Book of Pharmacy and
Therapeutics,&quot; Eli Lilly and Co., Indianapolis, 1898, p. 32.
</p>

<p>20. Loewe, S.: &quot;The active principles of cannabis and the
pharmacology of the cannabinols,&quot; &quot;Archiv fur Experim.
Pathologie und Pharmakologie,&quot; 211:175-93, 1950. </p>

<p>21. Loewe, S.: &quot;Studies on the pharmacology and acute
toxicity of compounds with marihuana activity,&quot; &quot;J.
Pharmacol. and Experim. Therap.,&quot; 88:154-61, Oct. 1946. </p>

<p>22. Marshall, C. R.: &quot;A contribution to the pharmacology
of cannabis indica,&quot; &quot;JAMA,&quot; 31:882-91, 15 Oct.
1898. </p>

<p>23. Mattison, J. B.: &quot;Cannabis indica as an anodyne and
hypnotic,&quot; &quot;St. Louis Med. and Surg. J.,&quot;
61:265-71, Nov. 1891. </p>

<p>24. &quot;Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, The Marihuana
Problem in the City of New York,&quot; Jaques Cattell, Lancaster,
Pa., 1944. </p>

<p>25. McMeens, R. R.: &quot;Report of the committee on cannabis
indica; from Transactions of the Fifteenth Annual Meeting of the
Ohio State Medical Society,&quot; Follett, Foster and Co.,
Columbus, Ohio, 1860, pp. 75-100. </p>

<p>26. Moon, J. B.: &quot;Sir William Brooke O'Shaughnessy--the
foundations of fluid therapy and the Indian telegraph
service.&quot; &quot;New Eng. J. of Med.,&quot; 276:283-84, 2
Feb. 1967. </p>

<p>27. O'Shaughnessy, W. B.: &quot;On the preparations of the
Indian hemp, or gunjah,&quot; &quot;Trans. Med. and Phy.
Soc.,&quot; Bengal, 71-102, 1838-40; 421-61, 1842. </p>

<p>28. Osler, W., and McCrae, T.: &quot;Principles and Practice
of Medicine,&quot; 8th Edition, D. Appleton and Co., New York,
1916, p. 1089. </p>

<p>29. Parker, C. S., and Wrigley, F.: &quot;Synthetic cannabis
preparations in psychiatry: &quot;(1) synhexyl,&quot; &quot;J. of
Mental Science,&quot; 96:176-79, 1950. </p>

<p>30. Pond, D. A.: &quot;Psychological effects in depressive
patients of the marihuana homologue synhexyl,&quot; &quot;J.
Neurol. Neurosurg, Psychiat.,&quot; 11:271-79, 1948. </p>

<p>31. Ratnam, E. V.: &quot;Cannabis indica,&quot; &quot;J. of
the Ceylon Branch of the Brit. Med. Assoc.,&quot; 13:30-34, 1916.
</p>

<p>32. &quot;Report of the Committee on Legislative
Activities,&quot; &quot;JAMA,&quot; 108:2214-15, 1937. </p>

<p>33. Reynolds, J. Russell: &quot;Therapeutical uses and toxic
effects of cannabis indica,&quot; &quot;Lancet,&quot; 1:637-38,
22 Mar. 1890. </p>

<p>34. Robinson, Victor: &quot;An Essay on Hasheesh--Historical
and Experimental,&quot; L. H. Ringer, New York, 1912. </p>

<p>35. Rolls, E. J., and Stafford-Clark, D.:
&quot;Depersonalization treated by cannabis indica and
psychotherapy,&quot; &quot;Guy's Hospital Report,&quot;
103:330-36, 1954. </p>

<p>36. Sasman, Marty: &quot;Cannabis indica in
pharmaceuticals,&quot; &quot;J. of the N.J. Med Soc.,&quot;
35:51-52, Jan. 1938. </p>

<p>37. Shulgin, Alexander T.: personal communication, 1968. </p>

<p>38. Stevens, A. A.: &quot;Modern Materia Medica and
Therapeutics,&quot; W. B. Saunders and Co., Philadelphia, 1903,
pp. 77-78. </p>

<p>39. Stockings, G. Taylor: &quot;A new euphoriant for
depressive mental states,&quot; &quot;Brit. Med J.,&quot;
1:918-22, 28 June 1947. </p>

<p>40. Suckling, C. W.: &quot;On the therapeutic value of Indian
Hemp,&quot; &quot;Brit. Med. J.,&quot; 2:12, 1881. </p>

<p>41. Terry, C. E., and Pellens, M.: &quot;The Opium
Problem,&quot; Bureau of Social Hygiene, Inc., New York, 1928,
pp. 53-93. </p>

<p>42. Thompson, L. J. and Proctor, R. C.: &quot;The use of
pyrahexyl in the treatment of alcoholic and drug withdrawal
conditions,&quot; &quot;N. Carolina Med. J.,&quot; 14:520-23,
Oct. 1953. </p>

<p>43. U.S. Treasury Dept., Bureau of Narcotics, &quot;Traffic in
Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs for the Year Ended Dec. 31,
1965,&quot; U.S. Printing Office, Washington, 1966, pp. 55-56. </p>

<p>44. Walton, Robert P.: &quot;Marihuana: America's New Drug
Problem,&quot; J. B. Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1938, pp. 1-18,
86-157. </p>

<p>45. Waring, Edward John: &quot;Practical Therapeutics,&quot;
Lindsay and Blakiston, Philadelphia, 1874, pp. 157-61. </p>

<p>46. Wood, G. B., and Bache, F.: &quot;The Dispensatory of the
United States of America, 12th Edition,&quot; J. B. Lippincott,
Philadelphia, 1866, pp. 379-82. </p>

<p>47. Domino, Edward F., &quot;Neuropharmacological Studies of
Marijuana-- Some Synthetic and Natural THC Derivatives in Animals
and Man,&quot; 1971. Unpublished. 54 pp. </p>

<p>48. Hardman, Harold F., Domino, Edward F. and Seevers, Maurice
T., &quot;General Pharmacological Actions of Synthetic
Tetrahydrocannabinol Derivatives,&quot; 1971. Unpublished. </p>

<p>49. Berger, Alfred D., Marijuana. &quot;Med. World News,&quot;
July 16, 1971, pp. 37-43. </p>

<p>50. Jones, Reese T., &quot;Psychological Studies of Marijuana
and Alcohol in Man,&quot; &quot;Psychopharmacologia,&quot; 18,
108-117, 1970. </p>

<p>51. Jones, Reese T ., &quot;Tetrahydrocannabinol and the
Marijuana Induced Social `High' or the Effects of the Mind on
Marijuana. Ann.&quot; &quot;N.Y. Acad. Sci.,&quot; 1972. In
press. </p>

<p>52. &quot;Grants Active During Fiscal Years 1968 and 1969
Center for Studies in Narcotics and Drug Abuse,&quot;
&quot;National Institute of Mental Health,&quot; 1969.
Unpublished. </p>

<p>53. Ibid., 1970. </p>

<p>54. Bozetti, Louis: personal communication, January, 1972. </p>

<p>55. Arthur D. Little Company, &quot;New Incapacitating Agents
Quarterly Report 15/16 Supplement.&quot; &quot;Preclinical
Pharmacology and Toxicology of Candidate Agent 226, 169.&quot;
&quot;Papers on Tetrahydrocannabinols Cleared for public
release.&quot; The National Technical Information Service,
Department of Commerce, 1971. </p>

<p>56. Hepler, R. S. and Frank, I. R. &quot;Marihuana Smoking and
Intraocular Pressure,&quot; &quot;JAMA,&quot; Sept. 6, 1971. Vol.
217, no. 10. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p><br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>