
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-83</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B018-228</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t10a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044534 text/html 65046
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:45:17 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:14 GMT
Content-length: 64828
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Additional Statement of Harry J. Anslinger</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/schindhemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->

<h1><a name="OLE_LINK1">The Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </h1>

<p>Transcripts of Congressional Hearings </p>

<p><b>ADDITIONAL STATEMENT OF H. J. ANSLINGER, COMMISSIONER OF
NARCOTICS</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>(The following statements were submitted by Mr. Anslinger) </p>

<p><b>ORIGIN</b> </p>

<p>The origin of this drug is very ancient. In the year 1090
A.D., the religious and military order or sect of the Assassins
was founded in Persia and the numerous acts of cruelty of this
sect were known not only in Asia, but in Europe as well. This
branch of the Shiite sect, known as Ismalites, was called
Hashishan, derived from hashish, of the confection of hemp leaves
&quot;marihuana&quot;. In fact, from the Arabic Hasishan we have
the English word &quot;assassin.&quot; </p>

<p>The plant was known by the Greeks as &quot;nepenthe&quot; and
was lauded in the immortal Odyssey of Homer. It was known in
ancient times to the Egyptians, and its use in Egypt at the
present time is widespread. Its effect upon the Malays has been
terrific and the natives of the Malay Peninsula have been known,
while under its influence, to rush out and engage in violent and
bloody deeds, with complete disregard for their personal safety,
of the odds arrayed against them. to run &quot;amok&quot; in the
Malay Peninsula is synonomous with saying one is under the
influence of this drug. </p>

<p><b>DESCRIPTION:</b> </p>

<p>Indian hemp is a rough, annual plant, and grows to varying
heights, from about 3 to 16 feet. Its stem is erect, branching
and angular; the leaves are alternate or opposite and coarsely
serrated. Marihuana is the same as Indian hemp, hashish,
cannabin, cannabis Americana, or cannabis sativa. Marihuana is
the Mexican term for cannabis indica. In the argot of he
underworld it has colloquial, colorful names such as reefer,
muggles, Indian hay, hot hay, and weed. The drug is known in many
countries by a variety of different names. In India it is known
as bhang and ganja; as dagga in Africa. </p>

<p>the term &quot;cannabis&quot; in the Geneva Convention of 1925
and in the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act included only the dried
flowering or fruiting tops of the pistillate plant as the source
of the dangerous resin. Research during the past few months shows
conclusively that this definition is insufficient, as we have
found by experiment that the leaves of the pistillate plant as
well as the leaves of the staminate plant contain the active
principal up to 50 percent of the U.S.P. strength. Accordingly,
we are urging the several states to revise their definition to
include all parts of the plant, as it now appears that the seeds
and portions other than the dried flowering tops contain
positively dangerous substances. We have been anticipating a
challenge of the old definition in the courts and only a few
weeks ago a defendant in a case in Florida in appealing to the
higher court of that State said: </p>

<p>&quot;We are of the opinion, therefore, that the information
was insufficient to clearly apprise the accused of the nature and
cause of the accusation against him because of the sale of
cigarettes containing cannabis from which the resin had not been
abstracted may relate to the resin of the staminate plant, the
resin of which appears to be harmless.&quot; </p>

<p>This challenge demonstrates the advisability of making our
definition all-inclusive, which has been done with respect to the
bill under discussion, H.R. 6385. </p>

<p><b>EFFECTS </b></p>

<p>The toxic effects produced by &quot;cannabin&quot;, the active
narcotic principal of the cannabis sativa, hemp, or marihuana,
appear to be exclusively to the higher nerve centers. The drug
produces first an exaltation with a feeling of well-being; a
happy, jovial mood, usually; and increased feeling of physical
strength and power; and a general euphoria is experienced.
Accompanying this exaltation is a stimulation of the imagination,
followed by a more-or-less delirious state characterized by vivid
kaleidoscopic visions, sometimes of a pleasing sensual kind, but
occasionally of a gruesome nature. Accompanying this delirious
state is a remarkable loss in spatial and time relations; persons
and things in the environment look small; time is interminable;
seconds seem like minutes and hours like days. Let us think, for
instance, of what might happen if a person under its influence
were driving a high-powered automobile. </p>

<p>Those who are habitually accustomed to use of the drug are
said to develop a delirious rage after its administration, during
which they are temporarily, at least, irresponsible and liable to
commit violent crimes. The prolonged use of this narcotic is said
to produce mental deterioration. It apparently releases
inhibitions of an antisocial nature whichh dwell within the
individual. </p>

<p>It is said that the Mohammedan leaders, opposing the
Crusaders, utilized the services of individuals addicted to the
use of hashish for secret murders. </p>

<p>Despite the fact that medical men and scientists have
disagreed upon the properties of marihuana, and some are inclined
to minimize the harmfulness of this drug, the records offer ample
evidence that it has a disastrous effect upon many of its users.
Recently we have received many reports showing the crimes of
violence committed by persons while under the influence of
marihuana. </p>

<p>The effect of the use of the drug depends largely upon the
individual. Among some people the dreams produced are usually of
an erotic character, but the principal effect is on the mind
which seems to lose the power of directing and controlling its
thoughts. Then follow errors of sense, false convictions and the
predominance of extravagant ideas where all sense of value seems
to disappear. </p>

<p>The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the drug render it
highly dangerous to the mind and body upon which it operates to
destroy the will, cause one to lose the power of connected
thought, producing imaginary delectable situations and gradually
weakening the physical powers. Its use frequently leads to
insanity. </p>

<p>I have statement here, giving an outline off cases reported to
the Bureau or in the press, wherein the use of marihuana is
connected with revolting crimes. </p>

<p><b>EXTENT OF TRAFFIC</b> </p>

<p>The rapid development of a widespread traffic in marihuana
during the past several years, particularly during 1935 and 1936
is a matte of grave national concern. About ten years ago there
was little traffic in marihuana except in parts of the Southwest.
The weed now grows wild in almost every state in the Union, is
easily obtainable, and has come to be widely abused in many
states. The situation is especially fraught with danger because
this drug is being carried as a new habit to circles which
heretofore have not been contaminated. Incomplete reports that
have come to my attention during the past year on marihuana
seizures effected throughout the country by state authorities
show the existence of a dangerous and rapidly increasing traffic
in this drug in at least 29 states. </p>

<p>(Included Table - Page 30) </p>

<p>Three hundred and thirty-eight arrests for violations during
1936, but this by no means represents extent of traffic, because
not many of the states have actually begun real enforcement as
against marijuana -- many of the states lack special enforcement
facilities and require education of their enforcement officers in
the detection and prevention of marihuana traffic, especially in
identifying the drug. </p>

<p><b>STATE LAWS</b> </p>

<p>All of the states now have some type of legislation directed
against the traffic in marihuana for improper purposes. There is
no legislation in effect with respect to the District of Columbia
dealing directly with marihuana traffic. There is unfortunately a
loophole in much of this state legislation because of a too
narrow definition of the term. Few of the states have a special
narcotic law enforcement agency and, speaking generally,
considerable training of the regular polce officers of the states
will be required together with increased enforcement facilities
before a reasonable measure of effectiveness under the state laws
can be achieved. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE NEED FOR FEDERAL LEGISLATION</b> </p>

<p>Even in states which have legislation controlling in some
degree the marihuana traffic, public officials, private citizens,
and the press have urged or suggested the need for national
legislation dealing with this important problem. A partial list
of states wherein officials or the press have urged the need for
Federal legislation on the subject are Colorado, Kansas, New
Mexico, Louisiana, and Oklahoma. </p>

<p>The uniform state narcotic law has now been adopted by some 35
states, many of these including cannabis or marihuana within the
scope of control by that law. However, it has been recently
learned that the legislative definition of cannabis in most of
these laws is too narrow, and it will be necessary to have the
definition amplified in amendatory legislation in most of the
states, to accord with the definition in the pending Federal
bill. As is the case at present with respect to opium, coca
leaves, and their respective alkaloids, the uniform state law
does not completely solve the enforcement problem with respect to
marihuana but it will provide the necessary supplement to the
Federal act and permit cooperation of state an Federal forces,
each acting within its respective sphere, toward suppression of
traffic for abusive use, no matter in what form the traffic is
conducted. The Bureau of Narcotics, under the Marihuana Taxing
Act, would continue to act as an informal coordinating agency in
the enforcement of the uniform state law, exchanging information
as between the respective state authorities in methods of
procedure and attempting to secure true uniformity in the
enforcement of the act in the various states which have adopted
it. </p>

<p><b>INTERNATIONAL EFFECT</b> </p>

<p>The United Sates is not a party to the Geneva Convention off
1925 which includes Indian hemp in the classes of drugs with
respect to which the convention operates. It is a party to the
Hague Convention of 1912 and the Manufacturing Limitation
Convention of 1931, under both of which it submits complete
reports of progress in enforcement to the League of Nations
(insofar as opium, coca leaves, and their alkaloids are
concerned.) The United States goes beyond the letter of its
obligations under the last-mentioned conventions in international
cooperation with respect to opium and coca leaves and their
alkaloids. It is only with respect to cannabis (marihuana) that
it cannot afford complete cooperation with other countries, since
it is obviously handicapped by the lack of national drug
legislation which would permit a reasonable degree of control
over this drug and afford a direct means of information
concerning the trend of the traffic. The United States has more
than kept pace with other world powers in the united battle
against the opium, morphine, and cocaine traffic; it continues to
fall behind in the international movement directed against the
use of marihuana. The importation and exportation of marihuana,
with respect to the United States is practically unrestricted,
and on once occasion the attention of the Bureau was called to an
excess exportation of cannabis, by one of our exporters, to
England, When the British governmental agency called attention to
this exportation of a quantity from the United States in excess
of the British import certificate, we were in the humiliating
position of informing it that our laws did not cover cannabis,
and remedial action had to be limited to a warning to the
exporter -- not that he was violating a law of the United States,
but an admonition that he would please refrain from violating the
British laws. </p>

<hr>

<p>Alamosa Daily Courier </p>

<p>Alamosa, Colorado, September 4, 1936 </p>

<p>United States Treasury Department </p>

<p>Bureau of Narcotics </p>

<p>Gentlemen: Two weeks ago a sex-mad degenerate, named Lee
Fernandez, brutally attacked a young Alamosa girl. He was
convicted of assault with intent to rape and sentenced to 10 to
14 years in the state penitentiary. Police officers here know
definitely that Fernandez was under the influence of marihuana. </p>

<p>But this case is one in hundreds of murders, rapes, petty
crimes, insanity that has occurred in southern Colorado in recent
years. </p>

<p>The laws of this state make the first offense of using,
growing, or selling marihuana a mere misdemeanor. The second
offense constitutes a felony. </p>

<p>Indian hemp grows wild within the limits of this city. It is
clandestinely planted in practically every county in this
section. Its use amounts to a near traffic in drugs. </p>

<p>The people and officials here want to know why something can't
be done about marihuana. The sheriff, district attorney, and city
police are making every effort to destroy this menace. Our paper
is carrying on an educational campaign to describe the weed and
tell of its horrible effects. </p>

<p>Your bulletins on traffic in opium and other dangerous drugs
state that the production and use of Indian hemp are not
prohibited by Federal law. Why? </p>

<p>Is there any assistance your Bureau can give us in handling
this drug? Can you suggest campaigns? Can you enlarge your
Department to deal with marihuana? Can you do anything to help
us? </p>

<p>I wish I could show you what a small marihuana cigaret can do
to one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking residents. That's why
our problem is so great; the greatest percentage of our
population is composed of Spanish-speaking persons, most of who
are low mentally, because of social and racial conditions. </p>

<p>While marihuana has figured in the greater number of crimes in
the past few years, officials fear it, not for what it has done,
but for what it is capable of doing. They want to check it before
an outbreak does occur. Did you read of the Drain murder case in
Pueblo recently? Marihuana is believed to have been used by one
of the bloody murderers. </p>

<p>Through representatives of civic leaders and law officers of
the San Luis Valley, I have been asked to write to you for help.
Any help you can give us will be most heartily appreciated. </p>

<p>Very sincerely yours, </p>

<p>Floyd K. Baskette </p>

<p>City Editor, The Alamosa Daily Courier </p>

<hr>

<p><b>MARIHUANA - A MORE ALARMING MENACE TO SOCIETY THAN ALL
OTHER HABIT-FORMING DRUGS</b> </p>

<p>(By Dr. Frank R. Gomila, commissioner of public safety, and
Miss Madeline C. Gomila, assistant city chemist) </p>

<p>Many papers have been written on the effects, physical and
mental, of the marihuana weed. Some of the best descriptions that
we have read can be found in Bromberg's (1) paper called
Marihuana Intoxication; Bragman's (2) Toxic Effects - Weed of
Insanity; and Kingman's (3) Green Goddess. But talking and
writing of the various results that ensue from constant use of
this weed in no way impresses the reading public with the
seriousness of the problem that faces it today. </p>

<p>To our knowledge, this is the first time that such a paper as
this will be presented. After searching the literature thoroughly
we could find no complete record of the situation in this
country. We have not deluded ourselves into believing that the
information compiled her is in any way a complete record of the
situation, but we do believe that it is the best that can be
obtained. The difficulty encountered is that any drug addiction
is such a secretive affair that not even the authorities in
charge know all the culprits. Also, we have encountered some
rather unexpected reluctance on the part of some of the state
authorities to furnish the information. The large gaps in the
table that we compiled are due to this lack of information. </p>

<p>Referring to Table 1, we find that 46 out of 48 states, or 94
percent, have found it necessary to pass some legislation against
the use, possession, and sale of this menacing weed. the urgent
reason for all these laws was that in many states the discovery
was made that scores of youngsters of high school age had become
victims of the weed. It was only last year that the St. Louis
Star Times in a series of newspaper articles, led the people of
Missouri in a stirring fight for the passage of a state law for
the protection of their children. Quoting from the St. Louis
Start-Times of February 4, 1935, we read: &quot;Those acquainted
with the traffic say there are more women smokers than men. If
you are a 'right guy' a 'giggle smoke' is available in places of
lenient morals and may be purchased from a 'bystander' in many of
the cheaper downtown resorts. </p>

<p>&quot;One gentleman of the byways explained, 'The worst thing
about that loco weed is the way these kids go for them. Most of
them, boys and girls, are just punks and when they get high on
the stuff you can write your own ticker.'&quot; (4) </p>

<p>The article goes on to tell how, when the number of muggle
smokers increased, marihuana dives came into existence. Here is a
description, &quot;The windows were covered with blankets and a
single electric bulb flickers through smoke so dense you can
barely see across the room. A dozen person around a penny-ante
poker game. They range from boys of 16 to men in their late 20's,
all in a state of dazed exhilaration. </p>

<p>&quot;There are only a few rickety charis and the table for
furnishings and the gang lolls about the room, some chasing cheap
whisky with long muggles drags, others content to smoke, laugh
vacuously and 'walk on air.'&quot; (5) </p>

<p>Still quoting from the St. Louis Star-Times of an earlier date
we find the case of a young high school student reported. &quot;A
case in point is that of a young man, an intelligent high school
student, now confined to an institution for the mentally
diseased. His experience is entirely the result of acquiring the
habit of smoking marihuana cigarettes. </p>

<p>&quot;One of his friends said to a Star-Times reporter,
calling the youth by name, 'He was a swell fellow until marihuana
got him. Like the rest of us, he thought the weed wasn't
habit-forming and had no idea of the possible consequences of
smoking it. He smoked so many he couldn't quit. finally he went
crazy and his folks put him in a sanitarium.'&quot; (6) From this
same article we read: &quot;'Weed' smoking among young St.
Louisians appears to be chiefly confined to boys. Girls who
indulge do so largely as a result of association with boys who
smoke the drug.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;A girl student, still in her teens told a reporter she
had seen some of her friends under the influence and named a boy
and a girl who lost their senses so completely after smoking
marihuana that they eloped and were married. </p>

<p>&quot;'Another boy I know got the habit so bad he didn't have
enough money to buy all the cigarettes he craved. To get the
money he stole jewelry from his mother while under the influence
of marihuana and pawned it. He was arrested, but when his mother
found out who the thief was she naturally dropped her complaint. </p>

<p>&quot;'I know at least 20 boys, some of them in school, whom I
have seen smoking marihuana cigarettes. Sometimes three or four
of them crowd into a telephone booth and puff on a single
cigarette. </p>

<p>&quot;'Several girls I know have smoked marihuana and I smoked
with them, but I've decided its bad business and haven't smoked
lately. </p>

<p>&quot;'Sometimes we would go to a beer tavern and smoke, the
boys always supplying the muggles.'&quot; </p>

<p>Referring to table II, we find then that Colorado reports that
the Mexican population there cultivates on an average of 2 to 3
tons of the weed annually. This the Mexicans make into
cigarettes, which they sell at two for 25 cents, mostly to white
high school students. Strangely enough, it has been noted that
when this weed is grown at altitudes considerably higher than sea
level, it is much more potent. Colorado, a state that has an
average altitude than sea level (sic), can therefore grow a plant
that is much more powerful than one grown in Louisiana. (8) </p>

<p>From Massachusetts we learn that cigarettes sell for 25 cents
apiece and that they are chiefly used among the younger people
between the ages of 18 and 21. In Louisiana the age range is
18-37 years. Minnesota, like Missouri, has its difficulties with
high school addicts. Oklahoma is another of the afflicted
states,. Reports state that the weed is used widely among the
high school students there. </p>

<p>The tragic picture of all these youngsters coming under the
influence of the drug certainly must have some significance. It
means that more drastic action is necessary. All these states
have passed laws concerning this drug but though the law has
curbed the use of marihuana to a certain degree it has by no
means eradicated it. This is still a very important problem. Why
shouldn't our Federal government, with its wheels of action
already set in motion, take over the control of the use of this
dangerous drug in the United States? We said &quot;wheels of
action, already set in motion&quot;, because in many large cities
the Federal narcotic squads are cooperating with the local police
in stamping out the danger threatened by this drug. The states,
individually, are doing what they can, though in many instances
they are sorely handicapped by lack of experience with this
problem, insufficient funds and ignorance of the proper methods.
Referring to Table 1, again, we find that the narcotic squad is
even now helping curb this menace in Louisiana, Maryland, New
York, New Jersey, and Wyoming. </p>

<p>In New Orleans we were called in a case in which Federal
narcotics agents had made the wholesale arrests of 36 peddlers
simultaneously. This is just one case out of many handled by the
Federal men this year. These men are more thoroughly trained and
much better equipped to handle the situation than the local
police. Certainly our government could help out in this
deplorable situation by amending the Harrison Narcotic Act to
include marihuana as a potent and dangerous drug. As long ago as
1931 our country was one among 57 other countries that met at
Geneva Switzerland, in order to draw up a treaty convention for
restricting the manufacture and cultivation of narcotic drugs.
Included among the narcotics listed by this treaty convention is
marihuana. by the end of the year 1935, 55 nations had ratified
this convention, the United States being the second nation to do
so in 1932. Why then should our Government ratify this treaty
convention and not include marihuana in our own Harrison Narcotic
Act(11)? </p>

<p>The increasing prevalence of this menace is another matter for
serious thought. From Table 1, we find that eight states enacted
legislation against the use, sale, and possession of this weed in
1935 and 1936. by glancing over Table II you'll find that New
York State alone destroyed 187 tons of the weed in 1935. There
seems to be no shortage there. In Louisiana, in recent months,
the state police have destroyed more weed here than every before.
there are many states in a similar dilemma. This problem seems in
no way to be solved butt on the contrary is growing to be a more
dangerous one every day. </p>

<p>From table II we ascertain that out of 450 persons arrested in
New Orleans, La. in 1934, 125 were marihuana addicts; out of 37
murders 177 were addicted to the use of marihuana, and out of 193
convicted of thefts, 34 were under the influence of this drug.
Therefore, the ratio is that approximately 1 out of every 4
persons arrested in this city has become a victim of this
dangerous drug. (12) </p>

<p>In the state of New Mexico, 4 percent of the inmates of the
penitentiary are confessed users of the weed. In New York we find
that ten percent of all the narcotic violators are marihuana
cases. The warden of the state penitentiary in North Dakota
reports that some of the prisoners are addicted to the drug but
that there are none there at present. In Minnesota 10 out of 348
cases at the reformatory confessed to being addicts, while in
Mississippi 6 confessed users were arrested. Illinois reports
having arrested 30 marihuana addicts since 1933. </p>

<p>In the case of the city of New Orleans, if we refer to table
III for the year 1936, we find that in the first 4 months of that
year 36 arrests were made. This number does not include the
arrests made by the Federal narcotics men which greatly exceeds
this figure. If we consider this figure 36 as an average figure
for that period we find that the total number of arrests for the
year of 1936 will substantially exceed the total for any one of
the preceding years. This is a significant fact and proves that
the danger is growing instead of abating. </p>

<p>Practically every article written on the effects of the
marihuana weed will tell of deeds committed without the knowledge
of the culprit, while he was under the influence of this drug.
There are many arguments for and against this statement, and many
cases reported which uphold it, and still others which contradict
it. Our opinion is that both arguments for and against are
correct because of the inconsistency of the action of this drug
on individual victims. The reactions resulting depend to a large
extent on the innate characteristics of the individual. The
person who is so unfortunate as to come under the influence of
this drug, in many cases, becomes the unwilling offender of the
law because the central nervous system has become affected, as is
the case with other habit-forming drugs. As a representative
case, note the tragic predicament of this Californian. &quot;A
man under the influence of marihuana actually decapitated his
best friend; and thn, coming out of the effects of the drug, was
as horrified aas anyone over what he had done&quot; (9). Then we
have the case of a young boy in Florida. The story runs as
follows: &quot;A young boy who had become addicted to smoking
marihuana cigarettes, in a fit of frenzy because, as he stated
while still under the marihuana influence, a number of people
were trying to cut off his arms and legs, seized an axe and
killed his father, mother, two brothers and a sister, wiping out
the entire family except himself.&quot; (10) </p>

<p>Those of us who are native New Orleanians must well remember
the tragic incident that happened in our city last year. In a
downtown section a man under the influence of the weed became so
frenzied and angered at his wife as to kill her out on the street
in front of many witnesses. </p>

<p>These are only three cases of which there are hundreds. Each
one is a blot on the history of the State where the crime was
committed and so it is very difficult to unearth such
information. </p>

<p>Is marihuana sufficiently like any other habit-forming drug
that it should receive recognition as a real menace? For an
answer we have only to glance over table IV, where we find that
in comparison with other habit-forming drugs, heroin, morphine,
opium, and cocaine, marihuana has an established place. Like
these drugs named, it , too, derives it effects chiefly from
resultant changes to the central nervous system. It decreases
pain and in certain instances dispenses it completely. Comparable
to the other drugs mentioned, a certain amount of tolerance is
set up rather easily with marihuana. </p>

<p>In its action of depression and stimulation it is very much
like that noted under small doses of morphine. Habit-forming
drugs in ever case disturb the vision and heart. In this instance
marihuana reacts like cocaine, in that the pupils become dilated
and the pulse is accelerated. Habitual use of heroin weakens
judgment, self-control, and attention. IN this sense, marihuana
is like heroin as constant use results in loss of judgment and
measurement of time and space. Marihuana makes the imagination
run rampant and the dreams that result are as extravagant as
those reported by opium eaters. Social dangers that ensue from
the use of marihuana are comparable to those that result from
heroin. The heroin habit produces an utter disregard for
conventions and moral; similar results ensue from the smoking of
the weed. Here, however, the skeptic has a point which he can
dispute. The action of marihuana is much less constant than
heroin, as it depends to a certain extent on the disposition and
intellectual activity of the victim. However, we must remind
friend skeptic that the great majority of users are ignorant and
inexperienced youngsters and members of the lowest strata of
humanity. When you think this fact over there should be no room
for argument on that point. </p>

<p>After an exhaustive search on marihuana from its earliest
history to the present time, it is easy to see that the
destruction of the plant is absolutely essential in all
communities in this country. To this end we believe that the
members of the Orleans Parish Medical Society should lend their
wholehearted cooperation. </p>

<p>In conclusion we wish to state that we have proved
conclusively: </p>

<p>1. The seriousness of the problem as it concerns youngsters
who are willing to take a chance at all times. </p>

<p>2. The increasing prevalence of this menace which results in a
large percentage of criminal users. </p>

<p>3. The tragedy of persons who use the weed becoming unwilling
offenders of the law because the central nervous system has been
so affected. </p>

<p>Table III -- Statistics of number of arrests, number of
cigarettes confiscated, and pounds of weed destroyed in the city
of New Orleans for the years of 1928 to April, 1936. <br>
</p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td width="84">Year</td>
        <td width="84">Number of arrests</td>
        <td width="84">Number of white arrests</td>
        <td width="84">Number of colored arrests </td>
        <td width="84">Number color not recorded</td>
        <td width="84">Number of cigarettes confiscated </td>
        <td width="84">Pounds of weed confiscated</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84">1928-29</td>
        <td width="84">19</td>
        <td width="84">9 </td>
        <td width="84">6</td>
        <td width="84">4</td>
        <td width="84">406</td>
        <td width="84">4.2 ounces</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84">1930</td>
        <td width="84">30</td>
        <td width="84">17 </td>
        <td width="84">4</td>
        <td width="84">9</td>
        <td width="84">527</td>
        <td width="84">27 pounds, 10 ounces, 7 stalks of freshly
        cut herb </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84">1931</td>
        <td width="84">18</td>
        <td width="84">6</td>
        <td width="84">1</td>
        <td width="84">11</td>
        <td width="84">405</td>
        <td width="84">2 pounds, 6 ounces </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84">1932</td>
        <td width="84">20</td>
        <td width="84">11 </td>
        <td width="84">5</td>
        <td width="84">4</td>
        <td width="84">94</td>
        <td width="84">1 pound 2 ounces</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84">1933</td>
        <td width="84">13</td>
        <td width="84">6</td>
        <td width="84">3</td>
        <td width="84">4</td>
        <td width="84">62 </td>
        <td width="84">1 ounce </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84">1934</td>
        <td width="84">20</td>
        <td width="84">9</td>
        <td width="84">7</td>
        <td width="84">4</td>
        <td width="84">236</td>
        <td width="84">3 pounds, 6.4 ounces; 2 3/4 pounds seeds
        and fragments of leaves </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84">1935</td>
        <td width="84">82</td>
        <td width="84">22 </td>
        <td width="84">32</td>
        <td width="84">28</td>
        <td width="84">2,752 </td>
        <td width="84">3 pounds, 11 ounces</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="84">1936 (January through April</td>
        <td width="84">36 </td>
        <td width="84">18</td>
        <td width="84">15</td>
        <td width="84">3</td>
        <td width="84">149</td>
        <td width="84">3.01 ounces</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>Table IV. An interesting comparison of the action of heroin,
morphine, opium, cocaine, and marihuana <br>
<br>
</p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td width="148">Heroin</td>
        <td width="148">Morphine and opium </td>
        <td width="148">Cocaine</td>
        <td width="148">Marihuana</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="148">Action on cerebrum and medulla seems to
        be stronger than morphine. Senses dulled. </td>
        <td width="148">Decided action on cerebrum and medulla.
        Depression of sensibility. </td>
        <td width="148">Most important effect is that on central
        nervous system. Applied locally, paralyzes sensory nerve
        terminations. Injections anesthetize all areas where drug
        penetrates, complete loss of sensation in lower part of
        body but movements unimpaired. </td>
        <td width="148">Effects due chiefly to changes in central
        nervous system.<p>Sensation of pain decreased or entirely
        absent. Sense of touch dulled. </p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="148">Tolerance set up rapidly</td>
        <td width="148">Tolerance easily maintained for large
        doses. </td>
        <td width="148">Tolerance can be attained by habitual
        use. </td>
        <td width="148">Some tolerance is rapidly acquired.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="148">Has little effect in intestines.</td>
        <td width="148">Movement of bowels irregular.<p>Depression
        and stimulation follow each other in rapid fashion. </p>
        </td>
        <td width="148">Movement of intestines are augmented.<p>Depression
        succeeds stimulation in some order; 2 statges not divided
        and often overlap. </p>
        </td>
        <td width="148">Causes diarrhea.<p>Depression and
        stimulation that results is comparable to that noted
        under small doses of morphine. </p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="148">Vision disturbed.</td>
        <td width="148">Pupils contracted </td>
        <td width="148">Pupils dilated.</td>
        <td width="148">Pupils dilated. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="148">Slow small pulse</td>
        <td width="148">Heart irregular<p>Appetite bad </p>
        </td>
        <td width="148">Pulse accelerated<p>Loss of appetite</p>
        </td>
        <td width="148">Pulse accelerated.<p>Appetite increased.</p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="148">Judgment, self-control attention
        weakened; resembles morphine in its general effects </td>
        <td width="148">Results in nervousness, weak character
        and lack of energy; utterly unfit for work unless
        supplied with drug; tremors and unsteadiness in walking
        may be apparent. </td>
        <td width="148">Reflexes more easily excited. tremors or
        slight convulsive movements often occur; has surprising
        power of removing fatigue; small doses, mental powers
        increased; large doses stimulant effect spreads to lower
        areas and produces a great increase of movement. </td>
        <td width="148">Results in loss of judgment; imagination
        runs rampant; measurement of time and space lost; dream
        state followed by unconsciousness and then by restful
        sleep; action less constant that any other drug; depends
        greatly on disposition and intellectual activity of
        victim; large doses result in loud disturbances and
        violence </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="148">Social dangers greater that in the case
        of morphine as it produces marked changes in personality,
        utter disregard for conventions and morals; degenerative
        changes in individual progress more rapidly than in the
        case of any other drug; addict quickly becomes a mental
        and moral degenerate. </td>
        <td width="148">No evidence of physical deterioration or
        unfitness from addiction to drug. Melancholia and
        dementia follow continued use of drug. </td>
        <td width="148">Sleeplessness, tremors, occasional
        convulsions and hallucinations often occur, also
        delirium, indefinite disturbances of sensation and
        motion; mental, moral, and physical deterioration more
        rapid than in the case of morphinism. </td>
        <td width="148">Often produces disregard for conventions
        and morals. </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td width="148">Habit most difficult to cure.</td>
        <td width="148">Habit difficult to cure; relapses after
        withdrawal are exceedingly common. </td>
        <td width="148">View of some doctors is that habit can be
        broken as easily as smoker's habit, as there seems to be
        no after effects upon withdrawal. </td>
        <td width="148">Habit can be easily broken as there are
        no withdrawal effects, but as is the case with all drugs
        the increased desire due to abstinence causes continued
        relapses. </td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p><br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><font size="4"><b>BIBLIOGRAPHY</b></font> </p>

<p>(1) American Journal of Psychiatry, Marihuana Intoxication,
Clinical Study of Cannabis Sativa Intoxication. Walter Bromberg,
Volume 91, Pages 303-330, September, 1934. </p>

<p>(2) Medical Journal and Record, The Weed Insanity. Louis J.
Bragman, Syracuse, NY, October 7, 1925, pages 416-417. </p>

<p>(3) Ibid., October 19, 1927, pages 470-475. The Green Goddess
(A Studyin Dreams, Drugs, and Dementia). Robert Kingman,
Brooklyn, NY </p>

<p>(4) St. Louis Star Times, February 4, 1935. Louisville Paper
Finds Marihuana a Menace There. </p>

<p>(5) Ibid. </p>

<p>(6) St.. Louis Star Times, January 18, 1935. Young Slaves to
Dope Cigaret Pay Tragic Price For Their Folly. Hulius Kleen. </p>

<p>(7) Ibid. </p>

<p>(8) World Narcotic Defense Association. Marihuana or Indian
Hemp and Its Preparations. </p>

<p>(9) Ibid. </p>

<p>(10) Ibid. </p>

<p>(11) World Narcotic Defense Association. Narcotic Drug
Addiction and How to Fight It. </p>

<p>(12) World Narcotic Defense Association. Marihuana or Indian
Hemp and Its Preparations. US Treasury Department, Bureau of
Narcotics, Washington, DC, Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous
Drugs, 1934. Cushny's Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Edmunds and
Gunn, pages 278-293, 1934. </p>

<p>The New Orleans Times-Tribune </p>

<p>Cannabis. W. G. Walker, Chief, Division of Narcotic
Enforcement, San Francisco, California, July 1, 1934. </p>

<p>Annual Report on Narcotic to Governor Lehman for 1935, New
York State. </p>

<p>Legal Mediciine and Toxicology. Webster, W. B. Saunders Co.,
Philadelphia, United States of America, 1930. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>MARIHUANA AS A DEVELOPER OF CRIMINALS</b> </p>

<p>(By Eugene Stanley, district attorney, parish of Orleans, New
Orleans, La.) </p>

<p>Many prosecuting attorneys in the South and Southwest have
been confronted with the defense that, at the time of the
commission of the criminal act, the defendant was irresponsible,
because he was under the influence of marihuana to such a degree
he was unable to appreciate the difference between right and
wrong, and was legally insane. A great deal of difficulty has
been experienced in rebutting this defense by the testimony of
psychiatrists, for, while some of these experts are conversant
with the nature and effect of this drug, it has been the
experience of the author that many psychiatrists know nothing
whatsoever of the effect of the drug. </p>

<p>This may be due to the fact that this drug has come into wide
use in certain parts of the South only within the last 10 years. </p>

<p>It is the purpose of this article to give a brief outline of
the nature and origin of this drug, the legislation enacted which
prohibits its sale and use, to recommend that this drug be placed
within the provisions of the Harrison Anti-Narcotic Act, and to
give a list of some of the works which may be consulted by any
persons interested in making a thorough study of the drug. </p>

<p><b>MARIHUANA IS THE MEXICAN TERM FOR CANNABIS INDICA.</b> </p>

<p>The plant or drug known as Cannabis indica, or marihuana, has
as its parent the plant known as Cannabis Sativa. </p>

<p>It is popularly known in India as Cannabis Indica,; in
America, as Cannabis americana; in Mexico as Cannabis mexicana,
or marihuana. </p>

<p>It is all the same drug, and is known in different countries
by different names. It is scientifically known as Cannabis
sativa, and is popularly called Cannabis americana, Cannabis
indica, or Cannabis mexicana, in accordance with the geographical
origin of the particular plant. </p>

<p>In the East it is known as charras, as gunga, as hasheesh, as
bhang, or siddi, and it is known by a variety of names in the
countries of continental Europe. </p>

<p>Cannabis sativa is an annual herb from the &quot;hemp&quot;
plant; it has angular, rough stems and deeply lobed leaves. </p>

<p>It is derived from the flowering tops of the female plant of
hemp grown in semi-tropical and temperate countries. It was once
thought that only the plant grown in India was active, but it has
been scientifically determined that the American specimen termed
&quot;marihuana&quot; or &quot;muggles&quot; is equal in potency
to the best weed of India. The plant is a moraceous herb. </p>

<p>In the South, amongst the Negroes, it is termed
&quot;mooter&quot;. </p>

<p>In India, where the plant is scientifically cultivated on a
wide scale for the drug obtained from it, the plants, when small,
are separated, the female plant being used exclusively for the
purpose of obtaining the drug. </p>

<p>In Mexico and in America, the plants are permitted to grow
together indiscriminately, without separating the male and female
plants, so that the potency of the female plant is lessened by
the admixture of the male element. </p>

<p>In semitropical climates, because of the fertility of the soil
and the ease with which hemp seed may be procured, the plant can
be easily cultivated, and prohibition of the actual cultivation
is rendered practically impossible. It resembles a weed, and has
been found growing in some of the back yards and lots of the
cities. the traffic in the plant , and the drug derived
therefrom, has been found to be considerable, particularly in the
South and Southwestern States. </p>

<p><b>CULTIVATION OF HEMP</b> </p>

<p>Hemp is cultivated all over the world; its culture probably
originated in China, from whence it spread. It is cultivated for
three purposes; For the fiber, out of which rope, twine, cloth,
and hats are made; for the seed, from which a rapidly drying oil
is obtained that is used in the arts and as a commercial
substitute for linseed oil; and for the narcotic contained in the
resin of the dried, flowering tops of the pistillate plant. The
seed is also sold as a constituent of commercial bird seed. </p>

<p>Hemp is grown in the New England Colonies for fiber used in
the making of homespun. It was also grown in the Virginia and
Pennsylvania Colonies and cultivated at an early date in the
settlements of Kentucky, from whence the industry spread to
Missouri. Hemp has been grown at various times in Illinois, near
Champagne; in the Kankakee River Valley, in Indiana;; in
southeastern Pennsylvania, and in Nebraska, Iowa, and California.
It is now abundant as a wild plant in many localities in Western
Missouri, Iowa, Southern Minnesota, and in the southwestern and
western states, where it is often found as a roadside weed. It is
not known when the plant was introduced into Mexico, and the
southwest, but probably along with the early Spanish settlements.
It was introduced into Chile in the 16th Century. </p>

<p>The early cultivation of hemp in the United States was of the
small European variety, but this has been replaced since 1857 by
the larger Chinese hemp. Practically all the seed for present-day
American hemp culture is grown in the Kentucky River Valley. </p>

<p><b>CANNABIS INDICA OR SATIVA</b> </p>

<p>Cannabis Sativa is designated as a &quot;narcotic&quot; in a
number of State laws. It is sometimes mentioned in the laws as
&quot;loco weed&quot; because of its inebriate effect upon men
and cattle; in others a &quot;marihuana&quot;, &quot;hemp&quot;,
or &quot;hashish&quot;; in fact, the drug is known by a wide
variety of names. </p>

<p>It is one of the several drugs included under the antinarcotic
laws of 17 States, namely Texas, Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico,
Nevada, California, Oregon, Idaho, Washington, Utah, Maine,
Vermont, Massachusetts, New York, Indiana, Wisconsin, and Iowa.
It is also prohibited under the laws of Mexico and England. </p>

<p>In a great many of the states where this legislation was
enacted, so widespread was the use of marihuana, and so terrific
the result, that grave emergencies were declared to exist which
justified the legislation taking effect immediately. </p>

<p>The restrictions respecting the smoking of &quot;hemp&quot;
are mentioned along with those restricting opium smoking. </p>

<p>Although the different forms of the plant have been described
under different botanical names, there are no essential
differences in any of the specific characteristics, and all
cultivated or wild hemp is now recognized as belonging to one
species - Cannabis sativa. </p>

<p><b>THE ORIGIN OF THE DRUG</b> </p>

<p>The origin of the drug is very ancient. </p>

<p>In the year 1090 A.D. the religious and military order or sect
of the Assassins was founded in Persia, and the numerous acts of
cruelty of this sect was known not only in Asia, but in Europe as
well. This branch of the Shiite sect, known as Ismalites, was
called Hashishan, derived from Hashish, or the confection of the
hemp leaves (Cannabis indica). </p>

<p>In fact, from the Arabic &quot;Hashishan&quot; we have the
English word &quot;Assassin&quot;. It is mentioned in the Arabian
Knights, and was known at the time of the Crusaders. It is known
to the Greeks as &quot;Nepenthe&quot;, and was lauded in the
immortal Odyssey of Homer as a drug to lull all pain and anger,
and to bring forgetfulness of all sorrow. </p>

<p>It was known in ancient times to the Egyptians, and its use in
Egypt, at the present time is widespread. </p>

<p>In fact, it is presently as widely used amongst the Egyptians,
and in the East, as opium is used by the Chinese, and alcohol by
the Americans and Europeans. Its effect upon the Malays has been
terrific, and the natives of the Malayan Peninsula have been
known, while under its influence, to rush out and engage in
violent or bloody deeds, with complete disregard for their
personal safety, or the odds arrayed against them. To run
&quot;amok&quot; in the Malayan Peninsula is synonymous with
saying one is under the influence of this drug. </p>

<p>In America, particularly in the South and Southwestern
portions of the United States, it is called marihuana. It is
popularly known amongst the criminal element as
&quot;muggles&quot;, or &quot;mooter&quot; and addicts are
commonly termed &quot;muggle heads.&quot; </p>

<p><b>THE EFFECT OF THE USE OF THE DRUG</b> </p>

<p>The flowering tops of the female plant are the source from
which the drug is obtained, and in American these flowering tops
are gathered and rolled into cigarettes and smoked, the smoke
being inhaled. </p>

<p>A favorite method of smoking these cigarettes is for a person
to draw into the mouth the smoke from one of these cigarettes and
to blow the smoke from the mouth against the cupped hands, and
then inhale the smoke. </p>

<p>In India, marihuana or &quot;muggles&quot; is mostly used in
&quot;ganja&quot; form, which is the Indian name for a mixture of
the stems, leaves, and flowering tops of the cultivate female
plants. It is smoked, as in America, in the form of cigarettes,
or in the pipe; its smell is typically offensive, and is easily
recognized by the initiated. </p>

<p>In Inida, Bhang, or siddi, are the Indian names for the
mixture of these dry leaves and capsules without stems, whether
male or female, cultivated, or in its wild state. It is the
cheapest and the weakest of all the preparations of hashish, and
is taken as tea. </p>

<p>In India, the resinous substance which exudes from the
flowering head of the female plant is called
&quot;chearris&quot;, and is either smoked or taken in pills or
in confections, or mixed with sugar or honey, and is commonly
sold amongst the bazaars of Egypt and the Far East. </p>

<p>In many respects, the action of cannabis sativa is similar to
that of alcohol or morphine. Its toxic effects are ecstasy,
merriment, uncontrollable laughter, self-satisfaction, bizarre
ideas lacking in continuity, and its results are extreme
hyperacidity, with occasional attacks of nausea and vomiting. It
has also been described as producing, in moderate doses, from a
mild intoxication to a dead drunk, a drowsy and semicomatose
condition, lapsing into a dreamy state, with a rapid flow of
ideas of a sexual nature and ending in a deep sleep, interrupted
by dreams. On awakening, there is a feeling of great dejection
and prostration. </p>

<p>Large doses produce excitement, delusions hallucinations,
rapid flow of ideas, a high state of ecstasy, psychomotor
activity with a tendency to willful damage and violence, and a
temporary amnesia of all that has transpired. In cases of
prolonged addiction, especially in the Malays, the somnolent
action of Cannabis indica is replaced with complete loss of
judgment and restraint, the same effects so frequently observed
in alcohol intoxication. </p>

<p>It is commonly used as an aphrodisiac, and its continued use
leads to impotency. This has been observed among the natives of
India. </p>

<p>It is an ideal drug to quickly cut off inhibitions. </p>

<p>At the time of the founding of the religious sect of the
&quot;Assassins&quot; in Persia, by Hassan Ben Sabbat, young men
whom the sheik desired to subjugate were given this drug, and
when under its influence, were taken, blindfolded, into the
garden of the sheik, where every pleasure which appealed to the
sense awaited them. </p>

<p>When complete indulgence in these pleasures were had, they
were taken from this garden, and so eager were they for a further
opportunity to use this drug and a repetition of these pleasures,
that they were under the complete domination of the sheik, who
alone knew the secret of this drug, and gladly followed his will,
even to the extent of sacrificing their lives is he commanded
them to do so, in order to further experience the pleasures to
which they had been initiated. </p>

<p>At the present time, the underworld has been quick to realize
the value of this drug in subjugating the will of human derelicts
to that of the master mind. Its use sweeps away all restraint,
and to its influence may be attributed many of our present day
crimes. </p>

<p>It has been the experience of the police and prosecuting
officials in the South that immediately before the commission of
many crimes the use of marihuana cigarettes has been indulged in
by many criminals, so as to relieve themselves from a sense of
natural restraint which might deter them from the commission of
these criminal acts, and to give them the false courage necessary
to commit the contemplated crime.<br>
</p>

<p>THE GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE TOWARD MARIHUANA<br>
</p>

<p>Indian hemp (marihuana) addicts were made eligible for
treatment in recent legislation enacted by the Seventieth
Congress, approved January 19, 1929, establishing narcotic farms
for the confinement and treatment of persons addicted to the use
of habit-forming narcotic drugs. </p>

<p>This legislation is somewhat unique in congressional
legislation, since Indian hemp is not classified as a
habit-forming drug or narcotic in other Federal narcotic laws. </p>

<p>Inasmuch as the harmful effects of the use of the drug is
becoming more widely known each day, and it has been classed as a
narcotic by the statutory laws of 17 American states, England,
and Mexico, and persons addicted to its use have been made
eligible for treatment in the United States narcotics farms, the
United States Government, unquestionably, will be compelled to
adopt a consistent attitude toward this drug, and include it in
the Harrison antinarcotic law, so as to give Federal aid to the
States in their effort to suppress a traffic as deadly and as
destructive to society as the traffic in the other forms of
narcotics now prohibited by the Harrison Act. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>REFERENCES </b></p>

<p>See American Illustrated Medical Dictionary (Dorland, 1927)
&quot;Marihuana.&quot; </p>

<p>Arny, Henry V. Principles of Pharmacy (3rd Ed.) Philadelphia
and London, W. B. Saunders Co. (1926, 1978pp. Cannabis, pp
767-768, Reference p. 779) </p>

<p>(Bethea) Materia Medica and Prescription Writing (1926 pp.
114-15) </p>

<p>Boyce, Sidney S. Hemp (Cannabis Sativa), a practical treatise
on the culture of hemp for seed and fiber, with a sketch of the
history and nature of the hemp plant. New York, Orange Judd Co.
(1900, 112 pp) </p>

<p>Briosi, Giovanni, Interno alla anatomia canapa (Cannabis
sativa) Milano, Tip. Bernardoni di C. Rebeschini (cc. 1894-96, 2
v., bibliografia; ff. 1 pp. 2-28; v. 2, pp. 14-38) </p>

<p>Century Dictionary and Encyclopedia (vol. 12, pp. 771, 1909). </p>

<p>Daggett, Charles H. Theory of Pharmaceutical Chemistry.
Philadelphia and New York, Lea &amp; Febiger, 1910 (539 pp.
Cannabis Indica; p. 480). </p>

<p>Edmunds, C. W. and J. A. Gunn. A textbook of pharmacology and
therapeutics (9th ed.) , Philadelphia, Lea &amp; Febiger, 1928
(743 pp. Cannabis; pp. 280-282) </p>

<p>Evers, Norman and G. D. Elsdon. The analysis of drugs and
chemicals. London C.Griffin &amp; Co. (1929, 372 pp. Cannabis
Indica; p. 190) </p>

<p>India. Department of Finance and Commerce. Indian Hemp Drugs
Commission (No. 1369 ex. Government of India, Calcutta, 1925 23
pp.) </p>

<p>-- Memorandum on excise administration in India, so far as it
is concerned with hemp drugs * * * (3d, 1. e. 2d ed.; Simla,
Printed at the government central printing office 1902, 22 pp.) </p>

<p>-- Hemp Drugs Commission. Report, Simla, printed at the
government central printing office (1894 7 v.) </p>

<p>--- Supplementary Volume. Answers received to selected
questions for the native army. * * * Calcutta, 1895 (186 pp) </p>

<p>-- Supplementary Volume. Evidence of witnesses from nattive
states. Calcutta, office of the superintendent of government
printing, India, 1895 (218 pp.) </p>

<p>Marshall C. R. The active principle of Indian hemp; a
preliminary communication. Lancet (London), Jan.23 1897 (pt. 1,
pp. 235-238) </p>

<p>Marihuana (Mex) In Mexico, any one of several plants having
narcotic properties; in many localities; Cannabis indica and in
the State of Sonora, Nicotiana glauca. </p>

<p>Medical -- Jurisprudence &amp; Technology, Prof. Jno. Glaister
and Hon. Jno. Glaister, Jr. (5th Ed. 1931) Wm. Wood &amp; Co.,
New York, E &amp; S Livingstone, Edinburgh (p. 849) </p>

<p>Merck's Index; an encyclopedia for the chemist, pharmacist,
and physician (4th ed.), Rahway, NJ Merck &amp; co., Inc. (19330,
585 pp), Cannabis (p. 147) </p>

<p>Moreau Jacques J. Du hachich et de l'alienation mentale.
Etudes psychologiques. Paris, Fortin Masson et cie, 1845 (431
pp). </p>

<p>Munch, James Clyde. &quot;Bioassays; a handbook of
quantitative pharmacology&quot;, Baltimore, the William &amp;
Wilkins Co., 1931 (pp. 190-197) An article on the subject,
including a few references in the text (covers, pp. 67 -88) </p>

<p>Orleans Parish Medical Society. the Marihuana Menace, by Dr.
A. E. Fossier. </p>

<p>Perez, Genaro. La Marihuana. Breve estudio sobre esta planta.
Mexico, 1886. Noted in Nicolas, Leon. &quot;Biblioteca botanico -
mexicana.&quot; Mexico, Officina tip. de la secretaria de
fomento, 1895 (p. 207) </p>

<p>Pharmacopiea of U.S.A. 1925 (pp. 95-96) </p>

<p>Poulsson, E. A textbook on Pharmacology and therapuetics (Eng.
ed.) London, W. Heinemann, 1923 (519 pp.). Cannabis indica; (pp.
90-91) </p>

<p>Prain, Sir David. on the morphology, teratology, and diclinism
of the flowers of Cannabis, * * * Calcutta, office of the
superintendent of government printing, India (9104, 32 pp.)
Scientific memoirs of officers of th medical and sanitary
departments of the government off India (new ser. no. 12) </p>

<p>Robinson, Victor. An essay on hasheesh, historical and
experimental (2d ed.), New York. E. H. Ringer (1925, 91 pp.) </p>

<p>Rusby, Bliss &amp; Ballard. The Properties and Uses of Drugs
(1930 ed., p. 415) </p>

<p>Solis Cohen Githens. Pharmaceotherapeutus (192 ed., pp.
1702-3) </p>

<p>Sollman, Torald. A manual of pharmacology, and its
applications to therapeutics and toxicology (3d ed.) Philadelphia
and London, W. b. Saunders Co. (1926, 1184 pp.) (Marihuana
(Cannabis) (pp. 323-324) </p>

<p>United States Departemtn of Publich Health, See Report of
Surgeon-General, Hugh S. Cummings, to the Seventieth Congress.
See Index Catalogue of the Surgeon General's Office, as follows: </p>

<p>Series 3 (Cannabis indica), 3:836-37, 1922 </p>

<p>Series 2 (Cannabis indica) 3:341-45, 1898 </p>

<p>Series 2 (Haschisch) 6:784, 1901 </p>

<p>Series 1 (Cananbis indica) 2:690-91, 1881. </p>

<p>U.S. Dispensatory, 1918 (p. 276) </p>

<p>Wood, George B., The dispensatory of the United States of
America (21st ed.) Philadelphia and London, J. b. Lippinscott Co.
1926, 1892. Cannabis indica (Marihuana in Mexican) p. 277-281 A
few references are given in the text.<br>
</p>

<p>JOURNALS<br>
</p>

<p>See (Bragman) Toxic effects: Weed of insanity (M. J. &amp;
Rec. 122; pp. 416-18, 1925) </p>

<p>(Del Favero) mental effect o hashish on Central African
Negroes. Pensiero med. 17;270-277, 1928 </p>

<p>(Dontas and Zis) Narcotic action of potassium chlorate added
to smoking tobacco; comparison with hasheesh Wien. Klin.
Wehnsehr. 41:161-163, 1928 </p>

<p>(Dawner) Cannabis indica in smoking tobacco. Brit. M. J.
2:521, 1923 </p>

<p>(Fantchenko) Case history of intoxication psychosis from
poisoning with tinct. cannabis indicae. Klin. Med. 6: 770-773,
1927 </p>

<p>(Gayer) Pharmacologic standardization of oriental hashish and
cannabis indica. </p>

<p>Hasheesh Insanity (by Dr. Warnock, superintendent Cairo
Lunatic Asylum), British Medical Journal, vol. 2, p. 2 or 8, 1903
</p>

<p>(Huher) History of hashish and opium. Deut. Med. Wehnschr.,
53: 1145, 1927 </p>

<p>(Joel) Cultivation of cannabis indica; reply to Sabaltschka,
Klin. Wehhenschr., 5: 364-365, 1926 Abst J.A.N.A. 86: 1490 </p>

<p>(Djunjibhoy) Role of Indian hemp in causation of insanity in
India. Far East Assn. Trop. Med. Trans. 7th Cong. 1927, V. 1:
400, 1928 </p>

<p>(Joel and Frankel) Hashish intoxication; contribution to
experimental psychopathology. Klin. Wehnschr.5: 1707-1709, 1926. </p>

<p>(Kant and Krapf) Psychic phenomena by ingestion of Hashish
Archiv. f. exper. Path. u. Pharmakol. 129: 319-338, 1928 </p>

<p>(Kant and Krapf) Question off intact function in hashish
intoxication, Ztschr. f. d. ges. Neurol u. Psychiat. 112:
302-305, 1928 </p>

<p>(Kingman) Gren Goddess, study in dreams, drugs and dementia.
M. J. &amp; Rec. 126-470-475, 1927 </p>

<p>(Sabalitschka) Cultivation of cannabis indica; comment on
Joel's article, Klin. Wehnschr. 5: 1279-1280, 1926 </p>

<p>(Straub) Bavarian hashish, experiments. Munch. Med. Nehnschrr.
75: 49-51. </p>

<p>(Kent) Forms of reaction of psychotic indivisuals to hashish
intoxication; study of problem of hallucination. Arch. f.
Psychiat. 91: 694-721, 1930. </p>

<p>(Dhunjiohoy) &quot;Indian Hemp Insanity&quot; peculiar to
India, J. Ment. Sc. 76; 254-264, 1930<br>
</p>

<p>STATUTORY REGULATIONS </p>

<p>England -- George V (1925), Statutes 15 and 16 amending. </p>

<p>California - Code of California, statutes and amendments
(1929), page 381, chapter 216 </p>

<p>Indiana -- A. Burns' Annotated Indiana Statutes, volume 1,
section 2494, page 1228, act 1911, page 45 </p>

<p>Iowa -- 1924 acts of Iowa, chapter 156, page 427 </p>

<p>Louisiana -- Act 41 of 1924 </p>

<p>Maine -- Revised statues of Maine (1930, sec. 25, ch. 23, p.
477). </p>

<p>Nevada -- Compiled laws of Nevada (1929) </p>

<p>New Mexico -- The laws of New Mexico (1923), chapter 42, page
58. </p>

<p>Oregon -- General Laws of Oregon (1923) Chapter 27 </p>

<p>Texas -- Vernon's Annotated Criminal Statutes of the State of
Texas (Penal Code) volume 2, 1926, chapter 3, article 720. </p>

<p>Utah. -- Compiled laws of Utah, section 4432 (1917 edition),
page 902. </p>

<p>Vermont -- General Laws of Vermont (1919), section 6285, page
1081 </p>

<p>Washington -- Remington's Compiled Statutes of Washington
(1923), supplementing chapter 7, sections 2509-2511, 2509-2512. </p>

<p>Wisconsin -- Wisconsin Statutes (1929), tenth edition, section
146.02, formerly sectioon 1419 of the Old Wisconsin Statutes,
paragraph 16. </p>

<p>Wyoming.-- Wyoming's Compiled Statutes(1920), section 3570,
page 693 </p>

<p>(see descriptive word index and tables of cases affirmed.
Revised or modified, covering &quot;Current Digest&quot;. vols, 1
to 5 (1926030) (West Publishing Co. &quot;Marijuana&quot;, p.
327.) </p>

<p>Criminal law: 507 (1), 730 (2) 569, 338 (7) 1170 1-2 (2), 1153
(6) 814 (8,9), 459, 741 (1) </p>

<p>Poisons. 9.<br>
</p>

<p>(Thereupon the committee adjourned to meet tomorrow,
Wednesday, Apr. 28, 1937, at 10:30 a.m.)<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schindhemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>