
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-71</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B006-203</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/coughlin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035452 text/html 15575
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:46 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:18:07 GMT
Content-length: 15357
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Rockefeller Drug Laws -- 20 Years Later</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<p>Testimony of New York State Corrections Commissioner Thomas A.
Coughlin, III: </p>

<p>&quot;Rockefeller Drug Laws -- 20 Years Later&quot; </p>

<p>Before a hearing convened by the Assembly Committee on Codes </p>

<p>Tuesday, June 8, 1993 </p>

<p>Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to appear before this panel
to formalize . . . for the record . . . my position on what has
become known as the Rockefeller drug laws. </p>

<p>Contrary to popular belief, I was not the prison commissioner
when they were enacted. But this month, as I close in on 14 years
as Corrections Commissioner, I believe that I offer a unique
perspective on the subject before us today. </p>

<p>Because . . . more than anyone else in State government today.
. . I have seen the effects - both good and bad - of these laws.
I've seen them used to lock up the right people for very, very
long periods of time. But I have also seen them lock up the wrong
people. . . for the wrong reasons. </p>

<p>Let me summarize the impact of the Rockefeller drug laws. . .
upon the prison population . . . and why I think we desperately
need to modify our approach to the drug epidemic plaguing New
York State. </p>

<p>As of May 25, the prison house 64,000 inmates -- 2,000 of them
living in double bunks that were added as an emergency response
to a bed shortage. Because of fiscal constraints and policy
differences, no new prison construction has been authorized by
the Legislature for several years. Nevertheless, the prison
population continues to grow . . . as does the backlog of 1,700
offenders . . . waiting out in the counties, to be received into
the Department's custody. </p>

<p>If each of the 64,000 people actually belonged in prison, I
would have no problem in simply asking the legislature to pay
$100,000 each for all the new cells that I need. But that is not
the case. And we are putting untold pressures on prison employees
by crowding our prisons. And, quite frankly, we unnecessarily
invite trouble when crowding forces met to put more inmates out
on the streets. . . in work release . . . than I feel comfortable
with. </p>

<p>My position has long been that prison space is a finite
resource. We should be filling them with the people we built them
for -- the violent predator and repeat offenders. Not the guy who
got caught with a few bucks worth of crack. The time is long
overdue for the Legislature to recognize this distinction and
enact some basic reforms to our sentencing structure. </p>

<p>I firmly believe that drug addiction affecting the street
level addict can be far more successfully treated in community
settings, instead of the prison environment. It used to be that
offenders came to prison and got the high school diploma they
never earned on the outside. Now, street addicts are coming to
$100,000 prison cells that cost $27,000 a year to operate . . .
to get the same drug treatment that could be available at $5,000
to $10,000 per person on the street. </p>

<p>It would make far more sense -- logistically and economically
-- to provide initial diversion from the prison system to
community-based treatment provideers in the first instance for
the street level addict. Treatment, not punishment, should be our
first line of defense for non-violent addicts . . . in our
so-called war against drugs. We can't do that. </p>

<p>Meanwhile, the punitive effect of the Rockefeller drug laws,
as well as the rigidity of the second felony offender laws, do
not deter, they do not lessen, nor do they cure drug addiction.
Instead, as far as prisons are being filled with low-level drug
offenders, more street level sellers and abusers appear to take
the place of those individuals who get caught up in the criminal
justice system. </p>

<p>Thus, as a simple matter of common sense, if not pure
economics, we are wasting valuable and limited prison space on
low-level, non-violent offenders. Space that could be more
appropriately utilized keeping violent felony offenders
incarcerated for longer periods of time. There is no question
that forcing drug offenders into the State prison system at the
current rate of incarceration detracts from our ability to
incarcerate violent offenders, which, in turn, only weakens our
overall ability to promote public protection. And the public
isn't fooled, just look ad the newspaper or watching the evening
news. </p>

<p>In the early eighties, drug offenders accounted for roughly 10
percent of all new court commitments to the Department. The
prison population was, instaed, dominated by those committing
violent felony offenses. </p>

<p>Since 1989, commitments for violent felonies and other
coercive crimes consistently totaled just under 40 percent of the
total number of new court commitments. But drug offenses
consistently comprised 45 percent of commitments. </p>

<p>If ought to be obvious, we are locking up people for their
addiction, at higher rates than for those who commit violence
against us. </p>

<p>Despite the obvious, there is a near insurmountable political
paralysis in relation to sentencing reform. Some of our elected
officials are so obsessed with the possibility of being labeled
soft on crime, that the sweep away all rational discussion of the
futility of our present approach. The end result is that we all
come up big losers -- the public at large, the taxpayer, and the
prison employees who labor all day in crowded prisons. </p>

<p>I am well aware of the fact that the public response to the
prevalence of crime is to treat all offenders with singularity of
purpose, regardless of crime. In effect, &quot;lock them up and
throw away the key.&quot; But that is the same public which voted
down the Prison Construction Bond Act in 1981. I believe that
common sense can prevail -- if we only take the time to
communicate to the general public . . . calmly and clearly . . .
what is really going on. </p>

<p>For example, if you explain to the public that the law
currently has the identical 8 to 25 year maximum sentencing
range, for a person who commits a forcible rape and for a person
who sells a dollar's worth of cocaine. . . I believe it would
tell you that our legal sense of priorities is totally out of
whack. Yet, that is exactly what the current law provides. </p>

<p>The identical treatment of these two offenses, which have such
a disproportionate impact upon their victims, borders on the
ridiculous. It is for this and other reasons that the Rockefeller
drug laws need to be reexamined and reevaluated in their
entirety. </p>

<p>In 1974, the year after the Rockefeller drug laws were
enacted, there was a total of 713 new prison commitments for drug
felonies. IN 1992, there were more than 11,000 drug felony
commitments. Cumulatively through 1992, nearly 75,000 individuals
have been committed under the Rockefeller drug laws. Yet, the
extremely punitive aspects of the Rockefeller drug laws do not
appear to have had any deterrent effect whatsoever on the drug
problem. </p>

<p>Because of widespread availability, the prices for both heroin
and cocaine have recently fallen, according to media reports.
Crack is reportedly sold for as low as 75 cents a hit. Heroin is
down to $5 a bag, with levels of purity higher than five years
ago. It appears there are so many dealers that they are cutting
prices to stay in business at all. So the Rockefeller drug laws
have lost any deterrent effect they might once have had. </p>

<p>But the impact of these laws upon the Department has been
staggering. A snapshot of the May 22, under-custody population
reveals the following statistics: </p>

<p>Out of a total under-custody population of nearly 64,000
inmates, 22,000 of them are doing time for drug offenses. </p>

<p>1,600 were convicted of a Class C, D, or E felony . . . which
means they could have been sentenced to local time or probation
instead of state prison. </p>

<p>2,000 of these inmates were convicted of Class B sale or
possession, while another 2,100 were convicted of an A-II drug
felony and 800 of an A-I drug felony. </p>

<p>But of 22,000 drug offenders, more that 15,000 are second
felony offenders -- which means there was no judicial discretion
to impose a sentence other than state prison. </p>

<p>I could bore you with numbers, but I won't. Suffice it to say
I have them. . . and am more than willing to share them with your
staffs at any time. But let me get to the heart of what these
numbers mean: </p>

<p>The totality of overall drug commitments has increased at an
astronomical rate and now significantly surpasses commitments for
violent felonies and other coercive crimes; </p>

<p>Convictions for the sale of drugs predominate, particularly
low-level predicate convictions, and </p>

<p>A sizable number of first felony offenders who could have
received alternative sentences instead received state prison
sentences. </p>

<p>That's where we are today. But the Rockefeller drug laws were
the product of another era. They were a straight-forward
representation of Legislative intent: Namely, that the severity
of the punishments involved would serve as a monumental deterrent
to drug trade participants and &quot;wannabe's&quot;. These
sanctions, it was thought, would keep the drug trade within
manageable proportions, by imposing nightmarish penalties upon
the drug lords who controlled the trade. </p>

<p>In their worst nightmares, the writers of that legislation
never envisioned cheap &quot;crack cocaine&quot;, and they never
conceived of a society where drug trafficking would occur in
private residences. . . with the family in the next room. They
could never have foreseen the level of violence that would occur
and the massive firepower that would be employed. In short, they
never imagined the drug trade as a cottage industry. . . where
tens of thousands of street addicts would finance their own
habits by becoming low-level drug dealers themselves. </p>

<p>Filling the state's prisons with those low-level drug
offenders has not diminished drug trafficking in the slightest
degree. In continuing to allow this scenario to play out, we are
squandering limited resources that could be more appropriately
utilized for violent felony offenders. At the same time,
resources for providing drug treatment services within the
community go under-funded . . . even while we know they could, in
some cases, be more effective than incarceration. </p>

<p>The Governor's Executive Budget for 1993-94 contained several
important proposals that would have amended either the
Rockefeller drug laws themselves, or their effect when combined
with the second felony offender law. For example, the current A-1
felony weights for possession and sale, which are set at four and
two ounces respectively, would have been increased to eight and
four ounces respectively. Since an A-1 felony conviction is
punishable by a minimum term ranging between 15 and 25 years,
such a change would have better aligned our drug laws with the
current nature of the drug trade. It would recognize the
difference between a dealer and an addict. </p>

<p>Another proposed change would have amended the second felony
offender law to grant discretion to the sentencing judge . . .
discretion to impose probation, local jail, an alternative
sentence. They could continue to impose the same incarceration,
or a shorter minimum term State prison sentence in the case of
Class C, D, and E nonviolent predicate felony offenders whose
predicate crime was also a nonviolent offense. </p>

<p>Regrettably, both houses of the Legislature agreed between
themselves to not even consider negotiating these changes. And
they have offered nothing in their place. Besides have rejected
the Governor's proposal, the Legislature is telling the public
that it has no coordinated approach to criminal justice. </p>

<p>It isn't enough to tell the public, &quot;We can prove we're
tough on crime because we won't enact alternatives.&quot; And it
is equally insufficient to say, &quot;We won't build any more
prisons.&quot; </p>

<p>Instead of repeating and echoing the courses that you won't
follow, the public is waiting to see in what direction you will
lead. The Governor has made proposals that deserve more than the
deafening silence of the Legislature. </p>

<p>This hearing today builds upon those Executive proposals, by
trying to focus public attention on the Rockefeller drug laws.
They may have been the right statutes for the 1970's, but we are
addressing the realities of the 1990's. </p>

<p>I believe those realities require as dramatic and intelligent
a change in our sentencing structures, as the Rockefeller drug
laws were in their era. For the public to have faith in the
criminal justice system, it must be seen as swift, as firm, and
as equitable. </p>

<p>When you have thousands of offenders waiting trail and
hundreds backed up in country jails, justice is not swift. </p>

<p>When the courts are so crowded with low-level cases that 95
percent of all cases are pleaded, justice is not firm. </p>

<p>And when the violent rapist gets the same sentence as the
seller of a buck's worth of drugs, justice is not equitable. </p>

<p>Reform of the Rockefeller drug laws is only one part of the
medicine needed to cure our criminal justice system. I look
forward to working with each of you to restoring the public's
slipping faith and skepticism about our criminal justice system. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>