
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-58</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B036-192</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/jcforewd.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064622 text/html 11878
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:46:14 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:20:50 GMT
Content-length: 11659
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Joyous Cosmology - Foreword</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
</head>

<body>

<hr>

<h2>Foreword</h2>

<hr>

<p> The Joyous Cosmology is a brilliant arrangement of words
describing experiences for which our language has no vocabulary.
To understand this wonderful but difficult book it is useful to
make the artificial distinction between the external and the
internal. This is, of course, exactly the distinction which Alan
Watts wants us to transcend. But Mr. Watts is playing the verbal
game in a Western language, and his reader can be excused for
following along with conventional dichotomous models. </p>

<p> External and internal. Behavior and consciousness. Changing
the external world has been the genius and the obsession of our
civilization. In the last two centuries the Western monotheistic
cultures have faced outward and moved objects about with
astonishing efficiency. In more recent years, however, our
culture has become aware of a disturbing imbalance. We have
become aware of the undiscovered universe within, of the
uncharted regions of consciousness. </p>

<p> This dialectic trend is not new. The cycle has occurred in
the lives of many cultures and individuals. External material
success is followed by disillusion and the basic &quot;why&quot;
questions, and then by the discovery of the world within---a
world infinitely more complex and rich than the artifactual
structures of the outer world, which after all are, in origin,
projections of human imagination. Eventually, the logical
conceptual mind turns on itself, recognizes the foolish
inadequacy of the flimsy systems it imposes on the world,
suspends its own rigid control, and overthrows the domination of
cognitive experience. </p>

<p> We speak here (and Alan Watts speaks in this book) about the
politics of the nervous system---certainly as complicated and
certainly as important as external politics. The politics of the
nervous system involves the mind against the brain, the
tyrannical verbal brain disassociating itself from the organism
and world of which it is a part, censoring, alerting, evaluating.
</p>

<p> Thus appears the fifth freedom---freedom from the learned,
cultural mind. The freedom to expand one's consciousness beyond
artifactual cultural knowledge. The freedom to move from constant
preoccupation with the verbal games---the social games, the game
of self---to the joyous unity of what exists beyond. </p>

<p> We are dealing here with an issue that is not new, an issue
that has been considered for centuries by mystics, by
philosophers of the religious experience, by those rare and truly
great scientists who have been able to move in and then out
beyond the limits of the science game. It was seen and described
clearly by the great American psychologist William James: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>. . . our normal waking consciousness, rational
    consciousness as we call it, is but one special type of
    consciousness, whilst all about it, parted from it by the
    filmiest of screens, there lie potential forms of
    consciousness entirely different.. We may go through life
    without suspecting their existence; but apply the requisite
    stimulus, and at a touch they are there in all their
    completeness, definite types of mentality which probably
    somewhere have their field of application and adaptation. No
    account of the universe in its totality can be final which
    leaves these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded.
    How to regard them is the question,-for they are so
    discontinuous with ordinary consciousness. Yet they may
    determine attitudes though they cannot furnish formulas, and
    open a region though they fail to give a map. At any rate,
    they forbid a premature closing of our accounts with reality.
    Looking back on my own experiences, they all converge toward
    a kind of insight to which I cannot help ascribing some
    metaphysical significance. </p>
</blockquote>

<p> But what are the stimuli necessary and sufficient to
overthrow the domination of the conceptual and to open up the
&quot;potential forms of consciousness&quot;? There are many.
Indian philosophers have described hundreds of methods. So have
the Japanese Buddhists. The monastics of our Western religions
provide more examples. Mexican healers and religious leaders from
South and North American Indian groups have for centuries
utilized sacred plants to trigger off the expansion of
consciousness. Recently our Western science has provided, in the
form of chemicals, the most direct techniques for opening new
realms of awareness. </p>

<p> William James used nitrous oxide and ether to &quot;stimulate
the mystical consciousness in an extraordinary degree.&quot;
Today the attention of psychologists, philosophers, and
theologians is centering on the effects of three synthetic
substances---mescaline, lysergic acid, and psilocybin. </p>

<p> What are these substances? Medicines or drugs or sacramental
foods? It is easier to say what they are not. They are not
narcotics, nor intoxicants, nor energizers, nor anaesthetics, nor
tranquilizers. They are, rather, biochemical keys which unlock
experiences shatteringly new to most Westerners. </p>

<p> For the last two years, staff members of the Center for
Research in Personality at Harvard University have engaged in
systematic experiments with these substances. Our first inquiry
into the biochemical expansion of consciousness has been a study
of the reactions of Americans in a supportive, comfortable
naturalistic setting. We have had the opportunity of
participating in over one thousand individual administrations.
From our observations, from interviews and reports, from analysis
of questionnaire data, and from pre- and postexperimental
differences in personality test results, certain conclusions have
emerged. (I) These substances do alter consciousness. There is no
dispute on this score. (2) It is meaningless to talk more
specifically about the &quot;effect of the drug.&quot; Set and
setting, expectation, and atmosphere account for all specificity
of reaction. There is no &quot;drug reaction&quot; but always
setting-plus-drug. (3) In talking about potentialities it is
useful to consider not just the setting-plus-drug but rather the
potentialities of the human cortex to create images and
experiences far beyond the narrow limitations of words and
concepts. Those of us on this research project spend a good share
of our working hours listening to people talk about the effect
and use of consciousness-altering drugs. If we substitute the
words human cortex for drug we can then agree with any statement
made about the potentialities---for good or evil, for helping or
hurting, for loving or fearing. Potentialities of the cortex, not
of the drug. The drug is just an instrument. </p>

<p> In analyzing and interpreting the results of our studies we
looked first to the conventional models of modern
psychology---psychoanalytic, behaviorist---and found these
concepts quite inadequate to map the richness and breadth of
expanded consciousness. To understand our findings we have
finally been forced back on a language and point of view quite
alien to us who are trained in the traditions of mechanistic
objective psychology. We have had to return again and again to
the nondualistic conceptions of Eastern philosophy, a theory of
mind made more explicit and familiar in our Western world by
Bergson, Aldous Huxley, and Alan Watts. In the first part of this
book Mr. Watts presents with beautiful clarity this theory of
consciousness, which we have seen confirmed in the accounts of
our research subjects--- philosophers, unlettered convicts,
housewives, intellectuals, alcoholics. The leap across entangling
thickets of the verbal, to identify with the totality of the
experienced, is a phenomenon reported over and over by these
persons. </p>

<p> Alan Watts spells out in eloquent detail his drug-induced
visionary moments. He is, of course, attempting the
impossible---to describe in words (which always lie) that which
is beyond words. But how well he can do it! </p>

<p> Alan Watts is one of the great reporters of our times. He has
an intuitive sensitivity for news, for the crucial issues and
events of the century. And he has along with this the verbal
equipment of a poetic philosopher to teach and inform. Here he
has given us perhaps the best statement on the subject of
space-age mysticism, more daring than the two classic works of
Aldous Huxley because Watts follows Mr. Huxley's lead and pushes
beyond. The recognition of the love aspects of the mystical
experience and the implications for new forms of social
communication are especially important. </p>

<p> You are holding in your hand a great human document. But
unless you are one of the few Westerners who have (accidentally
or through chemical good fortune) experienced a mystical minute
of expanded awareness, you will probably not understand what the
author is saying. Too bad, but still not a cause for surprise.
The history of ideas reminds us that new concepts and new visions
have always been non-understood. We cannot understand that for
which we have no words. But Alan Watts is playing the book game,
the word game, and the reader is his contracted partner. </p>

<p> But listen. Be prepared. There are scores of great lines in
this book. Dozens of great ideas. Too many. Too compressed. They
glide by too quickly. Watch for them. </p>

<p> If you catch even n few of these ideas, you will find
yourself asking the questions which we ask ourselves as we look
over our research data: Where do we go from here? What is the
application of these new wonder medicines? Can they do more than
provide memorable moments and memorable books? </p>

<p> The answer will come from two directions. We must provide
more and more people with these experiences and have them tell
us, as Alan Watts does here, what they experienced. (There will
hardly be a lack of volunteers for this ecstatic voyage.
Ninety-one percent of our subjects are eager to repeat and to
share the experience with their family and friends). We must also
encourage systematic objective research by scientists who have
taken the drug themselves and have come to know the difference
between inner and outer, between consciousness and behavior. Such
research should explore the application of these experiences to
the problems of modern living---in education, religion, creative
industry, creative arts. </p>

<p> There are many who believe that we stand at an important
turning point in man's power to control and expand his awareness.
Our research provides tentative grounds for such optimism. The
Joyous Cosmology is solid testimony for the same happy
expectations. </p>

<p> Timothy Leary, Ph.D.---Richard Alpert, Ph.D. </p>

<p> Harvard University, January, 1962 </p>

<hr>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/jcprefce.htm">Preface
of Joyous Cosmology</a> </p>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/jccontnt.htm">Joyous
Cosmology Table of Contents</a> </p>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm">LSD
and the Psychedelics Menu Page</a> </p>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>