
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B030-113</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065230 text/html 21961
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:52:18 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:32:17 GMT
Content-length: 21742
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Chapter 1</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>1.&nbsp; &nbsp; The pearl of great price</h2>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At a party in Chicago, a young man under the
influence of LSD seized a live kitten and ate it. Later, in an
effort to explain his action, he said he had felt an urgent need
to experience everything. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The story is revolting, of course, and possibly
apocryphal; but the incident is by no means improbable, and it
does make the point&#151;that LSD is powerful medicine, and that
the consequences of its use are often bizarre and terrifying.
While it now appears that health authorities have exaggerated the
threat of self-destruction or mental breakdown, the fact remains
that LSD is dangerous. The nature of the danger, however, may be
other than is commonly supposed, and it is possible the alarmists
are not nearly as alarmed as they should be. Almost anything may
happen when LSD produces the negative reaction that inner-space
voyagers refer to as a &quot;bad trip,&quot; and such a reaction
is by no means uncommon; but LSD also can result in a good trip,
which is more to the point, and the good trip may in the long run
have graver consequences than the bad. Indeed, there are
implications in the use of LSD which are far more disturbing
perhaps than an occasional suicide or psychosis. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Assume just for a moment that LSD's cultists are
actually doing what they suppose they are doing. If you can take
their own word for it, they have been tinkering with the gears of
the universe. They have rushed in where Sigmund Freud feared to
tread, invading a region of the human psyche from which the
father of psychoanalysis recoiled in horror. They have penetrated
a realm of Egyptian darkness&#151;courageously, perhaps, or
recklessly it may be&#151;and in doing so they have raised
fundamental questions about man and God. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Whatever the answers, the questions are valid. They
are not new questions but very old ones, and some have their
roots in a philosophical tradition which predates Western
civilization. LSD has merely given them a renewed emphasis. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Moreover, the LSD cults are not an isolated
phenomenon. There is some evidence that they represent only one
aspect of a psychic revolt whose manifestations can be detected
today in the areas of theology, psychology, and ethics. For
example, the cults appear to have a relationship to the radical
New Theology, and especially to the ultra-radical Death of God
theology. In essence, the LSD cultists are saying the same thing
that some of the Death of God prophets have said. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; From one point of view, LSD presents the orthodox
church with a challenge more awesome than the Turk and the
comet&#151; from which, good Lord, deliver us. It casts doubt on
the validity of religious experience as a whole, suggesting that
the mystical awareness of God is nothing more than
chemistry&#151;and therefore a delusion. From another point of
view, however, the drug raises just as many questions for the
atheist as it does for the church. It challenges the scientist as
well as the priest. And some of its more extravagant enthusiasts
believe it will lead the way to a rebirth of the spirit&#151;to a
new Age of Faith in which man's soul in the twentieth century
will win an ultimate victory over materialism and a skeptical
science. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Its members in fact have described the drug
movement as religious&#151;if not a religion&#151;and some groups
already have incorporated as churches. But if there is to be a
new age, there also will be a new faith, for the LSD cultists in
many cases are promulgating concepts which basically are alien to
popular Western theology. Perhaps the most striking aspect of the
New Theology has been its re-emphasis of the concept of <i>immanence</i>,
or the indwelling nature of God&#151;as opposed to <i>transcendence</i>,
or the &quot;otherness&quot; of God. While immanence as such is
by no means heretical, in the drug movement and in Death of God
theology immanence is carried all the way to its radical
conclusion, where it becomes pantheism. Pantheism of course is an
Eastern concept, and the West has regarded it as anathema,
describing it invariably as &quot;a vague pantheism&quot;&#151;as
opposed presumably to such crystal-clear doctrines as
transubstantiation and trinitarianism. But pantheism is not
vague. Whatever the merits of the idea, it is perfectly clear-cut
and straightforward in its assertion: <i>God is Man</i>. Or God
is the Universe. There is nothing very complicated about that,
and that is pantheism. It is, by and large, the Eastern view of
divinity. By and large, it represents the direction in which the
drug movement appears to be headed. And, in so many words, it
sums up the position of the theological school represented by Dr.
Thomas J. J. Altizer. When Altizer says God is Dead, he means
simply that God is Man. Altizer is a pantheist, and he admits he
is a pantheist. His pantheism is not quite the same as the
Eastern version, as we shall see further on; but it is
nonetheless pantheism and basically therefore an Oriental
concept. In this respect, along with LSD, it hints at a
development that could have considerable significance for Western
society. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; East is still East, and West is still West, but
there is evidence now that the twain have started to meet, and at
a point where one might least have expected it: the point of
religious metaphysics. It appears that there is presently
occurring, especially in America, a wholesale introduction of
Asian theories regarding the nature of man and the cosmos. This
development began long ago, in a small way, in the New England of
Emerson and Thoreau, but it seems to have accelerated
tremendously since the Second World War. Sages throughout history
have prophesied the day when the Wise Men of the Orient would
join hands&#151;or lock horns&#151;with the Wise Men of the
Occident, and signs abound that the day has arrived as a natural
consequence of the shrinking of the globe. In a sense, the
immanent God of the East has come knocking at the door of the
transcendent God of the West, and it is possible that we are
witnesses today to a kind of cosmic shoot-out at the O.K. Corral.
It would be premature to assess the full impact of the encounter
or its likely denouement, but there seems to be little doubt that
the encounter is taking place and that certain fundamentals of
Eastern thought are being integrated or assimilated into Western
culture. In its initial stages the development preceded both
radical theology and the drug movement; but it is obvious that
these are related to the development, just as they are related to
each other, and it would be worthwhile perhaps to judge them at
least partially within this wider context. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Within such a context, LSD and the Death of God
oppose orthodoxy in crucial areas of doctrine. Not only do they
dispute the idea of Theism, or a personal and transcendent deity,
but they also question such concepts as pluralism, resurrection,
personal immortality, grace, evil, and redemption or atonement
through the intercession of some supernatural agency. In short,
they leave man pretty much on his own, with nobody to turn to but
himself and with no place to seek salvation except inwardly, in
the recesses of his own inner Being. Putting these doctrinal
concerns to one side, the drug movement challenges the church in
its functional role as well. According to the LSD cultists, men
today are thirsting for the direct, personal experience of
God&#151; regardless of his actual nature. In other words, it
matters not whether God lies within or without; in either case,
men need and want a sense of direct communion with the ultimate
source of their faith. This divine-human encounter is not found
in church, where little or nothing is done to promote it. But it
is found in LSD, the cultists believe. Thus LSD challenges the
church to do as well and offer as much. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The debate spills over into the province of
psychology, where a related movement is under way to establish
standards of behavior and adaptation based on universal truths
rather than social norms. Mental health would be defined in terms
of man's actual nature or Being, and LSD might prove a helpful
tool in determining what that nature or Being really is. Such a
program of course would introduce psychology to the field of
values and ethics, which many have argued is a field that
psychology should have occupied long before now. And it might
open the way to the development of a humanistic morality founded
on man's true nature, replacing those legalistic moralities which
are founded on cultural mores or instinctive but arbitrary
notions of right and wrong. Coincidentally, this movement comes
at a time when psychoanalysts are doing their best to repress a
theory that schizophrenia is a physical disease, best treated by
massive doses of Vitamin B-3. The theory reduces Freud more or
less to the status of a witch doctor, and it raises the
possibility at least of a common origin for insanity, religious
mysticism, and LSD experience. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It may be that all of these movements are
interrelated in still another fashion, reflecting a revived
interest in the study of metaphysics&#151;and especially that
branch of metaphysics termed ontology, or the metaphysics of
Being: the study of life's essential nature. Academic philosophy
had largely abandoned metaphysics in favor of an arcane
linguistic analysis, and churchmen for the most part had turned
their attention to such mundane considerations as ecumenicism,
internal renewal, and civil rights. Now it appears that
metaphysics has come into its own again&#151;both inside the
church and out of it, but mostly out of it, and not so much yet
in the universities. And this is just a fancy way of saying that
people have started once more to ask ultimate questions. They are
asking who they are, and who God is, and what is the
relationship, if any, between them and him. Altizer is asking
these questions, and so is the hipster who seeks cosmic fireworks
in an LSD sugar cube. They are asking the questions that Gauguin
asked on his canvas: &quot;Where Do We Come From? What Are We?
Where Are We Going?&quot; It might be said that men have found
themselves confronted by two kinds of questions, problems and
mysteries. In recent years, men have dealt primarily with the
problems; but the mysteries are now and always will be the source
of the world's essential anxieties and aspirations, and it
appears that men are probing afresh into the mysteries, including
the <i>mysterium tremendum</i>. They are seeking again the pearl
of great price. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The asking of ultimate questions is significant in
itself. It implies an assumption that there are ultimate answers,
and that these answers moreover are accessible to men. In recent
times, it seems fair to say, this assumption has not been widely
held or widely expressed. Even proud science has gone mute on the
subject, having painted itself into that corner known as
Heisenberg's Principle of Uncertainty. As a result, it has been
said, the very best we can hope for apparently is that science
one day will be able to describe everything&#151;and explain
nothing. But the new search for answers is not predicated upon
scientific principles, nor indeed is it predicated upon orthodox
religious principles; it seems to reject both the Scribes and the
Pharisees, the scientists and the formal religionists. If it does
in fact constitute a religious revival, which is open to
argument, it is one which is bypassing the church's magisterium.
It is eclectic, and it rejects all outward authority. On the
other hand, it does accept the basic religious premise, as
William James defined it: &quot;the belief that there is an
unseen order, and that our supreme good lies in harmoniously
adjusting ourselves thereto.&quot; Fundamentally, today's pearl
seekers are following Plato's injunction. They are striving for
an explanation of Being, which all true lovers of knowledge must
have as their final object, Plato said. They are inquiring into
the nature of their own Being and into the nature of Being
itself. And they are conducting the inquiry by turning inward
upon themselves, like flowers closing their petals in the night
of doubt. Like poppies, one might add, or possibly morning
glories and lotuses. But that is another question. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; All in all, the challenge appears to be directed
toward the laboratory more than the pulpit. The implications of
the drug movement are basically anti-science rather than
anti-church, and they offer grounds for some far-reaching
speculation. We spoke earlier of a possible psychic revolt, and
we might ask whether this is not in fact suggested now by the
widespread interest in LSD and by related developments in radical
theology and psychology. Are these perhaps omens of a
counter-swing of the psychic pendulum? Over the centuries, as the
classical historian Edith Hamilton has observed, that pendulum
has swung back and forth: from the rational to the intuitive,
from the seen to the unseen, from the conscious to the
unconscious. Whenever one alternative has failed to answer man's
questions or to meet his needs, he has turned invariably to the
other option; it follows, therefore, that the apparent challenge
now is not merely to science but to rational thought as such. And
this is necessarily so. It can be argued that the erosion of
religious belief has not been caused so much by the specific
revelations of science; rather, it is a result of the empirical
method which science has utilized to obtain those
revelations&#151;of the introduction into the culture of a
show-me frame of reference which might be characterized as the
Missouri Syndrome. If empiricism has proved a disappointment, as
indeed it has, it is entirely possible that the instinctive and
unconscious forces of the mind may be rising again now in
opposition to the rational and the conscious; the spiritual
element may be reasserting itself in an era when scientific
rationalism had appeared to be solidly entrenched. An outburst of
mysticism perhaps has been simmering on the rear burner for some
time, in fact, and, if you care to, you might trace the
possibility back to the anti-rational philosophy of Henri
Bergson. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Now LSD has turned up the flame. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Of course, a revolt is not a revolution. The flame
could die&#151; from lack of oxygen&#151;and empiricism may be
just as impregnable as it thought it was. But the movements of
the time deserve serious attention even if they do not, for the
moment, seem to be leading anywhere or offering much substance.
What men search for, after all, is just as significant in a sense
as that which they find, providing some measure at least of their
nature and their needs. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But suppose the revolt did ripen into a revolution.
Would that necessarily be a bad thing? What, if any, are the
dangers involved? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The main danger, already apparent, is the
possibility that these various movements could lead to a sort of
neo-Gnostic rejection of the world&#151;a retreat from the
concrete, as it were, resulting in the kind of pipe-dream
lethargy which characterizes so much of India and the Middle
East, and which is symbolized in turn by the Hindu contemplative
and the Arab hashish-eater: the one held spellbound by an idea,
the other by a drug. And perhaps the gravest challenge is not
after all to science, or to rationalism, but to the world as
such. Not just the values of the world, not just social goals,
but the world itself, as earth and substance. The danger in this
case arises from Oriental concepts of the world as some kind of
illusion, trick, or snare for the senses. According to this point
of view, the world does not really exist. It's all done with
mirrors, and the purpose of life is to realize this fact, such
realization bringing with it an immediate release from the world
where man is held captive by his own ignorance. Upon such release
the enlightened one attains the eternal bliss of nirvana, beyond
appearances. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; What we have called a danger&#151;and the Hindu
calls a blessing&#151;is not a problem in so far as radical
theology is concerned. New Theology is utterly committed to the
world, having turned away from the heavens, and Death of God
theology actually rejoices in the world, embraces it, cherishes
it, and does all but make love to it. Contrary to their popular
image, the Death of God people are by and large a jolly and
optimistic lot. As the radical theologian William Hamilton
expressed it, in so many words: Prufrock, no; Ringo, yes. As far
as he is concerned, the Wasteland has been transformed into a
latter-day Canaan. Man is no longer alienated from the world,
according to Hamilton. Man is &quot;quite at home in this
world.&quot; And next to Altizer, Hamilton is a gloomy Gus. All
this happy talk stems directly from the fact that God is no
longer around to spoil the fun, so to speak. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The danger of world rejection exists within the
drug movement, where one hears cultists referring to the Net of
Illusion and the Quagmire of Phenomena. But even if you grant the
basic validity of the drug experience, it does not necessarily
follow that the world is a hoax. After all, there are Oriental
philosophies and Oriental philosophies. The Hindu and the Zen
Buddhist start from the same point of view; they share a common
experience, and they argue from the same evidence. But they
arrive at antipodal conclusions. The Hindu appears at least to
deny the world, while the Zen Buddhist affirms it. So it is
possible for the drug movement to go either way: toward a total
rejection of the world or a total commitment to the world. To
help clarify the alternatives, we shall explore the conclusions
of Zen and related concepts in some detail. To provide still
another option, we shall look into the evolutionary-theological
theories of Teilhard de Chardin, applying them to the questions
raised by LSD and Asian metaphysics. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In sum, it is the argument of this book that a
relationship exists between LSD cultism and radical theology;
that both offer a legitimate challenge to orthodox theology; that
both reflect an introduction into the West of Eastern religious
ideas; that LSD may provide the basis for a humanistic ethics;
that contemporary currents indicate a renewed interest in
metaphysics in general, ontology in particular; that there is
some evidence of a nascent revolt against science and
rationalism; that all of these developments carry with them both
dangers and promises. If the church is challenged, it has been
challenged before. If men have lost their God before, they have
always managed, somehow, to find him again. If legitimate
questions are raised, there also are legitimate answers to those
questions, and we shall suggest what some of them might be. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The drug movement has been characterized as a
weak-kneed retreat from reality. In reply, the cultists assert
that the truth is just the other way around: it is we who flee
reality and they who accept it. They alone have faced the
dreadful knowledge that comes when one encounters the Clear Light
of the Void. Only they have dared to turn and see what makes
those flickering shadows on the wall of the cave. Possibly the
only way to settle the question is to follow these explorers all
the way and enter with them into the secret inner world they say
they have discovered. And if you do that . . . well, they are not
cowards. They are very brave, perhaps, or very wise, or very dull
and foolish. Craven they are not. </p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | <a
    href="braden2.htm">Chapter 2</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>