
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B048-100</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/duapip/pip3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023106 text/html 234794
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:30:45 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:12:35 GMT
Content-length: 234575
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Social Impact of Drug Dependence and Drug-Induced
Behavior </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> <br>
</p>

<h1>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse </h1>

<h2>Drug Use In America: Problem in Perspective </h2>

<p> <b>Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972</b>
</p>

<h2>Chapter Three - The Social Impact of Drug Dependence and
Drug-Induced Behavior</h2>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> Western man pays frequent homage to the freedom of his will.
Although Western philosophy has always included strains of
predestination in one form or another, the belief that man
controls his fate runs deep, and even those who question this
from. the scientific standpoint are often quick to add that the
state should continue to act upon it. Whenever an individual
chooses to act irresponsibly, as defined by his society, he is
held accountable to other men, to his state, or according to
prevailing belief, to his Creator. </p>

<p> But man does not will everything that happens to him, and the
precepts of free will and accountability have been tempered in
relation to many conditions of existence, Foremost of these, of
course, is the notion of sickness. Although the individual may
place himself in a position which increases the risk of disease,
he does not usually will to be sick; -accordingly, he is
generally not held accountable either for his sickness or for its
behavioral concomitants. Poverty is another area which has
recently been separated from notions of free will and moral
worth. There are some who shun worldly possessions in order to
enhance their spirituality, but most men do not will to be poor.
Since the late 19th Century Western society has acted
increasingly on the proposition that environmental factors may
predispose poverty and socioeconomic immobility. The emergence of
the welfare state rests on the belief that man should not be held
accountable for, or suffer for that which he cannot prevent. </p>

<p> Disease and poverty are two broad qualifications of a
normative order premised on considerations of free will. In
addition, our normative system and our law are replete with other
exceptions which recognize that an individual may well be
overborne by others or by conditions for which he is not
responsible. Love, hypnosis, duress, &quot;acts of God,&quot;
irresistible impulses, uncontrollable rages all may excuse the
individual for conduct which might otherwise be considered
foolish, unwise, intemperate or even criminal. Of course, there
are also conditions which may predispose behavior although we do
not excuse them, such as foolishness, immoderation and vanity. </p>

<p> Drugs introduce a new dimension into this uneasy marriage of
free will and human and social imperfection. The very phrase
&quot;being under the influence&quot; of a drug manifests the
fundamental proposition that drugs can alter or control human
behavior. </p>

<p> The drug may induce a socially desirable form of control in
the sense that the influence of a drug may restore control which
has otherwise been lost. For example, sedative drugs may be
administered to a person whose anguish over the death of a loved
one is out of control, not to obliterate grief but to modify the
person's responses. Drugs may also be used to minimize the
effects of &quot;unwilled&quot; behaviors stemming from mental
illness or aberration. Some examples of the socially sanctioned
uses of drugs for behavior control in the context of therapy are:
the administration of drugs to mental patients to dampen the
intensity of acute behavioral disruption and to enhance their
capacity for organized responses, the drug-based efforts to
increase concentration and reduce aimlessness of hyperkenetic
children, and the maintenance of heroin-dependent persons on
methadone to stabilize their otherwise anti-social behavior.
Drugs have also been used for punishment; that is to alter the
behavior of persons in detention, although this development, has
met with substantial resistance. </p>

<p> The common thread of these examples is that drugs may be
employed to restore the capacity for responsible, willed
behavior. However, public attitude and social policy toward drug
use are focused primarily on the fact that drugs may also
diminish the capacity of a person to control his conduct in the
manner society expects of him. This perception has dominated
political rhetoric, literary description, legal doctrine and
public understanding about drugs for centuries. With some
exceptions, the American normative system stipulates that such
loss of control is socially undesirable and in itself constitutes
irresponsible behavior. On the other hand, American law has long
been ambivalent about whether a person should be held entirely or
partially accountable for such behavior or its consequences,
reflecting the basic tension between freedom of will and human
limitations. </p>

<p> Whatever the precise relationship between drug use and self
-control, the very possibility of drug-influenced behavior is
what distinguishes drug use from other forms of behavior,
motivating all societies to regulate it. In American society,
however, the extent to which drug use, by itself, can deprive the
individual of control over his behavior has been highly
exaggerated. </p>

<p> Drugs are fixed in the collective consciousness as substances
which can rob man of his sentiency, morals and values. Each drug,
whether it be LSD, heroin or marihuana, is widely believed to
have the capacity to destroy the will. For decades, the public
has held the view that the initial use of psychoactive
substances, often tied to the exotic Eastern world, is the
opening of Pandora's box: one taste of the forbidden fruit and
control will shortly be lost. The assumed paths from marihuana to
heroin, from. LSD to insanity, from heroin to crime, and, in
bygone days, from tobacco to alcohol, and from alcohol to skid
row, reflect concern not only about social cost but also about
the inevitable erosion of will. </p>

<p> This presumed relationship between drugs and will is also
reflected in the tendencies to ascribe a causal relationship to
drugs and almost every type of unwanted behavior, and to
attribute to drugs the undes1rable behavior of disapproved social
groups. Whenever specific drugs are temporally related to sexual
excess, crime, traffic accidents or use of other drugs, the
person and his will tend to be forgotten, and the drug itself
becomes the villain. </p>

<p> Perhaps the unique expression of drug-induced loss of
self-control is the inability of the individual to stop using the
drug. The dread of becoming ensnared in the &quot;clutches of
addiction&quot; has long dominated public antipathy toward the
evils of drug use, reflecting a deep-seated belief that mental,
physical and moral debilitation is the likely consequence of
habitual drug use. Whatever its ancillary impact or subsequent
history, the Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914 embodied above all
else a firm public policy judgment opposing the use of
&quot;addicting&quot; or &quot;habit-forming drugs.&quot;
Further, the progression thesis, which has been propounded since
drug policy began, although the drugs have changed, and the more
recent distinction between bard and soft drugs, suggests how
strongly concern about dependence dominates the entire drug
issue. </p>

<p> The notion of addiction is of relatively recent origin,
emerging as a recognizable medical entity during the 18th
Century. Before that time, the focus of social control in this
country as in other societies, was on the disordering
consequences of the drug experience. Aggressive behavior, loss of
psychomotor control or other disordered behavior induced by the
drug experience must also be taken into account in the
formulation of drug policy. </p>

<hr>

<p> TABLE 111-1. (Cont.) </p>

<p> <img src="pip30001.gif"> </p>

<p> <img src="pip30002.gif"> </p>

<p> FOOTNOTES to TABLE 111-1. </p>

<p> I In choosing substances to be included in this table, the
Commission did not attempt to be comprehensive. Selections were
made in order to illustrate the full range of dependence
liability and capacity for influencing or inducing behavioral
change. </p>

<p> 2 Capacity of drug to induce continued use on the basis of
psychological reward. Relative judgments are based on use of
maximum tolerated dose, as measured by laboratory studies and
confirmed by refined clinical experience. </p>

<p> 3 The actual prevalence of chronic use among the using
population. The relative prevalence of chronic use of specific
substances is determined by a wide range of sociocultural
variables, including such factors as social custom, availability
of the substance, susceptibility of particular populations to
patterns of chronic use and availability of more potent
substances. </p>

<p> 4 Potential for disruption or impairment of social
functioning after a single dose. Relative judgments are based on
consumption of doses sufficient to produce marked pharmacological
effects. </p>

<p> 5 Drug-induced behavioral response, as measured by potential
impairment of social functioning, accompanying chronic
administration of dependence-producing doses. </p>

<p> 6 Short-term behavioral responses, measured by disruption or
impairment of social functioning, accompanying interruption of
drug taking after chronic administration of dependence producing
doses. </p>

<p> 7 The relative judgments regarding methadone are based on
parenteral administration and oral administration in naive
subjects. The Commission expressly notes that oral administration
to opiate-dependent persons in a maintenance setting has a
significantly different impact on behavior. </p>

<p> 8 Includes related drugs such as psilocybin, DMT. </p>

<p> 9 Inapplicable. Because of extremely low reinforcement
potential, chronic use patterns do not generally occur, and no
abstinence syndrome has been described. </p>

<p> 10 Includes drugs which are structurally related and roughly
similar in effect to mescaline, such as DOM (&quot;STP&quot;). </p>

<hr>

<p> While drugs have a capacity to affect behavior, they do not
do so uniformly. Table 111-1 provides an overview of the relative
capacity of selected drugs to induce dependence and influence
behavior. However, drugs do not affect behavior independently.
Non-drug factors play an equally crucial role in determining the
behavorial concomitants of drug use. The personal characteristics
of the user, his expectations about the drug experience and about
society's attitudes and possible responses, the setting in which
the drug is used, as well as broader sociocultural factors, are
all major determinants of drug effect and of the individual's
capacity to control the effects of the drug through the exercise
of his will. </p>

<p> We will now examine the social consequences of drug-using
behavior. First, we will establish a framework by analyzing drug
dependence and drug-induced behavior from a psychopharmacological
standpoint, providing detailed explanations for the concepts
presented in Table 111-1. Then we will consider the actual and
potential impact on the public safety and the public health and
welfare of the patterns of drug-using behavior discussed in the
previous Chapter. Finally, we will sketch the implications of
this analysis for social policy. These guidelines will serve as a
backdrop for the application of the policy-making process in
Chapter Four. </p>

<hr>

<h2>I -- DRUG DEPENDENCE</h2>

<p> Since the psychoactive properties of naturally-occurring
substances were first discovered and sought, the excessive,
chronic or compulsive use of these substances has been an
identifiable and predictable human condition. Until the 19th
Century, however, this phenomenon was viewed primarily in moral,
rather than medical or scientific terms. One 18th Century
observer likened the use of opium in Eastern countries to the use
of &quot;wine and spiritous liquors in civilized Europe (where it
is) the support of the coward, the solace of the wretched and the
daily source of intoxication of the debauchee&quot; (Crumpe
1793). </p>

<p> This is not to say that the physical consequences of chronic
drug use went unnoticed. As early as 1701, a London physician, in
The Mysteries of Opium Revealed, addressed &quot;The Effects of
Sudden Leaving Off the Use of Opium After a Long and Lavish Use
Thereof,&quot; where he described a withdrawal syndrome (Jones
1701). However, neither Dr. Jones nor his contemporaries regarded
this condition as fundamentally different from that associated
with excessive wine drinking or the excessive eating or chewing
of other substances such as tobacco. The, physical concomitants
of the &quot;opium habit&quot;, like those for tobacco and wine,
were associated by some with a defect of individual will and by
others with some unknown property of the drugs. </p>

<p> Isolation of morphine from opium and the subsequent
development of the hypodermic syringe clarified the distinction
between the opium habit and the alcohol and tobacco habits. Two
previously held theories were now discarded: first, that the
opium habit was dependent on oral ingestion of the drug, and
second, that the withdrawal effects arose. from resinous
substances in the opium. Vivid literary descriptions, the,
introduction of opium-smoking by Chinese immigrants, and the
widespread use of opium and morphine during and after the Civil
War soon stimulated the attention of medical professionals. The
&quot;army disease&quot; or morphinisin was now recognized as a
distinctive medical and social problem. </p>

<p> During the last three decades of the 19th Century, medical
professionals strove to understand, describe and treat this
sickness. Meanwhile, the public was becoming acquainted with the
habit-forming properties of the opiates, as the population of
opiate-dependent persons increased. State laws at once, began to
reflect them popular fear of drug habits, as did the labelling
requirement of the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906.
Simultaneously, the social aspects of chronic opiate use aroused
the popular imagination. The stereotype of the &quot;dope
fiend&quot; emerged, and with it a highly restrictive public
policy, one rooted in considerations apart from the pharmacologic
effects of the prohibited drugs. </p>

<p> <b><font size="4">TEMINOLOGICAL CONFUSION</font></b> </p>

<p> In the United States, the public, the medical professions and
policy makers all discovered the individual mid social
consequences of chronic opium use at roughly the same time. A
connection between popular vocabulary and scientific terminology
was established as the scientific community tended to appropriate
lay terms, laden with emotional and imprecise meanings, and to
imbue them with scientific meanings. The first of these
descriptive terms to emerge was &quot;addictions&quot; </p>

<p> <b><font size="4">Addiction</font></b> </p>

<p> The word addiction evolved from the Latin addicere which, in
Roman law, meant the giving or binding over of a person to one
thing or another, such as a judge assigning a debtor to his
creditor. By the late 16th Century, &quot;to addict&quot; had
apparently assumed a broader meaning: to devote, give up or apply
habitually to a practice. One writer suggests that the word was
generally identified with bad habits or vices (Sonnedecker 1959).
With the emergence of public and scientific interest in the opium
problem, &quot;addiction&quot;' and &quot;mania&quot; were
commonly used in the press to describe this ascendent vice. </p>

<p> Within the American scientific community, the terms most
commonly employed during the 19th and early 20th Centuries to
describe the condition were &quot;opium (or morphine) habit&quot;
and &quot;morphinism.&quot;' In 1903, for example, the, American
Pharmaceutical Association established a &quot;Committee of the
Acquirement of Drug Habits.&quot; By 1920, however, the
scientific community had given the term addiction its blessing, a
development paralleling the popularization of the word
&quot;narcotics&quot; and the entry of government into the field.
&quot;Narcotic addiction&quot; became a household phrase. </p>

<p> As we suggested in Chapter One, &quot;narcotic&quot; soon
lost its pharmacologic meaning and came to encompass any drug
associated with the populations using the opiates or cocaine;
similarly &quot;addiction&quot; came to be tied in the public
mind to the habitual use of any drug. In the press and councils
of government, marihuana users and cocaine users were frequently
characterized as addicts. Interestingly, the dangers of alcohol
&quot;addiction&quot; were widely proclaimed during the intense
Public discussion surrounding the adoption of the 18th Amendment
although this terminology was strongly resisted by opponents of
Prohibition. </p>

<p> Many scientists remained uncomfortable with the imprecise use
of the term addiction, and particularly with its strong moral
over-tones. Yet, because the condition was so little understood,
there was little agreement on a substitute. Throughout the 1920's
there remained &quot;considerable confusion ... as to the
significance of various terms employed in consideration of drug
addiction in the broad sense of the word&quot; (Seevers 1962).
Terry and Pellens, in the introduction to their classic 1928 work
addressed this problem: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>One further matter requires consideration, namely, the
    terminology employed. As elsewhere, here also controversial
    subjects are involved, for different writers have used terms
    and definitions which in themselves have indicated particular
    attitudes toward the nature of the, problem. Thus habit,
    craving, appetite, mania, addiction, addiction disease, all
    may be interpreted significantly if desired by those using or
    reading them. We have tried to select some name for the
    condition of chronic opium-using that would not carry a
    partisan, restricted or incomplete implication as far as the
    nature of the condition is concerned. The phrase Chronic
    opium intoxication seems to fulfill this purpose better than
    any other but it has the disadvantage of length and is at
    times an awkward expression. We decided, therefore, not to
    restrict ourselves to any one term, but to employ whichever
    of those in common use today seemed best suited to the
    individual need (Terry and Pellens, 1928). </p>
</blockquote>

<p> Most scientific observers recognize that habitual users of
many drugs did not experience the same degree of physical
discomfort upon abstinence as did chronic opiate, users.
Consequently, the main goal was to establish a conceptual
framework and a vocabulary which would distinguish the habitual
use of other drugs from the, chronic rise of opiates. By the late
1920's, a general consensus had emerged that habit-forming drugs
could be separated into those which produced
&quot;habituation,&quot; and those which produced
&quot;addiction.&quot; </p>

<p> <b><font size="4">Habituation</font></b> </p>

<p> In broad terms, habituation usually characterized recurrent
use of those drugs which were not associated with the development
of tolerance and an abstinence syndrome; for this reason, the
condition was closely linked with weakness of individual will
rather than specific drug effects. Addiction, by contrast, was
associated with physical dependence and -with serious individual
and social consequences. This dichotomy, because of its public
policy implications, was not completely satisfactory from either
the scientific or legislative viewpoints. For example, the
tendency to classify cannabis as an habituating substance was
generally resisted by those who sought to prohibit its use,
mainly because public policy was so closely identified with the
prohibition of drugs of addiction. Well into the past decade,
there was still a strong tendency to classify marihuana as an
addictive drug. </p>

<p> Many pharmacologists were uncomfortable with the
addiction-habituation dichotomy because many drugs would not fit
easily in these categories. They recognized that cocaine, for
example, did not produce the classic withdrawal symptoms or
tolerance which were so closely intertwined with the notion of
addiction; yet, it was clear to them that &quot;cocainism&quot;
carried significant consequences for both the individual and
society. In addition, the succeeding years witnessed the
development for medical application of whole new families of
psychoactive drugs. Often these new drugs could not easily be
pigeon-holed within the simple dichotomy. Many pharmacologists
were concerned that classifying such new drugs as
&quot;addicting&quot; would stigmatize them by associating them
with the opiates and with the perception of serious social
hazards. From this concern emerged a policy-based distinction
between the labelling and warning concepts tied to the Pure Food
and Drug Act and its successor statutes, and the addiction
concept associated with the Harrison Act. </p>

<p> <b><font size="4">The Search for Precision</font></b> </p>

<p> For more than three decades, experts attempted to preserve
the habituation/addition dichotomy, continually redefining and
enlarging its scope in the hope that it would serve the needs not
only of science and medicine but also of law and sociology. </p>

<p> In 1931, two experts, attempting to introduce some coherence
into the subject, defined habitation as &quot;a condition in
which the habitue desires a drug but suffers no in effects on its
discontinuance.&quot; Addiction was defined as &quot;a condition
developed through the effects of repeated actions of a drug such
that its use becomes necessary and cessation of its action causes
mental or physical disturbances.&quot; Addiction was further
subdivided into &quot;true addiction&quot; which involved the
&quot;physical disturbances&quot; associated with the withdrawal
syndrome, and &quot;psychic addiction, which was associated with
the &quot;feeling of exhilaration and euphoria [constituting] an
almost irresistible goad to its continued use&quot; (Tatum and
Seevers 1931). </p>

<p> Six years later another expert redefined the basic terms as
follows: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>By habituation is meant the physical phenomenon of
    adaptation and mental conditioning to the repetition of an
    effect. Habituation to opiates is probably more intense than
    habituation to other substances. In a, sense habituation
    represents Psychical dependence. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Addiction to opiates embraces three intimately related but
    distinct phenomena, namely tolerance, habituation, and
    dependence. These phenomena which make up the psychosomatic
    complex known as addiction are intricately interwoven and
    interdependent (Hirnmelsbach,1937). </p>
</blockquote>

<p> Over the years, successive definitions and redefinitions
became more and more elaborate. In 1957, the Expert Committee on
AddictionProducing Drugs of the World Health Organization (World
Health Organization, 1957) attempted to specify the ways in which
addiction differed from habituation: </p>

<p> <b>Drug addiction</b> </p>

<p> Drug addition is a state of periodic or chronic intoxication
produced by the repeated consumption of a drug (natural or
synthetic). Its characteristics include: </p>

<ol>
    <li>an overpowering desire or need (compulsion) to continue
        taking the drug and to obtain it by any means; </li>
    <li>a tendency to increase the dose; </li>
    <li>a psychic (psychological) and generally a physical
        dependence on the effects of the drug; </li>
    <li>detrimental effect on the individual and on society. </li>
</ol>

<p> </p>

<p> <b>Drug habituation</b> </p>

<p> Drug habituation (habit) is a condition resulting from the
repeated consumption of a drug. Its characteristics include: </p>

<ol>
    <li>a desire (but not a compulsion) to continue takin- the
        drug for the sense of improved well-being which it
        engenders; </li>
    <li>little or no tendency to increase the dose; </li>
    <li>some degree of psychic dependence on the effect of the
        drug, but absence of physical dependence and hence of an
        abstinence syndrome; </li>
    <li>detrimental effects, if any, primarily on the individual.
    </li>
</ol>

<p> Despite the loophole provided in subsection (3) to permit the
classification of cocaine as a drug of addiction, the WHO
definitions continued to tie that term primarily to physical
dependence, thereby perpetuating the impression that the social
detriments of chronic drug use arise primarily from physical
dependence or addiction. </p>

<p> Despite a concerted effort within the expert community during
the 1950's to rationalize the in-suited terms addiction and
habituation, the confusion remained. As the World Health
Organization noted in 1965: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Both terms are frequently used interchangeably and often
    inappropriately. It is not uncommon to apply the term
    addiction to any misuse of drugs outside of medical practice,
    with a connotation of serious harm to the individual and to
    society, and often with a demand that something be done about
    it. Such broad use can only create confusion and
    misunderstanding when abuse of drugs is discussed from
    different viewpoints. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>The difficulties in terminology become increasingly
    apparent with the continuous appearance of new agents with
    various and perhaps unique pharmacological profiles, and with
    changing patterns of use of drugs already well known. These
    developments must be considered in their relation to, but may
    not be adequately characterized by, current definitions of
    addiction. There is scarcely any agent which can be taken
    into the body to which some individuals will not get a
    reaction satisfactory or pleasurable to them, persuading,
    them to continue its use even to the point of abuse-that is,
    to excessive or persistent use beyond medical need. Probably
    the only exceptions are agents that have incidental or side
    effects that prevent such use-for example, cumulative or
    early toxic effects, to which the individual does not become
    tolerant (Eddy, et al., 1965). </p>
</blockquote>

<p> Two basic problems inhere in the concepts of addiction and
habituation. First, the nature of chronic drug-taking behavior,
involving a range of individual-drug interactions, is entirely
too complex to be compartmentalized into two mutually exclusive
categories. Determining the point where the lesser (habituation)
becomes the greater (addiction) is bound to be arbitrary, since,
as is true in all biological responses, there is a wide range of
variation in the same individual and between individuals. </p>

<p> Second, the terms, from their inception, were designed not
only to describe a form of drug-using behavior but also to
comprehend the relationship between that behavior and the
society. The need to accommodate definitions to social
consequence is reflected precisely in subsection (4) of the 1957
WHO definitions quoted above. That the chronicity of drug-taking
behavior and social harm were not directly correlated became
particularly obvious in the early 1960's when an anti-smoking
crusade was launched. In this connection, the word addiction was
commonly used to describe the tobacco habit despite the absence
of significant drug-induced behavior arising from its use. </p>

<p> <b>Drug Dependence</b> </p>

<p> In the early 1960's, the search for more suitable concepts
and terminology was intensified. In rapid-fire succession, most
experts in the field and most professional organizations
discarded the terms addiction and habituation and substituted
instead the concepts of physical and psychological (or psychic)
dependence. After endorsement by two WHO expert groups and the
relevant committee of the National Academy of Sciences-National
Research Counsel, the WHO officially adopted this position in
1965, defining drug dependence as follows: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Drug dependence is a state of psychic or physical
    dependence, or both, on a drug, arising in a person following
    administration of that drug on a periodic or continuous
    basis. The characteristics of such a state will vary with the
    agent involved, and these characteristics must always be made
    clear by designating the particular type of drug dependence
    in each specific case; for example, drug dependence of
    morphine type, of barbiturate type, of amphetamine type, etc.
    (Eddy, et al., 1965). </p>
</blockquote>

<p> In order to save the new notion of dependence from the fate
of its predecessors, WHO added the following important caveat: </p>

<p> The specification of the type of dependence is essential and
should form an integral part of the new terminology, since it is
neither possible nor even desirable to delineate or define the
term drug dependence independently of the agent involved. It
should also be remembered that it was the desire to achieve the
impossible and define a complex situation by a single term
(&quot;addiction&quot; or &quot;habituation,&quot; respectively)
which has given rise to confusion in many cases. Therefore, the
description of drug dependence as a state is a concept for
clarification and not, in any sense, a specific definition. </p>

<p> However, the requirements of law and interdisciplinary
communication have doomed this attempt to keep dependence as a
wide umbrella sheltering a series of more technical dependence
types. All attempts to provide a more comprehensive definition
have been faced with the fundamental truth that dependence is a
matter of degree. </p>

<p> For example, federal legislation and that of many states now
define a drug-dependent person as: </p>

<p> A person who is using a controlled substance and who is in a
state of psychic or physical dependence, or both, arising from
the use of that substance on a continuous basis. Drug dependence
is characterized by behavioral and other responses which include
a strong compulsion to take the substance on a continuing basis
in order to experience its psychic effects or to avoid the
discomfort caused by its absence. </p>

<p> *Many drugs with dependence liability, notably alcohol, are
not legally classified as &quot;controlled substances.&quot; </p>

<p> The problem of degree is submerged in this definition within
the terms &quot;continuous&quot; and &quot;strong
compulsion.&quot; From a legal standpoint, the umbrella
definition and vague terms which cannot be applied to individual
cases are inadequate, particularly when a finding that a person
is drug dependent may result in coercive legal intervention. </p>

<p> The Commission applauds the much-belated attempt by the
scientific community to sever its conceptual apparatus from the
vocabulary of politics and emotion. &quot;Addiction,&quot; like
&quot;narcotics&quot; and &quot;drug abuse,&quot; has a general
connotation of evil, suggesting illicit ecstasy, guilt and sin.
Because the public image is conditioned more by cultural
perceptions than by medical ones, medically-precise meanings
simply cannot be harmonized with common parlance. </p>

<p> We believe that the concept of drug dependence offers a
useful, objective way of describing a highly complex range of
drug-using behavior. At the same time, the Commission recognizes
that the contrasting requirements of law and science may doom
&quot;dependence&quot; to the fate of its predecessors. The only
way to avoid this result is for the scientific community to
engage in a concerted attempt to formulate a narrower umbrella
definition which will meet the specificity requirements of law.
For example, the broad concept of drug dependence must, for legal
purposes, be oriented toward the degree and types of dependence
which impair the social functioning of the drug-dependent person
and pose predictable adverse consequences for the society. </p>

<p> In addition to this qualification regarding the requirements
of law, the Commission also emphasizes the responsibility of the
expert community to communicate an understanding of drug
dependence to the public, and to modify the exaggerated
perceptions which have so long been tied to the concept of
addiction. </p>

<p> <b>Excising &quot;Addiction&quot;</b> </p>

<p> The imprint of history on public attitudes is deep. Addiction
still provides the lightning rod for public concern about drugs,
and is generally identified with &quot;physically addicting&quot;
drugs, the prototype being heroin. The &quot;narcotics,&quot;
morphine and cocaine, were the models for comparative social
danger 50 years ago, and heroin is the model today.
&quot;Narcotic&quot; use was identified with depravity,
immorality, uncontrolled drug use (addiction) and crime 50 years
ago, and the same is true today. </p>

<p> Because addiction has been painted as the paramount social
and individual danger in drug use, these images and fears extend
to some extent to the use of all drugs. Scientific emphasis on
the physical attributes of addiction has confirmed and supported
the lay fears. </p>

<p> As a general guide for public policy and personal conduct,
the fear of addiction is a constant. When asked in the context of
the National Survey which drugs are addictive in the sense that
&quot;anybody who uses it regularly becomes physically [and/or]
psychologically dependent on it and can't get along without
it,&quot; the public responded affirmatively in the following
proportions: </p>

<p> <img src="pip30003.gif"> </p>

<p> When asked, in an open-ended question, to elaborate on the
dangers of proprietary and prescription drugs, the most common
response was that they are habit forming. Roughly 50% of the
public characterized this as the chief reason for not using
prescription drugs. For proprietary drugs, 35% mentioned this
concerns a proportion exceeded only by the 40% which feared
overdoses. Finally, slightly more than half of those with
opinions on the subject have worried that if they took pills they
might become dependent on them (48% have worried and 44% have not
worried). </p>

<p> These responses bear comparison with the intensity of the
fear of addiction. That is, all these drugs are perceived by a
large majority of people to be addicting; but specific
perceptions about the nature of this phenomenon vary according to
drug, often inaccurately. When asked whether they agreed or
disagreed with the statements that &quot;you can use (heroin or
marihuana) occasionally without ever becoming addicted to
it,&quot; only a small proportion of the public agreed. </p>

<p> <img src="pip30004.gif"> </p>

<p> Alcohol and barbiturates are not viewed as addicting to the
same extent as heroin, and the alcoholic is not viewed with the
same fear as the &quot;narcotics addict.&quot; For example, the
Commission-sponsored National Survey in 1971 found that 66% of
the adult public believe that &quot;most people who use alcohol
lead a normal life;&quot; only 23% thought the same was true of
most marihuana users (Abelson et al., 1972). </p>

<p> These differences in perception stem from social factors
rather than from failure to ascribe addiction potential to all
drugs. Paraphernalia is an important indicator of true addiction
in the public imagination; the needle, the spoon and
irregularly-shaped cigarettes stand as symbols of drug addiction.
Further, the perception of addictiveness and its severity has
been tied to class and ethnic considerations since the creation
of modern drug policy. The net result is that although most drugs
are thought to be addictive, some are thought to be more
controllable and less of a problem than others. These
discriminations are at odds with pharmacological truth. To
redress this situation, we now turn to an overview of the nature
of drug dependence and its social impact. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b><font size="4">TOWARD A FUNCTIONAL UNDERSTANDING OF DRUG
DEPENDENCE</font></b> </p>

<p> Research has established that repetitive drug use results
from the interaction between a drug, the user and the surrounding
environment. Understanding this behavior requires a conjunction
of psychological, pharmacological and sociological theory. The
concept of drug dependence offers a useful framework for such an
analysis. This is not to say that it is without ambiguity, but
rather that it is functional, and comports with social,
psychological and pharmacological notions, rather than
overemphasizing one aspect of this intricate drug-person
situation relationship. </p>

<p> <b> Psychological Dependence: The Primary Reinforcer</b> </p>

<p> To explore the concept of dependence, we must approach
repetitive, drug use from a broad psychological standpoint. Ul
behavior which is repeated more or less systematically, whether
it be dressing in a certain order, watching special television
programs, playing poker on Thursday, going to work in the,
morning or coining !ionic from work in the evening, has been
reinforced. In a sense, a person can be said to be dependent on
any of the innumerable liabits of life. The iniportant question,
however, is how strongly the bebavior is reinforced and by what
factors. Or, put the other way, what is the degree of dependence?
</p>

<p> Degree of dependence can only be measured by looking beyond
the behavior itself to its role in the individual's existence and
to the nature of the adjustments which would be made if he could
not beliave in the way he has come to depend upon. For example,
the compulsive gambler is preoccupied with this particular
behavior, often to the, exclusion of his social obligations.
Other persons may be, preoccupied with sexual behavior, sometimes
to the point of dominating the person's existence and interfering
with the lives of others. For many Americans, TV viewing on
Sunday afternoon during football season has become a highly
significant part of weekend life. This all suggests that
recurrent behaviors will fall on a continuum from lesser to
greater dependence in terms of their importance. to the
individual. </p>

<p> The same is true for repetitive drug use, with one important
addition. While other habits are only indirectly reinforced
through the central nervous system, psychoactive drug use is
directly reinforced by its effect on the brain.2 This factor also
distinguishes the, notion of vitamin-deficient, diabetic and
cardiac-insufficient patients. Psychoactive drugs also modify the
capacity of the nervous system to react to, and to interpret the
nature of the stimulus. </p>

<p> 2 With pharmacologically inert substances dependence is based
solely on the so-called placebo effect. It is strictly
psychogenic and a reasonable measure of the, existing
psychological state of the user or of the user's relationship
with the giver. Many other substances which have no direct effect
on the central nervous .system may, because of a strong
peripheral action, reinforce psychologically and create
dependence by drug-induced sensory input or by abolishing
unpleasant sensations which arise from the the periphery. (For
example, relief of burning sensation by counterirritants, intense
catharsis, relief of heartburn by antacids and the like.) </p>

<p> Consideration of dependence on non-psychoactive drugs or
placebos is introduced here only to show why it should not be
confused, as it has been, with the principal issues as they
relate to dependence on psychoactive drugs. </p>

<p> Underlying the notion of psychological dependence is the same
concept of positive reinforcement which describes behavioral
responses to many types of rewards such as food, drink, sex, and
acclaim. In this instance, however, the specific reinforcer is a
drug whose effects are sufficiently attractive and rewarding
psychologically at the first trial to motivate the user to repeat
the experience. </p>

<p> <b>The Pharmacological Component: Reinforcement Potential</b>
</p>

<p> An individual who has had no experience with psychoactive
substances will never become drug dependent. Having once
experienced psychoactive effects, many persons will become
dependent to some degree. Some drugs are so weak that little harm
results. But many are such powerful reinforcers that if every
individual in a given society were exposed to all such
psychoactive drugs by intravenous administration and then
permitted free access to them, a major social problem would
ensue. </p>

<p> Lesser animals, such as monkeys or even rats, having once
experienced a drug such as cocaine and after being given
unlimited access, will self-administer the drug until they die.
It should be clearly understood by those who decry the depravity
of the compulsive drug user that susceptibility is only relative,
and under certain conditions, almost any individual can be made
to be drug dependent in the most extreme sense of the term.
However, specific drugs are qualitatively different in this
respect, and it is therefore important to consider the
reinforcement potential of different substances. </p>

<p> Some drugs offer, from a psychopharmacologic standpoint, high
rewards and consequently great reinforcement for their continued
use. With drugs such as alcohol, heroin, amphetamines,
barbiturates and cocaine, there is a significant likelihood that
recurrent administration of large doses will result in a high
degree of involvement. However, this result is not inevitable.
Many factors such as self-concept, peer orientation and religious
feelings may mitigate against the use of large doses and frequent
administration, thereby reducing the likelihood of a high degree
of involvement. </p>

<p> Substances such as amphetamines, when consumed orally, and
the minor tranquilizers&quot; appear to have a moderate
reinforcement potential. Others, such as marihuana and codeine,
appear to have considerably less reinforcement potential.
However, just as it is not inevitable that a high level of
dependence will occur with heroin and alcohol, it is possible for
a person consuming sufficiently high doses to develop a high
degree of dependence upon substances such as marihuana and
codeine. In such cases, the dependence is reinforced primarily by
non-pharmacologic factors related to the individual and his
environment. </p>

<p> Other drugs, such as LSD and mescaline, appear to possess a
self limiting quality due to the temporary development of a
moderate degree of tolerance to the psychic effects and to a
phenomenon of psychological satiation arising from the intensity
and duration of the drug experience. For these reasons, instances
of prolonged, frequent self-administration of these substances
are rare. Finally, some drugs, such as the phenothiazines (the
major tranquilizers) have a minimal reinforcement potential.' </p>

<p> <b>Psycho-Social Components</b> </p>

<p> Reinforcement for continued use may also stem from
non-pharmacologic factors. As noted in Chapter Two, drug-using
behavior may be influenced and reinforced by a wide range of
psychological and sociological variables, and this is no less
true of continued use than of initial use. Various conditioning
theories have been advanced to illustrate how people learn to use
drugs, adapt them to their needs and seek the drug when needed.
Drug dependence is a dynamic process composed of a sequence of
phrases during which the behavior may be reinforced by different
factors at different times. </p>

<p> On one extreme, drug-using behavior may be a function of
status definition in terms of class, group, ethnicity or
geography. Researchers have noted, for example, the antipathy of
many marihuana-smoking youths for glue-sniffing groups (Blumer et
al., 1967). Among other drug-using groups, there may be status
connotations involved in selecting a particular brand of scotch
whiskey or in preferring scotch to bourbon. The cocktail party
epitomizes the manner in which drug using behavior may be
reinforced by non-drug factors. In these examples, the recurrence
of drug use may reflect very little commitment by the user; in
other words, repetitive drug-using behavior may not reflect
drug-seeking behavior .4 </p>

<p> 3 'Reinforcement potential&quot; is an absolute laboratory
concept, within which psychosocial factors are held constant. In
this sense, the major tranquilizers are not reinforcing at all
since the &quot;normal&quot; population would not choose to
repeat the drug experience because of its side effects. However,
we should note that the use of any psychoactive drug can be
reinforcing given the appropriate Psychological and social
reinforcements. Thus, it is meaningful to say that the major
tranquilizers are reinforcing to the patients who agree to use
them because of their positive rewards as the individual and his
physician define them. </p>

<p> 4 These situations might be distinguished from the type of
behavior involving elaborate, ritualistic preparation and
administration of a drug where the meaning of the behavior rather
than the psychological experience (of the drug provide the entire
reward. The selection and preparation of a bottle of wine and the
rolling of a marihuana joint are examples. There is also the
&quot;needle freak,&quot; a person who is enamored of the process
of self-injecting any substance, including water. </p>

<p> By contrast, drug use may be reinforced by less ephemeral
variables, as a person comes to rely upon the drug effect to get
things done or to avoid unpleasantness. For example, an anxious,
unhappily married individual or an obsessional, overworked
executive may gradually drink more in quantity, frequency and
intensity as he or she finds that this behavior blurs awareness
of problems and enhances the ability to avoid their resolution.
By the same token, a lonely young person may turn to
&quot;speed&quot; when it is popular and readily available,
finding with more and more, predictability that he feels potent,
alert and energetic and that he shares a common bond with his
peers who reinforce each others participation in the entire speed
ritual. </p>

<p> At the other extreme, the recurring drug-using activity may
form the very definitional base of a person's life: &quot;When
I'm on the way home with the bag safely in my pocket, and I
haven't been caught stealing all day, and I didn't get beat and
the cops didn't get me I feel like a working man coming home;
he's worked hard, but he knows he's done something. . .&quot;
This person's life style is his repeated acquisition and
consumption of heroin; and each administration of the drug
confirms the success of his life style, representing his wages
and his sole reward. </p>

<p> <b>The Development of Dependence: Conditioning</b> </p>

<p> Many models have been proposed to describe the interactions
which take place during the development of dependence. As yet
research has not delineated or confirmed these models and their
implications. However, at least three identifiable phases of the
process of initiation and reinforcement have received attention.
The initial phase of beginning and continuing drug use is
reinforced primarily by social f actors. Pharmacological and
psychological factors become increasingly important in the
development and maintenance of dependence. Finally, the
permanence of the phase following detoxification and
&quot;withdrawal&quot; from the dependent state can be affected
by social as well as psychological factors. </p>

<p> No one model or theory is uniformly accepted and many
questions remain. However, it is instructive to examine some of
the current thinking about these factors, and about their
interaction in forming and sustaining dependence, without
implying thereby that these examples comprise a theory in
themselves. </p>

<p> On the basis of participant observation of marihuana smokers,
Becker identified a three-step process of social reinforcement
leading to continued use: technical mastery of the process of
administration, identification of the pharmacologic effects and
definition of those effects as desirable. Becker's investigations
revealed that novices generally reported their first exposure to
the drug as unrewarding. After being instructed by their
companions regarding how to aerate the smoke (to take deep
breaths filling the recesses of the lungs and to hold their
breath for maximal absorption of the drug), these novitiates
began to identify vague sensations as the drug experience.
Finally, they were led to translate what in many cases had been
unpleasant responses into desirable ones and therefore into
reasons for continuing to use marihuana. The end product of this
sequence of events was a confirmed marihuana user. Other factors
were delineated by Becker to explain the direction, frequency and
intensity marihuana-using behavior might take (Becker, 1953). </p>

<p> Social reinforcement alone, however, does not explain
subsequent and deep involvement: the weaving of drug use into the
fabric of the user's life. One elaborate scheme assesses the role
of pharmacologic reinforcement in the context of conditioning
theory. Wikler (1970), for example, describes &quot;primary
pharmacologic reinforcement&quot; as being either
&quot;direct&quot; or &quot;indirect.&quot; Direct reinforcement
is related to receptors in the body which pre-exist the use of
the drug. This corresponds to the concept of reinforcement
resulting from stimulation of a reward center in the brain.
Indirect reinforcement develops with drug administration and in
essence is synonymous with &quot;physical dependence.&quot; </p>

<p> During repeated administrations a learning process occurs,
which Wikler relates to &quot;direct secondary pharmacology
reinforcement&quot; or (&quot;psychic dependence&quot;) (Wikler,
1970). </p>

<p> During the learning process, associations are made between
nonspecific environmental conditions or events and the
reinforcements, including the central nervous system changes
created by the drug. For example, long abstinent persons can be
provoked into a mild withdrawal sickness simply by returning to
the community where their dependence occurred (Jaffee, 1970).
Similarly, it is conceivable that relapse to drug use by
abstinent former users may be influenced by non-drug factors
which stimulate associated drug-taking responses. </p>

<p> This kind of conditioning approach carries important
implications for treatment. For example, a treatment regimen
might usefully associate with the drug certain influences
incompatible with its consumption. The therapist might create,
verbally and otherwise, a dislike of the situation each time the
drug is administered. </p>

<p> In a corollary model some researchers have suggested that
behavioral responses may be learned while a person is under the
influence of a drug and that these responses may be reduced in
strength or be. entirely absent in the non-drug state. Such
&quot;state-dependent learning's has been demonstrated
experimentally in man using amphetamines, alcohol and amobarbitol
(Overton, 1968). </p>

<p> Many of the life style concomitants of dependent individuals
have been learned while those persons were in the drugged state.
It possible that certain relationships and activities necessary
for copingor for effective life management have become
state-dependent. If this is the case, then detoxification and
abstinence, may create anxieties and frustrations, perhaps
unrecognized, because the person is less able to cope than h e
was in the drugged state. Relapsing would then afford the
individual one option for regaining such capacity. Another option
is for the therapist to assist transferrence of these skills from
the drugged to non-drugged state. </p>

<p> <b>The Dependence Continuum</b> </p>

<p> We emphasize that the only common denominator of all types of
drug dependence is psychological reinforcement resulting from
reward associated with the first individual-drug-society
interaction and the subsequent increasing desire for repeated
reinforcement. In the broad sense of dependence, a considerable
segment of the world's population can be said to be dependent on
drugs. This drug-using behavior is not necessarily harmful, and
in most instances carries no social stigma. </p>

<p> All repeated drug taking including that which is medically
sanctioned is conditioned by positive reinforcement provided by
the action of the drug and by the anticipated response of the
user's interpersonal referent, whether it be a physician or a
social group. In this respect medical and non-medical use share
much in common. All drug therapy, regardless of the
pharmacological nature of the drug, or whether the substance is
self-selected or prescribed, has a psychological component. Were
it not so, advertising to the public would lose much of its
force, and physicians would lose a valuable aid in the treatment
of the sick, or those who believe they are sick. </p>

<p> Consequently, psychological dependence must mean something
more than positive reinforcement through drug-based reward if it
is to be a functional concept. At this point, then, it becomes
necessary to narrow the focus. As is true of non-drug habits, the
fact of the recurrence of drug use is unimportant. The crucial
question, for the individual, as well as for society, is the
degree of dependence and its consequences. For drug use as well
as any other behavior, the phase's of dependence actually form a
continuum from lesser to greater, from minimal to compulsive. The
additional elements from the psychological standpoint are the
degree to which the individual is committed to or preoccupied
with drug-seeking behavior as part of his life style, and the
degree of behavioral disruption which would attend the
interruption of his drug taking. From a pharmacological
standpoint, these elements are related to the frequency,
duration, regularity and intensity of the reinforcements. </p>

<p> Determining the existence of psychological dependence on
drugs by segmenting the broader dependence continuum requires an
arbitrary decision. It will be recalled that the same kind of
judgment was made in past years in order to distinguish addiction
from habituation on grounds other than physical dependence. The
strength of reinforcement is critical; yet, this judgment varies
not only with the chemical, physical and pharmacological
characteristics of the drug, and with the dose, method, frequency
and duration of administration, but also with the personal
characteristics of the user and the sociocultural context. </p>

<p> <img src="pip30004.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>Measuring the Degree of Dependence: Psychological
Components</b> </p>

<p> The most important factor to consider in describing the
degree of dependence is the extent to which drug use has become
interwoven in the fabric of the user's life. For some persons,
interaction with or avoidance of the world are facilitated by
drugs. The more frequently the drug satisfies the person's needs,
the greater the likelihood of his commitment to or preoccupation
with such use, with a consequent neglect of lower ordered
priorities and responsibilities, and a decrement in other social
functioning. Personal health, economic relationships and family
obligations may all suffer as the drug-seeking behavior increases
in frequency and intensity and dominates the individual's life. </p>

<p> A parallel consideration in measuring the degree of
dependence is the likelihood of adjustment or disruption which
occurs when the individual's drug-using behavior pattern is
interrupted. When faced with interruption, the individual may
respond with some form of substitute behavior or may experience a
disruption of his customary behavior patterns. Because the desire
to continue the behavior also suggests a desire to avoid being in
a position of abstinence, the notion of adaptation is closely
related to that of preoccupation. Some experience with
interruption may increase the priority assigned to the behavior. </p>

<p> The disruption which can occur when an individual is deprived
of his drug or a substitute varies with the extent of his
dependence. Mild behavioral symptoms may be seen in a housewife
deprived of her diet pills, such as lethargy, irritability,
reduced amount of housekeeping, or an unusual afternoon nap,
while, more intense drug-seeking behavior, including aggression,
may be seen among compulsive speed users. To a large extent,
these symptoms can be exacerbated by the pharmacologic effects of
the drug; in other cases they may be products of anxiety or the
unmasking of behavior formerly under pharmacologic control. </p>

<p> Many treatment programs for drug-dependent persons operate on
the premise that therapy must provide alternative supports for
the individual previously preoccupied with drug taking. In large
measure, the potential for success is related to the intensity
with which the individual participates in the design of the
program, and on the strength and numbers of supports within the
alternative system. As </p>

<p> an awareness of these interrelationships has increased, some
programs have made the system and the treatment synonymous.
Alcoholics Anonymous was one of the first such systems. During
the last decade many therapeutic communities, relying on the
pioneering experiences of Synanon, have emerged to deal with
heroin, amphetamine and alcohol dependence. For many of these
programs, particularly those dealing with severely dependent
persons, a prerequisite to participation is a drug-free status.
This is partially in recognition of the disruption attending
interruption of drug-using patterns. </p>

<p> It might be useful at this point to relate this discussion of
psychological dependence to the patterns of drug-using behavior
developed in the previous Chapter. By definition, experimental
use is not a recurrent drug-use pattern. Recreational and
circumstantial use, if systematically repeated over a short or
long period of time, would reflect the positive reinforcement
underlying the notion of psychological dependence; but these,
forms of drug-using behavior, as we have defined them, are not
sufficiently interwoven in the fabric of the users' lives to
impair social functioning. </p>

<p> The functionally important area of the dependence continuum
includes intensified and compulsive use. Intensified use may be
of the regular long-term variety which involves continuous
intoxication followed by periodic drug-free intervals of several
days' duration-the intravenous amphetamine user, for example; or
it may be of the regular daily use variety with long drug-free
intervals during the day-the heavy social drinker, for example;
or it may be of the intense episodic or spree variety-the
patterned binge drinker, for example. The classic type of drug
dependent person, of course, is the compulsive user who rarely
has any drug-free intervals. The chronic alcoholic and heroin
dependent person are the most recognizable examples. </p>

<p> <b> Physical Dependence: The Secondary Reinforcer</b> </p>

<p> All drugs which induce rewarding subjective responses have
the capacity to become psychological reinforcers. Whereas this is
the primary force leading to intensified or compulsive use
patterns, certain drugs, when administered in sufficient dose and
frequency, are capable of producing physiological changes
requiring repetitive use in the, sense, that physical illness
will ensue if the drug-taking behavior is not continued. This
highly specific abstinence syndrome, which is what is generally
meant by &quot;physical dependence,&quot; can be reversed by
readministration of the drug which causes it. Substitution of
another drug or drugs from the same pharmacologic class can also
accomplish reversal. Of course the symptoms themselves can be
ameliorated by administration of substances from other
pharmacological classes although these substances will not
reverse the patho-physiological process of withdrawal. </p>

<p> Fear of drug-deprivation, with its attendant physical and
psychological agonies, serves as a powerful secondary reinforcer
for repeated and, in these cases, continuous drug use. In the
absence of the drug or a substitute, behavioral disruption will
occur. The intensity, length and nature of the disruption varies
according to the drug, the method of administration, the dose and
the length of time the drug has been used. The rapidity with
which the physiologic need develops varies similarly. </p>

<p> Abrupt deprivation of use of certain stimulants, such as
cocaine and amphetamines, following prolonged and continuous use,
may precipitate a rebound withdrawal illness characterized by
psychological letdown and depression, and by extreme exhaustion
generally compounded by previous lack of sleep. The array of
non-specific symptoms and signs results from continuous
agitation, absolute insomnia and acidosis from food and water
deprivation. In contrast to the highly specific morphine and
barbiturate syndromes, this &quot;withdrawal&quot; illness can
not be prevented by continued readministration of the drug. </p>

<p> Lastly, there exist a number of drugs, such as marihuana,
betel and nicotine, with mixed depressant and stimulant
properties, which create strong anxiety when use of the drug is
discontinued. Since no evidence has been adduced which implicates
a physical dependence, the basis for this anxiety is presumably a
function of psychological, social and cultural variables. </p>

<p> <b><font size="4">Summary</font></b> </p>

<p> Drug dependence, in its broad sense, involves much of the
world's population. Conceptually, drug dependence should be
viewed as a continuum starting from a low degree of dependence as
measured by minimal individual preoccupation with drug-using
behavior and minimal disruptive effects upon interruption of the
behavior, and escalating to compulsive dependence as measured by
total preoccupation with drug-using behavior and serious
behavioral disruption attending deprivation of the drug. Drug
dependence exists in innumerable patterns and in all degrees of
intensity depending upon the nature of the drug, the route of
administration, the dose and frequency of administration, other
pharmacological variables, the personality of the user and the
nature of the environment. </p>

<p> In this connection, it is important to discard the
undimensional concept of individual loss of self-control which
has long dominated scientific and lay concepts of
&quot;addiction.&quot; Most people who use psychoactive drugs do
not succumb entirely to the pharmacologic. properties of the
drugs. All of the factors which we have noted interrelate in
distinctly different fashions with different individuals under
different circumstances. For this reason, there can be no static
model of drug dependence within which finite values are assigned
to these various factors. Drug dependence is a dynamic
phenomenon, and the formulation of social policy must reflect its
complexity and relativity. </p>

<p> Further, the primary basis of dependence for all drug use is
psychological reinforcement based on reward. This reward is
composed of two elements: it stems from whatever brain effects
occur, some of which the user may experience subjectively, and
from complicated sequences of psycho-social variables shaping the
needs satisfied by the drug experience, and drug-seeking
behavior. When physical dependence is a part of chronic drug
administration, the threat of the aversive effects of withdrawal
serves as a powerful secondary reinforcer of the drug-using
behavior. </p>

<p> Drug dependence is not necessarily harmful either to the
individual or to society. The social cost of drug dependence is
related directly to the intensity of user-preoccupation. The
compulsive extreme of drug dependence may lead to disorders or
defects of behavior with serious implications for the public
safety, health and welfare. However, many forms of drug
dependence do not carry adverse social consequences, as is
illustrated by the widespread chronic use of substances, such as
tobacco and coffee, with such weak psychoactive properties that
they are measurable largely in subjective rather than objective
terms. Heavy and prolonged chronic use of the substances may
damage organ systems and result in injury to individual health.
But they do not induce physical dependence or result in
anti-social behavior even upon prolonged or excessive use. This
factor distinguishes them from all other dependence-producing
drugs. </p>

<p> WHO's appreciation of the need to separate social impact
considerations from the simple description of drug dependence was
stated clearly in its 1965 statement: </p>

<p> Further to clarify our meaning, the nature and significance
of drug abuse may be considered from two points of view: one
relates to the interaction between the drug and the individual,
the other to the interaction between drug abuse and society. The
first viewpoint is concerned with drug dependence and the,
interplay between the pharmacodynamic actions of the drug and the
psychological status of the individual. The second-the
interaction between drug abuse and society-is concerned with the
interplay of a wide range of conditions, environmental,
sociological, and economic. The 1957 Committee tried to encompass
both points of view when, in its definition of addiction, it
listed characteristics of which some were pharmacodynamic and
other psychological and socioeconomic, perhaps thereby
compounding some of the existing confusion (Eddy et al., 1965). </p>

<p> 'The 1957 WHO Committee statement quoted earlier in this
chapter on page 124.<br>
</p>

<p> <b><font size="4">EVALUATING THE SOCIAL IMPACT OF DRUG
DEPENDENCE</font></b> </p>

<p> Any analysis of the social consequences of dependence, as
they relate to public safety, health and welfare depends on both
the degree of dependence and the characteristics of the drug,
rather than on the fact of dependence itself. </p>

<p> <b>Dependence, Health and Behavior</b> </p>

<p> No rational social policy would aim to eliminate drug
dependence per se. There are societies in which virtually an
entire population is dependent on natural products of plant
origin. Many of these plants, like the betel morsel, are used by
millions of people and produce no striking effects on the central
nervous system. The only subjective sensations are those of
mildly pleasant stimulation. Psychological dependence is well
established; many of the users spend much of their income to
acquire the substance, and even the more intelligent users suffer
a considerable mental letdown in its absence. </p>

<p> When the risk associated with a type of drug dependence does
not involve drug-influenced behavior, but is rather limited to
possible danger to individual health, it is the Commission's view
that private normative choices should prevail, and that the
social policy decision is of an entirely different order than
that required by behavior influencing drugs. As already noted in
Chapter One, the primary policy consideration here is the
behavioral impact on the public safety, health and welfare. </p>

<p> With regard to stronger psychoactive drugs, however, repeated
use may lead to intensified and compulsive patterns of use with
the resultant neglect of other activities, to the point of
decrement in or destruction of other social functioning. Whatever
the appropriate legal policy toward availability of any given
substance, and whatever the relative impact on behavior of
chronic use of these substances, a crucial element of social
policy must be to minimize the proportion of the population
reaching high degrees of dependence on all such substances. </p>

<p> <b>The Vulnerability Factor </b> </p>

<p> The prevalence of high degrees of dependence seems to rest
more in the nature of the soil than in the characteristics of the
seed. The individual user, rather than the drug, is the core of
the problem; compulsive drug use is generally thought to occur
most frequently in emotionally unstable persons who have
difficulty in coping with reality. </p>

<p> Drug dependence is in this sense an attempt at adaptation;
the drug-dependent person seeks to alter his personal situation
not by changing his environmental circumstances or his pattern of
behavioral reaction but by modifying his affective reaction to
and perception of those circumstances. Secondarily to this, his
entire pattern of interacting with his environment may change. </p>

<p> The concept of psycho-social vulnerability rests on the
notion that as environmental stresses and frustrations become
stronger, an increasing proportion of the otherwise susceptible
population will respond through self-changing responses such as
compulsive drug use. On the basis of this hypothesis, if an
otherwise susceptible individual can either master the
environment or remove himself from the adverse conditions, he may
broaden his options and reduce the likelihood of drug dependence.
</p>

<p> 'From this point, drug dependence will refer only to the
compulsive end of the dependence continuum; drug-seeking behavior
with a high degree of user preoccupation. <br>
</p>

<p> Although the data are inconclusive, many observers believe
that American minorities, such as the Spanish-speaking, blacks
and native Indians, have a higher risk potential to drug
dependence in the sense that they are disproportionately poor and
leave disproportionately higher percentages of drug-dependent
persons. Since social and economic forces continue to restrict
the upward mobility of these groups, particularly the young
males, they remain at high risk to development of drug
dependence. </p>

<p> Whatever the accuracy of this hypothesis, it is clear that
certain populations in any society at any given time are more
vulnerable to intensified or compulsive drug use than others. The
choice of drug varies within and across societies. Although this
phenomenon has not been studied carefully, the Commission's
impressionistic survey of consumption patterns in societies
throughout the world indicates that the choice of substances has
an affective component and differs among those segments of the
population most susceptible to intensified or compulsive
drug-using behavior. </p>

<p> In the United States, for example, the most vulnerable groups
appear to demonstrate a preference for the depressants,
particularly alcohol and heroin, which are most likely to
obliterate rather than intensify their awareness of their social
condition and to reduce the anxiety which wells up in reaction to
this condition. In other societies however, the reverse may be
true. Vulnerable populations in Japan turned to the stimulants
after World War II. We should note, however, that a persuasive
case can be made for the proposition that availability is the
crucial determinant of chronic drug-using patterns in any
society. </p>

<p> For this reason, a comparison of different drugs in terms of
relative danger to society is impossible. In each society a
multitude of factors will determine the levels of use of
different drugs, and the price which society bears as a result.
At best, we can speculate about the cumulative social cost
accruing from widespread chronic use of a drug under conditions
of unrestrained availability. Comparisons between drugs would be
based on their relative potential for reinforcement and on their
relative capacity to influence behavior. (See Table 111-1.) </p>

<p> Available cross-cultural information does suggest that there
may be a maximum penetration level of drug dependence in any
society. Even in Hong Kong where heroin is available and
inexpensive, the prevalence of intensified and compulsive use
does not exceed 4% of the entire population although this
proportion is higher (about 11%) among males over 20 years of
age. Similarly, heroin and opium are easily secured in Thailand,
but the proportion of chronic smokers does not exceed 2% of the
entire population or 10%, of the adult male population. In the
United States, the proportions are roughly the same for chronic
alcohol use: about 15% of the total population and about 15% of
the middle-aged population. Available estimates also suggest that
the level of chronic cannabis use in Egypt may be of the same
order. Interestingly enough, the prevalence of chronic opium and
morphine dependence in the United States at the turn of the
century when availability was relatively unrestricted probably
never exceeded 1% of the adult population. </p>

<p> As availability of a substance becomes more restricted
through formal legal controls, the maximum penetration level of
dependence probably becomes lower. Thus, under any given social
policy in any given society there is probably a maximum social
cost. On the other hand, no matter how restricted the legal
conditions of availability for a given substance, there is also
likely to be a minimum penetration level. From this perspective,
the best that a society can hope for is to reduce the level of
intensified and compulsive use to that minimum, and keep it
contained at that level. </p>

<p> <b>The Relevance of Social Response</b> </p>

<p> Finally, the adverse behavioral consequences of certain types
of dependence may be tied to social policy and to institutional
responses to the drug-using behavior. Among those dependent on
highly reinforcing drugs, the level of dependence likely to be
reached is increased by social policies which prohibit
availability of the substance to the drug-dependent person. This
is because the &quot;hustle&quot; necessary to acquire the drug
will exaggerate the user's preoccupation with drug-seeking
behavior. Similarly, prohibitory policies also increase the
adverse social impact of drug-abstinence behavior of those
physically dependent on the prohibited drugs. Consequently,
appraisal of the social cost of a given type of dependence must
also take into account the potentially counterproductive effects
of the institutional response. </p>

<p> <b>Present Social Impact</b> </p>

<p> Turning now to the social impact of dependence on various
substances in the United States today, we find first that public
perception of the problem is not related either to the prevalence
of dependence or to the environmental and pharmacologic aspects
of the issue. </p>

<p> <b>Alcohol</b> </p>

<p> Alcohol dependence is without question the most serious drug
problem in this country today. Alcohol users far outnumber those
of all other drugs and are found along the entire continuum of
dependence. The reinforcement potential of alcohol and its
potential for behavioral disruption are high. Use of the drug is
pervasive within the general population, and its ready
availability facilitates the development of high degrees of
dependence among vulnerable populations. The prevalence of
intensified and compulsive use among the entire alcohol using
population is roughly 10%, and a serious decrement in social
functioning is noticeable in half of this group. </p>

<p> While there are many abstainers and the number of
non-dependent users is large, alcohol use nonetheless carries a
substantial social cost. The risk of individual involvement is
accentuated also by the pervasive sentiment which tends to
exclude alcohol from classification as a drug, thereby
eliminating it from the concept of &quot;drug abuse&quot; and the
social problems which go by that name. As noted in Chapter One,
according to the National Survey, alcohol is regarded as a drug
by only 39% of the adult population and 34% of the youth
population. Twice-daily use of the drug is viewed as drug abuse
by only 36% of the adults and 37% of the youth in contrast to the
use of heroin &quot;once in a while,&quot; which is regarded as
drug abuse by 82% and 80% of these populations. Finally, only 7%
of the public mentioned alcoholism as a serious social problem,
as compared with the 53% who mentioned drugs. </p>

<p> <b>Heroin</b> </p>

<p> Heroin is a highly reinforcing drug and, in the present
social context, demonstrates a selective attraction for
high-risk, vulnerable populations, in particular those with
minimal opportunities for a rewarding life style. The risks of
compulsive use are exacerbated by the prevalence of intravenous
administration and the rapid development of tolerance. The
dependence continuum is compressed at the maximal end and
movement through the phases of dependence is rapid. Even though
the incidence of ever-use among the adult and youth populations
is less than that of any other drug, the prevalence of dependence
among the exposed population is high, though not as high as
popular belief would suggest: available data suggest that 25% to
50% of those in high risk populations who try heroin may become
dependent. </p>

<p> Heroin dependence is disproportionately high among the most
vulnerable segment of the population; young males in the nation's
urban centers. Because dependence tends to develop during the
early years of adulthood, social and economic integration is
inhibited at the most crucial time, to the detriment of the
society in general and to the users' immediate social group in
particular. For this reason, the social cost of heroin dependence
is substantial. Unfortunately, present social policy tends to
exacerbate this cost even more. Because of enormous pressures
characterizing the present social-legal-medical response, a
disproportionate degree of behavioral disorganization and
disruption accompanies heroin dependence. </p>

<p> <b>Barbiturates</b> </p>

<p> Barbiturates are pharmacologically similar 'to alcohol,
involving the same dependence liability and potential social
impact. At the present time, however, no major social cost
arising from compulsive use has been specifically identified.
This is largely because these substances were hitherto
distributed primarily through medical channels, and their use has
been generally hidden. Recently, episodic barbiturate use has
appeared increasingly in the streets among youth populations,
posing serious problems in certain urban areas. For the most
part, however, high degrees of dependence have not been apparent.
</p>

<p> The Commission suspects that the prevalence of dependence may
be much higher than is generally estimated. The depressant
properties of the barbiturates have already attracted the same
populations who are most vulnerable to alcohol and heroin
dependence, and these drugs are often used in combination or as
alternatives. Even more important, however, the frustrations so
commonly felt among housewives appears to be fertile soil for the
development of sedative, anti-anxiety responses. Increased
barbiturate use in the past decade parallels the increase in
alcohol dependence during the late 1950's among this same
population. </p>

<p> The Commission believes that barbiturate dependence may be
the modern equivalent of the hidden opiate dependence of the late
19th Century. Therefore, even though a verified social cost
remains relatively low, the Commission attributes this fact less
to the pharmacologic qualities of the drug than to the present
medical orientation of the distribution system. As shown in our
National Survey figures in Chapter Two, the incidence of
barbiturate use outside the medical system has increased
significantly in recent years and promises to result in more
serious problems of episodic and multi-drug use in the future,
and perhaps an increased prevalence of intensified and compulsive
use patterns. Even so, the appropriate social response must be
formulated in the context of continuing therapeutic needs within
the medical system. </p>

<p> <b>Amphetamines and Related Stimulants</b> </p>

<p> Amphetamines and related stimulants, when administered
intravenously, have a high reinforcement potential. Consequently,
strong psychological dependence can develop, even though these
drugs do not induce physical dependence. The potential social
cost of amphetamine use, as measured by the prevalence of
compulsive use, is much lower than with any of the depressants,
largely because continued use of increasing amounts beyond the
stage of pleasant mental and physical exhilaration leads
generally to unpleasant and unbearable hyper-excitability through
psychotic manifestations. For this reason, compulsive use is
rarely sustained on a chronic basis. </p>

<p> This does not mean, however, that compulsive use of
amphetamines cannot present a significant social problem. In
post-war Japan, thousands of persons, particularly adolescents,
turned to readily available methamphetamine. Enormous problems in
social reconstruction were created. The establishment of special
psychiatric hospitals and the formulation of stringent legal
controls were necessary to curb the increased use. Fortunately,
cultural homogeneity and national purpose facilitated effective
measures to deal with this problem. </p>

<p> In the United States, compulsive use of amphetamines did
occur among a highly vulnerable segment of the adolescent
population during the middle and late 1960's, although the extent
of this phenomenon was exaggerated at the time and has diminished
rapidly since then. On the other hand, there is mushrooming
evidence that large numbers of middle class adults, particularly
women, have developed chronic using patterns of orally
administered low dose stimulant preparations. Although this
phenomenon may have been halted by modified prescription
practices, most of the dependence on these substances at the
present time does appear within the context of the medical
distribution system. In contrast to the barbiturates, medical
indications for the amphetamines and related stimulants are
highly limited. </p>

<p> <b>Cocaine</b> </p>

<p> Laboratory experiments with animals have demonstrated beyond
dispute that cocaine is the most powerful reinforcer of all
psychoactive substances. Although neither tolerance nor physical
dependence develop, this drug has a higher potential social cost
than the amphetamines. </p>

<p> Little social cost has actually been verified in this
country. Although increasing, the incidence of use and the
prevalence of chronic use remain relatively low. The route of
administration normally employed, sniffing or
&quot;snorting,&quot; is less likely to induce high degrees of
dependence than intravenous use. At the same time, cocaine has
demonstrated its attraction to the same populations vulnerable to
heroin dependence and to intensified amphetamine use, although
this factor may be in part attributable to multi-drug use and an
overlap in the acquisition ritual. Prudent policy planning
demands that the nature of cocaine-using behavior be kept under
close scrutiny, and that the currently inadequate data-base on
cocaine and the behavioral concomitants of its use be
significantly improved. </p>

<p> <b>Hallucinogens</b> </p>

<p> The dependence liability of hallucinogens is relatively low.
Although indiscriminate, sometimes daily use was not uncommon a
few years ago, the combination of rapid tolerance, aversive
side-effects and psychological satiation minimize the likelihood
of intensified or compulsive use. For this reason, these drugs
are generally utilized only for &quot;spree&quot; circumstantial
or recreational use, generally with the goal of self-exploration
or enhanced awareness. Consequently, dependence is not a
significant social concern, and attention should instead be
focused on the behavior potentially influenced by the drug
experience itself. </p>

<p> <b>Cannabis</b> </p>

<p> Particularly in the doses commonly used in this country,
cannabis is not a highly reinforcing drug. This drug does not
induce physical dependence and no significant degree of tolerance
is developed. Although compulsive use of the more potent forms of
cannabis does occur in cannabis-origin countries, there is no
evidence that such a use pattern is developing in this country
where use is generally experimental or intermittent and is
confined primarily to the less potent forms. Although there is
some evidence that the availability of hashish is increasing, the
users generally titrate their doses to reach the desired effect.
Finally, most persons using cannabis heavily in the United States
can be classified as intensified rather than compulsive users.
Consequently, dependence on marihuana is but a minor problem in
the United States today. We should note, in this connection that
whatever tranquilizing effect marihuana has may be sought in
alcohol and other sedative, anti-anxiety drugs. For this reason,
the likely penetration level of cannabis dependence is fairly
low. </p>

<hr>

<h2>II -- DRUG INDUCED BEHAVIOR </h2>

<p> A variety of social forces mold and reinforce desirable
individual behavior. Can the momentary influence of a drug loosen
the socialized restraints, inducing the individual to behave in
ways he would not otherwise choose? </p>

<p> The history of psychopharmacology is replete with examples of
behavior changes associated with the acute administration of
drugs. A traditional, widely shared assumption of current
thinking in biological science is that there are an infinite
number of interactions between behavioral and pharmacological
systems. The description of these interactions requires
information about concomitant variations between the
characteristics of the behaviors and of the drugs. Information
about the behaviors should be specific with respect to factors
such as intraindividual and interindividual variability, type of
behavior and past behavioral history. Information about the drugs
should be specific with respect to such items as dose-response
relations, time-response relations, dose-order relations,
localization of the site of drug action, dosage forms, routes of
administration, absorption and distribution in the body and
biological fate. </p>

<p> Such drug and behavioral variables can be further modified by
environmental variables such as set and setting. The resultant
myriad of drug-induced changes in behavior cannot be fully
understood unless all these underlying variables are so
specified. Furthermore, recent advances in neurochemical research
suggest that many drug effects on behavior are mediated by
neurochemical events and that these relationships are reciprocal
in the sense that changes in one may affect the state of the
other. </p>

<p> If all of these possible combinations and permutations appear
hopelessly confounded, it should simply caution us in making any
premature generalizations about drug-behavior interactions. While
it is true that a full understanding of these interactions is
restricted by the limits of present empirical data, the presence
of such intricacies should temper an initial desire to simplify
the drug-behavior story and encapsulate it in succinct clich6s
suitable for mass media. Such attempts in the past have probably
contributed to the need for this Commission in the first place
and to do so again would be to ignore that information which the
Commission has marshalled. </p>

<p> Nonetheless, there is a certain utility in discussing several
important ways in which drugs may affect behavior. Although the
interaction among all of the drug-person-environment variables
will not be fully explored in this discussion, the Commission
believes it important to sketch certain categories which are
directly relevant to man's conduct. Since behavior has been
defined by some as activity of an organism which is observable by
the organism itself or by other organisms, drug-induced change in
perception is a suitable place to begin. </p>

<p> <b>IMPACT ON PERCEPTION </b> </p>

<p> Perception is defined as those processes by which man
receives or extracts information about the environment through
sensory apparatus (for example, vision and audition). Drugs can
alter the sensitivity of these systems and thereby alter
perception. </p>

<p> Space and time relationships are examples of perceptions
commonly affected by drugs. Marihuana, alcohol, hallucinogens and
other drugs have been noted to expand or contract estimates of
elapsed time or distance. For example, in simulated driving tests
involving use of moderate doses of marihuana, some subjects
perceived themselves to be driving at a speed faster than that
actually being simulated. Similarly, some user-perceptions
relating to enhanced sexual performance under the influence of
marihuana are thought to relate to temporal distortions as well
as to abolition of negative perceptions. Temporal distortions
have also been described by amphetamine users who perceive
themselves to be performing more activity in shorter time spans. </p>

<p> Drug effect may simply be a facilitating factor in many
alterations of perceptions; the effect of setting, for example,
cannot be overlooked. However, the occurrence of illusions and
hallucinations seem less influenced than other perceptual changes
by non-drug factors. Hallucinogens such as LSD increase the
visual threshold in man, cause arousal of the central nervous
system and allow for hyperexcitation to visual and auditory
events. Colors may seem more saturated and sounds may seem
louder. Similarly the delirium tremens associated with alcohol
use is a state involving visual hallucinations and spatiotemporal
distortions. </p>

<p> Drugs may also produce changes in specific anatomic areas of
sensory organs. For example, several phenothiazines (used for
tranquilizing and sedative effects) have produced pigmentary
degeneration of the retina, and, occasionally, blindness. Some
drugs, such as the anti-depressant imipramine, have even
precipitated glaucoma in susceptible individuals. </p>

<p> Drugs may also interfere with the user's perception of his
own abilities. Some studies have noted that student amphetamine
users tended to overestimate their capacity to make sound
judgments and solve mathematical -problems, and amphetamine-using
soldiers tended to overestimate their performance in certain
routine monotonous tasks. </p>

<p> The important implication of any of these perceptual changes
is that behavior may be altered from the expected to the
unexpected unless the user is able to compensate for these
effects as do some sophisticated users of marihuana and alcohol.
The degree to which the altered behavior is of concern to society
relates to the type of conduct which may be affected by the
perceptual change. This could range from being late for an
appointment to foolishly undertaking hazardous tasks. </p>

<p> <b>IMPACT ON MEMORY </b> </p>

<p> Man's behavior is dependent in part on what he has learned,
either directly from experience or from others. To the extent
that drug use or any other event affects man's ability to acquire
knowledge or recall it, it may influence his ability to
anticipate the consequences of his behavior. A full discussion of
learning and memory processes is beyond the scope of this Report;
indeed, these processes are currently the subject of intensive
research, covering an entire range of variables from genetic ones
to biochemical ones. The controversial nature of these
investigations into learning and the inadequacy of the data on
the impact of drug use on man's learning process preclude
detailed consideration here. However, some general observations
may be made regarding the influence of drugs on memory
(short-term and long term storage and retrieval). </p>

<p> Retention of acquired learning is hindered by amnesia or
forgetfulness. Amnesia is a state of decreased retrieval produced
by trauma or by chemicals; forgetfulness is a state of decreased
retrieval produced by passage of time or by preoccupation with
sensory input during time. Among the precipitators of amnesia are
electro-convulsive shock, anoxia, anesthesia (barbiturate and
ether), carbon dioxide and certain antibiotics. With regard to
psychoactive drugs in particular, anesthesia produced by either
ultra-short-acting barbiturates or by ether can precipitate
amnesia. Similarly, &quot;blackouts&quot; are commonly reported
after drug-taking episodes, constituting a form of drug induced
amnesia. </p>

<p> Drugs may also induce forgetfulness. It is common knowledge
that moderate doses of barbiturates and alcohol can reduce or
ablate newly acquired knowledge; in recognition of this
phenomenon, a recently proposed highway safety device would
require the driver to recall a randomly displayed series of
numbers before being able to engage an automobile ignition
system. </p>

<p> Occasionally recall may be facilitated by drugs. Marihuana,
LSD, and ketamine act vicariously to retrieve stored images and
&quot;project&quot; them into some sensory modality-vision,
audition, smell. The use of short-acting and intermediate-acting
barbiturates to facilitate recall of long-term memory in
psychoanalysis or espionage (truth serum) is well documented.
Finally, nitrous oxide has been shown in some circumstances to
reduce forgetfulness. </p>

<p> <b>ALTERATION OF MENTAL STATES</b> </p>

<p> Profound mental changes, both transient and permanent, have
been attributed to psychoactive drugs. These include some drastic
changes in mood and psychological status. Humans are normally
constrained by sets of socially-induced inhibitions from engaging
in certain behaviors. Drugs such as alcohol and other sedative
hypnotics tend to relieve these socially-inculcated anxieties
thereby increasing the likelihood of the usually restrained
behavior. The garrulousness and amorous behavior associated with
cocktail parties and the unabashed laughter following marihuana
use are examples of this disinhibition. Indeed such actions are
so common as to form a battery of socially recognized excuses for
normally embarrassing behavior. With prolonged use of high doses
of some drugs, notably alcohol, and the barbiturates, general
irritability increases and aggressive threatening acts may occur.
The challenging conduct frequently encountered in bars
constitutes a recognizable example. </p>

<p> Some drugs, notably amphetamines, cocaine and alcohol, can
produce a sense of bravado and have reportedly been used
intentionally to support the performance of daring acts. Euphoria
associated with initial opiate experiences may promote
thoughtless or indiscriminate actions. Amphetamines may induce
garrulousness, hyperactivity, rash promises and the like. At the
opposite pole, depressive states and suicidal acts are associated
with drug taking, particularly with the sedative-hypnotic
substances. This fact was overlooked when some sedative-hypnotic,
drugs were incorrectly promoter as tranquilizers appropriate for
the treatment of depression. </p>

<p> Almost all psychoactive drugs can produce transient
confusional and delusional states. The use of hallucinogens,
particularly by naive, control-oriented individuals, can produce
transient panic reactions, as the. user apparently loses control
of his environment. Phencyclidine has been associated with panic
states involving fear of suffocation arising from the drug's
powerful action on the muscles of respiration; hydrocarbon
inhalants have been associated with similar states of fear
arising from displacement of oxygen in the inspired air. Acute
confusional states occur with overdoses of alcohol, barbiturates
and other sedative-hypnotic drugs. Alcohol and marihuana among'
other drugs have been known to produce depersonalization. </p>

<p> Subacute and chronic psychotic episodes, particularly
paranoid reactions of a persecutory nature, are associated with
the major stimulant drugs--cocaine, amphetamines and
amphetamine-like substances. A prolonged &quot;spree&quot; use of
stimulants may induce a psychosis similar to that induced by the
hallucinogens (LSD, psilocybin, mescaline and others). These
drugs also have the specific capacity to induce an acute
psychosis with a single effective dose even in so-called
&quot;normal&quot; individuals. As with all of the drugs
mentioned above, emotionally unstable individuals are especially
susceptible to drug-induced behaviors of this type. </p>

<p> 'This is probably due in part to sleep-deprivation which may
last 5-10 days. It is well established scientifically that
prolonged sleep-deprivation alone can induce an acute psychosis.<br>
</p>

<p> The exact relation between the drugs and these reactions is
unclear. Although the acute reactions mentioned above are quite
generally accepted as being at least partially drug related, the
origins of the chronic psychoses, either drug-precipitated or
residuals after termination of use, are much more debatable.
Perhaps the most confusion and misinformation devolves about
drug-induced &quot;brain damage&quot; and its relation to mental
dysfunction. </p>

<p> With but few exceptions, disorders of behavior cannot be
related specifically to detectable morphological change in the
brain, either at the gross or microscopic level. Whereas gross
and cellular changes have been associated with chronic
alcoholism, and with very heavy intake of barbiturates and the
hydrocarbons, profound behavioral and marked mental changes may
also be observed following long-term, chronic use of most other
potent psychoctive drugs without any detectable cellular
alterations whatsoever. In fact, this is usually the case. Thus,
any statement that no mental dysfunction occurs because no brain
damage can be demonstrated is in error. </p>

<p> The social significance of these drug-induced mental changes
is manifested in several ways. Those disruptions of mental
function associated with illusions and hallucinations,
confusional states, and the like, cause the individual to
misinterpret his environmental impressions and react in an
abnormal manner. This may take the form either of complete
withdrawal and negativism, or at the other extreme, of violent
and aggressive responses to situations which otherwise would not
have been considered to be threatening. In either type of
response, regard for welfare of self or others may be impaired or
entirely lost leading to violent behavior and even to suicide and
homicide. </p>

<p> <b>IMPAIRMENT OF PSYCHOMOTOR FUNCTION</b> </p>

<p> Depressant drugs as a class-alcohol, barbiturates, volatile
hydrocarbons and a multitude of lesser drugs-with the common
properties of inducing unconsciousness and anesthesia in large
quantities, produce varying degrees of motor incoordination as a
dose-related response. This phenomenon is so much a matter of
common experience with the alcohol-consuming public that it
hardly warrants description. </p>

<p> These drugs impair the function of all of the highly
integrated response mechanisms in the nervous system which
control all coordinated acts such as ambulation, operation of
motor vehicles and the like.' Depressant drugs by impairing
higher brain functions and distorting or rendering inactive
sensory input, or by rendering the user inattentive to these
controlling signals, may make him completely incapable of
performing complex voluntary actions. Unfortunately, such
impairment may occur with quantities of drugs much smaller than
those required to prevent the muscular response itself. Thus, the
driver of a motor vehicle under the influence of relatively small
quantities of alcohol may lose control, not because he is unable
to perform the mechanical act of driving, but because his
attention span is reduced, his vision is impaired, his memory of
a turn in the road is obliterated or he fails to hear the horn of
a passing vehicle. In other words, simply because a drug user can
&quot;walk a straight line&quot; after drinking does not
necessarily qualify him to drive a motor vehicle. </p>

<p> &quot; Less complicated psychomotor tasks do not require all
of this biological machinery to be In action. For example, a
blind person may feed and dress himself without the sensory input
from vision and a deaf person can even operate a motor vehicle
without auditory input, providing other sensory input is not
impaired or distorted.<br>
</p>

<p> Stimulant drugs, notably the amphetamines, have been widely
used to permit truck drivers to endure long trips and athletes to
carry on beyond their ordinary limits of endurance. Whereas such
drugs may mask the subjective effects of fatigue, they do not
correct the adverse effects of fatigue on attention, visual
discrimination and other factors which control proper psychomotor
functioning. Amphetamines were used by all belligerents in World
War II to prolong psychomotor performance. It was common practice
for Allied pilots to take these drugs after a bombing mission in
Germany to permit them to get back to their home bases in
England. A surprisingly large number made the return flight to
England safely but crashed their planes on landing. The subtle
effects of fatigue on psychomotor and other sensory components of
proper psychomotor functioning are not corrected by this class
or, for that matter, by any other class of drug. </p>

<p> <b>SUMMARY</b> </p>

<p> In summary, drug taking has the potential for affecting man's
behavior in a number of overt as well as subtle ways. Drugs can
affect perception, thereby influencing the way man regards his
environment. Drugs can affect memory, thereby influencing man's
capacity to anticipate the consequences of his actions. Drugs can
alter mental states, thereby affecting his capacity to interpret
and order his environment. Drugs can alter psychomotor function,
thereby affecting man's capacity to respond appropriately to his
environment. </p>

<p> These effects are neither uniformly negative nor uniformly
predictable. The number of variables affecting the interaction
between a drug, a person and his environment is perhaps
limitless. We can state with assurance only that drug-induced
behavior is as multi-faceted as all other human behavior. </p>

<hr>

<h2>III -- IMPACT ON PUBLIC SAFETY </h2>

<p> All other ends of government are secondary to its
responsibility to ensure the public safety; and the cornerstone
of any viable social organization must be that each individual
have due regard for the life, limb and property of others. Fear
that the drug user will violate this precept has been a common
feature of the periodic cycles of public concern about drugs. </p>

<p> We have indicated that drugs can affect behavior in a
multitude of ways, some subtle such as decrement in short-term
memory, and others more overt such as aggressiveness and
psychotic disorders. Naturally, public concern has always been
greatest for drug-induced violence or assaultive behavior. But
the public safety may also be endangered by drug-influenced
recklessness or negligence. In this section, we will assess the
impact of drug use in the two areas of the most concrete
interest: crime and driving. </p>

<p> <b>DRUGS AND CRIME </b> </p>

<p> Fifty-three percent of all adults surveyed in the National
Survey spontaneously mentioned drugs as one of the most serious
problems facing our nation and in need of attention. As noted in
Chapter One, the &quot;drug problem&quot; conjures up many images
and conveys many things to many people; but for 13% of all those
who mentioned this problem, the primary concern was the
relationship between drugs and crime. </p>

<p> When the National Survey queried the respondents directly on
this question, it found that more than half of all adults and
about two thirds of our youth believe that marihuana users often
commit crime to buy more of the drug and that they &quot;often
commit crimes that they would not otherwise commit.&quot; The
American public is even more convinced of heroin's direct
relationship to crime; more than 90% of both youth and adults
believe that &quot;heroin users often commit crimes to get the
money to buy more heroin&quot; and that they often commit crimes
that they would not have otherwise committed. The extent of
agreement with these statements, however, was found to differ
significantly according to both the age and drug experience of
the respondent. (See Table III-4.) </p>

<p> <img src="pip30006.gif"> </p>

<p> In order to probe some of the factors responsible for this
set of beliefs, respondents were also asked to indicate their
experience with what they perceived to be drug-related crime. The
data show that about one-third of the adults reported having
experience at some time with someone breaking into their home or
place of work to steal some property. Fifteen percent stated that
the theft occurred at work, 19% indicated that it took place at
home and 67% had no recollection of .such an incident. Then
respondents were asked if they, personally, had ever been
attacked, mugged or robbed or if another member of their
household ever had such an experience, or if this bad happened to
someone &quot;they knew well.&quot; Again, about one-third (31%)
responded affirmatively; that is, if they themselves did not have
such an experience, they at least knew someone who had been
victimized in this manner. These individuals were then asked if
they had reason to believe that the attacker was a drug user or
was under the influence of alcohol at the time of the offense.
The data reveal that just under onefourth of those with such
personal experience or knowledge believed that the criminal may
have been a drug user. Specifically, 77o believed the attacker or
robber was a drug user, 2% thought he was under the influence of
alcohol, and 22% said they did not know. </p>

<p> In general, those who reported either being a victim or
knowing a victim of personal crime were disproportionately young,
college educated, and from a large metropolitan area, usually
located in the Northeast. Users of marihuana and alcohol
(behaviors which also correlate with age and education) were also
disproportionately likely to have been a victim or to have
first-hand knowledge of one. Thus it appears that the generalized
belief in the existence of a direct relationship between drug use
and crime derives considerable reinforcement from the public's
experience with both personal and property crime. </p>

<p> As the Commission noted in its first Report on marihuana, the
relationship of drug use to criminal behavior is difficult to
unravel. Its investigation requires more than an examination of
the pharmacological properties of a particular substance and
their effects upon the individual user. Rather, additional
factors to be considered include dosage level; the immediate and
long-term physiological and psychological effects on the
individual; frequency, intensity and duration of use; the purity,
potency or type of drug used; the potentiating effects of drugs
used in combination; personal expectations; motivations for use;
set and setting; and the general impact and influence of the
larger society upon the individual. </p>

<p> In order to assess the nature, direction and strength of the
alleged relationship between drug use and antisocial behavior,
particularly violent and non-violent criminal and delinquent
behavior, the Commission examined several hundred documents in
the professional and research literature and conducted a number
of its own studies. Review of the professional and research
literature, including a number of studies conducted either by or
for the federal government, have led the Commission to conclude
that it is difficult, if not impossible, to establish a direct
relationship between crime and the use of various drugs; but if
one cannot say that the use of any drug in and of itself is
directly responsible for the commission of a criminal act, it is
possible to demonstrate that drug use in combination with a
number of physiological, psychological and social factors may
assume an important role in the exacerbation of criminal,
delinquent or other antisocial behavior. </p>

<p> In the pages which follow, we will briefly survey 11 selected
classes of drugs ranging from alcohol to heroin relative to their
pharmacologic potential for inducing criminogenic behavior, and
to the empirical relationship of their use to crime and
delinquency in selected populations. Then we will attempt to
identify the major psychological, social and demographic
characteristics of drug users, both criminal and noncriminal, and
compare these with similar characteristics of non-drug users,
both criminal and non-criminal. Next we will grapple with tl.e
problems associated with inferring causation in the relationship
between drug use and criminal behavior, regarding the impact of
each on the other. Finally, we will address the larger issue of
the impact of drug treatment and rehabilitation on that criminal
conduct assumed to be related to drug use. </p>

<p> <b>Drugs and Their Criminogenic Effects</b> </p>

<p> All potent psychoactive drugs have been associated with
crime, delinquency, heightened aggression, mental illness,
reckless or negligent operation of a motor vehicle or other
dangerous machinery and other forms of antisocial behavior. In a
paper prepared specifically for the Commission, 'Enklenberg
(1973) has examined the pharmacological properties of several
drug classes, has analyzed the degree to which they may be
considered criminogenic, and has completed an exhaustive review
of the research literature regarding the empirical relationship
between drug use and the generation of criminal and delinquent
behavior. This section draws substantially upon this special
report to the Commission. </p>

<p> <b>Alcohol</b> </p>

<p> The major behavioral effects of alcohol derive from its
depressant action on the central nervous system, also affecting
the function of peripheral nerves, skeletal, smooth and cardiac
muscle and other body tissues. Any behavioral stimulation which
is observed is probably attributable to the suppression of
inhibitory control mechanisms in various parts of the brain.
Among the commonly observed acute effects of alcohol use are a
reduction of anxiety, mild euphoria, some lack of muscular
coordination, slurred speech, enhanced conviviality and
assertiveness. </p>

<p> Low doses of alcohol, although said to improve functioning
with regard to some simple motor or cognitive tasks, reduce the
level of performance of such complex tasks as driving. When taken
in moderate doses, alcohol has been found to reduce substantially
motor skills as well as orderly thought processes and speech
patterns. Higher doses of this substance may cause the user to
become highly irritable and emotional and displays of anger and
crying are not uncommon. Exceptionally high doses are known to
cause stupor, unconsciousness and sometimes death. </p>

<p> The standard setting, dose-response function and personal
expectations of the individual with regard to alcohol are, in
part, responsible for his behavior while under its influence.
When loss of control, whether physical or emotional, is an
expected and recurrent reaction to alcohol use, the individual
often feels justified in his belief that it was the drug which
was responsible for his behavior. </p>

<p> Some researchers have advanced the theory that alcohol
reduces anxiety related to sexual behavior and enhances sexual
aggression; in fact, however, scientific opinion is split on the
validity of this proposition. </p>

<p> Various empirical studies on the relationship between the use
of alcohol and the commission of violent crime have shown that,
in the case of homicide and other assaultive offenses, alcohol
was used by at least half of the offenders directly prior to the
crime (Shupe, 1964; Wolfgang, 1958; MacDonald, 1961; Voss and
Hepburn, 1968). These studies also show that in alcohol-related
violent crime, the violence is most often directed at relatives
or friends who were drinking together. </p>

<p> Sex crimes have also been attributed to the use of alcohol.
In a survey of sex offenders conducted by the Kinsey Institute
for Sex Research, alcohol was reported as a factor in 67% of the
sexual crimes against children and 39% of sexually aggressive
acts against women (Gebhard, et al., 1967). </p>

<p> Molof (1967) found that youth who used alcohol were
responsible for significantly more crimes of assault than their
non-drinking counterparts, and Goodwin and his colleagues (1971)
reported that the use of alcohol was significantly associated
with other forms of antisocial behavior including poor school
attendance, an unfavorable work record and excessive fighting. </p>

<p> Finally, some researchers have stated that a criminal may be
prone to excessive drinking in order to increase courage in
preparation for the commission of a crime. </p>

<p> <b>Marihuana</b> </p>

<p> The initial effects of marihuana on the body can be compared
with some of those attendant to alcohol use; mild euphoria,
stimulation of the central nervous system and increased
conviviality. The user experiences a pleasant heightening of the
senses and relaxed passivity. In moderate doses the substance can
cause short lapses of attention and slightly impaired memory and
motor functioning. Heavy users have been known to become socially
withdrawn and depersonalized and have experienced distortions of
the senses. </p>

<p> Marihuana use is believed to reduce the inclination of the
individual toward physical tasks, particularly those requiring
sustained effort. The combination of aversion to sustained effort
as well as the disruption of the thought processes and alteration
of sensory perception occurring from high doses of marihuana is
believed to act as a deterrent to those criminal acts which
require, continuing physical effort and concentration. Only on
very rare occasions have individuals under the influence of this
substance been shown to become agitated and even aggressive, and
many of these persons had long histories of acting out behavior
well prior to their marihuana use. </p>

<p> Motivations for use, personal expectations, along with set
and setting exert a strong influence upon the individual's
behavioral responses to marihuana use. A person who believes that
marihuana use does not culminate in loss of control can be
expected to remain nonassertive while under its influence. </p>

<p> 'The Commission has already provided a detailed report of the
research findings regarding the impact of marihuana on public
safety (see Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding, Appendix,
Vol. 1, 1972, pp. 424-477). Presented here is a brief updated
overview of these findings. </p>

<p> Because marihuana does not have high dependence liability,
the cessation of use, regardless of frequency and intensity of
prior consumption, does not induce the physical discomfort
attendant to abstinence from other, more reinforcing substances
such as heroin, barbiturates or amphetamines. Therefore, it is
unlikely that even the heavy marihuana user will resort to crimes
to sustain his level of use. It should be noted, however, that
some individuals who sustain particularly heavy levels of use may
become psychologically dependent upon the substance and may
become somewhat more likely to engage in socially disapproved
behavior and to become involved in multidrug use. </p>

<p> As with alcohol, marihuana is not an aphrodisiac and does not
chemically induce sexual arousal. Although some observers believe
that the sexual experience is enhanced by marihuana use, an equal
number disagree with this theory. In its review of the available
data, the Commission found no evidence to indicate that marihuana
use results in heightened sexual aggressiveness. </p>

<p> From the facts stated above one can conclude that marihuana
use is not ordinarily accompanied by or productive of aggressive
behavior, thus contradicting the theory that it induces acts of
violence. Indeed, the only crimes which can be directly
attributed to marihuana-using behavior are those resulting from
the use, possession or transfer of an illegal substance. </p>

<p> <b>Barbiturates</b> </p>

<p> Like alcohol, barbiturates cause depressant reactions and
affect nerve, skeletal, smooth and cardiac muscle as well as
other body tissues. Depending on the barbiturate used, the dosage
administered and the emotional state of the individual, reactions
to these drugs can range from mild sedation to coma and death. In
general, individual reactions to these substances are closely
parallel to those of alcohol. </p>

<p> Barbiturate use in low to moderate doses is generally
unlikely to result in assaultive behavior, although high dose use
of these drugs has been known to cause irritability and
unpredictably violent behavior in some individuals (Bell and
Fraser, 1950; DiMascio, 1968; McGrath, 1970; Eckerman, et al.,
1971; Malmquist, 1971; Blum et al., 1972; Tinklenberg, 1973). For
the individual accustomed to maintaining a high level of
barbiturate use, cessation of that use may result in delirium,
convulsions and other transient toxic disturbances which is
usually life-threatening. </p>

<p> The increasingly common simultaneous use of alcohol and
barbiturates must be considered when examining the relationship
between barbiturate use and crime. In a study by Devens and
Wilson (1971), it was discovered that 70% of the population (N =
129) of multiple drug users were known users of barbiturates as
well as alcohol. As mentioned previously, many of the effects of
these substances on the individual are similar. It is not
surprising, then, that persons who are regular users of
barbiturates may also be or have been regular users of alcohol.
Since a strong association between the use of alcohol and violent
crime undoubtedly exists, it is not difficult to surmise that
high level barbiturate use may also be linked to violent crime. </p>

<p> <b>Amphetamines</b> </p>

<p> The group of drugs known as amphetamines consists of
synthetic chemicals causing stimulation of the central nervous
system. They are commonly referred to as &quot;uppers&quot; or
&quot;speed.&quot; Some of the acute reactions produced by these
substances include increased alertness, vigor, suppression of
boredom and sometimes paranoia, assertive or assaultive behavior.
Because of their reputation for increasing physical endurance,
amphetamines have been used by athletes, truckers and other
individuals who have found it necessary to sustain high levels of
alertness and vigor. Some individuals, however, experience
headache, palpitation, dizziness, confusion and sometimes
delirium and fatigue. </p>

<p> The cessation of repeated use of high doses of amphetamines
generally causes the user to feel irritable, fatigued and
depressed; and a type of withdrawal occurs, although it is
qualitatively different from and not as uniquely characteristic
as the withdrawal syndrome associated with cessation of heroin
use. </p>

<p> The influence of amphetamines on sexual behavior is largely
dependent upon dosage, setting and predisposing personality (Bell
and Trethowan, 1961; Ellinwood, 1967). Use of these drugs over a
short period of time, however, appears to induce no appreciable
change in performance although some increase in the enjoyment of
the sex act (accompanying the delay of orgasm) has been reported.
Anqrist and Grershon (1969) found that &quot;increased
promiscuity, compulsive masturbation, prostitution and
intensification of sado-masochistic fantasies were all reported
as consistent sequelae of [high level and high intensity]
amphetamine use.&quot; Similar findings were also reported by
Geerlings (1972). In sum, the research findings indicate that the
direct effects of amphetamines on sexual behavior are complex and
multidetermined. </p>

<p> Only a limited number of studies have focused on the
relationship of amphetamine use to crime (Blum, 1967b. 1969;
Eckernian, et al., 1971; Ellinwood, 1971, 1973; Malmquist, 1971;
Smith, 1972; Tinklenberg, 1978). The majority of research
conducted on this subject, however, shows that amphetamine users
were disproportionately involved in crimes of violence (assaults
and robberies, for example). It has not been definitely
determined, in this country however, that these crimes were
directly attributable to the acute reactions of the drug,
although it would appear likely that the paranoid states induced
by this drug may be linked to dangerous conduct. This is
confirmed by the close association between methamphetamine use
and violent crime which occurred in Japan during the mid 1950's.
This development was particularly striking because violent
behavior is relatively rare among the Japanese and the incidence
of this conduct decreased markedly when the use of amphetamines
receded (Nagahama, 1968). </p>

<p> <b>Opiates</b> </p>

<p> Taken in small to moderate doses, the opiates can diminish
pain, anxiety and tension and induce mild euphoria. Sustained
high intensity use, unlike that of alcohol or barbiturates, does
not cause slurring of speech or lack of muscular coordination,
nor do these drugs induce the paranoid behavior generally
resultant from the use of amphetamines. The effect of a
particular dose of any of these substances is largely dependent
on the means of administration. Injection of these substances
reacts on the body more quickly than oral administration.&quot;,
however, the latter often causes a more prolonged although less
intense &quot;high.&quot; All drugs included in this class have
the potential for inducing dependence, and tolerance is built up
rapidly. </p>

<p> &quot; Heroin is not consumed orally. </p>

<p> The relationship of opiates to crime has been extensively
investigated. The research conducted in this area has been
limited primarily to: review of criminal records of known
dependents in an effort to determine whether dependence predated
or postdated criminal behavior; or a determination of the rates
of dependence among criminal or mental hospital populations; or
comparisons of criminal activity among dependents and
non-dependents or among users and nonusers; or comparisons of
pre- and post treatment criminal activity; or comparisons of
criminal behavior between dependents who remained in or
successfully completed treatment and those who dropped out of
treatment or relapsed. </p>

<p> Regardless of the type of study, some common conclusions were
apparent. First, the available data indicate that most known
opiate (primarily heroin) dependent persons had long histories of
delinquent or criminal behavior prior to their being identified
as drug users, that opiate use becomes a further expression of
delinquent tendencies, and that most heroin-dependent persons
continue to be arrested subsequent to release from prisons,
hospitals or treatment programs (Kolb, 1925, 1962; Anslinger,
1951; Anslinger and Tompkins, 1953; Morgan, 1965; Blum, 1967b;
Winick, 1967; O'Donnell, 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a; Friedman
and Peer, 1970; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman,
1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973; Tinklenberg, 1973). Tn fact,
opiatedependent persons tended to escalate the seriousness of
their offenses and to experience increased arrests over their
pre-dependence rates, mostly for drug arrests and secondarily for
crimes against property (Blum, 1967a; Friedman and Friedman,
1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973). As Blum (1967a) has noted,
&quot;there is no doubt that among addicts with a delinquent
life-style, drug use is part and parcel of their other
activities, crime included.&quot; </p>

<p> Other observers have focused their attention on the
criminogenic effects of opiate use, per se, and especially on the
necessity to resort to crime in order to support a habit (Dal,
1937; Pescor, 1943; Haines and McLaughlin, 1952; Mever, 1952;
Tappan, 1960; Maurer and Vogel, 1962; Schur, 1962,1965; Duvall,
et al., 1963; Lindesmith, 1965; Vaillant and Rasor, 1966;
Cushman, 1971), and most note that the crimes committed for this
purpose generally tend to be non-violent. money-making crimes
(Bromberg and Thompson. 1937; Finestone, 1966, Kolb, 1962; Chein,
et al., 1964; Schur, 1965; O'Donnell, 1966; Preble and Casey,
1969; Amsel, et al., 1971; Canadian Commission. 1972; Friedman
and Friedman, 1973). </p>

<p> Indirect evidence linking the opiate (heroin) user to
criminal behavior is provided by a number of persons
administering treatment programs. Research findings indicate that
when the drug users are active in a therapeutic program and
presumably not using heroin, criminal activity decreases. That
is, when heroin use, decreases either by treatment or other
means, criminal behavior is also said to decrease (see, for
example, Joseph and Dole, 1970; DuPont and Katon, 1971;
McGlothlin, et al., 1972). This proposition and the supporting
data. however, will be scrutinized carefully in a later section. </p>

<p> Since drug-behavior interactions are complex processes
involving the operation of multiple variables, the identification
of a single factor as causal is bound to be incorrect and
misleading. The number of nondrug influences on the opiate user's
behavior is large, involving not only the immediate
circumstantial or situational variables but what preceded them
(personality, socioeconomic factors, etc.). Some observers focus
their attention on the contagious features of opiate use, that
is, the spread of use is seen as largely attributable to drug
availability, modeling behavior, peer group pressures,
conditioning and reinforcement (Chein, et al., 1964; Hughes,
1971; Goode, 1972b; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). Despite
significant and numerous attempts by skilled investigators to
discover which of the many non-pharmacological f actors assume,
the greatest relative importance, generalization,, at this time
are still premature. </p>

<p> In sum, the use of opiates in the United States, particularly
heroin use, increases the probabilities that all individual will
engage in acquisitive crimes or other criminal behaviors. most of
which are directly related to supporting the drug habit. However,
the available evidence indicates that users of opiates are
significantly less likely to commit homicide, rape and assault
than are users of alcohol, amphetamines and barbiturates. While
there are no data directly comparing the criminal proclivities of
opiate users with those of the general population, the evidence
indicates that a disproportionate number of heroin dependent
persons have had long histories of deviance which began well
prior to their use of and their official identification as users
of heroin. </p>

<p> <b>Cocaine</b> </p>

<p> Cocaine is obtained from the leaves of Erythroxylon shrubs
which grow in the Andes. It is a powerful stimulant to the
central nervous system and its acute effects resemble those
caused by the amphetamines, increased alertness and vigor and
suppression of hunger, fatigue and boredom. Unlike the effects of
amphetamines, the effects of cocaine last only a short time due
to rapid detoxification, and no tolerance occurs. Chronic use,
when and if it occurs, is attributable to psychological rather
than physical dependence. </p>

<p> Since cocaine produces many of the same reactions as
amphetamines (e.g., paranoid reactions, impulsiveness and
hostility), one would expect the user to be prone to aggressive
action. Although there have been crimes against persons
perpetrated by cocaine users, documentation of the drug's
specific effect is often absent. Like the opiate user, the user
of cocaine is more prone to commit crimes against property (Kolb,
1962; Lewin, 1964; Eckerman, et al., 1971; Woods and Downs,
1973). </p>

<p> <b>Hallucinogens</b> </p>

<p> The hallucinogens or &quot;psychotomimetic&quot; drugs can
cause marked alterations in normal thought processes, perceptions
and moods. Usually produced synthetically, this class of drugs
includes lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD),
dimethoxymethylamphetamine (STP), dimethyltryptamine (DMT),
mescaline, phencyclidine and psilocybin. Of this family of drugs,
LSD is the most potent and differs little from the other drugs
except for intensity of induced reactions and side effects. Among
the acute reactions of these drugs are dizziness, nausea,
dilation of the pupils of the eyes, visual ,aberrations and
heightened auditory acuity. According to Holister (1968) the
individual first experiences somatic changes then perceptual
alterations and finally psychic changes. The effects of any of
these drugs on the, individual are largely dependent upon his
expectations. his emotional outlook and the social action
occurring around him. Although dependence does not develop with
continued use, the individual may be prone to flashbacks and
psychotic reactions even after use is discontinued. </p>

<p> Presently, there are no convenient methods for determining
the tissue level of most hallucinogens; consequently, information
regarding the association between use of these drugs and crime is
limited toverbal reports and general observations. What little is
available, however, suggests that aggressive outbursts can occur
during panic reactions, especially if such reactions include
paranoid delusions and hallucinations. A small number of
homicides attendant to LSD induced psychoses have been documented
(Williams, 1969, Glickman, 1970; Malmquist, 1971; Reich and
Hepps, 1972; Snyder, 1973). </p>

<p> In his review of drugs and violence, Blum (1969) asserted
that emotionally stable individuals, even under the influence of
these, drugs, do not generally act in ways qualitatively
different from their normal patterns of behavior. As such, it is
important for investigators of the LSD-crime relationship to
examine the LSD user's previous psychosocial history and behavior
patterns before attributing any criminogenic potential or
properties to the drug itself. Blum did note, however, that a
poor judgment syndrome may develop in association with chronic
use, and that this syndrome could be a contributory factor to
some non-violent crimes such as perjury or theft. Nonetheless, he
concluded that hallucinogens probably have little effect upon
both the induction and prevention of violence. </p>

<p> <b>Other Psychoactive Substances</b> </p>

<p> Reactions attendant to the, use of the non-barbiturate
sedatives include excitation of the central nervous system and
feelings of anxiety. Very few data exist regarding the
relationship of these substances to crime. However, it is
believed that crime attendant to their use is probably minimal
and not of a violent nature. </p>

<p> Glue and noxious vapors may cause impairment of brain f
unction in the individual as well as delirium and toxic
psychoses. At present, however, there is a general absence of
information regarding the relationship between these substances
and the commission of crime, although a few isolated cases of
assaultive behavior by persons in a delirious state have been
reported. The delinquent behavior generally attributable to these
substances, however, tends to be of a petty and nonviolent
nature, although Friedman and Friedman (1973) have noted
increasing violence among glue sniffers. </p>

<p> <b>Summary</b> </p>

<p> In conclusion, the research findings concerning the
associations between drug use and crime have been complicated by
the interplay between the pharmacologic properties of the drugs
and the psychosocial characteristics of the individuals who use
them. Inferences which might have been drawn from laboratory
research have suffered primarily from the difficulties attending
replication of non-pharmacological. variables; and while
naturalistic studies are appropriate to this area of
investigation, they have been plagued for the most part by
deficiencies in research design and sampling procedures.
Nonetheless, the following tentative conclusions appear
justifiable from the data available: </p>

<p> Alcohol, the most commonly used drug, is strongly associated
with violent crime and with reckless and negligent operation of
motor vehicles. </p>

<p> Research findings linking barbiturate and amphetamine, users
with criminal behavior, especially assaultive offenses, are
increasing, but no definitive association has yet been
established in this country; However-, a strong association has
been demonstrated between amphetamine use and violence, in Sweden
and Japan. </p>

<p> Research data are generally lacking regarding the actual
relationship between cocaine use and criminal behavior; however,
the pharmocologic effects of the drug would seem to suggest a
potential for drug-induced violent behavior similar to that shown
for amphetamine and barbiturate users. </p>

<p> Marihuana use, in and of itself, is neither causative of, nor
directly associated with crime, either violent or non-violent. In
fact, marihuana tends to be underrepresentcd among assaultive
offenders, especially when compared with users of alcohol,
amphetamines and barbiturates. </p>

<p> Use of opiates, especially heroin, is associated with
acquisitive crimes such as burglary and shoplifting, ordinarily
committed for the purpose of securing money to support
dependence,. Assaultive offenses are significantly less likely to
be committed by these opiate users, especially in comparison with
users of alcohol, amphetamines and barbiturates. </p>

<p> Except in relatively rare instances generally related to
drug-induced panic and toxic reactions, users of hallucinogens,
non-barbiturate sedative-hypnotics, glue and similar volatile
inhalants are not inclined toward assaultive criminal behavior.
It should be noted, however, that some of the non-barbiturate
sedatives, notably methaqualone, and the hydrocarbon solvents
have a potential for inducing violent behavior although the
incidence, of such behavior is currently low. </p>

<p> <b>Psychosocial Characteristics of Drug-Dependent Persons:</b>
</p>

<p> <b>Implications for Public Safety</b> </p>

<p> The research literature is replete with descriptions of the
psychological, social and behavioral characteristics of drug
users, indicating that the characteristics and attributes of
different drug-using populations are varied and tend to change
over time. The research findings regard-ing the characteristics
and attributes of drug-using offenders, however, tend to reveal
more similarities than differences. In general, this can be
explained by their usual reference to a very narrowly defined
sub-population of drug users: the arrested, convicted,
incarcerated, hospitalized or in-treatment populations of drug-
(primarily heroin-) dependent persons. </p>

<p> Before describing the characteristics of this sub-population,
however, we emphasize again that the largest proportion of drug
users never comes to the attention of official authorities. Most
of those who experiment with drugs do so while they are young and
terminate use without escalating to dependence, or incurring ,any
adverse effects upon their behavior or their psychological or
social development. The same official invisibility and general
absence of untoward effects also obtain for the majority of
recreational and circumstantial drug users. </p>

<p> These segments of the drug-using population share the
characteristics of the population-at-large; to the extent that
they do come to the attention of law enforcement authorities or
medical and psychiatric personnel, such contact is almost
exclusively limited to apprehension for drug law violations
(possession, transfer and sale offenses or alcohol-related
traffic violations) or temporary treatment for an acute toxic
reaction to a drug. Such persons are generally neither more nor
less criminal than their non-drug-using counterparts.11 </p>

<p> Compulsive drug users,12 especially heroin-dependent persons,
on the other hand, are considerably more visible to official
agencies and frequently differ considerably in their
characteristics and behavior patterns front the
population-at-large, particularly with respect to their histories
of psychopathology tied social de6alice. For the most, part,
heroin-dependent persons can be said to belong to a subculture
whose dominant characteristic is the presence of a variety of
pathologies and illegal activities, only one of which is the use
of illicit drugs (see Kozel, et al., 1969; Cuskey, et al., 1973@.
The probability is high that such individuals will, in the
relatively lengthy course of their dependence, come, to the
attention of the police, the courts, the prisons, the general
hospital, the mental hospital, the treatment program or the
morgue. </p>

<p> 11 To the extent that they do become more deviant, it may be
a function of the manner in which they are officially handled
(contamination through incarceration, for example) or the
operation of the self-fulfilling prophecy (Consequent to labeling
them as deviant for their drug activities (see Weitzner and
Figlio, 1973). </p>

<p> 12 Under present social conditions, the segment of the
drug-using population which we have classified as intensified
users is composed primarily of &quot;problem drinkers&quot; of
alcohol, and heavy barbiturate or amphetamine users in the
mainstream population. These persons do not tend to commit crimes
and are not arrested for their drug-using behavior. </p>

<p> Although compulsive drug users constitute the smallest
numerical segment of the drug-using population, they, like the
chronic offender generally, are seen to pose the greater threat
to the public safety. For this reason, the following discussion
will focus on this particular group. </p>

<p> Although a few of the more recent studies deal with
drug-dependent persons drawn from the various cohorts of the
general population, most research has been specifically and
exclusively concerned with drug-Involved male offender
populations (arrestees, prison inmates, parolees), persons in
drug treatment programs or residents of psychiatric hospitals. As
such, the descriptions to follow can be viewed as limited to
those drug-dependent individuals already officially recognized
and labeled by society as emotionally unstable, criminal or
antisocial. </p>

<p> <b>Social and Demographic Characteristics</b> </p>

<p> <b>Age: 13</b> </p>

<p> Most drug-dependent (primarily heroin-dependent) persons
known to some official agency or authority are young, the
majority being under 30 years of age. Despite their youth,
however, their drug-using behavior has endured for many years;
substantial segments of this population report onset of drug use
to have occurred by the mid-teens, heroin use, to have occurred
by about 18 to 20 years of age, the stage of drug dependence to
have been reached within a few years thereafter, and public
notice of their heroin-related activities to have followed within
about five years from the onset of dependence (Ellinwood, 1967 ;
Robins and Murphy, 1967 ; Kozel, et al., 1969; Roebuck, 1970;
Taylor, et al., 1970; Bass, et al., 1971 Cushman, 197 I ; Heckel
and Mandell, 1971, Inclardi and Chambers, 1971a; Joseph, 1972;
Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973; Jacoby, et
al., 1973). </p>

<p> Taylor and his colleagues (1970), for example, indicated that
56% of their sample of heroin-dependent persons in a Philadelphia
methadone treatment program were under 35 years of age, but 58%
of the sample had histories of over ten years of drug use. The
median age of a sample of heroin dependent persons entering the
New York Narcotic Control Commission for treatment was 20 years;
the median age of their initial drug experience was 13 years for
males and 15 years for females (Inciardi and Chambers, 1971b).
The ages of 81 patients in a hospital methadone clinic studied by
Cushman (1971) ranged from 20 to 62 years; the mean age was 37
years. The length of dependence in this group ranged from two to
47 years with a mean of 14.2 years. </p>

<p> 13 Research findings are inconsistent regarding sex and
racial distributions, a function perhaps of inherent sampling
biases. </p>

<p> Only seven of the 81 patients reported having been
heroin-dependent for five years or less. </p>

<p> Bass, et al., (1971) interviewed 150 admissions to the
District of Columbia Jail during January of 1971. Forty-seven
percent were found to be dependent on heroin and an additional
21% were reported to be &quot;chipping&quot; heroin. Eighty
percent of the dependent offenders were under 30 years of age
(mean age,: 24.1 years) ; 94%, of the &quot;chippers&quot; were
under 30 (mean age 22.3 years). A comparison with the non-heroin
using admissions revealed that the latter were, on the average,
five years older than the heroin-dependent offenders and seven
years older than the chippers (mean age 29.2 years). The mean
ages of onset of drug use for the two heroin using groups were
20.5 years for heroin dependents and 19.7 years for the chippers,
though use of other types of drugs had occurred considerably
earlier for both groups. About one-fifth of the dependent
offenders (21170 reported using heroin on a daily basis for one
year or more with 3% indicating that their daily use of heroin
continued over a period of at least five years. </p>

<p> Two years earlier, Kozel and his colleagues (1969) had
similarly interviewed a random sample of 225 inmates at the D.C.
Jail and identified 45% as dependent on heroin and 2% as chipping
the drug. Two-thirds of the dependents in this institutional
population were under 30 years of age with the greatest
concentration being under 21. Half had used heroin before the age
of 20, and 26% reported using heroin by the time they were 17
years of age. </p>

<p> <b>Educational Status:</b> </p>

<p> Very few of the heroin-dependent persons included in the
various studies completed high school, and many dropped out
before reaching the 9th grade. The majority, however, dropped out
between the 10th and 11th grades or as soon as they reached the
age at which they could legally do so (Griffith, 1966; Babst, et
al., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a, 1970b;
Roebuck, 1970; Stanton, 1970a; Taylor, et al., 1970; Amsel, et
al., 1971; Bass, et al., 1971; Cushman, 1971; Cuskey, et al,
1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). </p>

<p> Even while they were in school, however, and despite normal
intelligence, most exhibited behavioral problems in the classroom
situation (Bender, 1963; Griffith, 1966; Robins and Murphy, 1967;
Babst, et al., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Milman, 1969; Joseph,
1972; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). </p>

<p> <b>Income, Occupation and Employment Status:</b> </p>

<p> Because of their rather low educational achievement and their
general absence of occupational skills, most heroin-dependent
individuals remain at the bottom of the socioeconomic hierarchy.
Substantial, though varying, segments of this population have
been unemployed either totally or intermittently for considerable
lengths of time and many researchers have noted their financial
dependence, either upon public welfare or the support of others.
Among the 41-66% of the various study populations found to be
employed immediately prior to arrest, incarceration or treatment,
most described their jobs as unskilled labor with low earning
capacity and admitted to supplementing their income, in order to
support their habits, through illegal activities (Griffith, 1966;
Angrist and Gershon, 1969; Babst, et al., 1969; Kozel, et al.,
1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a, 1970b; Taylor, et al., 1970; Bass,
et al., 1971; Cushman, 1971; Inciardi and Babst, 1971; Joseph,
1972; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Greenleigh, 1973). </p>

<p> Because of the generally high relapse rate, employment
subsequent to release from prison or treatment tended to follow
these general patterns. The proportion actually employed,
however, tended to rise after incarceration or treatment (Joseph
and Dole, 1970; Cushman, 1971; DuPont, 1972; Cuskey, et al.,
1973). </p>

<p> <b>Home Environment and Marital Status:</b> </p>

<p> For the most part, heroin-dependent persons known to official
agencies were raised and still resided in the inner city core
areas close to their drug sources, in an environment
characterized by economic deprivation and family instability.
Excessive drinking and criminal involvement among both family
members and friends were not uncommon. Many of these conditions
continued into the marital situations of these subjects. Although
most remained single, possibly as a function of their youth, a
substantial segment of those who married had already terminated
their marital relationships through separation or divorce. In
essence, the preoccupation with drug use, the self imposed
isolation from stable social relationships (both to avoid
detection and preclude the possibility of family disapproval or
efforts at reform) and the general inability to assume, personal
and economic responsibilities collectively contributed to
unstable home and family situations (Ellinwood, 1967; Babst, et
al., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970b; Roebuck,
1970; Taylor, et al., 1970; Amsel, et al., 1971; Bass, et al.,
1971; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Friedman and Friedman, 1973). </p>

<p> <b>Psychological Characteristics</b> </p>

<p> The heroin-dependent individual has been variously described
as immature, resentful of authority, passive-aggressive,
emotionally labile, sexually inadequate, anxiety-ridden,
rebellious, withdrawn, socially isolated, depressed and suicidal.
According to the available evidence, he also tends to repress
aggressive and hostile feelings, to require immediate
gratification, to have low frustration and anxiety tolerance, to
possess generally low self-esteem and to be manipulative, (Hill,
et al., 1962; Bender, 1963, Alessinger and Zitrin, 1965,
Schonfeld, 1967; Milman, 1969; Chambers, et al., 1970a; Roebuck,
1970; Friedman and Friedman 1973). </p>

<p> The heroin dependent person can be viewed as an individual
totally uncomfortable with and alienated from himself and his
surroundings, who must constantly maintain control over the
frustrations, anxieties, hostility and aggression. At the same
time, because his dependence requires his preoccupation with
drug-using and drug-seeking behavior, he has neither the, time
nor the inclination to form stable social relationships. His low
self-esteem and perceived inadequacies push him further into
isolation from friends and relatives. </p>

<p> It is not, surprising given this variety of psychological and
social characteristics, that so many of these individuals have
histories of psychopathology and antisocial behavior which date
to childhood and continue,, exacerbated by drug dependence, well
into adulthood. </p>

<p> <b>Problems in Inferring Causation</b> </p>

<p> Research interest has recently increased in the relationship
between dr-ug use and antisocial behavior. Regardless of its
quality or method, most of this research is intended to answer
the following, basic questions: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Does drug use predate or postdate criminal or delinquent
        behavior? </li>
    <li>What is the nature of the relationship between drug use
        and crime? How strong is it? Under what conditions is it
        present? </li>
    <li>Is criminal behavior caused by drug use? </li>
    <li>Does involvement in criminal behavior increase the
        likelihood that a given individual will use drugs, either
        generally or of a specific type? </li>
    <li>Is criminal or delinquent behavior aggravated by drug
        use? Is drug use, increased or aggravated as a
        consequence of involvement in criminal or delinquent
        behavior and its psychological, social and behavioral
        correlates? </li>
    <li>Is the alleged association between crime and drug use
        direct and identifiable or is it largely, if not wholly,
        attributable to the presence, of external intervening
        factors or simultaneously operating variables (that is,
        is it &quot;real&quot; or spurious) ? </li>
</ul>

<p> The research thus far conducted falls into several major
categories. </p>

<p> One category involves the interviewing of selected offender
populations (arrestees, adjudicated delinquents, prison
initiates) relative to their drug-using behavior in relation to
the offense for which they were last arrested, convicted or
incarcerated. A second type involves comparisons between the
drug-using behaviors of selected groups of offenders and matched
groups of either non-offenders or different types of offenders. A
third type involves comparison of the criminal records of drug
users and non-drug users. The fourth major type involves a
before-after design relative to the temporal sequence of drug use
and criminal behavior; the arrest records of individuals are
compared both before and subsequent to the onset of drug use or
drug dependence. </p>

<p> Few studies either use prospective (following one or a,
number of cohorts through time) rather than retrospective
analysis, or take into consideration multi-drug use patterns, or
adequately investigate the individual's past psychological,
social and behavioral history. As such, untested assumptions are
accepted as given and invalid conclusions are presented as
definitive. </p>

<p> Two illustrations should suffice to make this point. First,
it has been assumed that if drug use is found to predate arrest,
then it was in some measure responsible for the criminal
behavior. Often unrecognized, however, is that a considerable
amount of undetected criminal behavior may have existed prior to
apprehension and prior to the onset of drug use (see Inciardi and
Chambers, 1971a; Jacoby, et aL, 1973; Friedman and Friedman,
1973; Tinklenberg, 1973). </p>

<p> Second, if the offender indicated that he has taken a drug of
some type (including alcohol) prior to the commission of a crime,
or his use of drugs is identified in some, other manner, an
assumption made is that the drug was responsible for (caused) the
crime. This is difficult to prove because the arrest may occur
many hours, days, weeks or months after the crime and the few
tests that exist are not systematically used to determine the
type or amount of the drug in the body. Despite these problems,
the simple assertion or determination of drug use is often deemed
sufficient to establish a causal link between that drug use and
crime. </p>

<p> Despite the methodological limitations of specific studies,
however, comparative analysis of self-reported delinquency or
criminality and of arrest or court records presents at least one,
challenge to the hypothesis that drug use causes crime. If a drug
user or drug-dependent person commits criminal or delinquent acts
before he begins using drugs, then his criminality cannot be
solely attributable to his drug use. Further, an examination of
the types and amount of crime committed subsequent to the onset
of drug use or dependence is useful in analyzing the oft-stated
assumption that many drugs, especially heroin, have criminogenic
effects on the personality and behavior of the user. </p>

<p> Relative to the first point, considerable data exist to show
that the majority of drug-dependent, especially heroin-dependent,
persons are involved with criminality or delinquency prior to
their drug use and dependence (Morgan, 1965; Vaillant and Brill,
1965; Finestone, 1966, Smith, et al., 1968; Bluni, 1969; James,
1969; Stanton, 1969; Plair and Jackson, 1970; Inciardi and
Chambers, 1971b; Cuskey, et al., 1973; Ellinwopd, 1973; Friedman
and Friedman, 1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973; Research Concepts,
Inc., 1973; Tinklenberg, 1973). </p>

<p> Most of the researchers who have found that the majority of
their sample populations were arrested before the onset of
dependence agree that criminal behavior is not a by-product of
dependence but results, as does the, drug dependence, itself,
from psychological and social deviance which predates dependence
and is ordinarily apparent by adolescence. This conclusion
challenges the theory that drugs cause crime and stresses that
drug dependence and criminality are two forms of social deviance,
neither producing the other. </p>

<p> It is generally agreed that drugs have the ability to
exacerbate, existing psychopathology, delinquency and
criminality. However, such ability is conditional upon the
pre-existence of psychological and social maladjustment prior to
the onset of drug use or dependence (Bender, 1963; Hekimian and
Gershon, 1968; Milman, 1969, Stanton, 1969; Jacoby, et al., 1973;
Friedman and Friedman, 1973; Jones, 1973). Stanton (1969) notes,
for example, that: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Offenders do not originally become unstable or commit
    crimes because of drug use but drug use does contribute to
    and exacerbate both instability and anti-social behavior (p.
    16). </p>
</blockquote>

<p> In examining post-dependence arrests, the increases were
highest for drug law violations and to a lesser extent
acquisitive crimes against property (Jacoby, et al., 1973;
Weitzner and Figlio, 1973). Even smaller was the increase in
arrests for crimes against the person; several researchers found
no increases in violent or personal crime (Chein, et al., 1964;
Finestone, 1966). </p>

<p> To the extent that increased criminal activity involves drug
offenses and acquisitive crimes, some observers have suggested
that the illegal status of heroin is the primary factor in the
criminal behavior of heroin-dependent persons. By law, society
has defined the drug-related behavior (possession, sale) of the
dependent person as criminal, and has necessitated continuous
criminal contacts. The property crimes often resorted to by
heroin-dependent persons to support their habits are seen as a
direct consequence of these conditions. Of course, this view is
also compatible with the argument that this previously delinquent
population would probably have engaged in another criminal life
style even if it had not been the heroin life style. </p>

<p> Whatever the merits of this argument, it does highlight
several important issues. First, what are the social costs of
heroin dependence under circumstances of prohibited availability?
What price is society paying in order to avoid the social
consequences of loosened availability? Second, to what extent are
treatment programs for heroin dependent persons able to reduce
these costs? </p>

<p> <b>The Costs of Heroin Dependence</b> </p>

<p> In order to accurately estimate the social costs of heroin
dependence, several factors must be taken into account, including
the crime-related costs as well as the public health and welfare
costs. In this section we will cover only the crime-related
costs. In the next, we will deal with factors such as the
economic loss to the community of productive citizens and the
strain on the community caused by social and economic dependence,
family disruption, and the like. With regard to crime related
costs, we will cover: </p>

<ul>
    <li>The cost to the drug-dependent person to support his
        habit. </li>
    <li>The cost incurred to the community from crimes against
        both person and property committed by the
        opiate-dependent person. </li>
    <li>The cost to the community for arrest, detention, trial,
        probation, incarceration, parole, aftercare, treatment
        and rehabilitation. </li>
</ul>

<p> <b>Cost to the Heroin-Dependent Person</b> </p>

<p> A figure recently released by the Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs sets the number of &quot;active addicts&quot;
nationwide at 559,224. It has been estimated that between half
and three-fifths of the nation's opiate-dependent persons reside
in New York. That State's Narcotic Control Commission estimated
that at the end of 1967, there were approximately 65,000 active
opiate-dependent persons in New York City alone, and by the end
of 1971, approximately 150,000 heroin users were known to the
Narcotics Register maintained by the Department of Health in New
York City. The problems involved in accurately estimating the
number of heroin-dependent persons, however, are myriad, and past
estimates have all suffered from invalid assumptions or
inappropriate measurement techniques. 14 It is not surprising,
therefore, to find critics of these estimates who are willing,
however, to substitute equally questionable ones in their place.
One such critic has set the 1971 New York City estimate at
between 70,000 and 100,000. Regardless of the exact number of
heroin-dependent persons or even heroin users, however, a basic
fact remains: a substantial illicit heroin market exists in this
country and the demand apparently remains larger than the supply.
</p>

<p> 14 The Commission has specifically addressed the problems of
heroin estimation and has attempted to identify the major
fallacies and deficiencies of past work in this area. It has also
provided some suggestions for future research. This study can be
found in its entirety in the Appendix to the Report (Blumstein,
et al., 1973). </p>

<p> Undoubtedly, the price of heroin and its quality vary with
both the supply of and demand for the drug. Between World Wars I
and II, heroin use was confined primarily to artisans,
entertainers and marginal social groups who congregated in urban
areas. Use of the drug also became fairly widespread among the
black and Puerto Rican males in the inner cities. </p>

<p> After World War II, heroin trade ,and distribution routes,
which had been interrupted during the War, reopened. New York
City and to a lesser extent Chicago, witnessed a great upsurge in
heroin use among young minority group males. As victims of
unemployment and discrimination, frustration and alienation, they
formed a ready market for the new influx of heroin. At this time,
heroin was in ample supply and of good quality; it was rarely
beyond the financial reach of anyone who cared to escape the
realities of his existence. </p>

<p> During the 1950's, heroin use spread with increasing
popularity to the younger people of the cities, children of
immigrants and Southern blacks who were unsolved in the life and
life style of the street gangs. Although the available evidence
is somewhat contradictory, many observers have related the
increase in heroin use to the disorganization of gang activities
and the disintegration of many street gangs. as their members
grew ineffective in their own terms and incapable of protecting
gang interests (Chein, et al., 1964; Hughes, 1971). </p>

<p> Late in 1961, a critical shortage of heroin, an event which
came to be known as the &quot;panic&quot;, occurred in New York.
According to some, this panic&quot; is largely responsible for
the inflated cost of maintaining a habit today. Because the
substance was in such short supply, dealers cut the quality of
the, dose many times and therefore increased the amount of the
drug needed and the amount of money necessary to buy it. Yet,
even with the inflated price and deflated quality, dealers
experienced little difficulty in disposing of their supplies. Two
observers have noted that during this period, the cost of
maintaining a habit was said to have increased to ten times what
it had been only twenty years before (Preble and Casey, 1969). </p>

<p> The inflationary cost of heroin, however, did not disappear
with the passing of the panic, and recent estimates of the daily
cost of supporting a habit have ranged from $20 to $100,
fluctuating according to availability and location (Hekimian and
Gershon, 1968; Babst, et al., 1969; Kozel, et al., 1969; Preble
and Casey. 1969, Holahan, 1970; Joseph and Dole, 1970; Rogers,
1970; Tinklenberg and Stillman, 1970; Cushman, 1971 ; DuPont and
Katon, 1971; DuPont, 1972). </p>

<p> <i><b>Costs to Society From Criminal Activity</b></i> </p>

<p> According to Preble and Casey (1969), at least 80% of New
York's heroin-dependent population reside in urban slum areas.
Figures culled from the Bureau of the Census reveal that at the
close of the 1970 census, the median family income of New York
City residents was $9,692. while, the mean income of families
reporting public assistance in that city was $2,114. </p>

<p> If we assume that a heroin-dependent person has a daily habit
of $20 (the lowest daily estimate found but amounting to $7,300
per year), we can also assume that it would be relatively
impossible for him to support his habit without supplementing his
income through illegal means. </p>

<p> F or the most part, this illegal activity manifests itself in
crimes against property, principally burglary and shoplifting
(Finestone, 1966; Kozel, et al., 1969; Preble and Casey, 1969,
Jacoby, et 11., 1973). Less commonly, heroin-dependent persons
resort to offenses against the person (assault, mugging, robbery)
in a similar desperate effort to obtain the money required to
purchase the drug (Anisel, et al, 1971; Friedman and Friedman,
1973; Jacobv, et al, 1973; Tinklenberg. 1973). Researchers have
estimated that for a heroin-dependent person to support his
habits he must steal property amounting to between two and
one-half to five times the actual cost of his habit (Cushman,
1971) and that he may be expected to steal in property an amount
ranging from $25,000 to $50,000 per year (Joseph and Dole, 1970;
DuPont, 1.972). The estimated daily tolls in stolen property have
ranged from $25 to $375. At least one researcher (Singer, 1971),
however, has been highly critical of these, estimates, all of
which he deems to be grossly exaggerated. </p>

<p> Heroin-dependent persons are also known to raise funds to
support their habits by pimping and prostitution. Although these
activities do not represent a direct financial burden to society,
they do, nevertheless, constitute socially and legally
disapproved behavior&quot; (Cushman. 1971 , 1972; see also Amsel,
et al., 1971). </p>

<p> A heroin-dependent person may also become involved in the
complicated hierarchy of individuals who are responsible for the
importation and distribution of heroin. In this way, he is
assured of a supply of the drug for his own needs and very often
realizes a profit large enough to induce him to go into the
drug-dealing business for himself. </p>

<p> <b>Criminal Justice Costs: Processing the Drug-Dependent
Person</b> </p>

<p> In addition to the costs of crime incurred by drug-dependent
persons, the community must also assume the cost of
investigating. identifying, arresting, detaining, trying,
sentencing, treating and rehabilitating the drug-dependent
offender. </p>

<p> In 1969, the New York State Department of Corrections
estimated that it cost the State $12.75 per day for incarceration
of one person (Cushman, 1971), a figure including the separate
costs of overhead, custodial personnel, maintenance and other
limited services.15 A similar figure of $12 per day was quoted as
the cost of (retention, while arrest procedures were estimated to
total $25 per arrest (Cushman, 1971).16 </p>

<p> 15 One 1969 study (Babst, et al., 1969) estimated that the
cost of keeping all individual on parole or in aftercare came to
approximately one-tenth of that required to maintain him in a
correctional facility. This suggests all a(Witional cost to the
community of approximately $1.25 per day once the individual is
released from prison (if. of course. the estimated cost of
incarceration is reasonably accurate). </p>

<p> 16 This estimate was derived hy multiplying the hourly
wag&quot;, of an average policeman by five, the absolute minimal
estimated time deemed necessary to complete the initial
administrative procedures attendant to arrest. </p>

<p> In a more recent study of heroin use in Washington, D.C.
(DuPont, 1972), the daily cost per user for incarceration was set
at $14, compared with an approximate cost of $5.50 per patient
for outpatient care. The Corrections Department in that same city
listed the daily cost per offender on parole at $0.97, a figure
somewhat lower than that noted for New York a few years ago. </p>

<p> If the costs of arrest, trial, incarceration, treatment and
the like are multiplied by the alleged number of
heroin-dependent, persons in this country today, society is faced
with another potentially astronomic bill directly related to
heroin and other drug use and dependence. To this figure must be
added additional amounts which reflect the, rate of recidivism
among drug offenders and the costs incurred from crimes committed
to support their habits. Yet another adjustment must be made for
those who, during the course of their drug dependence will
probably be arrested several times on a variety of charges and be
processed through the criminal justice system many times over. </p>

<p> <b>The Effect of Drug Treatment on Crime</b> </p>

<p> During the past eight years, methadone maintenance has
evolved from an experimental program with 22 patients into the
most widely used treatment mortality in the nation. Its
supporters havee claimed that participation in one methadone
program reduces heroin-related crime, a direct function of the
patient's reduced need for and use of heroin. In addition,
individuals participating in methadone maintenance programs are
reported to be able to function, perhaps for the first time in
their adult lives, as socially responsible and economically
independent and productive members of society. </p>

<p> The Commission has carefully scrutinized these claims. In
general, they have been based on the reported findings of a
limited number of quasi-experimental studies (mostly before-after
comparisons); the deficiencies in research design, sampling
techniques, analysis and interpretation of the data significantly
limit the reliability and validity of the conclusions and the
inferences drawn therefrom. In fact, we have not found
sufficiently responsible research to conclude that any of the
various treatment modalities, regardless of type, actually reduce
crime. </p>

<p> When methadone maintenance was first devised, its
crime-reducing potential was regarded as ancillary to achievement
of the primary program goal, the elimination of drug use. With
the passage of time, however, heightened public fear and dramatic
increases in what is frequently reported to he heroin-related
acquisitive crime have distorted the public's view of the purpose
of methadone maintenance. Funding agencies, program officials and
public leaders have continually touted this treatment modality as
a law enforcement strategy designed primarily to reduce
drug-related crime.17 </p>

<p> 17 The Canadian LeDain Commission recently noted in its,
report on treatment &quot;The success of methadone programs is
generally measured in terms of social or cultural criteria rather
than psychological ones. A return to a normal life cycle based
upon employment, marriage and stability of social interaction is
the prime criterion of success. However, the expectation of a
normal life style characterized by emotional maturity and
complete abstinence in addition to a law-abiding. productive
existence is an ideal which in practice is seldom achieved.
Because of this, some methadone programs arrange their goals
hierarchically. The foremost expectation is that all patients who
are treated will become law-abiding citizens. although they might
not become productive. mature or drug-free. The next level is to
achieve a status in which patients are law-abiding and gainfully
employed.&quot; (1972. 1). 24.) </p>

<p> <b>Current Research Findings </b> </p>

<p> The degree to which patients in treatment, have made gains
toward crime-free lifestyles is generally measured by comparing
patients' arrest records prior to program entry and during
treatment. In a few studies, however, attempts at control have
been made by comparing arrest records of methadone maintenance
patients with those of reportedly matched groups of individuals
in other treatment modalities (detoxification or abstinence,
programs) or with those of individuals who dropped out of the,
maintenance program at, some stage. </p>

<p> Several before-after comparison studies have attempted to
establish a direct relationship between methadone maintenance and
a reduction in crime. Although the data available strongly
suggest a reduction in the criminal behavior of patients in
treatment, differences in the basis of measurement preclude
precise comparison of their results. Joseph and Dole (1970), for
example, utilized data on convictions whereas Gearing (1971)
studied arrests; Cushman (1971) reported on data derived from
police records and interviews while DuPont (1972) drew on crimes
known to the police, arrests and incarceration figures. The
periods of time before and after treatment which were measured
also differ considerably and thereby affect the crime rates
reported. </p>

<p> Examination of studies incorporating control groups have
generally come to conclusions similar to those reflected in the
before-after designs. Researchers who have compared individuals
in treatment with those who have dropped out, at some stage
uniformly show significant differences in arrest or conviction
rates between the two groups and therefore conclude that it was
the treatment which was largely responsible for the resultant
crime reduction (Joseph and Dole, 1970, Williams, et, al, 1970;
Moffett, et al, 1971: Clines, 1972, DuPont, 1972). </p>

<p> Studies designed to compare the arrest or conviction rates of
individuals in different treatment modalities are intended to
deal more specifically with the degree of crime reduction
produced by a particular type of treatment. In general, their
findings have shown that methadone maintenance has been
significantly more successful than other modalities
(detoxification, and abstinence, for example) In achieving crime
reduction, although the absolute amount of reduction and the
program differentials have varied considerably (Asher, 1970:
Joseph and Dole, 1970; Wieland and Chambers, 1970; DuPont, 1972;
Cuskey et al., 1973). </p>

<p> Although the statistics presented are generally impressive
(crime reduction estimates range from 14% to 94%) untested basic
assumptions and other methodological deficiencies preclude their
generalization and signal careful interpretation. </p>

<p> In one before-after study, for example, the researcher's
major hypothesis was that a recent annual rise in serious crime
was largely attributable to a heroin &quot;epidemic,&quot; and
was manifest in significant increases in commitment rates of
opiate offenders and parallel increases in index offenses for
that period. A second hypothesis was that a subsequent unexpected
and abrupt decline in serious crime was largely attributable to
the treatment (primarily methadone maintenance) of thousands of
heroin-dependent persons. Although the researcher did give some
credit for this &quot;pronounced and progressive&quot; reduction
in crime to the doubling of the police force during the time
period under investigation, the major conclusion of the study was
that if the rise in crime was correctly attributable to a heroin
epidemic, then it was also true that heroin treatment was largely
responsible for- the subsequent crime reduction (DuPont, 1971). </p>

<p> The researcher failed to demonstrate, however, that the
significant increase in reported crime was indeed attributable to
the alleged rise in heroin dependence. Although the proportion of
incarcerated heroin dependent persons did increase, the reported
number of index crimes increased by an even greater margin. Some
of this increase was undoubtedly related to the growth of heroin
dependence, but the very large and general increase in the crime
rate suggest that most of the increase was probably attributable
to the majority of criminals who are not heroin -dependent.
Another fallacy in the researcher's reasoning lies in the fact
that the study was based on increases in arrests and
incarceration and on the records of those persons who were in
treatment. Those arrested, however, represent only a small
fraction of the universe of offenders, even drug offenders;
persons incarcerated constitute only a tiny fraction of those
arrested; and persons in treatment represent only a small
proportion of known heroin-dependent persons (many more are on
waiting lists) which, in turn, represents some unknown fraction
of all heroin-dependent persons. Thus, what is perceived as a
triumph of a particular treatment modality may be for the most
part a simple statistical artifacts </p>

<p> Numerous other methodological obstacles preclude
generalization from research findings regarding, treatment and
crime. In only one study, for example, did the researcher attempt
to control for dosage level of the methadone administered (those
with lower dosages were found to have higher crime rates). None
of the studies examined takes into account the monitoring and
supervision of the drug's administration nor is there any
standardization of the point in treatment at which the
measurements are. made. Finally, some studies use a man-year
figure as a measurement of success although the conclusions drawn
therefrom are especially likely to be distorted and misleading,
(Joseph and Dole, 1970; Gearing, 1971, Joseph, 1972). </p>

<p> To illustrate this final point, let us assume for a moment,
that we are interested in 20 individuals in treatment program X.
Of these 20, 15 had dropped out at exactly two months after
entering, two more dropped out after five months in the program,
one stayed for a year before leaving and one confirmed in
treatment for three years. Multiplying the number of individuals
(20) by the number of months each spent in the program and adding
those figures yields the total member of man-months spent in
treatment. This number, divided by 12, equals the total number of
man-years in treatment. (See Table III-5) </p>

<p> <img src="pip30007.gif"> </p>

<p> Dividing the man-month or man-year figure by the number of
individuals who had participated in treatment yields the average
(mean) number of man-months or man-years of treatment per
individual. In this case, the average number of man-months of
treatment per individual totals 5 (or an equivalent of .4
man-years of treatment per individual, on the average). </p>

<p> Both the total. and the average man-month or man-year
figures, however, provide for varying interpretation, depending
upon motive and requirements. In the case above, for example, an
individuals average time, in treatment was calculated to be five
months; yet the actual situation shows that 15 out of the 20
(75%) of these individuals dropped out of the program after two
months, the latter being the modal length of stay. </p>

<p> The ways in which programs record admission and dropout data
further complicate this matter. In some instances, persons who
drop out during the early high risk period (0-5 months after
entry into program) are simply not counted and therefore remain
invisible for dropout or failure statistics. These same persons,
however, are frequently counted as program participants for
budgetary and accounting purposes. Similarly, dropouts who return
to the program after a specific, unusually short, period of time,
are frequently counted as new program entrants rather than
readmissions, again primarily for budgetary and program
accounting reasons (Research Concepts, Inc., 1973). </p>

<p> Clearly, the manner in which data are presented can
significantly alter and distort the perception of the reader if
not the actual facts themselves. Aside from any basic
methodological deficiencies, this kind of statistical
misrepresentation constitutes perhaps the most serious defect in
the available research literature on the effect of treatment in
reducing crime among drug-dependent persons. </p>

<p> <i><b>A Realistic Appraisal</b></i> </p>

<p> We have already noted that most opiate-dependent persons
leave long histories of psychopathology and social pathology
which are manifest in delinquent, criminal, suicidal and other
deviant, behavior prior to the onset of drug use. Psychiatric and
other studies have also confirmed the hypothesis that the
pre-existence of these problems significantly increased the
individual's initial susceptibility to opiate dependence as well
as his high vulnerability to relapse into drug use and crime, 18
(Bender, 1963; Milman, 1969, Stanton, 1970a: Taylor, et al.,
1970; Chambers and Taylor, 1971 Cushman, 1971; Gearing, 1971;
Inciardi and Chambers, 1971b; Joseph, 1972; Laugrod and Lowinson,
1972; Cuskey, et al., 1973). </p>

<p> 18 A partial explanation for the increase in rearrest may lie
in police practice. By virtue of the police practice of increased
surveillance of known drug-dependent persons the once-identified
drug-dependent person, one with a history of arrest and
hospitalization, stands a greater chance of being apprehended
than does one who is not yet known to the police. The simple
addition of opiate-dependence to delinquency automatically
increases the likelihood that the drug-dependent offender will
come to the attention of the police (see Bridges, 1965: Roberts,
1967: Cuskey, et al., 1973; Jacoby, et al., 1973). </p>

<p> Additional research findings have indicated that most
opiate-dependent persons come from unstable home and family
situations where social deviance was evident in other family
members, and drop out of school at a fairly early time (generally
about 10th grade). They generally possess no marketable skills;
have non-existent or at best unstable employment histories; have
unstable personal and social relations; reside in the inner-city
ghettos and suffer the psychological, social and economic
stresses so often concommitant with that type of existence.19 </p>

<p> 19 Several researchers have attempted to describe the
&quot;addict subculture&quot; and to document its importance and
its implications for the treatment of drug-dependent individuals.
See, for example, Finestone, 1964; Sutter, 1966; Feldman, 1968;
Preble and Casey, 1969; Stephens and Levine, 1971. </p>

<p> Taken together, these findings suggest that chances for
rehabilitative success, however defined, are not high for such
individuals. The psychological ambivalence which most
opiate-dependent persons feel toward the drug coupled with the
indication from research findings that these persons had not yet
been &quot;habilitated&quot; suggests a poor prognosis for their
&quot;rehabilitation,&quot; defined in terms of a &quot;normal
life style based on gainful employment, marriage and social
stability.&quot; Notwithstanding the fact that social,
psychiatric, psychological, counseling and other ancillary
services are provided to those in treatment, this society must
face the fact that even the best of the services have inherent
limitations in the degree to which such programs can alter the
behavior of individuals who for so long have been subject to
nonsupportive social and emotional circumstances. While evidence
does exist to show that some qualitative and quantitative changes
in behavior with respect to crime and employment are associated
with treatment, the precise nature or amount of change which can
be directly attributable to programmatic inputs is difficult to
measure and has not yet been documented substantially. </p>

<p> <b><font size="4">DRUGS AND DRIVING</font></b> </p>

<p> Adult Americans spend an average of 5% of their waking hours
every day behind the wheel of their cars.20 Although
&quot;driving under the influence&quot; of drugs is universally
condemned by public opinion and public law, far too many
Americans appear unwilling to structure their activities in such
a way that drug use and driving do not coincide. In an ideal
society in which all individuals behaved responsibly, the effects
of drugs on driving would not be of major concern. In this
country, however, our citizens are more dependent on motor
vehicles than they are on drugs. For this reason, the full impact
of drug-using behavior on the public safety cannot be fully
assessed without reference to the effect of psychoactive drugs on
the user's ability to drive a motor vehicle. </p>

<p> 20 Each licensed driver drives an average of 10,000 miles
every year, spending 255 hours on the road. </p>

<p> <b>Research Limitations</b> </p>

<p> Data are generally lacking on drug use and its effect upon
the user's driving ability and motor vehicle accidents. The major
research obstacle is that effective devices are, not available to
detect some psychoactive drugs within the body fluids of persons
who are involved in accidents or traffic violations. In addition,
these, tests, where available, are inconvenient and are not
systematically administered. Since it took several years of
research to develop functional alcohol detection devices, it is
reasonable to predict that it will take some time to develop the
more complex detection devices for these drugs. Further, even if
blood or urine samples are taken in an effort to test for the
presence of drugs other than alcohol, laboratories are generally
not available or equipped to determine the identity or quantity
of drugs present. </p>

<p> Even when such tests are feasible and available, research is
further inhibited by the complexity of the drug-person
interaction. The relationship between the risk of automobile
accidents and use of psychoactive drugs is difficult to establish
for many reasons, among which are: the wide variety of such drugs
which are available; the, substantial quantitative and
qualitative variation in drug-effect, the differences in duration
of drug effect; the cumulative and/or interaction effects due to
prolonged or combined drug usage, and individual differences in
reaction to drug-effect. One of the major shortcomings of prior
research is its emphasis on the dosage per se rather than on
blood concentration levels which more accurately reflect the
dosage effect according to individual characteristics, such as
weight. </p>

<p> Moreover, the studies conducted leave suffered from serious
methodological defects which undermine their findings (Nichols.
1971). </p>

<p> Laboratory Investigations can determine the effects of use of
particular drugs on driving-related performance. However, it is
difficult to generalize such results to real driving situations,
and previous studies have failed to relate performance decrement
to drug concentration levels. </p>

<p> <i>Anecdotal reports and case histories </i>may suggest areas
where controlled research is needed, but are, in themselves
insufficient to establish relationships. </p>

<p> <i>Comparison of crash records of drug users and non-users </i>comprises
an alternative method for assessing the impact of drug use on
highway accidents. However, even if the frequency of accidents is
higher among drug users, these findings do not establish any
causal relationship between the variables. For example, there is
no way of determining from this method alone whether the highway
accidents in which drug users are involved occurred while such
users were &quot;under the influence&quot; of a drug. </p>

<p> <i>Systematic analysis of body fluids taken from crash
victims can </i>determine the correlation between drug use and
accidents but can only presume causal relationships. As we noted
earlier, such data are presently inadequate because some drugs
are not detectable in human body fluid samples. In addition,
testing procedures are plagued by unstandardized sampling and
screening techniques. </p>

<p> <i>Comparison of drug concentration levels of crash victims
and of non-involved drivers operating vehicles under similar
circumstances </i>is perhaps the. soundest way of determining the
impact which drug use <i>per se </i>may be having on highway
crashes. However, this procedure has not generally been used in
connection with drugs other than alcohol. In addition, it is
hampered by the difficulty of matching comparison groups and by
the inconvenience of stopping and testing drivers not involved in
accidents. </p>

<p> <b>Research Findings</b> </p>

<p> Prior to describing the available data regarding specific
drugs and their effects on driving, we should note that
insufficient attention has been paid to the impact of
&quot;medical&quot; drugs on driving performance. </p>

<p> At any one time, perhaps 3-5% of the driving population (age
16 and over) are taking psychoactive medication prescribed by a
physician (Kibrick and Smart, 1970).21 </p>

<p> 21 In addition, psychoactive preparations sold
over-the-counter may affect driving performance. So may some
prescription drugs not normally taken for their psychoactive
properties, such as antihistamines, which may have sedative side
effects in some individuals. </p>

<p> <i><b>Alcohol</b></i> </p>

<p> Alcohol is the one drug which has been studied extensively to
determine its effect on driving ability. Not surprisingly, the
data confirm popular opinion that its use is a major contributor
to accidents, especially fatal ones. The evidence consists
largely of postmortems of fatally injured drivers, conducted in a
multitude of locations , which consistently show that 60% of
these victims had more than a 0.05% blood/alcohol concentration
and that at least 30% of these drivers had more than a 0.15%
blood/alcohol concentration (Arthur D. Little, Inc. 1966; Midwest
Research Institute, 1972). Complete assessment of the role of
alcohol in accidents requires a controlled investigation
comparing the incidence of drinking by accident and non-accident
driving populations exposed to the same risks. Such studies are
not conclusive, but they do indicate that the incidence of
drinking in the non-accident group is far less, and among the
accident group, drinkers are more prevalent than nondrinkers. </p>

<p> Present data, though still inadequate, are sufficient to
suggest for purposes of policy making that drinking itself is a
contributory factor in a major fraction of all traffic accidents
and fatalities. In addition, several researchers have estimated
that heavy drinking may be a factor in perhaps one, quarter of
all automobile fatalities. Although infrequent heavy drinking and
chronic alcoholism naive not been sufficiently distinguished in
the, literature, one study does indicate that alcoholics, when
sober, do not appear to have an accident rate significantly
higher than average. These points could stand further
examination, but additional studies are quite unlikely to refute
the present evidence which implicates chronic drinking as a very
important factor in fatal automobile accidents (Arthur D. Little,
1966). </p>

<p> <b>Marihuana</b> </p>

<p> In our first Report on marihuana, we concluded that research
had not proven that use of this drug significantly impairs
driving ability or performance; we cautioned, however, that
driving under the influence of any potent psychoactive drug is a
serious risk to public safety and that acute effects of marihuana
intoxication, such as spatial and time distortion and slowed
reflexes, could be expected to impair driving performance. We
also urged further research in this area. </p>

<p> In the period between our first Report and the present one
several studies have been performed to determine whether or not
automobile driving performance may be adversely affected by use
of marihuana. Generally, the studies indicate that marihuana use,
even at dose levels normally consumed in social settings, does
impair to a significant degree visual perceptual performance as
well as temporally controlled responses (National Institute of
Mental Health, 1973). </p>

<p> In actual and simulated driving tests, poorer automobile
handling was found among subjects under the influence of
marihuana, including slowed reaction times and increased
frequency of incorrect or inadequate driver-responses (Dott,
1972, Kielholz, et a]., 1972. Miller, et al, 1972) </p>

<p> In experiments designed to study the effects of marihuana on
driving-related visual functions, it was found that marihuana
interfered with peripheral vision as well as central vision. This
deficit was interpreted as a result of momentary lapses of
attention during marihuana intoxication (Moskovitz, 1972). </p>

<p> <i><b>Other Psychoactive Substances</b></i> </p>

<p> In contrast to the vast literature on alcohol and the growing
marihuana research, very few studies have been conducted
regarding the relationship between use of other psychoactive
drugs and motor vehicle accidents. Virtually no research has
appeared on hallucinogens and cocaine, and the studies on
opiates, amphetamines, barbiturates and tranquilizers are quite
limited. </p>

<p> On the basis of pharmacologic effects, however, some
generalizations can be made. The information presented earlier in
this Chapter regarding the influence of psychoactive drugs on
perception and psychomotor function have important implications
for driving performance. The, amphetamines present a case in
point. Although the stimulant properties of amphetamines and
amphetamine-like drugs may appear to improve alertness and
endurance, a significant highway hazard is presented by the
extreme fatigue and mental depression which occur when the
effects of stimulant drugs have worn off and by the unpredictable
appearance of these, effects after extended use. </p>

<p> In sum, depending on dose, most psychoactive drugs are
capable of impairing driving performance. It can be predicted
that widespread use of any of these drugs would have a direct
impact on highway safety. </p>

<hr>

<h2>IV -- IMPACT ON PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE</h2>

<p> It has become increasingly common in recent years to
characterize drug use as a public health issue, as opposed to a
criminal justice. issue, or alternatively as a medical problem as
opposed to a legal problem. Before analyzing the impact of drug
use on the public health and welfare, this classification of drug
use as a public health problem must be clarified and placed in
proper perspective. </p>

<p> A public health problem is neither synonymous with medicine
nor antonymous with law. The distinguishing feature of the public
health approach is the recognition that prevention of a definable
physical or psychological condition is beyond the competence of
the traditional medical system. Lead poisoning, cigarette
smoking, and air pollution are public health problems precisely
because, their prevention requires social resources and legal
measures beyond the services of individual physicians. Public
health is essentially a socio-medical concept, and legal actions
are generally ail integral part of the public health response to
a problem, as is illustrated by enforced quarantine of Carriers
of communicable diseases, compulsory vaccination, prohibition of
use, of lead in house paint. and fluoridation of water.
Prevention of certain social conditions having ail impact on the
health and welfare of the population is the hallmark of a public
health approach .22 </p>

<p> 22 The oft-stated distinction between the
&quot;criminal&quot; and &quot;medical&quot; approaches refers
primarily to the individual drug user, rather than to the public
impact of drug-using behavior. Many of those who characterize
drug use as a &quot;medical problem&quot; would prefer that the
individual be left alone and be permitted to risk his own health
if he so chooses. On the other hand, those who insist that drug
use he viewed as a criminal justice problem are emphasizing
either that the person should be punished for his behavior or
that the criminal law is a necessary deterrent to drug use or
both. Persons insisting on criminal intervention may actually be
doing so on public health grounds on the theory that the criminal
law will contain drug use and minimize its potentially adverse
consequences on the public health and welfare.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE: A PREVENTIVE CONCEPT</b> </p>

<p> In the Commission's view, all public health problems share
two common features. First, the society is confronted with a
significant incidence of a disabling medical condition or a clear
potential for development of such a situation. For example, a few
unrelated cases of pneumonia do not constitute a public health
concern; only when a particular condition becomes or threatens to
become of consequence to the collective well-being does it become
a public health matter. Second, the prevention and control,
including perhaps even treatment of this condition is generally
beyond the capacity of the individual medical practitioner. These
two elements define the existence of a public health problem. The
contours of the public health response will be determined by the,
nature of any operating),' assumption with regard to the cause or
causes of the undesirable condition, or in the absence of such a
hypothesis, will be limited to research alone. </p>

<p> The classic illustration of a public health problem is the
communicable disease such as typhoid. Prevention (or
&quot;primary treatment&quot; in the lexicon of public health
officials) would include sewage systems, water purification,
regulations for dish and food handling and immunization
procedures. Strategies of control (&quot;secondary
treatment&quot;) would be instituted upon the appearance of a
single, case of typhoid, including isolation of the carriers and
other techniques for reducing the spread of the epidemic.
Obviously such measures are beyond the capacity of individual
physicians and require an integrated public response. 23 In this
situation the potential impact on the public, health and welfare
is substantial, the relationship between an individual carrier
and the undesirable social consequences is immediate and direct,
and the necessary preventive and control measures are apparent. </p>

<p> 23 Treatment (&quot;tertiary treatment&quot;) could be
performed by the physician, such as by administering antibiotics,
etc. </p>

<p> On the fringes of the public health concept are matters such
as disabling automobile accidents. Here we have situations where
there is a significant incidence of a disabling medical
condition, one which is predictable and proportionate to the
number of drivers. In addition, the condition can presumably be
prevented by eliminating automobiles or controlled by various
traffic safety regulations. Finally, the population at-risk is
definable and becomes larger as participants in this activity
communicate its advantages to others. Thus, analytically
speaking, automobile accidents are a public health concern. The
crucial question, of course, relates to the implications of so
classifying them, and the relevance of countervailing social
needs and values, such as the utility of individual
transportation and the personal conveniences of relatively
unencumbered driving. </p>

<p> This brings us to the important question. In what ways is it
useful to think of drug use as a public health problem? The
earlier discussions of drug dependence and drug-induced behavior
demonstrate that the adverse social impact of drug use arises
from the special capacity of psychoactive drugs to influence
behavior by direct action on the brain. The acute or chronic use
of any drug, whether or not it is psychoactive, carries risk for
the physical health of the user, depending on dose, frequency and
other variables; but this fact is not the one which defines the
special public health dimension of psychoactive drug use. The
major component of the public health concern with drugs is mental
health, broadly defined: the decrement in individual's social and
psychological functioning attending certain patterns of drug use.
Consequently, the public &quot;health&quot; aspect actually
encompasses the less tangible impact on the total welfare of the
individual and the community in terms of social and economic
functioning. In short, the public health and welfare issues
overlap, as do the consequences to the individual and the
society. </p>

<p> In terms of public health analysis, the use of psychoactive
drugs falls somewhere in between the prototypical communicable
diseases on the one hand and car accidents on the other. It is
possible to predict and measure in very gross terms incidence of
disabling physical and psychological conditions among a
population of drug users. It is also possible to predict under a
given set of social conditions that the population at-risk will
be increased as drug users introduce their friends and
acquaintances to this behavior. Finally, the harm to the social
organism accruing from compulsive drug use is clear and
substantial, its is apparent from the incidence and consequences
of chronic alcoholism. In this sense, then, the use, of
psychoactive drugs particularly in intensified or compulsive use
patterns, has an adverse impact on the public health and welfare,
and may legitimately be classified as a public health problem. </p>

<p> The next question is whether and in what ways the
institutional apparatus we call the public health system can be
brought to bear in order to prevent, control and minimize these
aspects of the problem. As preventive measures, legal
prohibitions or restrictions on availability may be viewed as
elements of a public health approach. Of course, the public
health considerations may be outweighed by advantages offered by
the specific drug, whether therapeutic, recreational or
sacramental, and by the impracticality of restricting
availability under certain social conditions, as in the case of
alcohol. As we pointed out in Chapter Two, legal restrictions on
distribution can only reduce availability, not eliminate it. </p>

<p> Given the availability of psychoactive drugs and the
inevitability of their use, the public health approach must be
oriented toward the amelioration of the, acute health hazards of
use and the prevention of intensified and compulsive use, those
patterns with direct impact on the public health and welfare. As
our earlier observations on drug dependence illustrate, these
behavior patterns are initiated and reinforced by interrelating
factors involving the effects of the drug, the characteristics of
the user and the nature of the environment. Consequently,
institutional efforts to prevent drug dependence are inseparable
from the emerging concept of &quot;total health&quot; which
embraces the individual and his relationship with his
environment. It is crucial to recognize in this connection that
all intensified or compulsive drug user almost always has other
problems as well: emotional, social, familial, medical and under
our present system, legal. For this reason, the requirements of a
public health and welfare strategy is the need and ability to
provide a wide range of services to the individuals and
communities at-risk. </p>

<p> Before dealing with the appropriate public health response to
drug use, more specificity as to the adverse impact of this
behavior on the public health and welfare is needed.
Unfortunately, however, this impact has not been measured with
any degree of precision. As we pointed out earlier, the incidence
of drug use which has been measured does not define the problem.
The threshold question is to determine the conditions upon which
the psychological and behavioral concomitants of drug use are of
consequence to the public health and welfare. </p>

<p> <b><font size="2">ASSESSING THE PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
IMPACT OF DRUG USE </font></b> </p>

<p> The, forms of drug dependence with which society is most
familiar are that of the chronic alcoholic or &quot;skid
row&quot; drunk and the street heroin-dependent person. Somewhat
less visible than these compulsive users, however, is an even
larger group of intensified alcohol users who can be classified
as marginal with respect to their social functioning and economic
capability. Further, a substantial number of drug dependent
individuals generally remain &quot;hidden&quot; from public
notice. The opiate-dependent physician, the barbiturate-dependent
housewife and the functional alcoholic, for example, all
presumably suffer from some impairment of functioning which might
be manifested in absenteeism, reduced performance level or
neglect of family responsibility. However, since no concrete
information is available on these matters and the social impact
is not easily ascertainable, our primary focus here will be upon
that more visible group of drug-dependent individuals (generally
on heroin or alcohol), who cannot maintain an adequate level of
economic, social and psychological functioning and who therefore
pose more, immediate consequences for the public health and
welfare. </p>

<p> A very substantial proportion of such individuals is drawn
from what might be called a pre-dependent or high-risk group;
that is, persons who have been raised in an atmosphere rife with
social and psychological pathology: poverty, illiteracy,
malnutrition, delinquency, violence. emotional deprivation,
mental illness and alcohol or other drug dependence. These
persons are especially at-risk because they frequently lack both
the inner strengths and the institutional supports necessary to
cope successfully with the problems of living in such an
environment. </p>

<p> Because the environment in which heroin-dependent persons
dwell is frequently and characteristically the same as that in
which they resided prior to becoming heroin dependent, it is not
surprising to find substantial proportions of these individuals
with histories of psychiatric disorders, delinquent and criminal
behavior which long preceded their heroin involvement. In such
cases, the same unhealthy conditions which existed in the past
are simply carried over into the present but are now exacerbated
by the additional problems concomitant with drug dependence. </p>

<p> The Commission has noted an absence of reliable data with
respect t the social and economic costs of alcohol dependence,
and data regarding heroin dependence are virtually nonexistent.
Further, available data in specific jurisdictions are generally
not maintained in a manner which permits comparison with the
experiences of other jurisdictions. </p>

<p> Therefore, the following information regarding the impact of
drug dependence on the public health and welfare will be drawn
principally from the research on alcoholism. </p>

<p> <b>The Population of Heavy Alcohol Users</b> </p>

<p> The problems associated with drinking and alcoholism have
been demonstrated by many researchers. In a national survey
conducted by Cahalan, et al., (1969), for example, 31% of the
sample indicated some problem with drinking within the last three
years. Forty percent of the men and 15% of the women claimed some
psychological dependence on alcohol while 12% of the men and 8%
of the women reportedly experienced some health problem
associated with drinking during the three years preceding the
survey. </p>

<p> The Cahalan, et al., 1969 survey of drinking practices found
that 28% of the male drinkers and 8% of the female drinkers were
heavy drinkers and that half of the heavy drinkers (6% of the
general population) were heavy-escape drinkers who drank
excessively in an effort to avoid social pressures and personal
problems. Although such heavy-escape drinkers included most of
those termed &quot;alcoholics,&quot; they may also include
excessive drinkers who have avoided much of the long-term
psychological and physical effects of alcoholism. </p>

<p> In any case, Cahalan, et al., (1969) found that most
important predictors of heavy drinking to be sex, age, city size
and social position. The proportion of male heavy drinkers, for
example, was found to be about three and one-half times higher
than the proportion of female heavy drinker (28% VS. 8%).24 Among
drinkers, the highest proportion of heavy drinkers (30%) are men
in the 30-34 and 45-49 year age groups; in women the highest
proportions (10%) are found in the 45-49 and 21-24 year age
groups. For both sexes the prevalence of heavy drinking declined
rapidly after age 50. Residents of large urban areas consistently
evidenced higher rates of heavy drinking than did residents of
smaller towns. </p>

<p> 24 The U.S. Department of Health. Education and Welfare found
in 1965 that at least five times as many men as women were
&quot;alcoholics.&quot; </p>

<p> <b>Economic Loss</b> </p>

<p> The available data indicate that most heroin-dependent
persons are males, under 26 years of age with a tenth-grade
education or less, whose age at first arrest for heroin use was
genet-ally between 16 and 19 years. To a great extent, the
heroin-dependent individual suffers the loss of his youth, his
most formative and important years for healthy growth and
development, which can never be regained or recouped. And the
community simultaneously suffers the loss of its most valuable
natural resource. </p>

<p> Because alcohol dependence develops gradually, economic
losses do not generally occur among younger populations, in
marked contrast to those associated with heroin use. However,
once alcohol dependence develops, its impact on economic
functioning is devastating. </p>

<p> Gillespie (1967) found that between 27 and 81% (median 52%)
of alcoholics are unemployed. Fifty-two percent of the
hospitalized alcoholics in Glatt's sample (1967) lost their jobs
because of drinking, while Robbins, et al. (1969) discovered that
56% of alcoholics had job difficulties directly attributable to
drinking. Among alcohol-dependent persons who remained employed,
the decrement in job performance is substantial. For example, the
American Society for Personnel Administration (1972) has
estimated that &quot;there are 4.4 million employed people in the
country who are alcoholics; 90% of them have been on the job
10-20 years; they're costing employers $8-10 billion per
year.&quot; </p>

<p> Although the precise amount of absenteeism, accidents and
economic losses attendant to alcohol use is difficult to assess,
its impact is clearly considerable. Zentner (1969) found that the
cost to industry primarily in<b> </b>absenteeism and inefficient
job performance among employed alcoholics is nearly $2 billion
per year. Trice (1965) found that alcoholics use two to five
times more sick time than non-alcoholics and receive three times
the, amount of disability payments. Trice and Roman (1972) note
that sickness payments for problem drinkers was three times
greater than those for the normal worker. </p>

<p> A review of the existing literature indicates that most
observers generally agree that drug and alcohol dependence
contribute to increased insurance rates, industrial accidents,
increased absenteeism, theft, problems of morale and discipline,
impaired job performance, security risks, retraining costs and
other associated problems. </p>

<p> <b>Death</b> </p>

<p> Death is a particularly finite measure of the social cost of
drug dependence. The correlation between unnatural or premature
death and drug dependence is an astounding one. Because the data
regarding alcohol-related death is national in scope and
reliable, while that regarding other drugs is regional and
sketchy, we will have to present this information separately. It
does appear in<b> </b>general, however, that drug-dependent
persons and heavy non-dependent users are more likely than the
rest of the population to die by their own hand, either
intentionally or accidentally , or by the hand of others. </p>

<p> <i><b><font size="2">Alcohol</font></b></i> </p>

<p> Robbins, et al. (1959) reported that 26% of suicide victims
were reported to be chronic alcoholics. On the basis of a study
made one year later, 31% of the suicides were found to be
alcoholics (Palola, et al., 1962). The suicide rate for
hospitalized male alcoholics was reported by Kessel and Walton
(1965) to be 86 times the rate expected for the general
population; and 75% of the suicide victims studied by Murphy and
Robins (1967) were found to suffer from either alcoholism or
depression. </p>

<p> In addition to suicide, the excessive drinker of alcohol
risks death and injury in various other ways. Alcoholics are 2.5
to 3 times as likely to die during any given time period as the,
general population (Tashiro and Lipscomb, 1963; Brenner, 1967).
The most frequent causes of death are violence 24% (9% in general
population), heart disease 23% (40% in general population), and
cirrhosis of the liver 14% (3% in general population). Alcoholics
are seven times as likely to die in fatal accidents as
non-alcoholics (Tashiro and Lipscomb, 1963). </p>

<p> Waller (1968) found that 71% of persons who died of
accidental poisoning had a blood alcohol content of .10% or
higher. The same was true of 58% of those killed by fire and 46%
of those who drowned. In contrast, only 7% of the victims of
death by natural causes had significant levels of blood alcohol. </p>

<p> Accidents in the home, on the job or on the road show very
few factors in common other than human carelessness. It is
striking, therefore, to note how closely alcohol use is
correlated with accidental injury. By subjecting non-fatal
accident victims to the breathalyzer test, Wechsler et al.,
(1969) found that 22% of home accident victims, 30% of
transportation accident victims, and 15.5% of those<font size="1">
</font>with occupational injuries had positive blood alcohol
readings. Victims of fights or assaults showed significantly
higher alcohol involvement, with 56% showing positive blood
alcohol readings. </p>

<p> <font size="2">As we noted earlier in this chapter, a drinker
is less likely to survive than a non-drinker even when both are
involved in the same two vehicle automobile accident. In a study
of such crashes in<b> </b>which one driver survived, it was the
non-drinking driver who survived in 59 of 67 cases (U.S.
Department of Transportation, 1970b).</font> </p>

<p> The Commission's review of presently available data indicates
that property damage, insurance costs and medical services
consequent to alcohol-related motor vehicle accidents ran to $1
billion in 1971 (National Clearinghouse for Alcohol Information,
1972). A review of highway fatalities since 1966 shows that each
year approximately one-half are related to accidents involving
alcohol. From a public welfare standpoint, the impact is
considerable when one considers the lost earning power of those
injured or killed, the social security payments to dependents of
the deceased as well as public assistance and aid to dependent
children-expenditures which must be maintained as the result of
such accidents. </p>

<p> These data demonstrate, that the excessive drinker is subject
to significantly greater physical and social stress leading to
higher injury and fatality rates than the general population. The
greater vulnerability appears to be due to the general stress
involved in the alcoholic's living conditions, the presence of an
inadequate diet, the diseases connected with alcohol consumption
itself, and the increased (Chance of death after injury with
large quantities of alcohol in the blood (Brenner, 1967). </p>

<p> <i><b>Heroin</b></i> </p>

<p> National data concerning the incidence of heroin-related
death do not exist. The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner in
New York City, however, maintains what are undoubtedly the best
statistics on heroin-related morbidity and mortality. In 1968, he
estimated that bacterial endocarditis caused about 2% of the
deaths among heroin dependent persons in New York City, a figure
which represented about one-third of all deaths from endocarditis
in that city. In that same year it was noted that more than
one-half of the patients admitted to Bellevue Hospital for
hepatitis were heroin-dependent persons who injected the drug
intravenously (Baden, 1970). </p>

<p> In 1972, heroin-related deaths in New York City rose slightly
in comparison with the previous year (916 in 1971 to 924 in
1972). These, statistics account for deaths due to acute heroin
reaction and overdose, and deaths from hepatitis, endocarditis
and other infections. lf we add to these data other
heroin-related deaths such as homicides, suicides and fatal
accidents, the total figure for 1972 climbs to 1,409 as compared
with the composite 1971 figure of 1,268. New York City reported
324 opiate-dependent persons were homicide victims in 1972, as
compared with 208 in 1971 (Markham, 197 3). </p>

<p> Far too little is known at the present time about the
syndrome of acute fatal reaction following the intravenous
injection of heroin. Acute reaction which constitutes the major
cause of death among heroin users is commonly referred to as
&quot;overdose.&quot; Baden points out that this is an inaccurate
judgment and states that: </p>

<p> A pharmacologic overdose can sometimes be demonstrated, but
the precise mechanism of death is not clear in most cases. There
are probably many mechanisms for death, which may include an
allergic type reaction to heroin, quinine, or other dilutents; a
reaction to injected bacteria or other foreign materials; or a
true pharmacologic overdose of heroin or quinine or other drugs
(Baden, 1972a: 837). </p>

<p> Presently available data point to the fact that in<b> </b>New
York City, the heroin-related deaths account for the largest
proportion of deaths of persons between the ages of 15 and 35
years. In<b> </b>1960, New York City reported 199 opiate deaths.
This figure rose almost five times by 1972 when 924 deaths were
attributable to opiate drugs. Further, during the decade of the
1960's, as the number of deaths from opiates significantly
increased, the median age of such deaths decreased from 31 years
in 1960 to 23 years in 1972. As Baden (1972b) points out: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>[There has been a] change in pattern of drugs abused from
    heroin alone to multiple drugs, most recently methadone; more<b>
    </b>than 30% of narcotic deaths in New York City this year
    [1972] have been associated with methadone use, licit and
    illicit. The majority of younger addicts now have other drugs
    in their tissues at autopsy in addition to heroin: alcohol,
    methadone, barbiturates, and others hypnotics, amphetamines,
    tranquilizers, analgesics, etc. (P. 1). </p>
</blockquote>

<p> <i><b>Barbiturates</b></i> </p>

<p> Barbiturates appear to be related to death in two ways:
consumption of lethal doses is a common means by which persons
commit suicide; and their combined effects with alcohol sometimes
result in death even in cases where suicide is not apparent. It
has been estimated that 400 barbiturate-induced suicides occur
each year in New York City alone (Baden, 1972c). NIMH (1968)
indicates that there were 1,602 suicides involving barbiturates
nationwide in 1968. </p>

<p> Many accidental deaths involving barbiturates appear to
involve alcohol. For example, a report prepared for the
Commission by the Assistant Medical Examiner of Dade County,
Florida, indicates that 151 persons died from barbiturate-related
causes during 1970 and 1971, 133 of which were classified as
suicides on<b> </b>the basis of other factors. Of the 132 cases
tested for the presence of alcohol, 35% were positive, and 40% of
the accidental overdoses had blood alcohol levels of 0.05% or
more as compared with 23% of the suicides (Blackbourne, 1972). </p>

<p> <b>Medical Complications of Chronic Drug Use</b> </p>

<p> Disease which is related either to the life style of the drug
user or to the method by which be administered the drug is
especially common among skid row alcoholics and heroin-dependent
persons. In these populations susceptibility to various ailments
is significantly increased by virtue of life style; these
individuals commonly live in rather poor circumstances under
frequently unsanitary conditions. Consequent to their general
inability to maintain proper nutrition and health habits, these
persons frequently contract tuberculosis and other communicable
diseases or illnesses .25 </p>

<p> 25 A substantial public health concern in this regard is the
transmission of disease, especially hepatitis, through medically
required blood transfusion. It has been a longstanding and common
practice for hospitals to purchase whole blood from proprietary
blood banks because voluntary sources, especially Red
Cross-sponsored programs, are frequently unable to provide it in
sufficient amounts. It has likewise been a common practice for
persons who are drug dependent (especially heroin and
alcohol-dependent persons) to sell their blood. Cohen and
Dougherty (1968) found that the risk of contracting hepatitis
from transfusion of blood from a proprietary blood bank was six
times greater than from a bank where blood was given free. They
discovered as well that the chance of contracting hepatitis from
blood donated by known or suspected heroin dependent persons was
70 times greater than that of non-parenteral drug users. </p>

<p> In addition to diseases which may be related to life style, a
number of prevalent conditions or diseases are immediately
related to the method by which a drug is administered. Among
persons who are parenteral drug users, the use of unsterile
needles and contaminated drug solutions contributes to a serious
disease problem. Hepatitis, infectious endocarditis and tetanus
are particularly common among heroin users. </p>

<p> In New York City, tetanus is almost exclusively found among
heroin users. The Deputy Chief Medical Examiner of New York City
estimates that between 10 and 20% of deaths among
heroin-dependent persons are due directly to medical
complications, particularly hepatitis, infective endocarditis and
returns. Heart damage related to endocarditis is not uncommon
among persons engaged in parenteral drug use. Baden estimates
that 80% of the infective endocarditis cases are bacterial and
involve the aortic and mitral valves (Baden, 1972b). Similar
patterns of disease have been noted among persons who inject
&quot;speed&quot; or barbiturates (Canadian Commission . . .,
1972). </p>

<p> Disease and other medical complications associated with
alcohol use, are both common and serious. The incidence of heart
disease and cirrhosis of the liver is disproportionately high
among alcohol users (Tashiro and Lipscomb, 1963). Statistics from
New York City also point to the association of tuberculosis with
both alcohol and heroin dependence. It is estimated that 10% of
those admitted to the Chest Service at Bellevue Hospital are
heroin-dependent persons suffering from tuberculosis; 30-40% are
chronic alcoholics also afflicted with tuberculosis. </p>

<p> Cahalan, et al. (1969) found that 12% of all male drinkers
and 8% of all female drinkers experience health problems related
to alcohol use. Other researchers have noted that if a
21-year-old male in good physical health starts drinking, he has
a .9% chance of deeveloping gastritis, a 1% chance of developing
Laennec's cirrhosis, a 0.02% chance of developing primary liver
cell carcinoma, and a 0.01% chance of developing delirium tremens
(Malzberg, 1960; Sundby, 1967; Victor and Adams, 1970; Brunt,
1971; Goodman and Gilman, 1971). </p>

<p> It should be noted that contrary to popular belief,
alcoholism is rather common among heroin-dependent persons. A
1968 report emanating from the Office of the Chief Medical
Examiner in<b> </b>New York City indicates that at least 20% of
the heroin-dependent population. demonstrate heavy drinking
problems, and many show fatty livers and alcoholic-type cirrhosis
at autopsy (Baden, 1970). </p>

<p> <b>Impact on the Family Structure</b> </p>

<p> The family unit is particularly susceptible to the impact of
drug dependence; it not only reflects but magnifies the effects
of crime, suicide, accidents, economic problems, illness and
death. The influence of excessive drinking is deleterious to all
aspects of family life and often reduces the ability of family
members to function within them accepted limits of our society. </p>

<p> The alcoholic marriage is generally unstable and disturbed.
Chafetz, et al. (1971) found marital instability in 41% of the
families of alcoholics. Intense conflict appeared in 60% of
alcoholic homes (27% of the homes of non-drinkers) in a study by
McCord and McCord (1960). The Robins (1966) study revealed that
55% of previously married alcoholics bad been divorced.
Separations or divorces were found in 60% of the alcoholics'
family units by Lemert (1960). In<b> </b>fact, the higher the
degree of alcoholic involvement, the lower the likelihood of an
intact marriage (U.S. Department of Transportation, 1970a). In a
review of 22 studies conducted between 1944 and 1965, for
example, Gillespie (1967) found that 18-55% (median 32%) of
alcoholics are divorced or separated. Pittman and Gordon (1967)
noted that among their sample of chronic drinkers, 19% were
divorced and 32% were separated. </p>

<p> The effect on<b> </b>children of alcoholic parents has been
especially remarkable; between 22% and 55% of the children of
alcoholics have been reported to become alcoholics themselves
(Ellerman, 1948; Prout, et al., 1950; Selzer and<b> </b>Holloway,
1957; McCord and McCord, 1960; Moore and Ramseur, 1960; Block,
1964; Bailey, et al., 1965). </p>

<p> Goodwin, et al. (1971) reported that 67% of male felons
studied were alcoholics or problem drinkers. Studies of the
backgrounds of alcoholic criminals seem to indicate not only that
their family history and experiences are related to alcoholism
itself, but that a significantly high incidence of violence is
part of their home environment. Social deviance found in the
family may well be learned and passed on by parents to their
children, so that a pattern of deviance develops. </p>

<p> Of all the social institutions, the family is perhaps the
most crucially affected by drug dependence. </p>

<p> <b><font size="2">Compensatory Social <b>Costs</b></font></b>
</p>

<p> <font size="2">The Commission has found that very few
jurisdictions maintain any data on public assistance payments to
drug-dependent persons. However, it has been estimated that
one-third of all persons receiving welfare payments use alcohol
excessively (Rubington, 1969). Regarding heroin dependence, data
obtained from the City and State of New York in<b> </b>early 1973
indicate that there are about 30,000 heroin dependent persons
receiving public assistance in the State of New York.
Twenty-seven thousand of these are in New York City. Heroin
dependent persons thus comprise 1.5% of the total public welfare
caseload of New York State, estimated at 1.8 million persons. In<b>
</b>New York City, these persons comprise 2.1% of the public
welfare rolls in a total caseload of 1.2 million.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Of course these data represent only the tip of
the iceberg. Social support for the families of compulsive drug
users runs into hundreds of millions of dollars, and the massive
investment in treatment and rehabilitation services constitutes a
major social cost of drug dependence. The federal and state
governments spend approximately $380 million annually in<b> </b>connection
with alcohol treatment and yearly expenditures for
&quot;drug&quot; treatment have now reached $650 million. To
these costs should be added the $100 million annually spent
processing chronic alcoholics through the criminal justice system
(President's Commission, Task Force on Drunkenness, 1967) as well
as the $475 million devoted to processing heroin-dependent
persons (McGlothlin, 1972).</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">FRAMING A PUBLIC HEALTH RESPONSE</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The psychosocial, medical and economic
problems produced by and associated with drug dependence are
substantial. Whether the drug dependence is of the
&quot;hidden&quot;' variety in which the individual is
functional, albeit at a reduced level, or is totally
incapacitating and visible, it is a costly proposition for the
public health and welfare. Individuals who are socially
incapacitated as a consequence of alcohol, heroin, or other drug
use deprive the community of their participation and constitute a
drain on public resources. Unfortunately, they often appear
immune to many of the traditional methods of intervention, most
of which are directed at the symptoms rather than the causes of
dependence.</font> </p>

<p> The Commission has observed that in order to deal effectively
with this kind of drug dependence, reliable and valid information
about the epidemiology of that condition is essential. At
present, however, few reliable or valid data exist in this area.
We simply do not know the number of persons who can be
characterized as either pre-dependent individuals especially
vulnerable to full-scale dependence, or even the number who are,
already incapacitated by drug dependence. </p>

<p> Consequently, most of the &quot;public health&quot; response
to drug dependence, whether labeled &quot;control,&quot;
&quot;prevention,&quot; &quot;treatment&quot; or
&quot;rehabilitation,&quot; has occurred after the fact.
Imperfect knowledge has been one reason for society's failure to
&quot;rehearse&quot; the problem and formulate an effective
preventive strategy. But, there is another reason for this
failure: the inadequacy of the public health structure itself. </p>

<p> In this nation's pluralistic medical and human services
system, the functions of health and social service agencies are
largely undefined and overlapping. The fact that a particular
situation has been defined as a public health problem does not
assure that all of these resources will be harnessed in a
coordinated way to deal with the problem; instead it is entirely
likely that a series of initial <i>ad hoc </i>responses will be
followed by attempts on the part of each of the diverse
components of the system to define its own role independently of
the others. This is precisely the situation that now
characterizes the &quot;public health response&quot; to the
problem of drug use. </p>

<p> In this as in other public, health areas, a multitude of
public and private service agencies are involved: family and
child-care agencies, welfare organizations, business resources,
law enforcement agencies, the medical profession, community
mental health centers, the schools, social service agencies and
so on. There is no cohesive response as each institution deals
with a. small component of the total problem. Confusion of
funding, lack of training, inadequate accessibility of services
and insufficient assignment of priorities now characterize this
society's response to many public health problems ranging from
nutrition to drug dependence .26 </p>

<p> At the present time, a &quot;public health approach&quot; is
more a way of looking at a problem than of dealing with it.
Consequently, to state that drug use is a public health and
welfare problem is only to confirm the actual and potential
impact of certain drug-using behaviors on the public health and
welfare. Beyond this point, the determination of the appropriate
public health strategy is plagued by the amorphous character of
this nation's public health system, if in fact we have a
definable &quot;system&quot;, and uncertainty about, the utility
of different responses to the problem. </p>

<p> The Commission notes that the community mental health system
is designed to overcome these problems although administrative
and financial obstacles have continued to inhibit its
development. </p>

<p> We would suggest that an appropriate strategy for preventing
the adverse public health and welfare consequences of drug use
can be formulated only after the following questions are
answered. What, as a practical matter, can be, done in order to
prevent medical complications from drug use, to prevent chronic
use in general and to restore the health and social functioning
of those who have engaged in such use? Which of the components of
the public health and welfare system can perform those functions
which are achievable? In what ways should the various public
health and welfare resources be structured for delivery to the
client populations? Finally, if the existing resources are
insufficient, how should they be allocated and what new health
and welfare services should be developed? </p>

<p> In the next chapter we will address specifically three
particular elements of the public health response; prevention,
treatment and rehabilitation and emergency intervention. As a
prelude to these discussions, however, we think it important to
outline some general principles for formulating these strategies.
</p>

<p> First, the response to drug use must be part of the general
sociomedical strategy, focusing on the total person as a part of
the total environment, including the interrelationship between
family members, peers and other community influences on social
integration and mental health. </p>

<p> Second, the community-based response apparatus must be geared
to early detection of problems, and must have the capacity to
deal with them at all stages, primary through chronic. By
focusing on acute problems, early intervention techniques and
ongoing care, many drug related problems can be prevented among
the individuals being &quot;treated,&quot; and, most importantly,
among those influenced by them. For example, early concern about
the, families of those who are alcohol or heroin dependent might
be the most effective strategy for minimizing the incidence of
dependence among offspring. </p>

<p> Third, within this overall framework, services must be
geographically and economically accessible to target populations,
who must be aware of their existence. These services must be
adequate in terms of the training and experience of all
professional and paraprofessional personnel '27 and in terms of
facilities and equipment. Finally, the, services must be
coordinated in<b> </b>terms of lines of communication, authority
and responsibility. </p>

<p> 27 In this connection, the Commission notes with favor the
development of regional training and resource centers dealing
explicitly with community-oriented skills and services. These
centers will he discussed in<b> </b>the following Chapter.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>