
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B010-245</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/crimebil.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122100656 text/html 13567
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:06:42 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:29 GMT
Content-length: 13349
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Excerpt from the 1994 Crime Bill</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<h1>Excerpt from the 1994 Crime Bill </h1>

<p><b>Calling for the establishment of a commission to study the
drug problem. This clause was inserted into the Crime Bill as a
result of the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy
(Hoover Resolution).</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>TlTLE XXVII PRESIDENTIAL SUMMIT ON VIOLENCE AND NATIONAL
COMMISSION ON CRIME PREVENTION AND CONTROL </p>

<p>8EC. 27000L PRESIDENTIAL SUMMIT. </p>

<p>Congress calls on the President to convene a national summit
on violence in America prior to convening the Commission
established under this title. </p>

<p>8EC 270002. ESTABLISHMENT; COMMITTEES AND TASK FORCES </p>

<p>(a) ESTABLISHMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.--There is
established a </p>

<p>commission to be known as the &quot;National Commission on
Crime Control and Prevention&quot;. The Commission shall be
composed of 28 members appointed as follows: </p>

<p>(1) 10 persons by the President, not more than 6 of whom shall
be of the same major political party. </p>

<p>(2) 9 persons by the President pro tempore of the Senate, of
whom shall be appointed on the recommendation of the Majority
Leader of the Senate and the chairman of the Committeeon the
Judiciary of the Senate, and 4 of whom shall be appointed on the
recommendation of the Minority Leader of the Senate and the
ranking minority member of the Committee on the Judiciary of the
Senate. </p>

<p>(3) 9 persons appointed by the Speaker of the House of
Representatives, in consultation with the chairman of the
Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives, and 4
of whom shall be appointed on the recommendation of the Minority
Leader of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the
ranking member of the Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p>(b) COMMITTEES AND TASK FORCES.--The Commission shall
establish committees or task forces from among its members for
the examination of specific subject areas and the carrying out of
other functions or responsibilities of the Commission, including
committees or task forces </p>

<p>for the examination of the subject areas of crime and violence
generally, the causes of the demand for drugs, violence in
schools, and violence against women, as descrIbed in subsections
(b) through (e) of section 270004. </p>

<p>(c) REPRESENTATION.~1) At least 1 member of the Commission
appointed by the President, at least 2 members of the Commission
appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, and at
least 2 members of the Commission appointed by the Speaker of the
House of Representatives shall be persons well-qualified to
participate in the Commission's examination of the subject area
of crime and violence generally, with education, training,
expertise, or experzence in such areas as law enforcement, law,
sociology, psychology, social work, and ethnography and urban
poverty (including health care, housing, education, and
employment). </p>

<p>(2) At least 1 member of the Commission appointed by the
President, at least 2 members of the Commission appointed by the
President pro tempore of the Senate, and at least 2 members of
the Commission appointed by the Speaker of the House of
Representatives shall be persons well-qualified to participate in
the Commission's examination of the subject area of the causes of
the demand for drugs, with education, training, expertise, or
experience in such areas as addiction, biomedicine, sociology,
psychology, law, and ethnography and urban poverty (including
health care, housing, education, and employment). </p>

<p>(3) At least 1 member of the Commission appointed by the
President, at least 2 members of the Commission appointed by the
President pro tempore of the Senate, and at least 2 members of
the Commission appointed by the Speaker of the House of
Representatives shall be persons well-qualified to participate in
the Commtssion's examination of the subject area of violence in
schools, with education, training, expertise, or experience in
such areas as law nforcement, education, school governance policy
and teaching, law, sociology, psychology, and ethnography and
urban poverty (including health care, housing, education, and
employment). </p>

<p>(4) At least 1 member of the Commission appointed by the
President, at least 2 members of the Commission appointed by the
President pro tempore of the Senate, and at least 2 members of
the Commission appointed by the Speaker of the House of
Representatives shall be persons well-qualified to participate in
the Commission's examination of the subject area of violence
against women, as surviuors of violence, or as persons with
education, training, expertise, or experience in such areas as
law enforcement, law, judicial administration, prosecution,
defense, victim services or advocacy in sexual assault or
domestic violence cases (including medical services an
counseling), and protection of victims' rights. </p>

<p>SEC. 270003. PURPOSES. </p>

<p>The purposes of the Commission are as follows: </p>

<p>(1) To develop a comprehensive proposal for preventing and
controlling crime and violence in the United States, including
for implementing any recommendations made by </p>

<p>(2) To bring attention to successful models and programs crime
prevention and crime control. </p>

<p>community for ideas for controlling and preventing criminal
justice to recommend improvements in the coordination of local,
State, Federal, and international crime control and prevention
efforts, including efforts relating to crime near international
borders. </p>

<p>(5) To make a comprehensive study of the economic and social
factors leading to or contributing to crime and violence,
including the causes of illicit drug use and other substance
abuse and to develop specific proposals for legislative and
administrative taibtlons to reduce crime and violence and the
factors that </p>

<p>(6) To recommend means of utilizing criminal justice resources
as effectively as possible, including targeting finite
correctional facility space to the most serious and violent
offenders and considering increased use of intermediate sanctions
for offenders who can be dealt with adequately by such means </p>

<p>(?) To examine distinctive crime problems and the impact of
crime on members of minority groups, Indians living on res
ervations, and other groups defined by race, ethnicity, religion
age, disability, or other characteristics, and to recommend
specific responses to the distinctive crime problems of such
groups </p>

<p>(9) To examine the treatment of victims in Federal, State and
local criminal justice systems, and to develop recommendaions to
enhance and protect the rights of victims </p>

<p>(10) To examine the ability of Federal, State, and local
criminal Justice systems to administer criminal law and criminal
sanct~ons impartially without discrimination on the basis of
race, et nicity, religion, gender, or other legally proscribed
grounds, and to make recommendations for correcting any
deficiencies in the impartial administration of justice on these </p>

<p>(11) To examine the nature, scope, causes, and complexities of
vlolence </p>

<p>in schools and to recommend a comprehensive ret at problem. </p>

<p>C. a70004. RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMISSION </p>

<p>(a) IN GENERAL.--The responsibilities of the Commission shall
be such study and consultation as may be necessary or appropriate
to carry out the purposes set forth in section 270003, including
the specific measures described in subsections (b) through (e) in
relation to the subject areas addressed in those subsections. </p>

<p>(b) CRIME AND VIOLENCE GENERALLY.--In addressing the subject
of crime and violence generally, the activities of the Commission
shall include the following </p>

<p>(1) Reviewing the effectiveness of traditional criminal
justice approaches in preventing and controlling crime and
violence. </p>

<p>(2) Examining the impact that changes in Federal and State law
have had in controlling crime and violence. </p>

<p>(3) Examining the impact of changes in Federal immigration
laws and policies and increased development and growth along
United States international borders on crime and violence in the
United States, particularly among the Nation's youth. </p>

<p>(4) Examining the problem of youth gangs and providing
recommendations as to how to reduce youth involvement in violent
crime. </p>

<p>(5) Examining the extent to which the use of dangerous weapons
in the commission of crime has contributed to violence and murder
in the United States. </p>

<p>(6) Convening field hearings in various regions of the country
to receive testimony from a cross section of criminal justice
professionals, business leaders, elected officials, medical
doctors, and other persons who wish to participate. </p>

<p>(7) Reviewing all segments of the Nation's criminal justice
systems, including the law enforcement, prosecution, defense,
judicial, and corrections components in developing the crime
control and prevention proposal. </p>

<p>(c) CAUSES OF THE DEMAND FOR DRUGS.--In addressing the subject
of the causes of the demand for drugs, the activities of the
Commission shall include the following: </p>

<p>(1) Examining the root causes of illicit drug use and abuse in
the United States, including by compiling existing research
regarding those root causes, and including consideration of the
following factors: </p>

<p>(A) The characteristics of potential illicit drug users and
abusers or drug traffickers, including age and social, economic,
and educational backgrounds. </p>

<p>(B) Environmental factors that contribute to illicit drug use
and abuse, including the correlation between unemployment,
poverty, and homelessness and drug experimentation and abuse. </p>

<p>(C) The effects of substance use and abuse by a relative or
friend in contributing to the likelihood and desire of an
individual to experiment with illicit drugs. </p>

<p>(D) Aspects of, and changes in cultural values, attitudes and
traditions that contribute to illicit drug use and abuse. </p>

<p>(E) The physiological and psychological factors that
contribute to the desire for illicit drugs. </p>

<p>(2) Evaluating Federal, State, and local laws and policies on
the prevention of drug abuse, control of unlawful production,
distribution and use of controlled substances, and the efficacy
of sentencing policies with regard to those laws. </p>

<p>(3) Analyzing the allocation of resources among interdiction
of controlled substances entering the United States, enforcement
of Federal laws relating to the unlawful production,
distribution, and use of controlled substances, education with
regard to and the prevention of the unlawful use of controlled
substances, and treatment and rehabilitation of drug abusers. </p>

<p>(4) Analyzing current treatment and rehabilitation methods and
making recommendations for improvements. </p>

<p>(5) Identifying any existing gaps in drug abuse policy that
result from the lack of attention to the root causes of drug
abuse. </p>

<p>(6) Assessing the needs of government at all levels for
resources and policies for reducing the overall desire of
individuals to experiment with and abuse illicit drugs. </p>

<ol>
    <li>Making recommendations regarding necessary improvements
        in policies for reducing the use of illicit drugs in the
        United States. </li>
</ol>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>