
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-66</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B008-20</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/chicken.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034607 text/html 19786
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:45:58 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:50 GMT
Content-length: 19568
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Chicken Page</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<h1><img src="chicken1.gif" align="bottom" width="192"
height="298">The Chicken Page </h1>

<hr>

<h1>What this page is all about </h1>

<p>Debate? What debate? In the last year or so, the people and
organizations who support the War on Some Drugs have realized
that they simply cannot win an open and honest debate on drug
policy. As a rational matter, there is no rational defense for
our current policy. As a result, they have gone into a
hunkered-down mode where they are refusing to engage in any
dialogue at all on drug policy - because they realize they will
lose <b><u>badly</u></b>. </p>

<p>We think it is important to point out and name all the people
and organizations who want to try to tell the world what we ought
to be doing about drugs, but then refuse to engage in
constructive debate or dialogue with anyone who might propose any
modification to the current system. In short, they have pushed
themselves into an extremist corner, and we think it ought to be
publicly known. </p>

<p>Therefore, we are listing below the people and organizations
who have been invited for a polite, open, and honest public
debate on drug policy but have so far refused. We think they are
chicken - afraid to debate because they know they will be soundly
beaten. We feel that the media and everyone else who reads this
page should call it to their attention that their refusal to
discuss drug policy is unreasonable and counter-productive. If
they are really interested in finding a drug policy which works,
then we ought to be talking together, not hiding as these people
are doing. </p>

<p><b>PLEASE NOTE:</b> </p>

<p>We wholeheartedly invite any of the people or organizations
listed below to respond and participate in this debate by posting
their responses, arguments, or whatever. We have already
established links to their web pages so readers may compare the
respective arguments, and understand why these people don't want
to debate. We will post whatever responses they want to make. </p>

<hr>

<h2>The Chickens </h2>

<h3>The Drug Enforcement Administration </h3>

<p>The DEA refuses to discuss drug policy in any environment
where they might be subjected to either honest debate or direct,
probing questions about our drug policies. This is despite the
fact that they held a major conference in August, 1994, to try to
teach their people how to survive in a drug policy debate and
even wrote a book called &quot;How to Hold Your Own in a Drug
Legalization Debate&quot;. Why do they refuse to debate? Very
simple - they know from past history that they will get their
butts kicked without any question. </p>

<p><b>Prove it to yourself. </b>Call your local DEA office and
tell them you are setting up a public forum and would like them
to come to speak to whatever community group. They will gladly
volunteer - because they have public relations officers with that
specific task - until they hear the rest. Then tell them that
there will be people from the drug policy reform movement there,
and you would like to set up an open and honest
discussion/debate. Their answer will be short and simple:
&quot;We don't debate.&quot; If you ask them why, they will tell
you it is because it would lend credibility to the other side. Of
course, they will still refuse even if you have recognized
medical authorities, Nobel prize winners, or anyone else who
already has credibility. The real reason is: They are chicken! </p>

<h3>Thomas Constantine </h3>

<p><b>Administrator, Drug Enforcement Administration</b> </p>

<p>After putting his pretty face on the book he masterminded -
&quot;How to Hold Your Own in a Drug Legalization Debate&quot; -
Mr. Constantine has apparently wisely decided not to try it
himself. We have posted his book, along with our reply which,
among other things, found that they had cited books which didn't
even exist. That's no way to win a debate! In recent months he
has openly admitted that the drug war of the 1980s has had
little, if any, effect on the flow of drugs despite all the
billions spent. Mr. Constantine may now be frightened to come out
and debate this policy on any rational basis, or he may just be
getting his resume ready because he realizes that, sooner or
later, the jig is up. </p>

<h3>Robert Bonner </h3>

<p><b>Former Administrator, Drug Enforcement Administration</b> </p>

<p>Mr. Bonner relies on the same standard old arguments in
supporting the drug war but, curiously, doesn't want to put
himself in a position where anyone can question him about what he
says. He has been given numerous opportunities to debate credible
proponents of drug policy reform but rarely accepts any
invitation where he has any opposition at all. We believe it is
because he realizes he really can't &quot;hold his own&quot; in
the drug policy debate. </p>

<hr>

<h2><img src="biden.gif" align="bottom" width="112" height="134">
Senator Joseph Biden of the US Senate </h2>

<blockquote>
    <p><i>&quot;What we do not need is a debate that treats our
    nation's serious drug problem as a political football; what
    we do not need are more charges of who should do more and who
    hasn't done enough.&quot; -Sen Joseph Biden April 28, 1996
    Wilmington News Journal page A8 </i></p>
</blockquote>

<p>Joe, you really don't get the point, do you? The point, Joe,
is your fundamental ignorance of many facets of the issues. The
purpose of a debate is to educate people like you. Open and
honest discussion of the issues has always been a fundamental
part of the American political process - clear back to the days
when George Washington and Thomas Jefferson were still growing
hemp. </p>

<p>The following are some of his quotes, or close to them: (Most
of this section is supplied by Scott Ehlers.) </p>

<ul>
    <li><i>&quot;General McCaffrey, you should take this
        administration by the ears...If they don't give you real
        power, then you should quit&quot;</i>; (That ought to be
        a short job.) </li>
    <li><i>&quot;this war must be fought on the streets of every
        community&quot;;</i> (That's OUR community you are
        talking about fighting a war in, Joe.) </li>
    <li><i>&quot;hard-core addicts must face swift and tough
        punishment even if they are first-time or nonviolent
        offenders&quot;</i>; (OK, there are about 2.7 million of
        them and not a single available jail cell. Tell me how
        that works out, Joe.) </li>
    <li><i>&quot;gratuituous violence is due to cocaine
        users...you can bet they're on cocaine&quot; </i>(Joe,
        you just proved you haven't read the Federal Government's
        own reports on this issue. Start with <a
        href="../GOVPUBS/psycviol.htm">Psychoactive Substances
        and Violence</a> by the Department of Justice, -- click
        on the title there and you can read the whole thing.) </li>
    <li><i>&quot;Bill Bennett was the best drug czar because he
        hollered, and I hope you'll holler as well Gen.
        McCaffrey&quot; </i>(Personally, I want more out of
        Government officials than the ability to holler -
        especially when what he is hollering doesn't make any
        sense anyway.) </li>
    <li><i>&quot;Just act, we don't need any more studies...we've
        done plenty of studies...don't listen to the
        people.&quot;</i> (Would you care to share with us any of
        those studies that you have read? I have a number of them
        on these web pages and not one of them agrees with this
        drug policy. See the list - <a
        href="../LIBRARY/studies/studies.htm">Major Studies of
        Drug Policy</a>) </li>
</ul>

<p>Biden also added some interesting new &quot;facts&quot; to the
record that I was not aware of, namely: the Harrison Act was
passed in 1917; there was more drug education in 1923 than there
is today; and 10 to 20 times more drugs were confiscated under
McCaffrey than under his predecessors. (Yes, this is a U.S.
Senator and according to him, he's been studying the drug problem
for 20 years!) </p>

<p>Joe Biden has been a major supporter of the War on Some Drugs
for many years. His obvious ignorance of the basic facts about
the issue is all the more shocking, considering he is one of the
major congressional leaders and has been ranting about this for
years. He has admitted on several occasions that our drug policy
clearly leaves something to be desired but, for Joe at least, an
honest discussion of the issues - and how to make our policy
better - is out of the question. Unless you already agree with
his preconceived notions, don't bother to call. </p>

<p>Joe Biden is up for re-election again in 1996, so the obvious
questions come up: </p>

<p>Will Joe Biden ever have the courage to face someone from the
&quot;legalization&quot; camp in an open and honest debate? I
seriously doubt it. An open and honest debate would mean that
those long, rambling, say-nothing statements he makes would be
subject to some real examination. My personal opinion is that he
would look like a major fool in short order against any of the
top advocates for reform. </p>

<p>Who should you vote for if you live in Delaware? Clearly,
anybody more honest and forthright on the issue than Joe Biden -
such as any candidate who is willing to discuss his ideas in an
open forum and put them to an honest test. </p>

<p>I have included links to a page on Joe Biden, and another page
by one of his opponents so you can judge for yourself. </p>

<p><a href="http://www.vote-smart.org/congress/de/de-jr-a/">Joe
Biden's Vote Smart Page</a> </p>

<p><a href="http://www.jones96.com/">Mark Jones for Senate</a> </p>

<p><a href="mailto:senator@biden.senate.gov">Send Joe Biden some
e-mail</a> - Tell him he is listed here, and Cliff Schaffer is
calling him out for a debate. The only thing you will get in
response is a massive clucking sound. </p>

<hr>

<h2>Dr. Eric Voth </h2>

<p><a href="voth1.htm">Dr. Voth's List of Research</a> - wherein
he finds support for his position. The list is most curious
because much of the information listed plainly does not support
his point of view. </p>

<p>Dr. Voth is one of the Grand Poobahs of Drug Watch
International and a few other pro-prison organizations and is
well-known for histrionic appearances before congressional
committees where, to hear him tell it, the entire future of
civilization rests on the grand plan to incarcerate every pot
smoker. (Dr. Voth, when you read this, please remember that I
will be glad to post any statements you want to make about the
issue, including a rebuttal of everything I say here - but look
out, because that will probably start the debate you are trying
so hard to avoid.) </p>

<p>I have had several private e-mail conversations with him and
it is quite clear that Dr. Voth would be no match for me or
anyone I have trained and would quickly look quite foolish in
front of all but the most extreme audiences. </p>

<p>Dr. Voth's initial tactic, like those of the Drug Watch
International folks in general, is to try to turn the whole
debate into a series of personal attacks. I had extreme
difficulty in getting him to address any substantive issue about
drugs because he kept making accusations against everyone in the
drug-policy reform movement. For example: </p>

<ul>
    <li>He said that the drug policy reform movement was composed
        of a bunch of drug addicts. I pointed out to him that
        simple logic should tell him this was wrong. Why would
        anyone want to try to organize a bunch of drug addicts?
        The reasons they would not be good activists seem pretty
        obvious to me. </li>
    <li>He said that the real force behind the movement was a
        bunch of people like Dick Cowan (formerly head of the
        National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws)
        who wanted the laws changed just so they could get stoned
        and so they could get rich selling pot after the laws
        were changed. I can't tell you all of Dick Cowan's
        reasoning for wanting the laws changed but it is my clear
        impression that neither one of these two reasons are high
        up on the list. As for making money from pot after it is
        legal, I don't think Dick Cowan is stupid enough to
        believe that he could. (Dick can correct me, if I am
        wrong.) If anyone wanted to make money from pot, the best
        time to do it would be under the current policy. <br>
        But, the bottom line is that Dick Cowan's motives (or any
        other individual's motives) don't really have much to do
        with the issue of whether it makes sense to incarcerate
        millions of people for drug offenses. As I pointed out to
        Dr. Voth, Dick Cowan may not know any more about this
        issue than Dr. Voth does. </li>
</ul>

<p>Dr. Voth persisted in this kind of routine for quite some
time, until I finally hit him with a long list of corruption and
dishonesty on the other side, starting with the lies told by
Harry Anslinger starting in 1937. People who live in glass houses
shouldn't throw stones. </p>

<p>Once I hit him back, he stopped that routine (a little) and we
went on to some *real* issues, but the conversation was marked by
his inability to answer almost any question I asked him. For
example: </p>

<ul>
    <li>He claims he is a &quot;world-renowned expert&quot; on
        marijuana, and especially marijuana addiction. Yet, it is
        obvious to me that he has never read many of the basic
        research texts that I have posted on this web page and is
        woefully ignorant of many other facets of the subject. As
        one small example, he is not familiar with the various
        ways in which cannabis can be consumed medically. I
        pointed him to the web pages, especially the work of Dr.
        Tod Mikuriya, but it is doubtful if he will ever bother
        to read it. </li>
    <li>I asked him to provide me with his credentials and the
        full text of any research he has done on the issue, or
        that he thinks is important to understanding the issue. I
        assured him that I would post anything he sends me
        unaltered. So far he hasn't come forth with a single page
        of anything but his personal opinions. On the other hand,
        I have received reams of information from many other
        &quot;experts&quot; on the issue, including people with
        better medical credentials than Dr. Voth. </li>
    <li>He says that he supports the use of cannabinoids as
        medicine but wants people to use &quot;medicines&quot;,
        not &quot;potions.&quot; It occurred to me that, since
        the active ingredient in Marinol, an FDA-approved
        prescription drug, comes directly from the marijuana
        plant, that the difference between a &quot;medicine&quot;
        and a &quot;potion&quot;, was very much the same as the
        difference between a Vitamin C tablet and an orange. Some
        patients, it would seem, would naturally prefer the
        &quot;medicine&quot; (the tablet), while others would
        prefer the &quot;potion&quot; (the orange). I asked him
        to explain what I had missed, but he had no response. </li>
</ul>

<p>Most interesting is Dr. Voth's response to my request for a
debate. He said the conditions would have to be right. I told him
that my conditions were pretty simple: Any time, any place, any
audience, any rules - just show up. </p>

<p>Dr. Voth's terms for a debate were quite a bit different. They
are: </p>

<ol>
    <li>The forum needs to be high visibility such as a major
        media event like national talk show, news show, etc. I
        suggested any number of possible forums, including
        online, taped radio or TV appearances, etc. He said all
        of them could be edited to make him look foolish. (No
        editing required for that.) I even suggested that we do
        it online and then post matching transcripts on our
        respective web pages with links to each other - just so
        we could make sure that neither one of us had done any
        editing. No dice. </li>
    <li>No pro-legalization forum. Either a totally neutral
        audience or something on his turf. (One should note that
        a totally neutral audience would be almost impossible to
        find. I don't really see what the audience has to do with
        it anyway - they just watch, they don't participate.) </li>
    <li>He wants all his costs covered. (That shouldn't be a
        problem, I know lots of people who would buy tickets just
        to watch him fall). </li>
</ol>

<p>In short, Dr. Voth just isn't very eager for a public debate
with any knowledgeable opponent. He seems to have a lot to say
when nobody has the microphone but him, but he quickly craps out
when faced with any significant opposition. </p>

<p>If you happen to read about Dr. Voth in the newspaper, or see
him on the media, make it a point to write to the media source
and include a copy of this segment of the Chicken Page.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<h3>Dr. Kim Edward Light </h3>

<p>Dr. Light has a relatively small (by comparison to any of
ours) web site devoted to a few articles making poorly documented
and plainly illogical arguments against &quot;legalization.&quot;
His web page invites responses and even purports to maintain a
commentary area where people can comment, but he has never
responded to any invitation to debate, or even any comments on
his web page that anyone can determine. We invite Dr. Light to
join us in debate. We don't expect that he will do so any time
soon. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>