
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-49</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B039-34</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/General/family6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122071408 text/html 31546
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:13:54 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:30:07 GMT
Content-length: 31328
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Richardson-Taylor Reunion News -- 1992</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<h1>Richardson-Taylor Reunion News</h1>

<hr>

<p>Just when you thought, even hoped, that it would never happen
again, it is time to start planning for the next reunion. </p>

<p>Margaret and Vic were our hosts last year. They left town
immediately after the reunion, claiming that the timing of their
move was just a coincidence. The last I heard they were holed up
in a cave in the badlands of New Mexico. </p>

<p>As usual, we were supremely graced by the absence of several
disreputable Richardson individuals living in Ohio who have never
attended a single reunion. (As I have stated before, I do not
wish to embarrass <b>Bill Henry</b> by mentioning any names, or
by pointing out that <b>he is the only original Richardson who
has never shown his face at any reunion.</b>) I asked several
people if they had heard from these no-good people, seeing as how
they had not replied to any of the notices, or even returned
their family information sheets. (The truth must be far too
shameful for even them to admit.) The Hell's Angels have a rather
unique reproach for people who fall asleep at their parties and I
felt it was only fair that we also have a similar reproach for
people who consistently fail to attend reunions for a solid
decade. </p>

<p>I put out the word that I am interested in collecting, and
publishing, stories from this individual's past which would show
his most disgusting habits and complete lack of character. He
moved his family away from the rest of us just about the time his
kids were learning to talk so, no doubt, they have not heard the
best part of this low-down, no-good individual's criminal career.
</p>

<p>As soon as I put out the word for stories of this type, Louise
Leard and Margaret Sweet immediately leapt to his defense saying
that he is a very busy and important person (they don't have
enough practice lying to make it sound believable) and they were
sure there was some good reason why this <b>low-down, no-good
individual had missed every single reunion in the last ten years</b>.
Of course, this just illustrates my point about this individual's
character. </p>

<p>How low must one sink before Margaret and Louise come to your
defense? (They have never defended my good character, or come to
the defense of any Morris that I can recall.) They both
proclaimed with the loudness of an incompetent liar that this
individual had always been of sterling character and that there
were no terrible tales to tell from his childhood. They were so
loud, in fact, that I could not catch most of the details of the
stories Don and Laurence were telling about him. I believe that
Don may have gotten this individual mixed up with Herman Klomp in
some of the stories but that's not important </p>

<p>It is a sad case indeed when Margaret and Louise are left to
stick up for you. In any case, you should all know that I will be
collecting the most embarrassing stories about this low-down,
no-good individual and publishing them soon, so his family may
know the complete truth about why he consistently fails to attend
even a single family reunion. </p>

<p>Those of you who attended know that I passed around copies of
Mary Taylor's Family History which I transcribed and printed out
on the computer. I am not entirely sure who got copies so I have
included some copies in this newsletter for the people who
weren't there. (This, of course, includes the <b>low-down,
no-good Richardson individual from Ohio who has never attended a
single family reunion</b>.) If you did not receive a copy at the
reunion, and I did not include one for you here, just drop me a
line and I will send you a copy. It is a pretty interesting view
of the family's history going back a couple of centuries,
although some people have commented that Mary was rather
&quot;optimistic&quot; in recounting the facts. </p>

<p>There was an unusually aggressive pack of grandparents at the
reunion, all of them armed with a deadly arsenal of baby
pictures. Margaret and Vic, having waited so long for their first
two-footed grandchild, were perhaps the most vicious of the
bunch. Margaret showed me some pictures of her and I had to admit
that she is an incredibly beautiful child, with a sparkling
personality, and possessed of talents that ordinary human beings
can scarcely imagine. As soon as I did admit it, Margaret took
her foot off my throat, Vic picked me up, dusted me off, and they
both allowed as how they had always known that I was a gentleman
of intelligence and good taste. </p>

<p>Margaret and Vic were apparently unable to persuade Julie to
attend the reunion. Julie explained to me that, although she
works at the LA Zoo, she has no direct experience with large
primates. Julie puts on little shows at the LA Zoo where, among
other things, she sings a duet with a coyote. (Really!) It's
pretty interesting, but it must be said that the coyote has the
distinctly better voice. Julie also raised a mountain lion in her
home (how'd you like have this chick for a neighbor?). She said
there was no problem at all as long as she had dinner ready on
time and didn't make any sudden movements. </p>

<p>Dorothy showed up with that old tale about how she went to the
hospital and the nurse wrote on her chart that she &quot;looks at
least ten years younger than her stated age.&quot; If you haven't
heard that story yet, just get within fifty yards of her, and I
am sure the subject of medical charts will come up soon enough.
We will probably have to listen to that until she is at least ten
years older than her stated age. </p>

<p>James pontificated quite a while about the problems of these
United States and how he would solve them if he was king. Cut off
some bodily part, he said, every time someone commits a crime.
Lop off a hand, or an arm, or a foot, or something more valuable,
he said. It's an interesting idea but, if that was really the
law, his nickname would have been &quot;Stubby&quot; for many
years now. In the interests of justice and fair play, he said he
would not impose any penalties for anyone who chose to
prevaricate. In fact, he said, that is one of the few areas where
he thinks government subsidies would be justified. </p>

<p>James allows that some Richardsons, and perhaps a few Taylors,
might have committed some minor variations from the absolute
facts on rare occasions, but swears that he has never been known
to tamper with the truth. I thought about that quite a while and
then I had to admit that he was probably right. I could not
recall any time that he had been close enough to the truth that
he could have been accused of tampering with it. </p>

<p>Edna admits that her once-famous morals are gone. She says she
saves her copies of the Reunion News. </p>

<p>Doug and Barbara were there with their delightfully comatose
children. They recently made a trip with a motorcycle gang down
to the tip of Baja where they frolicked with the mating whales,
burned and pillaged a few mountain villages, participated in a
few large drug shipments, and had many other exciting adventures.
They came to visit us on the way back and took us out for a nice
Mexican food dinner -- which is not always a good idea when a
Leard is around. (I am sure we have all had an unfortunate
adventure in that regard.) </p>

<p>&quot;We didn't get the <i>turistas</i> near as bad as we
thought we would!&quot; Doug shouted through the bathroom door. I
was glad. </p>

<p>Pete has had a busy year. He says that he is still winning
foot races even at his advanced age, although he still hasn't
explained why someone would want to deliberately run around in a
circle just so they could get back to where they started before
somebody else did. He says he went to some track meet back in
Indianapolis where (he claims) he won the 400 and 800 meter races
and placed second in the 1500, or some such nonsense. When this
statement was greeted with some modest skepticism, he swore that
it was true (his standard first reply) and said the <b>low-down,
no-good Richardson individual who lives in Ohio and has never
attended even a single family reunion</b> would verify everything
he said. If two Richardsons swear to it, it's got to be true,
Pete said. Alternatively, he offered to swear on a stack of
family birth certificates. </p>

<p>As most of you already know (with the exception perhaps of
certain <b>low-down, no-good Richardson individuals living in
Ohio who have never attended a single family reunion</b>), Pete
has taken a wife, Sandy. Sandy said she thinks his name is Paul
and that what attracted her to Pete was his refined, gentlemanly
manners. As you might expect, that caused a good deal of
hilarity. </p>

<p>She is a Bohemian kind of person who wears funny clothes and
calls herself an &quot;artist&quot; and a &quot;designer&quot;,
although she was a little fuzzy on just what it is she
&quot;designs&quot;. I was in her company for most of two days
and she never did pass around any good drugs so there is some
question about her artistic credentials. She does, however, like
beer, and seems to be friendly even when she has had a few. She
claimed to be a lady of refinement and good taste before I got
the pictures of her with her head stuck in a watermelon. Most of
us hadn't seen such a sight since James sold his livestock. She
fits in pretty well. </p>

<p>David Leard did not attend this year. He sent me a Christmas
card with a rather snide remark about how I must have learned my
writing skills in jail -- a crack which was totally uncalled for
considering all the nice things I have said about the Leards.
David said that he was making huge sums of money in real estate
but he sent no cash. </p>

<p>In a prepared statement, Louise Leard said that David's recent
ventures in real estate had nothing at all to do with the failure
of several savings and loans in the Seattle area and she was
confident that the criminal investigations would exonerate him
completely. She explained that David did not attend the reunion
because one of his escrows did not close when it should have so
he was not legally allowed to leave town. We all nodded like we
believed everything she said. </p>

<p>Jerry was there promoting beer as the answer to a balanced
diet. He swears that he cannot be recognized without a beer can
in his hand. I recognized him immediately, but then the pile of
beer cans had shifted and his head was sticking out. </p>

<p>Last year I received an invitation to Laurence and Wilma's
wedding, of all things. Laurence and Wilma said they were
inviting me to attend because I am &quot;an important part&quot;
of their lives. I wondered a long time what they meant by that.
Then I realized Laurence had to be talking about the time we all
got drunk and trashed his apartment. When we left, Laurence was
standing out on the balcony in his underwear, yelling something
at us. If he had been sober enough to remember who we were, I am
sure he would have made sense. It's times like those that make a
family. </p>

<p>From what I could gather from the invitation, it seems that
Laurence actually asked Wilma to marry him some twenty-five years
ago or so, and it has taken this long to convince her that it is
a good idea. He lies pretty good, but apparently not good enough
to put that one across right away. </p>

<p>Ruthie and Tom were there. She wanted me to correct a minor
misstatement that I made in a previous issue of the Reunion News.
She said she wanted to make it clear that she <u>did not</u> send
me a picture of Tom bound and gagged in the trunk of her car.
Apparently it was some other guy. </p>

<p>Tom, who was pretty frisky the year before, looked a little
tired at times, like someone who had just spent the last year as
the only rooster in a ten acre hen house. Ruthie, on the other
hand, says she loves married life. She explains that Tom is still
in shock from the last reunion, which is certainly
understandable. Maybe it was just more than he expected. </p>

<p>Joanne was there, and managed to wrestle a few of the other
grandmothers to the ground to show them pictures of her accused
grandchildren. She called me after the reunion with some
grandiose scheme to lure unsuspecting men into joining a computer
dating service. I don't know why she wanted it on a computer, it
was pretty obvious which chick was going to get the date. </p>

<p>The last I heard, Joanne said her son, Laurence Kramer, was
working as a taste-tester on an alfalfa farm in Nevada. </p>

<p>I asked Becky why Jamie has missed the last few reunions. She
said that the reunions are usually scheduled the same week as the
Gay Pride parade in San Francisco and Jamie goes to the parade
instead of the reunion. That way, she says, she doesn't run into
quite so many oddballs. </p>

<p>Don Morris says that Elinor does not write letters, but I got
one from her last year thanking me for all the nice things I said
about Don in the last Family Doings. She was, however, a little
miffed that I failed to mention two of her children, Bonzo and
Cheetah Morris. </p>

<p>Don was there. It would purely amaze you, but he is just as
good-looking and charming as he ever was. He may have slowed down
a step or two but any sudden body movements can still clear out a
crowd just as quick as ever. Margaret and Vic thought ahead and
chose a windswept beach for the reunion. Like all the Morrises,
Don complained a lot about how hard it is to find comfortable
shoes for feet with an opposing thumb. He says that Elinor
&quot;understood&quot; all those little jokes I wrote in the last
Reunion News but confessed that some of it was just too
intellectual for him. I helped him count his bananas and told him
I understood how confusing these letters can be. </p>

<p>&quot;You can't insult a Morris,&quot; Don said. It ain't for
lack of trying. </p>

<p>Some people disputed my previous statements about Don. They
thought I flattered him unnecessarily and said they did not
believe he had ever been in church. I assert that he has,
although (by mutual agreement with the minister) it never was a
regular thing. &quot;We love our Brother Don,&quot; the minister
said, &quot;but even Jesus has limits.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;If they don't want you to fart, why do they call it a
pew?&quot; Don asked indignantly. He does not understand much
about religion. </p>

<p>Did you ever wonder what happened to Baby Huey when he retired
from comic books? I met Jeff Morris when he was wandering around
down on the beach, still wearing the radio tracking collar the
game wardens gave him. He was roaming around pretty freely so I
assumed he was out of range of their receivers. His fur is not as
long as Don's but the consensus of opinion is that they are the
same sub-species. </p>

<p>&quot;Cliffy,&quot; he said. &quot;Long time, no see.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Most of the time, not long enough,&quot; I said. </p>

<p>&quot;Didn't you used to have long hair and a beard?&quot;
Jeff asked. </p>

<p>&quot;Nope, I always had a crew cut and I was clean-shaven.
You must be thinking of your sisters. You remember.&quot; I told
him. </p>

<p>&quot;Oh, yeah, now I remember,&quot; he said. &quot;You look
a lot different with a beard.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Say, Jeff, what are you doing these days?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Being a bum, mooching off my Dad, getting into
trouble.&quot; </p>

<p>I was surprised. He seems safe, though it's hard to tell with
anything that big. </p>

<p>&quot;Say, Jeff,&quot; I asked, &quot;how many tranquilizer
darts does it take to bring you down?&quot; </p>

<p>He said he didn't know for sure and then told me some
outlandish story about how some woman wanted him to come live
with her and just be a bum over at her place. It's the Morris
dream but he didn't have all the details consistent. </p>

<p>I got some real nice pictures of Don and Jeff and I showed
them to the clerk in the drug store when I got them developed. </p>

<p>&quot;A friend of mine shot one of those things in Northern
Washington,&quot; he said. &quot;His wife wouldn't let him bring
it in the house.&quot; That confused me. </p>

<p>&quot;David Leard lives up that way, but no Morrises that I
know of.&quot; I told him. </p>

<p>He looked at the pictures again. &quot;Coulda been a Leard I
guess.&quot; </p>

<p>There was some discussion of the fact that the family
genealogy is, shall we say, <i>subject to interpretation</i>.
Some went so far as to state that Don Morris is not, strictly
speaking, a blood relative and, therefore, it is not necessary to
claim him, despite his obvious achievements. I feel that he must
be included, if only because he has infested an unusually large
portion of the family and he seems to show up at the slightest
mention of free food. There are, however, larger issues involved.
</p>

<p>Over the years, the Richardson-Taylor clan has acquired
members by a number of different methods, including adoption,
acquisition by marriage, friends who just kept hanging around,
(on a few occasions) actual &quot;legitimate&quot; births, and
from other causes far too complicated to explain in ten or twelve
pages. This can sometimes be confusing to children and others who
are not fully acquainted with the difference between admitted and
actual history. </p>

<p>I remember when I was growing up I used to ask my mother
questions like, &quot;What relation is David Leard to me?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;He's your first cousin,&quot; she said. </p>

<p>&quot;Are you sure?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Sure. Just check the tag on his ear.&quot; She handed me
a code book from the Department of Fish and Game. </p>

<p>&quot;What is Steve Morris to me?&quot;<br>
&quot;He's your first cousin, too.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Are all the Morrises my first cousins?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;In general they are. There are a few exceptions, but
those are purely on scientific grounds.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;What is Laurence?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Laurence is best avoided,&quot; she said. </p>

<p>&quot;That's common knowledge,&quot; I said. &quot;But what
relation?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Oooooh, he's just some kind of relative or other.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;But what kind? Cousin? Uncle? Great-aunt? What?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;I'm sure that he is at least one or more of those,&quot;
she said. &quot;Otherwise, it would be easier to get rid of
him.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Well, then, what about Ruthie? What relation is
she?&quot; I asked. </p>

<p>&quot;Do you think it will rain?&quot; </p>

<p>Some of you may have noticed that Mary avoided certain
questions with respect to the family history. I am sure there
must be a good, logical explanation. </p>

<p>Since I started the newsletter, and will some day publish a
family tree, I have been informed that several members of the
family were acquired by means which were, shall we say, not
exactly standard. Let it suffice to say that a large portion of
the family might not pass pedigree standards for the American
Kennel Club. As some of you may know, there is even a branch of
the family which is no blood relation at all, but was acquired
solely because they smelled hamburgers on the grill. </p>

<p>In any event, it shall be my policy to consider any family
member, however acquired, to be on a par with any other family
member who does not have quite so much to explain about their
bloodlines. How you got here (marriage, adoption, or factually
recorded birth) is basically irrelevant so, unless someone
insists, I will not list details of how someone got to be at any
particular branch on the family tree. Nor will I attempt to judge
the relative merits of anyone's lineage. Just take my word for
it, that is who they are represented to be. </p>

<p>See you at the reunion, (with the exception of the <b>low-down,
no-good Richardson individual who lives in Ohio and has never
attended a single family reunion</b>). </p>

<p>Sincerely, </p>

<p>Clifford A. Schaffer</p>

<hr>

<p>1992 Reunion Details</p>

<hr>

<p><b>When: June 20 &amp; 21, 1992</b> </p>

<p><b>Where: Mooney Grove, Visalia, California</b> </p>

<p>Arbor number 11 </p>

<p>That's really good thinking, Becky -- inviting Don Morris to a
place called &quot;Mooney Grove.&quot; </p>

<p><b>Contribution:</b> The standard contribution is again $8.00
per household, </p>

<p>giving the greatest benefit to those of you who breed like
rabbits. </p>

<p>Those of you who wish to send more may do so. The money goes
into a reunion fund which is used to pay for others who can't
manage it, or it is carried forward to the following year. Becky
says that if you contribute enough money, she will investigate
possible campsites in Rio De Janeiro for our benefit. Send your
cash, check, or small items of jewelry to: </p>

<p>Becky says that it would be helpful to know how many
bottomless pits you will be bringing with you so she can have
some idea how many sides of beef she will need. </p>

<p>Please reply by June 1 to let her know. </p>

<p><b>Bring: </b>Salads, beans (it's OK, it's outdoors - just
stay upwind of </p>

<p>the Leards), desserts, and munchies. </p>

<p>Bring your own beverages and a healthy load of charcoal. </p>

<p>Becky said to bring special dishes, gourmet cuisine, and
something which will &quot;suprise us all.&quot; Please don't. I
don't think she realizes what she is saying. Especially, please
don't bring anything you found in the park. </p>

<p><b><u>How to Get There and Other Notes</u></b> </p>

<p>Becky has chosen Visalia for this year's reunion. As you can
see from the enclosed sheet, it is the &quot;Jewel of the
Valley&quot;. Some of you may recognize it by other names. She
says she chose it because it is the only place in the area with a
low to moderate amount of gunfire in the city parks. </p>

<p>Here is Becky's description of how to get to <b>Mooney Grove:</b>
</p>

<p>To get to <b>Mooney Grove</b> in Visalia, take the Hwy 198
exit off Hwy 99. You will be turning east and the exit signs will
indicate Visalia/Sequoia National Park. You will drive right past
the majority of the motels as you head into town. Five miles
after you exit Hwy. 99 and are now heading east on Hwy. 198, take
the <b>Mooney Blvd.</b> exit and turn right (south). After
crawling about five miles through all the traffic, there will be
a little open space and on the left (east) side will be <b>Mooney
Grove</b>. </p>

<p>There is an alternate route to get to <b>Mooney Grove </b>without
using the heavily trafficked <b>Mooney Blvd</b>. Take the
Tagus/Ave. 264 exit east off Hwy 99 (this will be south of the
Hwy 198 exit by 6 miles), continue east on Ave. 264 until <b>Mooney
Blvd</b>. where you will turn left (North). <b>Mooney Grove</b>
will be on your right (east) real soon. </p>

<p>What do you think the Morrises will be thinking about by the
time they get there? Let's just hope they don't get out of hand. </p>

<p>Becky says this place is a county park (not unlike the place
where some of you may be residing) with lots of tall trees,
grass, kiddie play areas, and a duck pond where the Leards can
grab an occasional snack without bothering the rest of us. About
forty miles east of Visalia is the entrance to Sequoia National
Park. You may want to plan to visit Sequoia during your trip. </p>

<p>We have a large covered arbor -- <b>number 11, on the left
after you enter the park</b> -- reserved for both days. There are
electrical outlets on the site so you all can bring you favorite
appliances. Mooney Grove has a $2.00 per vehicle entrance fee.
There is NO parking around the outside of the park. Those who
wish to save money and/or help relieve the parking gridlock
within the park will need to leave extra vehicles and form car
pools at the shopping center north of the park, or at lodging
sites. Of course, if you just hitchhiked down for the free
hamburgers - even better. </p>

<p>In keeping with tradition (tradition? When did we ever have
any tradition beyond petty theft?) we will slaughter the fatted
calf around noon and put bowls out for the Morrises and the
Leards. We will have an early dinner on Saturday to try to get
their bellies full before the sun goes down. </p>

<p>There are two RV campgrounds nearby and campers need to
reserve early as this area gets very busy with folks traveling to
and from the National Parks. </p>

<p>Motelers have a good variety of choices. Most of the motels
are along Hwy 198 between Hwy 99 and Visalia proper; these are
recommended. (Apparently Becky has some considerable experience
with them.) There are also motels on Mooney Blvd. Mooney Blvd. is
the main commercial strip complete with six lanes of heavy
traffic , all stop and go due to frequent traffic lights . This
is also where the cruisers cruise. At one time, Visalia was
planned as the site for the movie <i>American Graffiti,</i> until
the producers decided to go to the more exciting town of Modesto.
</p>

<p>The Visalia KOA has a full range of sites offering no services
(comparable to home) to full hook-ups and tent areas. It appears
to be clean and well-maintained. Amenities include a pool, game
room, and a small playground. Becky says she was quoted $16.65
for full hook-ups. Reserve early, their busy season starts in
April. See the enclosed sheets for location map and campground
layout.</p>

<hr>

<p>Motels </p>

<hr>

<hr>

<pre width="132">
<b>Name</b>              Address            Phone              Rates &amp; Comments    

Holiday RV Park   6504 Betty Drive   (209) 651-1040     Slightly farther    
                  Goshen, CA                            away than KOA       

Lemon             Hwy 198 in Lemon   (209) 597-2346     Farther away -      
Cove/Sequoia      Cove                                  toward the          
Campground                                              national parks      

Three Rivers      Three Rivers       (209) 561-4413     Farther away -      
Motel &amp; RV Park                                         toward the          
                                                        national parks      

Kaweah Park       Three Rivers       (209) 561-4424     Farther away -      
Resort Motel &amp;                                          toward the          
RV Park                                                 national parks      

Best Western      623 W. Main St.    (209) 732-4561     2 blocks North of   
                  Visalia            (800) 528-1234     Hwy 198             
                                                        $52 to $60          

LampLiter Inn     3300 W. Mineral    (209) 732-4511     $59 to $75          
                  King Ave.                                                 
                  Visalia                                                   

Econo Lodge       1400 S. Mooney     (209) 732-6641     $36 to $45          
                  Blvd., Visalia                                            

Parkway Inn       4801 W. Mineral    (209) 627-2885     $38 to $52          
                  King Ave.                                                 
                  Visalia                                                   

El Rancho Motel   4506 W. Mineral    (209) 734-9271     $28 to $40          
                  King Ave.                                                 
                  Visalia                                                   

Visalia Radisson  Mineral King Ave.  (800) 333-3333     $75 for AAA         
Hotel             &amp; Court St.                           members             
                  Visalia                                                   

Holiday Inn       9000 W. Airport    (209) 651-5000     $66 to $81          
Plaza Park        Dr.                (800) 821-1127                         
                  Visalia            (inside                                
                                     California)                            
                                     (800) 348-8877                         
                                     (outside                               
                                     California)                            

Marco Polo        4545 W. Mineral    (209) 732-4591     unknown             
                  King Ave.                                                 
                  Visalia                                                   

Motel III         4645 W. Mineral    (209) 732-5611     unknown             
                  King Ave.                                                 
                  Visalia                                                   

Oak Tree Inn      401 Woodland Dr.   (209) 732-8861     unknown             
                  Visalia                                                   

Mooney Motel      2120 S. Mooney     (209) 733-2666     unknown             
                  Blvd.                                                     
                  Visalia                                                   

Visalia Visitors                     (209) 734-5876                         
Bureau                                                                      


</pre>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>