
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-83</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B007-206</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/grspch.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035803 text/html 18665
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:57:47 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:50 GMT
Content-length: 18447
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Darkening Shades of the Drug War -- Brown Vs. Gray</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h1>DARKENING SHADES OF THE DRUG WAR: BROWN VS. GRAY </h1>

<p><b>Address of The Honorable James P. Gray</b> </p>

<p>Orange County Superior Court Judge, State of California, at
the Crime, Drugs, Health &amp; Prohibition II Conference </p>

<p>Harvard Law School, May 21, 1994 </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>I don't always get such a nice introduction. Actually, it
reminds me of one I received a little while ago -- which was a
lot shorter -- and basically was along the lines of: &quot;I know
you all want to hear the latest dope from the courthouse, so
here's Judge Gray&quot;. [Laughter.] </p>

<p>But I am here speaking from my own personal standpoint with
much appreciation of what has happened so far today as well as, I
confess, a great deal of sorrow and some invigoration. I am
appreciative of the Clinton Administration allowing Dr. Brown to
come and share some thoughts with us. And I think that is very
important and it's certainly clearly important to get and
maintain a dialogue from all facets of this very multifaceted,
difficult and complex problem. </p>

<p>I am truly filled with sorrow, however, that we were not able
to engage in a dialogue with Dr. Brown. [applause.] He left -- he
came here and spoke with us and he listed his thoughts -- which I
would like to address in a moment -- and then regretfully was not
able to stay and respond to, I think, some very legitimate
questions. Because he listed eight myths, as he called them, and
I believe that all eight are...easily rebutted. [Applause.] And
so I am invigorated feeling the way I do -- a person who is in an
elected position in Orange County -- again a fairly conservative
area -- I'm up for election in 1996 and I'm ready for it. But I
have heard lots of arguments. I have heard people say we should
have debates and actually now, in my county, I'm having a great
deal of difficulty finding anyone to come and take the
alternative position. And in the last two years, I have not --
myself -- heard the alternative position expressed as eloquently
as I heard it today. And so I am invigorated to believe that
we're going to be successful, because that's the best they can do
and there simply is a response to everything they bring up.
[Applause.] </p>

<p>What is it? What is it that are these eight myths? Well, the
first is, as you recall: Nothing is getting better -- and he says
that is a myth. The problem with that is it's just the focus on
the wrong area. He is right if he's talking about education,
because we are making progress with regard to education. So it is
a myth that nothing is getting better. The problem is the
education is not married to [our] present system...which is, in
effect, prisons. Whichever option we choose, everyone agrees we
will continue to utilize education as a part of it. </p>

<p>He did not, however, ask the real question and that is: How
many people here feel that we, in our beloved country, are in
better shape today, with regard to this critical issue of drug
use and abuse and all of the crime and misery that goes with it,
than we were five years ago? How many people feel that way? I
never get anybody raising their hands. We all know that we are
not in better shape today. And if that's true -- and I fully
believe that you will agree with me, that it's true -- we have no
legitimate expectation of being in better shape next year than we
are in today, unless we change our approach. So the correct
question is: Are we in better shape today than we were five years
ago? And had he asked that question, I think that we could have
been on our way to a legitimate discussion. </p>

<p>Number two. He said [it was a myth] that current drug policy
is making things worse...He then said we have to address violence
and HIV areas, but he went on to talk about, very generally,
families, less productivity, the community issues and the rest of
that. Let's address those and talk about, for example, who the
role models in today's society -- in our inner cities and
probably everywhere else. And this can be addressed because the
role models -- as I'm sure we all know -- are not people who work
all day, go to school at night in order to attempt to better him
or herself. The role models for our inner city youth, and
probably everywhere else, are who? Are sellers of drugs. And that
is something that is truly challenging and damaging our very
fabric: our families, our employment, communities. </p>

<p>And if we are telling our people -- which we are, today -- you
probably can do nothing in your life that will bring you as much
money as you can get, by selling drugs, that is corruptive. It is
simply undercutting our work ethic. It is undercutting our
communities. These are the questions that we need to ask and not
just the mundane, quickly once-over: &quot;Let's talk about our
families and crack babies&quot;. Because every crack baby that is
born in the country today -- and there are lots of them -- are
born under our present system. And we need to look at that as
well. In fact, let's really look at prisons -- which is the issue
in our society today. And what are we doing? The San Francisco
Chronicle published an article on May 4, saying that we have 286
percent greater numbers of women in the California state prison
system today than we did ten years ago. I am in the juvenile
court now, in Orange County. I deal, on a daily basis, with
children that are abused and neglected. About a quarter to 30
percent of these babies are there because their mothers are in
prison. Every time we arrest a woman, 80 percent of those are
either pregnant or have small children. So we are taking the
children to the state. We are paying the money for that and we
are disrupting the family. These are issues that we must address,
and I don't hear people talking about that. It's time that we
focus attention upon it. </p>

<p>Number three. The myth, supposedly, is that enforcement adds
to the problem. Does enforcement add to the problem? Without a
doubt. We are slitting our wrists. [Dr. Brown] says that
enforcement is reducing the supply and drives up the price -- and
he's absolutely right, and that is part of the problem. The
problem here is not the drugs: It is the money. The problem is
the gangsters that are caused by the fact that these drugs bring
in such a great amount of money. So it's time to address that.
And instead of issuing a decree, supposedly to repeal the law of
supply and demand, have we focused upon the fact that the very
worst thing that could happen in the United States of America is
to have us all of a sudden successful in closing off our borders?
</p>

<p>The very worst thing that could happen to our country would be
to close off our borders and keep all of this opium out of our
country. Why? The law of supply and demand. The demand will
remain the same and if the demand is there it will be met. How
will it be met? Anybody that has a high school chemistry
education can, in his garage or bathroom, manufacturer illicit
chemical drugs, Ice and all of these other synthetic drugs that
go along with it. And then we have no quality control whatsoever
and will really be in trouble. </p>

<p>Has anybody ever seen a person who took one dose of a bad
batch of synthetic drugs? It does enormous damage. The lucky ones
die. These are the problems that we will visit upon ourselves.
Every time we're successful in seizing another ton of cocaine, we
raise the price and directly result in more burglaries, more
purse snatchings, more damage to our society. And so, yes, in my
view, the problem is not the police. The problem is the system.
The system is not working, it's time to recognize it and look at
our options. </p>

<p>Number four was: There was not massive support for change. It
depends how you ask the question. He says that the Gallup Poll
says -- and I'll take it at face value -- 80 percent of the
people are not in favor of the legalization of drugs. There is a
group in Orange County, they're called the Drug Use is Life Abuse
-- very overstated, by the way. There's a lot of caffeine on this
table here and that's being used -- I don't believe I am abusing
my life to drink iced tea. But this group is out there, passing
out polls. And two years ago, they came out with a poll asking
just that: How many of you people feel that legalizing drugs is a
good or not a good idea? 80 percent of the people said: No,
legalizing drugs is not a good idea. We in Orange County,
however, are discussing this issue. I'm speaking with Kiwanis
clubs and all of the rest; and so are lots of other people
discussing the area. One year after [the first poll], 63 percent
of the people said: No, legalization of drugs is not a good idea.
We made a 17 percent gain in public opinion in one year. If we
were to pass that poll now, we'd be in the majority, with the
same type of gain. </p>

<p>It's time that we address this and discuss it. And endemic in
that, critically and fundamentally important -- is that we get
across to our fellow citizens: It's OK to talk about this issue.
Just because we discuss our options does not mean that we condone
drug usage. If we can get that message alone across, we will have
been successful, because everything else will fall. If we can
only convince our people that just because we're discussing this
issue, just because we would even employ a different option, does
not mean that we condone drug abuse -- we will be successful.
That's all we need to do. </p>

<p>Number five. Legalizing or decriminalizing drugs will
eliminate violence -- and he says this is a myth. Of course it's
a myth. It is a straw man. We will never be able to get rid of
violence in our society. We have always had it, we always will.
We will always have crime, certainly. We will always have drug
abuse, certainly. But [Prohibition] contributes mightily to
violence in our society. Are you aware, as Ethan Nadelmann will
tell us: After the repeal of alcohol prohibition, what happened
to violent crime in our society? It went down 65 percent in the
next year and continued to go down for every year thereafter
until the beginning of the Second World War. I am convinced the
same thing will happen in our country, once we come to our senses
and employ a different system. [Applause.] </p>

<p>Then, another straw man myth. Legalizing is free of costs. Of
course not. Any system that we employ will have its problems. Any
system that I can come up with -- you, we as a country can come
up with -- will have some problems. Holland has realized that,
and other harm reduction countries. They realize these drugs are
harmful. I certainly believe that heroin, cocaine and marijuana
are dangerous drugs. I believe that very strongly. I don't take
them and I never will, regardless of what we do. But let's try to
recognize that and reduce, minimize the harm that will
necessarily flow from this. But let's not stand quiet when
someone presents a straw man saying: &quot;Aw, you're still going
to have problems under your system&quot;. Because of course we
are -- let's try to minimize those problems instead of simply
setting up straw men. </p>

<p>Number seven? There are excellent foreign models -- and he
called that a myth. Well, he mentions in Holland a problem with
foreigners -- and he's right. At the last Drug Policy Foundation
conference, a year ago last November, there were two men from the
[Dutch] Ministry of Health who I cornered -- because I wanted to
educate myself about the system that Holland is using -- and I
said, after they explained to me their system -- which I was
enormously impressed with -- I asked them: &quot;What are the two
biggest problems you have in Holland today?&quot; They looked at
me and said: &quot;Number one is we are a small country, [and]
about a third of the people that use drugs in Holland are
foreigners. They come here to have a good time and we don't know
what to do about it&quot;. [H]owever, to equate that with our
country -- so much larger -- is simply silly. We will not have
that problem if we were to go to a system like Holland's. By the
way, the second largest problem they had really embarrassed me
deeply. They'll embarrass you too. He looked me in the eye and
said: &quot;The second biggest problem we have is the government
of the United States of America -- they will not leave us
alone!&quot; What difference does it make to us how Holland
addresses this enormous problem domestically in their own
internal affairs? We are heavy handed and we ought to behave
ourselves. [Applause.] To be honest with you, I don't know what
is happening in Italy today. And if anyone does, maybe we can all
help each other. I do know that Italy changes -- it depends what
time it is as to which system they have. But it's difficult to
get statistics. But I think that that is something that we should
educate ourselves about and try to help each other... </p>

<p>The eighth personal myth is that this is just a personal
matter. Do I need to respond? Yes, it is a personal matter and if
the government is going to eliminate everything that is wrong and
harmful in our society, as we heard this morning, they will
eliminate power tools, they certainly should eliminate donuts --
a very, very harmful substance -- and we can continue going on.
Obviously, mother's milk is a gateway drug and there we go.
[Laughter.] </p>

<p>So what we need to ask is: Are prisons a myth? We in the State
of California have indeed added 13 new state prisons to our state
prison system in the last ten years, reaching now to the number
of 28. We have 13 more on the drawing boards, ten of [will have]
their doors open by the turn of the century. Today one out of
every six people that work today for the state of California,
work for the Department of Corrections. It is a growing industry.
An accountant came up to me a little while ago and said:
&quot;You know, if we continue going forward in the future -- as
we have in the last twenty years in the state of California -- by
the year 2020, literally everybody in the state of California
will literally be in prison or running one.&quot; And he is
absolutely right. </p>

<p>Finally, as we say, it is time to investigate the possibility
of change. Mike mentioned the Hoover Resolution, which was
founded back in February of last year by such flaming radicals as
Milton Friedman, George Schultz, Joe McNamara -- the former
police chief of San Jose -- numbers of medical doctors, an
Oakland high school principal and others. The resolution says
what I believe is irrefutable. Namely, what we're doing today
under the criminal justice system is not working. We have
substantial medical and social problems presented by the drug
abuse in our society. It is time to address them with medical and
social solutions. We beseech our president and congress to have,
to empower one final neutral commission to investigate this from
all aspects. Law enforcement, of course. From a religious
standpoint, from a community standpoint, social, medical or
anywhere else. We ask that you also sign the resolution, not
necessarily today. If you want copies, this beautiful lady here
in the green has some copies. Take them home with you, circulate
them. If you don't have one, you can look in the present Drug
Policy Foundation newsletter. It simply recommends that we
investigate the possibility of change. If what we're doing is not
working, it's time to look into change. There is a slogan that I
believe is instructive, and that slogan is not: &quot;Just say
no&quot; -- although I really buy into that, because
&quot;no&quot; should be spelled K-N-O-W. [Laughter/applause.] </p>

<p>What I would do instead is utilize the following slogan: If
you want to keep getting what you're getting, keep doing what
you're doing. And what we're doing now isn't working and we're
getting a whole lot of grief, and it's time to look into the
possibility of change. If people are not interested in
investigating our options -- be it legalization,
decriminalization, medicalization, regulated distribution -- OK,
fine and well. Then let's at least investigate what we are doing
now, which is prohibition. Let's at least investigate
prohibition. And if people do not even agree to investigate what
we're doing now, I'm afraid I must ask: Why not? What do you have
to be afraid of? It's time to look into this, to better ourselves
and our beloved country. We can't do any worse. Thank you very
much. [Applause.] <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>