
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B004-242</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134208 text/html 75714
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:41:54 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:24 GMT
Content-length: 75496
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Requirements for Policy Toward Drug Enforcement and
Organized Cr</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Consultant Paper: Data and Analysis Requirements for Policy
Toward Drug Enforcement and Organized Crime </h2>

<p>By Mark Kleiman. Submitted: November 1985. Mark Kleiman is a
Research Fellow in the Program in Criminal Justice Policy and
Management at the John F. Kennedy School of Government of Harvard
University, Senior Lecturer in Political Science at the
University of Rochester, and President of BOTEC Analysis
Corporation. </p>

<p>Executive Summary </p>

<p>Organized crime control and drug enforcement need to be
considered together insofar as drug trafficking contributes to
the organized crime problem or organized crime contributes to the
drug problem. In making policy it would be useful to know about
(1) the role of drug trafficking in supporting organized crime
groups; (2) the role of organized crime groups in supplying
drugs; and (3) the effects on each problem of changing
enforcement practices in the other. </p>

<p>Drug trafficking is almost certainly the largest source of
illegally-earned income in the United States. </p>

<p>Both &quot;traditionally&quot; organized crime groups (Mafia
families) and &quot;emerging&quot; organized crime groups
participate in some aspects of the illicit drug trafficking
industry. In addition, some drug trafficking organizations have
some of the characteristics of organized crime groups, such as
the capacity and reputation for the use of violence and
corruption to frustrate enforcement. </p>

<p>Organized crime can participate in drug markets either
&quot;productively,&quot; using its lawbreaking skills to
contribute to the supply of illicit drugs, or
&quot;parasitically,&quot; using violence and the threat of
violence to extort drug merchants or organize cartels. Only the
productive activity of organized crime contributes to the drug
supply problem, which is the main target of drug enforcement.
Parasitic organized crime activity, in illicit markets as in
legitimate markets, tends to raise prices and reduce consumption.
</p>

<p>Controlling organized crime and controlling drug abuse (and
drug-abuse-related crime) are two distinct objectives. Some
agencies of government - the Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA) and the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), for
example - have primary responsibility for drug abuse control.
Others, like the Organized Crime Strike Forces, are concerned
primarily with organized crime control. The two sets of agencies
may or may not promote each other's objectives. </p>

<p>Drug enforcement actions may affect the drug markets in
several ways. They may: (1) help or hurt the efforts of organized
crime to participate in and profit from drug dealing; (2)
encourage or retard the development of organized-crime-like
characteristics among drug trafficking groups; and (3) lead to
more or fewer convictions of organized criminals. Unless it is
deliberately focused on organized crime groups, high-level drug
enforcement may tend to foster organized crime by keeping prices
high and driving out less well-organized competitors. </p>

<p>Organized crime enforcement actions may make the task of drug
enforcement harder or easier, depending on whether the roles of
those groups in the drug markets are primarily parasitic or
primarily productive. Aside from heroin importation into New
York, traditional organized crime is largely a parasite on the
drug markets; thus, as long as the organized crime effort
concentrates on the Mafia, it has little to contribute to drug
supply reduction. </p>

<p>Data about drug trafficking and drug enforcement, and about
the relationships between the drug trade and organized crime, can
serve three purposes: describing the current dimensions of the
problem, reasoning about how changes in enforcement activity
might make matters better or worse, and measuring the actual
effects of such changes after they are made. </p>

<p>From the perspective of organized crime policy, essential
facts about the drug markets are prices and quantities, and, most
important, the relationship between changes in retail price and
changes in the quantity purchased: the price-elasticity of
demand. Driving up the price of an inelastically-demanded drug
will increase the total revenues of traffickers of that drug, and
thus tend to promote organized crime. </p>

<p>Data about the drug markets and drug enforcement come from
three sources: (1) survey research; (2) observations of the
consequences of drug abuse (deaths, injuries, and demand for
treatment); and (3) enforcement statistics and reports. </p>

<p>Current large survey efforts, among households and high-school
seniors, do not gather much price and quantity data. We need a
separate national survey with a sample designed to overrepresent
heavy drug-users, that ask very detailed questions about price,
quantity, and conditions of drug purchase. In addition, local and
regional surveys should be conducted to evaluate the effect of
enforcement initiatives on market conditions and drug
consumption. </p>

<p>Two techniques not now in use - &quot;panel&quot; surveys of
drug users and surveys of convicted dealers - should be
undertaken, if the difficult operational and ethical issues can
be resolved. </p>

<p>Neither abuse-consequence data now gathered (medical examiner
and emergency-room reports through the Drug Abuse Warning Network
(DAWN), drug abuse treatment data through the remnants of the
Client-Oriented Data Acquisition Process (CODAP), opinions of
treatment professionals through the Community Epidemiology Work
Group (CEWG)) nor alternative ways of reaching the same facts are
very useful in making organized crime/drug enforcement policy
choices. These programs serve other purposes and should not be
disturbed, except for adding bioassay capability to some DAWN
sites. Pilot programs to test jail admittees for heroin use are
worth pursuing. </p>

<p>More could be done with enforcement agency data, which could
tell us about the enforcement effort itself (agency activities,
targets, measured results) and on its effects (prices at
different levels of the drug trade). The new management of the
Drug Enforcement Administration has put less effort into
estimating prices and quantities in the drug markets. That change
should be reversed, and DEA should again publish price-chain
estimates. </p>

<p>Enforcement agencies can also make and analyze retail-level
drug purchases, unrelated to specific cases, to measure the state
of the drug markets. Such &quot;monitor&quot; programs should be
increased in frequency, systematized, and applied to marijuana
and cocaine as well as heroin. </p>

<p>Recent revisions in the methods used by the National Narcotics
Intelligence Consumers Committee (NNICC) in preparing the annual
Narcotics Intelligence Estimate (NIE) appear to have somewhat
reduced that document's inconsistencies with observable fact.
However, the NNICC still seems to practice analysis by
negotiation rather than basing its estimates on evidence. The NIE
would be more useful if its assumptions, data, and computations
were explicit. There might be value in allowing a group of
experts outside the government access to NNICC documents and
sources, from which they could develop an independent set of
estimates. </p>

<p>Questions to be Answered: </p>

<p>Drug trafficking and organized crime are linked problems.
Policy making and evaluation for each is complicated by the
presence of the other. My objective is to outline a set of data
collection and analysis activities that would answer questions
under four headings: </p>

<p>1. What effects do organized crime have on drug trafficking
and enforcement? </p>

<p>2. What effects do drug trafficking and enforcement have on
organized crime? </p>

<p>3. How should federal agencies engaged in organized crime
enforcement adjust their policies to contribute to the objectives
of drug policy? </p>

<p>4. How should federal agencies engaged in drug enforcement
adjust their policies to contribute to the objective of organized
crime control? </p>

<p>Data collection and analysis are never free; in the drug area,
they are likely to be quite expensive. It is therefore important
to identify in advance what is relatively certain on the basis of
information and analysis now in hand; it doesn't take a
spectroscopic analysis to discover that the sky is blue. The
following section will therefore attempt to describe what we now
know and to identify the key analytic points. </p>

<p>Introduction: Drug Enforcement and Organized Crime Control </p>

<p>How Two Objectives and Two Sets of Institutions Intersect </p>

<p>The objective of drug enforcement is to keep drugs away from
consumers. The objective of organized crime enforcement is to
control the wealth and power of major criminal organizations and
to frustrate their goal of being able to defy the law. </p>

<p>These objectives interact where the illicit drug business is a
major source of power or revenue to organized crime groups (or a
major source of their vulnerability to enforcement), and where
the capabilities of organized crime groups make drugs more
available than they would otherwise be: in other words, where the
drug trade contributes to the organized crime problem or where
organized crime contributes to the drug problem. </p>

<p>Defining Organized Crime </p>

<p>The term organized crime can be used in one of two ways. It
may be merely an ethnically neutral euphemism for &quot;the
Mafia&quot; or &quot;La Cosa Nostra&quot; (LCN); or it may
describe a class of criminal organizations whose characteristics
make them particularly worthy of law enforcement attention. Size,
wealth, political power, participation in a variety of criminal
activities, and continuity over time have all been suggested as
such characteristics. </p>

<p>One way to bridge the gap between the two definitional
approaches is to refer to the Mafia as &quot;traditional&quot;
organized crime, while acknowledging the existence of other,
&quot;emerging,&quot; organized crime groups. </p>

<p>Defining organized crime in terms of its characteristics,
rather than ostensibly, complicates the analysis. Not only does
this approach treat the set of &quot;organized crime&quot; groups
as variable rather than fixed; it also implies a many-valued
rather than two-valued classification. Criminal groups, rather
than simply being organized crime or non-organized crime (i.e.,
Mafia families or other), will fall along a spectrum of being
more or less &quot;organized-crime-like.&quot; This suggests the
possibility that drug enforcement activity can increase or
decrease the number of drug-dealing organizations with many
organized crime characteristics. It also suggests that it can
make existing organized-crime-like drug dealers more or less
organized-crime-like and give such groups a greater or lesser
share of the drug market. </p>

<p>This paper will attempt to distinguish between traditional and
emerging organized crime groups, but will think of organized
crime as primarily a set of organizational characteristics rather
than a predefined set of organizations. The relevant
characteristics are organizational continuity and organizational
investment in the capability and reputation for violent or
corrupt interference with law enforcement activity. </p>

<p>Organized Crime as a Drug Supply Problem </p>

<p>&quot;Traditional&quot; organized crime - La Cosa Nostra -
does not now contribute substantially to the drug problem, with
the exception of the major roles of two of the five New York LCN
&quot;families&quot; in heroin importation. This is not to say
that LCN members and associates do not participate in drug
dealing on many levels, but only that they make no distinctive
contribution to the supply of illicit drugs. Indeed, as Thomas
Schelling has pointed out, the activity of organized crime in
cartel formation and extortion from illicit entrepreneurs may on
balance reduce the supply and increase the price of illicit
goods, as is true in licit markets. </p>

<p>As a consequence, organized crime enforcement institutions -
the Strike Forces and the investigators who work with them - have
relatively little to contribute to solving the problem of illicit
drug supply, as long as they continue their concentration on
&quot;traditional&quot; organized crime groups. This
concentration has been so successful, both in terms of successful
cases and in terms of creating and maintaining productive,
high-morale enforcement and prosecution institutions, that it
seems both unlikely (as a matter of prediction) to be changed and
unwise (as a matter of policy analysis) to consider changing. </p>

<p>It may be the case that some &quot;emerging&quot; organized
crime groups make distinctive contributions to various parts of
drug supply, so that their disruption would contribute to drug
supply control (over and above the general effect of enforcement
in raising prices by raising the costs and risks of drug
trafficking). Outlaw motorcycle gangs - the Hell's Angels in the
West, the Outlaws in the Mid-Atlantic region - may be
&quot;least-cost suppliers&quot; in the distribution of cocaine,
amphetamines, and phencyclidine (PCP). Similarly, some
ethnic-based organizations among Asian-Americans may be
significant contributors to the heroin supply, as the Herrera
organization certainly was at least until the recent arrests. By
contrast, neither the importation nor the distribution of
marijuana appears to offer the economies of organization that
would make breaking up particular trafficking groups a major
marijuana enforcement objective. The marijuana trade may be at
its most efficient as a decentralized set of independent buyers
and sellers. </p>

<p>To develop a set of institutions to appropriately address the
role of emerging organized crime groups in the drug markets will
require devising organizational incentives and career patterns
that support extremely long-term investigations and investments
in intelligence (broadly defined), while maintaining a
supply-control orientation among agents and prosecutors. This
will not be an easy task. There may be lessons to be learned from
the Federal Bureau of Narcotics in its approach to LCN heroin
dealing. </p>

<p>The Drug Markets as an Organized Crime Problem </p>

<p>The illicit drug traffic contributes to the organized crime
problem because of the enormous amounts of money at stake. These
potential revenues will both attract (and help to sustain)
existing organized crime groups and call into existence new
groups with organized crime characteristics. </p>

<p>LCN families, other ethnically-based organizations long in
existence, and outlaw motorcycle gangs may engage in drug dealing
as a way to support themselves financially and to take advantage
of their organizational abilities in illicit transactions. The
opportunities in the drug trade may also allow the development of
organizations whose origin is in drug dealing, and which may
remain specialized in drug dealing, while taking on organized
crime characteristics, in particular, organizational continuity
and organizational investments in the abilities to use violence
and corruption to resist enforcement efforts while remaining
prominent in illicit markets. </p>

<p>Drug trafficking is almost certainly the largest source of
illegally-earned income in the United States, far outstripping
the market for illegal gambling or prostitution. Estimates of
total revenues from drug sales vary widely and are highly
unreliable. It seems unlikely that total annual revenues are much
less than $25-30 billion. </p>

<p>Virtually all of this represents rewards for lawbreaking; the
payments forlicit goods and services (rental or purchase of
vehicles and buildings; lawyers' fees) are negligible. On the
other hand, relatively little represents revenue to large
criminal organizations, because so much of the final retail price
of illegal drugs consists of the markups of retail dealers and
low-level wholesalers. For heroin and cocaine less than one-tenth
of the final retail price is collected by the dealer who sells
kilogram units. Marijuana, by contrast, with much less vigorous
enforcement at lower levels, undergoes only about a four-to-one
price markup between first domestic distribution and final retail
sale. </p>

<p>Therefore, while all three markets have total values on the
order of $10 billion per year, more than $2 billion of the
marijuana market represents the revenues of high-level
organizations, while the heroin and cocaine markets at that level
represent about $1 billion each. On the other hand, the tighter
distribution channels for heroin and cocaine make it possible for
large and highly disciplined organizations to exist at the
wholesale-retail level, so that organizations with many of the
characteristics of organized crime may exist at lower levels of
those trades (e.g., the Barnes organization in the Harlem heroin
market). </p>

<p>Making Strategy </p>

<p>Drug enforcement actions change the drug markets in ways that
may: (1) help or hurt the efforts of existing organized crime
enterprises, whether traditional or emerging, to participate in
and profit from them; (2) encourage or retard the development of
organized crime characteristics in existing or new enterprises
within the drug markets; (3) be more or less helpful in securing
convictions against members of already-identified organized crime
groups and the identification of new groups meeting those
criteria. </p>

<p>The more effectively drug enforcement is directed toward
organized crime control, the less hospitable organized crime
groups will find the drug markets. On the other hand, an increase
in the overall level of drug enforcement not aimed specifically
at organized crime groups may tend to frustrate organized crime
control by helping existing organized crime groups profit from
the drug trade and by encouraging existing drug enterprises to
take on more organized crime characteristics. </p>

<p>The ability of organized crime groups to profit from the drug
trade - and the tendency of the drug trade to spawn new organized
crime groups - depends both on the amount of money to be made in
that trade and on whether the environment rewards or punishes
tight control and a reputation for violence. Under some
conditions, tightened enforcement can both boost the total money
available to be made and confer competitive advantage on more
violent groups at the expense of less violent ones. </p>

<p>Tighter enforcement can increase the money to be made in any
black market, if it succeeds in raising the price of the
commodity involved and if consumption decreases less, in
percentage terms, than prices rise. (A 50 percent price increase
that causes only a 20 percent decrease in volume will create a
new market with total revenues 1.5 x 0.8 = 1.2 times as large as
the revenues in the old market, and thus increase the money to be
made by 0.2 or 20 percent.) Thus the sensitivity of consumer
demand to retail price - what economists call the
price-elasticity of demand - becomes an essential number to know.
</p>

<p>If the price-elasticity of demand is (in absolute value)
greater than one - if a given percentage increase in price will
cause a larger percentage decrease in volume - then price
increases will decrease total revenues. (Such goods are said to
be &quot;relatively elastically demanded.&quot;) On the other
hand, if the price-elasticity of demand is (in absolute value)
less than one - if a given percentage change in price will cause
a smaller percentage change in volume, as in the example above -
then price increases will increase total revenues. (Such goods
are said to be &quot;relatively inelastically demanded.&quot;) </p>

<p>In markets where demand is relatively elastic - where
consumers will respond to price increases by cutting back
consumption sharply - increased enforcement will reduce the money
at stake and thus tend to make the markets less lucrative for
organized crime. Where demand is inelastic, increasing
enforcement will increase the money at stake and thus make the
markets more able to support organized crime. Much of the
empirical work recommended below centers on measuring the
price-elasticity of demand for various drugs. </p>

<p>Unfortunately, it appears that the demand for marijuana and
cocaine is relatively inelastic. (The argument with respect to
marijuana is on much firmer ground than the argument with respect
to cocaine.) In any case, tightened general drug enforcement - as
opposed to drug enforcement targeted at organized crime - will
tend to give organized crime groups and organized crime-like
groups relative competitive advantage, because their capacity for
violence and corruption helps protect then against ordinary
enforcement actions. This is the central tension in organized
crime/drug enforcement policy: good drug enforcement may be bad
organized crime control. </p>

<p>Observations to be Made </p>

<p>The observations to be made fall into three broad classes:
retail purchasing and consumption, lower-level dealing, and
enforcement activity. (Of course, observations on high-level
dealing are also of great importance, but they are almost
impossible to distinguish from enforcement intelligence. Data
collection here means talking to agents, enforcement-agency
analysts, and prosecutors, and the information to be collected is
rarely in quantitative form.) </p>

<p>Three Objectives of Data Collection and Analysis </p>

<p>Data collection and analysis about drug markets can serve
three distinct functions: </p>

<p>- Descriptive: measuring the current dimensions of the problem
and identifying trends. Sample questions: How much cocaine was
sold to end users last year? What prices do they pay? How were
those revenues distributed among individuals and groups in the
illicit cocaine industry? What were the relationships between
identified organized crime groups and cocaine trafficking? How
have the volumes and prices in the cocaine market changed over
time? What organized crime groups are active in the cocaine
market? What role does it play in their other activities? What
roles do they play - productive or parasitic - in the market? </p>

<p>- Theoretical: generating and testing hypotheses about
relationships among variables, and in particular about the likely
effects of changes in enforcement. Sample questions: Are there
&quot;barriers to entry&quot; at some levels of the cocaine trade
that allow traffickers to collect &quot;pure&quot; profits
(&quot;economic rents&quot;)? How would the average size and
longevity of cocaine-trafficking organizations change if
enforcement were substantially tightened? </p>

<p>- Evaluative: measuring the actual effects of enforcement
initiatives. Sample question: How did the South Florida Task
Force change prices and volumes in the cocaine market? </p>

<p>Three Sources of Data </p>

<p>Illicit activities are by their nature hard to observe and
measure, because participants attempt to conceal them from
authorities. Excise tax data, which provide the most convenient
measures of alcohol and tobacco consumption, are unavailable for
illicit drug markets. The same is true of the reports routinely
prepared by licit enterprises reports to state and federal tax
collectors, to trade associations and government statistical
collectors, to trade associations and government statistical
agencies, and to stockholders - from which estimates of licit
markets are derived. </p>

<p>The remaining potential sources of information about illicit
drug markets are: </p>

<p>(1) Surveys of drug users and potential drug users; </p>

<p>(2) Observations of the consequences of drug - abuse health
effects, intoxicated behavior, and demand for treatment - and the
opinions of professionals who deal with those consequences; and </p>

<p>(3) Enforcement data and the opinions of agents and
prosecutors. </p>

<p>Note that while surveys and observations of consequences tell
us almost exclusively about the behavior of drug consumers and
drug dealers, enforcement data and the opinions of enforcement
professionals can also tell us about the other half of the
equation: the governmental response. </p>

<p>Several current programs now attempt to tap these three
sources of information. None is without major flaws from the
perspective of organized crime policy. A major problem common to
many is that they are more concerned with numbers of users and
frequency of use consumed than with quantities consumed and flows
of revenues. </p>

<p>Survey Research </p>

<p>Survey research is potentially the most powerful tool
available for studying the markets for illicit drugs. Unlike data
from enforcement activity or abuse consequences, survey research
can attempt to measure prices and quantities directly rather than
through complicated chains of inference. Performing surveys about
consumption activities - market research supports a rather
prosperous industry, including both for-profit enterprises and
prestigious universities and nonprofit research centers. These
institutions have developed a repertoire of established
techniques. The fact that consumer-goods firms continue to use it
heavily testifies to the ability of market research to measure
and predict consumer behavior. </p>

<p>The National Institute on Drug Abuse funds two series of
survey research projects on illicit drug consumption. The Social
Research Group of George Washington University does a survey
every two years of more than 5,000 persons 12 years or older
living in households [Miller et al. 1983]. This series is
referred to among students of drug abuse as &quot;the household
survey.&quot; </p>

<p>Every year, the Institute of Social Research of the University
of Michigan questions about 17,000 seniors in high school. The
Michigan reports are referred to as &quot;the high-school senior
survey.&quot; These two surveys are believed to cost NIDA
something less than one-half a million dollars for each two-year
cycle. </p>

<p>The concept of survey research is simple. Draw a sample so
designed that every member of the population under study has an
equal probability of being chosen. (This is what statisticians
mean by the term &quot;random sample.&quot; A variant on simple
randomization is to divide the population under study into
subgroups, called &quot;strata,&quot; and to draw the sample so
that each stratum is represented in proportion to its
representation in the population, and each member of a given
stratum has the same chance of being drawn as any other member.
This procedure, called &quot;stratified random sampling,&quot; is
the most commonly used.) Having drawn the sample, ask questions
and record the answers. Then use the percentage answers from the
sample as estimates of the behavior of the population from which
the sample was drawn: that is, make population projections based
on sample results. </p>

<p>Surveys can be inaccurate for three reasons: random error,
sample bias, and response bias. </p>

<p>Random error (or &quot;sampling error&quot;) occurs because
the law of averages only works on average. If 30 percent of the
population uses Crest Toothpaste, then in a sample of 100 persons
drawn at random about 30 will say they use Crest. But the
operative word is &quot;about:&quot; one time it will be 28,
another 33. The larger the sample, the smaller the random
sampling error, in accord with well-known statistical formulas.
This does not depend on the size of the population to be
measured: a sample of 1,000 is subject to the same sampling error
in estimating a population of 100,000 as in estimating a
population of 10 million. The rule of thumb is that the sampling
error is inversely proportional to the square root of the sample
size: a sample four times as big gives estimates one half as
uncertain. For many purposes - predicting the outcome of a
Presidential election, for example - a sample size of a few
hundred is ample. </p>

<p>The smaller the percentage of a population that has some
trait, the larger the sample needed to measure that trait
accurately, because a sampling error of 2 percent looms larger if
the underlying figure is 5 percent than if it is 50 percent.
Thus, attempts to measure rare phenomena - heroin use, for
example - take bigger samples than attempts to measure common
phenomena such as alcohol use. The other factor that drives up
needed sample sizes is the desire to study how subgroups of a
population differ. In a study of the effect of income on cocaine
use, the relevant sample size is the number of respondents within
each income class. To study whether recent increases in marijuana
enforcement by the Boston DEA office succeeded in reducing
marijuana consumption, one would need a sample including at least
a few hundred marijuana consumers from New England, and a similar
sample from another area to serve as a control. </p>

<p>Other than the expensive expedient of using very large sample
sizes - such as the 50,000 households interviewed each month by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics - the only way to reduce
sampling-error problems in estimating rare traits is to deviate
from stratified random sampling. Areas under special study or
subpopulations among which the trait in question is less rare can
be deliberately overrepresented. For example, if cocaine use is
concentrated among upper-income urban males in the 20-45 age
bracket, a study of cocaine use might deliberately seek out a
sample including more such people; this is called oversampling.
The results of a survey using oversampling need to be adjusted to
project them back on the population. Those adjustments introduce
great complexity into the statistical analysis of survey data.
Subtle errors can easily creep in. In consequence, survey
researchers try to avoid using oversamples. </p>

<p>Random error, just because it is random, does not tend to bias
results. The luck of the draw produces overestimates and
underestimates impartially. It does, however, introduce
uncertainty. This is more of a problem when trying to measure
trends (where small changes from one survey to the next matter
greatly) than in measuring absolute levels. By contrast, both
sample bias and response bias can create systematic divergences
between survey results and actual phenomena. </p>

<p>Sample bias comes from a failure to draw a representative
sample. If the sampling technique makes persons with a given
trait under study more or less likely than average to be
selected, the sample results will consistently overestimate or
underestimate the trait in question. For example, the household
survey omits persons with no fixed address and those living in
dormitories, barracks, and prisons. If very heavy drug users are
more likely than the general population to be drifting, away at
school, in the service, or in prison, then the household survey
will underestimate the number of very heavy drug users.
Similarly, the high-school senior survey may underrepresent drug
abuse among persons in that age range for two reasons. By
choosing to study high-school seniors, it omits dropouts, who may
be more likely than average to be heavy drug users. In addition,
the actual sampling technique may tend to underrepresent frequent
absentees, and frequent absenteeism seems to be associated with
heavy drug use. </p>

<p>If the only statistics of interest are population proportions
(e.g., the proportion of the voters who think the President is
doing a good job), sample bias is a controllable problem. When
frequency or quantity is at issue (e.g., how frequently the
average high-school senior smokes marijuana, how much cocaine was
consumed last year, the total amount paid for heroin) sample bias
can be a major worry. A small proportion of any population can
easily account for a very large fraction of any activity, from
baseball games attended to books purchased. In the case of
alcohol, for example, 5 percent of the population accounts for 50
percent of the consumption. By one estimate, 10 percent of the
marijuana-using population smokes two-thirds of the marijuana.
Cocaine consumption may be even more skewed, with the additional
problem that the total number of cocaine users is itself much
smaller than the totals for marijuana and alcohol; two-thirds or
more of the cocaine consumption may be accounted for by one-half
a million users. </p>

<p>Sampling procedures to guard against underrepresenting such
very small populations are hard to devise, particularly when the
behavior under study tends to make them furtive or to reduce
their participation in various normal activities. Oversampling
can help; so can what are called &quot;snowball&quot; techniques,
where respondents who fit some profile are asked for the names of
other respondents. The illicit nature of drug abuse can make
&quot;snowball&quot; sampling very difficult, however. </p>

<p>Response bias comes from the systematic failure of respondents
to answer accurately. Any survey will gather some inaccurate
responses, due to misunderstanding the questions, lapses of
memory, or deliberate deception by respondents resulting from
fear of breach of confidentiality, embarrassment, or a simple
desire to tell the interviewer what the respondent thinks he or
she wants to be told. As long as those errors cancel out, they
pose no problem. The problem comes if the inaccuracies are tilted
to one side or the other. A survey that asks questions about
activities that are both illegal and socially disapproved runs a
greater-than-normal risk of encountering response bias. </p>

<p>A clue to how serious response bias can be, even with legal
behavior, comes from surveys where people are asked how much
alcohol they drink. Only two-thirds of the alcohol on which
excise tax is paid (which may be an undercount of alcohol sold if
distillers cheat the Treasury) is accounted for by survey
responses; the survey data thus underestimate consumption by at
least 50 percent. It has been suggested that psychological
&quot;denial&quot; by a small population of extremely heavy
drinkers may account for most of the difference. Here again, as
with sample bias, problems with a very small portion of the
sample can cause the results to be seriously wrong. On the other
hand, a compilation of studies in which survey responses to
questions about illegal drug use were compared with urine-test
results showed no tendency to underreport. </p>

<p>A special kind of response-bias problem comes when survey data
are used to estimate trends. If the level or social disapproval
as perceived by recipients changes, then response bias may change
too. For example, increasingly negative attitudes about marijuana
use might lead adolescent respondents to the high-school seniors
survey to be less likely to tell adult interviewers that they
smoked marijuana every day, even if their actual behavior did not
change. The result would be an apparent, but spurious, decline in
heavy marijuana use among adolescents. (This is not to say that
changing attitudes might not also change behavior, only that the
survey evidence is subject to error from this source). </p>

<p>There are no easy answers to the problem of response bias.
Sometimes, as in the studies cited by K. H. Marquis, it is
possible to collect independent data as a check on a sample of
responses, and then adjust the sample results for the measured
bias. Another strategy is to vary the circumstances of response,
for example, by using &quot;secret ballot&quot; answer sheets
instead of face-to-face questioning or by changing the
characteristics of the interviewers. Just as pollsters long ago
discovered that black respondents answered many questions
differently when the interviewers were black, it may be the case
that some adolescents would respond differently to questions
about drug use put by another adolescent - particularly one
dressed and groomed in ways consistent with drug use - than to
the same questions put by an adult. </p>

<p>Changes and Supplements to Current Surveys </p>

<p>Both the household survey and the high-school seniors survey,
conducted by experienced researchers at institutions with
reputations for producing high-quality survey research, are
well-designed for their intended purposes: primarily the
measurement of the number of drug users, secondarily the
measurement of frequency of drug use. But from the perspective of
making drug enforcement policy, and particularly policy to
control organized crime, they do not gather the right data, or
gather it from the right people, or gather it frequently enough.
The most important things surveys can tell us are the quantity of
each drug purchased and consumed; the prices at which those
purchases are made; the identities and relationships of buyers
and sellers; the effects of enforcement on market conditions; and
the effects of market conditions on consumption. In order to
learn these things, surveys would have to: </p>

<p>1. Find More of the Heavy Drug-Users. So much of total drug
consumption is concentrated among a relatively few very heavy
users that no practical increase in sample size for a stratified
random sample among the general population will yield an adequate
sample. For example, the 5,000-person household survey could
expect to get by chance about a dozen of the one half-million
heaviest cocaine users. There are two ways to get a meaningful
sample of heavy users: either use oversampling in drawing
respondents for the household and high-school senior surveys, or
run separate studies of heavy use. The &quot;Young Men and
Drugs&quot; studies show both the feasibility of finding samples
rich in serious drug abusers and the value of the results that
finding such samples can yield. </p>

<p>2. Ask about Prices and Quantities purchased. We would like to
know when the user's last purchase of a given drug took place;
what quantity was involved, plus whatever the purchaser knows or
was told about purity/potency/ quality; and how much money
changed hands; this information is essential to making any
serious estimate of the dollar volume of the market. </p>

<p>3. Ask about the Conditions of the Transaction. Where did the
purchase take place? (The purchaser's residence, the seller's, a
school building, an office building, an apartment corridor, a
park, a street corner?) Were there other people present? Had the
transaction been prenegotiated? Was the price
take-it-or-leave-it, or was there negotiation? Was the
purchaser's previous transaction with the same seller or a
different seller? Is the seller a relative, a close friend, and
acquaintance, or a stranger? These questions can help answer
questions about the possible effectiveness of retail-level
enforcement as a way to cut down on the volume of drugs consumed.
</p>

<p>4. Ask about Price Increases, Shortages, Sharing, and Consumer
Inventories. Was the price of the most recent transaction higher
or lower than the respondent's previous transaction? Than the
respondent expected? If the price of the drug were to increase by
25 percent, what would the respondent do? (Use about the same
amount, use less, quit altogether, switch to another drug?) Has
the respondent ever been unable to find a supply of the drug in
question at any price? Does the respondent now have a supply of
the drug? If so, how long would it last at his normal consumption
rate? How frequently has the respondent used drugs purchased by
another? Given drugs to another? These questions will help
determine the effect of price increases and temporary shortages
on consumption behavior. Unfortunately, experience from market
research on legitimate products suggests that the answers to the
what-if questions are likely to be unreliable. </p>

<p>5. Give Information about Local Markets. Federal and local
enforcement efforts vary widely across the country in their
intensity and success, but there are almost no studies of what
the effects are on retail purchases and consumption. Nationwide
samples need to be supplemented with local ones. </p>

<p>6. Provide a Steady Stream of Data in Addition to Annual or
Once-Every-Two-Years Snapshots. This is particularly valuable in
combination with local data as a way of measuring the difference
enforcement makes (or fails to make). Is the availability of
drugs fairly constant, or does it vary? How do consumers respond?
Estimating the price-elasticity of demand requires frequent
measurements of both price and quantity, both to generate an
adequate number of data points and to avoid confounding price
effects with long-term trends or cohort effects on the demand
side. </p>

<p>One alternative to random sampling often used in market
research is a panel survey, where questions are asked repeatedly
of the same group of respondents. Panel data would be enormously
useful in understanding the effects of market conditions on drug
use, and the individual patterns of drug consumption. For
example, when drug supplies are short, how are consumption
decreases distributed among new users and existing users, poor
users and affluent users, heavy users and light users? What drugs
are used as substitutes when marijuana is scarce or expensive?
How many users, who cease use when supplies are tight, never
start up again, or start up at lower levels of use? An obvious
problem is assuring respondent confidentiality, and convincing
respondents that it is assured. Perhaps more worrisome, being
members of such a panel might make respondents more
drug-conscious, which raises serious ethical questions, as well
as threatening the validity of such studies. </p>

<p>Obstacles </p>

<p>Naturally, proposing such studies for someone else to fund and
carry out is much easier than doing the work. Aside from the
problems of expense and the mass of legal, ethical, and
operational issues raised by asking detailed questions about
illegal transactions, such studies would face several obstacles: </p>

<p>First, they would have to be cleared by the Office of
Management and Budget, which views any expansion of survey
research by the government with a jaundiced eye. The complexity
of the questions to be asked strongly argues for the value of
paying respondents a small fee to encourage them to complete the
interview, but this makes OMB reviewers even more nervous. (The
1981 household survey didn't get into the field until 1982
because of a dispute with OMB about forms and payments to
respondents.) </p>

<p>Second, modifying the existing surveys in terms of content or
sample selection will interfere with the ability of researchers
to compare results from one survey to the next to determine
trends. The preference of survey researchers for asking the same
questions in the same words to the same samples is not mindless
conservatism, but a well-founded belief in the virtues of
repeating measurements exactly, rather than changing survey
series represents a big investment of money and talent. </p>

<p>Finally, it is worth noting that neither the National
Institute on Drug Abuse, which funds the current surveys, nor the
researches who conduct them, share the policy and research
perspective urged here. NIDA is far more interested in the
patterns of drug abuse than in the size and functioning of the
drug markets. Nor is there any demand for this sort of research
from the enforcement and prosecution agencies. </p>

<p>Surveys of Dealers </p>

<p>The discussion above concerns only surveys of drug users. It
is also possible to survey drug dealers, asking both about their
own dealings - transactions, strategies for dealing with
customers, suppliers, and enforcement agencies, incomes,
expenses, encounters, if any, with organized crime, opinions of
enforcement risk, pricing policy, recruitment into the trade,
career patterns and goals - and about their knowledge of how the
drug markets work. There is probably no better way to start on
serious estimates of, for example, bow many marijuana or cocaine
to deliver drugs to the market - is more plausible the fewer the
participants, and the more stable the organizational structure,
of any given market. </p>

<p>Finding and interviewing a sample of dealers poses both
problems and risks for the researcher. However, we do have access
to a sample of drug dealers with nothing better to do than answer
questions: they are in federal and state prisons. Of course, they
may be unrepresentative of the overall dealer population,
particularly in terms of their success in avoiding enforcement,
and may also be unwilling to be interviewed, or to speak
candidly. </p>

<p>Still, if systematic interviews could be conducted with a
sample of convicted drug dealers, the results could not fail to
be informative. The Rand Corporation is now conducting a pilot
study along those lines funded by the National Institute of
Justice. </p>

<p>Consequence Data </p>

<p>One alternative to asking people about their consumption of
illicit substances is to observe the consequences of drug abuse.
These consequences include coming into contact with both the
police (arrests, automobile accidents) and the health care
system: hospital emergency rooms, medical examiners' offices, and
drug treatment facilities. There is now no systematic attempt to
record drug intoxication at arrest or at accident scenes of drug
users, but the National Institute of Drug Abuse maintains three
collection activities to gather medical data: the Drug Abuse
Warning Network (DAWN), the Client-Oriented Data Acquisition
Process (CODAP) and the Community Epidemiology Work Group (CEWG).
</p>

<p>The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) </p>

<p>The National Institute on Drug Abuse collects and publishes
[National Institute on Drug Abuse Statistical Series I)
information from about one-sixth of the nation's emergency rooms,
with a heavy concentration on 26 metropolitan areas (SMSA's), and
from about two-thirds of the medical examiners in those 26 SMSA's
only. The emergency rooms report on patients who come in as a
result of acute ill experiences with the non-medical use of
drugs; the medical examiners report on persons who, in their
judgment, died as the direct result of drug use. In 1981, the
most recent year for which the data have been published, the DAWN
system recorded 121,268 emergency room visits and 2,825 deaths,
as a result of drugs. (The deaths exclude New York City, which
did not report to DAWN in 1981; in previous years, New York had
accounted for about one-quarter of DAWN medical examiner
reports.) </p>

<p>DAWN records all drugs used incidents of multiple drug abuse:
thus 121,268 emergency room &quot;episodes&quot; yielded 199,400
&quot;mentions,&quot; and 2,825 deaths involved 5,640 mentions.
Heroin is the third most frequently-mentioned drug in emergency
rooms, after alcohol-in-combination (alcohol alone is now counted
in DAWN) and diazepam (Valium). Cocaine is sixth, marijuana
seventh. Others in the top ten are aspirin, methaqualone,
acetaminophen (Tylenol), flurezapam (another tranquilizer) and
PCP. Heroin, marijuana, and cocaine, the three largest drug
markets in dollar terms, account for fewer than 20,000 total
mentions among them. This is such a tiny proportion of the users
of these drugs (about 1 in 50 heroin users, about 1 in 1,000
cocaine users, about 1 in 5,000 marijuana users) as to make any
inferences from the DAWN sample to the general population
extremely questionable. In any case, other than personal
demographic data, no questions are asked of DAWN subjects other
than &quot;what did you take?&quot; For some drugs, even the
answer to this question may be open to doubt, since illicit drug
sellers frequently misrepresent their wares, and DAWN sites are
not equipped to assay blood or urine to determine the chemical
composition of the &quot;speed&quot; or &quot;ludes&quot; that
subjects report they have taken. </p>

<p>Attempts to base estimates of patterns and trends in drug
availability on DAWN data, but they have not been convincing.
DAWN is valuable as an early warning network about both street
drugs and pharmaceuticals causing injury and death; but it does
not, and almost certainly cannot, contribute much to our
understanding of the kind of drug trafficking that contributes to
organized crime. </p>

<p>The Client Oriented Data Acquisition Process (CODAP) </p>

<p>Through 1981 NIDA gathered data from all federally-funded drug
treatment clinics and programs and published them as NIDA
Statistical Series E. Incentive to participate was provided by
making participation a condition of funding under the NIDA
categorical grant program that paid for drug treatment. The
abolition of that categorical grant program and the inclusion of
drug treatment in the Community Development Block Grant program
of direct fiscal assistance to the states both reduced the total
number of drug treatment facilities and eliminated any direct
relationship between the clinics and NIDA. As a result, NIDA can
mo longer compel participation in CODAP. Approximately 15 states
have voluntarily continued to submit CODAP data, and NIDA
collects the information and prepares am unofficial series of
annual reports. In 1981 there were 249,206 admissions to CODAP
facilities, more than three-fourths for outpatient treatment.
(Persons admitted more than once during the year were
double-counted, so the number of individuals admitted was
somewhat smaller). At any one time there were an average of
126,000 persons under treatment, almost 85 percent as
outpatients. </p>

<p>While CODAP collected demographic data and information about
the drugs for which its clients sought or were assigned to
treatment, it did not collect data about individual purchase and
consumption patterns. Variations in CODAP counts over time might
indicate either increases in abuser populations brought about by
increased availability, growing numbers of addicts without
connections brought about by decreased availability, or merely
increased availability of treatment. CODAP data were of great
interest to treatment professionals and produced interesting
time-series data on such indicators as age at first use (which
allowed some inferences about &quot;cohort effects&quot;).
However, CODAP had even less direct relevance to enforcement
planning than did DAWN. While local studies of enforcement
effectiveness may wish to gather data on treatment demand, this
can probably be done as effectively on an ad hoc basis as through
a process like CODAP. Reviving that process would not seem to be
a high priority from the viewpoint of organized-crime
policymaking. </p>

<p>The Community Epidemiology Work Group (CEWG) </p>

<p>The Community Epidemiology Work Group, also supported by NIDA,
collects reports from drug abuse prevention and treatment experts
and officials around the country about patterns and trends as
they perceive them in their own areas, and summarizes and
publishes those reports in volumes of &quot;Proceedings&quot;.
The local reports are not in standard format, and CEWG does not
generate statistical series. Prices are occasionally mentioned;
quantities rarely, if ever. It is conceivable that CEWG
participants night be encouraged and funded to develop informal
&quot;panel studies&quot; among drug users in their own areas.
But this would represent a substantial move away from CEWG's
current informality. </p>

<p>Changes and Other Studies </p>

<p>As suggested above, drug abuse consequence data have little
promise of contributing much to making or evaluating strategy
against organized crime. The one source not now tapped is arrest
data. Arrests of users - particularly heroin users - for property
crimes and prostitution may be quite sensitive indicators of
short-run changes in availability. To develop such data, it would
be necessary to test arrestees' urine for the presence of opiate
metabolites and quinine. The National Institute of Justice is
funding a few pilot programs along these lines. Assuming they
turn out to be operationally feasible, they probably represent a
wise investment of funds. </p>

<p>Enforcement Data </p>

<p>From the agencies that arrest, prosecute, try, and imprison
drug traffickers and seize their drugs and other assets, we can
gather valuable data both about the enforcement activity and
about the underlying illegitimate market. Some of this
information exists, or can readily be obtained, in statistical
form; the rest is buried in case reports, informant interviews,
and intelligence analyses. The one governmentally-published
series estimating the revenues in the drug markets, the annual
Narcotics Intelligence Estimate, is prepared primarily by
enforcement agencies (particularly DEA) and apparently in large
part from enforcement sources. </p>

<p>Information About Enforcement Activity </p>

<p>Three things about enforcement activity are of interest: </p>

<p>(1) Inputs. What resources - measured in dollars, agent-hours,
prosecutor-hours, cell-years, ship-days, wiretap orders under
Title III - are spent on drug enforcement, and how are those
resources divided among agencies, geographically, by target drug,
by enforcement technique, and by the trafficking activity under
investigation (high-seas smuggling, port smuggling, first
domestic distribution, wholesaling and middleman activity, retail
dealing, money laundering)? </p>

<p>Even at the Federal level alone, something as relatively
simple as a comprehensive dollar budget broken down by agency and
by drug is not available. An attempt has been made to estimate
the share of marijuana in total Federal enforcement; it
illustrates both what is and what is not available. Assembling
such data is best done within the government, by an agency with
the authority to demand the relevant documents, than by
outsiders; the Drug policy Board, the Office of Management and
Budget, the White House Drug Abuse policy Office, any one of the
cognizant Congressional subcommittees, the General Accounting
Office, or the President's Commission on Organized Crime could,
by collating budget submissions from the agencies involved,
assemble crude but adequate estimates of dollars spent by agency
and drug rather easily. </p>

<p>Assembling meaningful information about inputs in non-monetary
forms (e.g., work-hours) would be a tedious process, requiring
both access to internal agency reporting systems and an
understanding of how those systems represent or misrepresent
reality. However, assuming that something resembling the DEA's
annual statistical report is available from the Coast Guard,
Customs Service, IRS, and FBI, it might be possible to assemble a
fair picture of Federal enforcement activity. Federal prosecution
agencies do not now have the ability to generate statistical
profiles of their work that would be useful here. The
case-management software system (PROMIS) being installed in the
U.S. Attorneys' offices may be able to produce estimates of
prosecutive work-hours by case type, although the system may not
code enough of the case data (e.g., G-DEP rank of case and
defendants) to allow useful analysis. </p>

<p>The Administrative Office of U.S. Courts can produce
cases-pending counts by offense, although this overestimates drug
cases as a proportion of total cases to the extent that drug
defendants are more likely than others to default on bail and
thus remain as active cases for long periods of time; no
estimates are made of the use of judge-days or grand jury days
for various kinds of cases. Moreover, since the statute names and
numbers attached to a given drug charge (manufacture,
distribution, conspiracy, continuing criminal enterprise, etc.)
do not vary with drug involved, it is almost impossible to
separate the conviction data by drug. It is possible to make very
crude estimates of Federal prison-cell utilization by convicted
drug dealers from the court data. The attempt to work directly
from DEA data is frustrated by the fact that the DEA statistical
report lists total convictions, rather than convictions in
Federal courts. The lack of a unified set of file numbers for the
federal criminal-justice agencies, or a set of links from one
file system to the next (what is called an &quot;Offender-Based
Tracking system,&quot; or OBTS) makes it nearly impossible to
trace a sample of DEA defendants through prosecution and
incarceration. </p>

<p>The primary problem with assembling such data is not
technical, but organizational: its collection and dissemination
are not in the perceived interests of the agencies involved or
the key individuals within them. While that remains, little
progress is to be expected. Below the Federal level, the
situation is much worse; there are simply no published figures on
drug enforcement spending or activities by state and local police
agencies, most of which do not have separate drug enforcement
units. </p>

<p>The current paucity of data on enforcement activities would
frustrate any attempt to study the effects of changes in
enforcement resources on the drug markets, even if adequate price
and quantity data were in hand. This problem is not easy to fix;
unless the agencies involved have their own reasons for
collecting the data, it will be difficult either for
&quot;outsiders&quot; - even from within the government - to do
the job or to persuade the agencies to do it instead. The
situation is similar for state and local enforcement; in the
absence of any convenient ways of getting nationwide data, a few
studies of individual cities and states might be useful. </p>

<p>(2) Outputs. How do those inputs translate into enforcement
actions felt by traffickers: arrests, convictions, sentences,
time actually served in prison, drug seizures, asset seizures?
How are those outputs distributed geographically, by drug, by
level of the traffic? </p>

<p>These figures are less nebulous than resource and workload
data; a man-hour is &quot;the stuff that dreams are made
on,&quot; but an arrest actually happens. Nonetheless, although
DEA reports its arrests broken down by almost every possible
variable, there is no government-wide collation of all arrest
reports. Convictions and prison time, as noted above, are simply
not available in useful formats. </p>

<p>Even drug seizure data are complicated by the multiplicity of
agencies involved; simply adding together agency totals runs the
risk of double-counting. The first annual report of the Organized
Crime Drug Trafficking Task Force program gives government-wide
numbers that may be reliable. </p>

<p>Data on asset seizures are complicated both by interagency
(and Federal/ State/local) cooperation and by the complexity of
seizure cases: appraised value is one thing, realized value less
lienholders' equity something very different. The lags in
forfeiture actions against seized items, plus the growth in the
overall level of seizures, make it difficult to compute
seizure-to-forfeiture ratios, because 1984 forfeitures do not
correspond to 1984 seizures. Some central responsibility for this
area was assigned to the U.S. Marshal Service and the Asset
Forfeiture Office of the Criminal Division of the Justice
Department; those agencies may now be in a position to provide
unified statistics. </p>

<p>Arrests, convictions, seizures, and prison time are basic
measures of risk imposed on the illicit drug industry, and it is
very hard to plan or evaluate policy in their absence. Unlike
most of the input numbers, good output measures can be assembled
with only minimal cooperation from the agencies themselves, if
someone with authority insists on it. </p>

<p>Below the Federal level the situation is more dismal. Other
than the uninformative counts of total drug arrests in the
Uniform Crime Reports, no national data are available. It has
been almost ten years since the last national study of state
prisoners by offense category, and even that study combined all
drug offenses into one category. Here again, the best that can be
hoped for is a few well-done local studies. </p>

<p>(3) Effects. Enforcement actions impose costs and risks on
illicit entrepreneurs and thus tend to increase prices and
perhaps to make supplies less reliable. To some extent the
cost-imposition value of a given enforcement action - the
imprisonment of a major marijuana importer for an effective term
of six years, the seizure of one kilogram of 90 percent pure
heroin from a New York City wholesaler - can be calculated, and
those costs can be added together to estimate the effects of
enforcement on the market. Such calculations could contribute
substantially to policy analysis and evaluation. They could form
the basis for comparisons of alternative enforcement techniques
in terms of the costs imposed on a given drug market per
government dollar spent. However, to make then accurately one
needs the right kind of tabulation of enforcement outputs. </p>

<p>The value of any illicit drug grows enormously as it moves
down the distribution chain toward the final consumer. A kilogram
of heroin that sells for $200,000 is the raw material for street
bags of heroin worth more than $2 million. Adding together
physical volumes seized at different stages of the traffic is
adding apples and oranges. Each seizure should be evaluated at
the point where it is seized, and then the values added together.
The &quot;street value&quot; calculations, so beloved by
reporters, resemble calculations of the value of stolen cattle
based on the price of a steak dinner in a restaurant. Given
estimates of the &quot;price chains&quot; (of which more below),
simple rules of thumb, based on quantity and location, will give
reasonable estimates of the coast imposed on the illicit market
by drug seizures. Imprisonment data also need to be
quality-weighted. The higher in the trade a trafficker is, the
more dollars he would spend to avoid a year in prison, both
because he has more dollars and because any given period in
prison costs him more in lost earnings. That willingness-to-pay
per prison-year-willingness-to-pay of traffickers at different
levels. But unless the data on imprisonment are collected by drug
and G-DEP violator class, there are no figures to use in
calculation. </p>

<p>Information about Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime </p>

<p>Enforcement activity yields two kinds of information about
drug trafficking: (1) that which can be inferred from the
enforcement statistics, and (2) that known to (and sometimes
published by) agents, prosecutors, and enforcement-agency
intelligence analysts. </p>

<p>(1) Inferences from Enforcement Statistics. Lost in the
organizational history of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics is the
unsung hero who first proposed the rule of thumb that enforcement
agencies capture about 10 percent of the drug supply on its way
to market. That rule of thumb allows (once the problems with the
seizure data are straightened away) a simple calculation of the
physical size of the drug markets: take seizures and add a zero.
More of the official drug market estimation than anyone would
like to admit is still based on some variant of that methodology.
</p>

<p>There are two problems with this calculation. First, there was
never a period when we had a good measure of the total market
traffickers will tend to lower it. In fact, if the change in
enforcement is great enough to cause shifts in basic smuggling
patterns, the result may be a lower overall seizure rate despite
a higher level of enforcement. This seems to have been the case
for the South Florida Task Force, which succeeded both in driving
drug smugglers away from its territory and in causing many of
them to switch from large vessels to smaller, faster vessels;
total seizures actually fell. </p>

<p>The same is true of using other enforcement measures as
estimates of market size. The enforcement success count depends
on the size of the market, the vigor and tactics of enforcement,
and the countermeasures of traffickers. Without an independent
basis for estimating the effect of countermeasures, the success
count tells us little even about trends in the size of the
market. </p>

<p>(2) Facts and Analysis From Agents and Agencies. Drug
enforcement agencies are not in business to collect data or do
analysis; they are in business to put drug dealers in jail and
seize their drugs. Like other agencies, they tend to collect and
publish data that will help them do their job better, will
persuade someone else to help them do their job better, or will
make them look good. </p>

<p>Traditionally, the Drug Enforcement Agency and its
predecessors defined their mission as controlling the supply of
drugs. Thus, for example, the estimates of the price and purity
of heroin at retail were published as part of the
&quot;Performance Measurement System,&quot; implying that drug
availability was an important measure of agency effectiveness.
This mission definition encouraged the development within DEA of
an extensive &quot;strategic intelligence&quot; capability,
devoted to understanding the drug markets. By contrast, the
Federal Bureau of Investigation has always defined its mission as
securing the conviction of lawbreakers. It regarded the number of
bank robbers it caught, rather than the number of bank robberies,
as its central performance measure. Since the 1981 reorganization
that placed DEA under the administrative authority of the
Director of the FBI, DEA's mission definition has moved closer to
the FBI's. At least in part, this reflected a belief that
enforcement outputs were more subject to organizational control,
and thus more likely to consistently reflect organizational
success, than drug market outcomes. This new mission definition
may have advantages from the perspective of organized crime
control. The supply-control approach tended to stress quantities
of drugs rather than trafficking organizations as targets.
However, the new mission definition is much less hospitable to
strategic, as opposed to operational, intelligence. </p>

<p>(a) Price Chains. In the past DEA devoted considerable energy
to estimating &quot;price chains&quot; for drugs, based on
undercover buys and data from informants. That information,
insofar as it was accurate, told a great deal about the structure
of the markets, and in particular about where the money was being
made. It was never formally published, but it was estimated on a
quarterly basis and available to the rest of the government. It
appears that such &quot;price chain&quot; estimates are no longer
made, or no longer made available. If true, that should be
rectified. There is no other source for that information, and it
is essential. There is an enormous amount of relevant information
in DEA case files. Undercover transactions, intercepted
communications, and conversations with informants all contain
price data. The problem is maintaining a staff to collate and
analyze what is there. One improvement that could easily be made
in publishing all statistics on drug prices is to adjust past
prices for the effects of inflation, using the Consumer Price
Index or GNP deflator. Otherwise, anyone trying to determine
price trends has to keep looking up the rate of inflation since
1976, or whatever appropriate date. </p>

<p>(b) &quot;Monitor&quot; Programs. DEA has never had a
substantial number of retail-level cases, but the Performance
Measurement System required data about retail price and purities
for heroin across the country. These were accordingly collected
by the simple expedient of sending agents out to make undercover
retail purchases and collecting retail samples from local police
to seek good quality at low prices? More seriously,
&quot;retail&quot; included samples as large as 2 grams and up to
14 percent pure, while the typical actual retail transaction is
for 100 milligrams (one-tenth of a gram) less than 5 percent
pure. </p>

<p>Now that price-purity data are no longer publicly released,
there seems to be somewhat less monitoring activity than in the
past. It may well be true that a program run by local police
units (perhaps with funding from DEA or NIJ) would be more
effective than DEA-run monitoring efforts. (Unofficial
researchers might develop even more accurate results, but the
legal and ethical problems seem insurmountable). But whether run
by DEA or outside, there is no substitute for actual street buys
as an index of market conditions, and not only for heroin. </p>

<p>Enforcement-based Analysis: NNICC </p>

<p>The National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers Committee
(NNICC, pronounced &quot;nick&quot;) is the official custodian of
estimates regarding the drug markets. It was originally
established to help control the embarrassing flow of mutually
contradictory estimates that used to emerge from various Federal
agencies. Although staffed primarily from DEA, it includes a
broad variety of agencies as members, and its reports are
negotiated products. </p>

<p>At one time, the NNICC annual report, called the Narcotics
Intelligence Estimate, provided sources, physical volumes, and
dollar revenues for each of the four major drug categories:
opiates, cannabis, cocaine, and the &quot;dangerous drugs.&quot;
Subsequently, criticism of the dollar-volume estimates, both from
outsiders and from within the NNICC staff, led to a decision to
cease publication of dollar-volume estimates. At the same time
the marijuana estimates for previous years were restated downward
by approximately one-third. As the NNICC methodology review makes
clear, the NIE figures are largely derived from estimates of
farm-level production in foreign source countries, because the
data sources on the consumption side are so inadequate. However,
that same report shows how weakly grounded the production-based
estimates are. The crop figures themselves are hard to
distinguish from guesswork, and the fraction of each country's
crop reaching the U.S. market is fundamentally unknown. </p>

<p>Still more serious is a problem not considered in the
methodology review: that a large fraction of the total crop in
the average year may go unsold. But a peasant marijuana-grower,
for example, deciding how many plants to grow under uncertainty
both about crop yields and about demand from exporters, will, if
he is rational, overplant on average. Marijuana is so lucrative,
compared with other crops, that it makes sense to grow an extra
plant, even if there is only one chance in five of selling it for
export. Of course, if there were a smoothly functioning
competitive market over wide geographic areas, the result would
be lower prices rather than unsold crops, but the market in
marijuana for export may be highly localized, with exporters
buying from nearby farmers even if prices elsewhere are much
lower. </p>

<p>In general, then, it is hard to place much confidence in the
NIE numbers, particularly because they are presented as a just
set of conclusions, without any detailed presentation of the
underlying data or the calculations performed on that data. One
way to improve this situation would be to gather better data,
particularly about consumption, as discussed above. </p>

<p>On the purely analytic side, two things might be done: (1)
NNICC might publish more of its underlying data and some of the
details about the calculations performed on them, or (2) a team
of outside scholars might be allowed full access to NNICC
materials and asked to prepare an independent estimate. </p>

<p>But whether one considers improving the data with which NNICC
has to work or changing the analytic approach, the fundamental
problem remains one of organizational incentives. The current
lack of adequate data or convincing analysis is not a problem
from the perspective of DEA or other enforcement agencies. If the
information were available, there is no reason to expect that it
would be used to reshape what agents and prosecutors do. In fact,
by providing outsiders with a basis on which to criticize, data
and analysis might seem to threaten agency autonomy. Nor have the
White House or Congressional staffs concerned with these problems
displayed any anxiety over the absence of information. The first
step in solving a problem is getting it identified as a problem
by someone with the resources to bring about a solution. In this
area, that step remains to be taken.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>