
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B046-158</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/mis2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022104 text/html 70753
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:20:47 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:02 GMT
Content-length: 70535
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marihuana and the Problem of Marihuana</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse</b> </p>

<p><b>Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding</b> </p>

<h1>I -- marihuana and the problem of marihuana</h1>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&quot;There are no whole truths; all truths are half -truths.
It is trying to treat them as whole truths that plays the
devil.&quot; </p>

<p>Alfred North Whitehead (1953) </p>

<hr>

<p>We are a nation of problem-solvers. We are restless and
impatient with perceived gaps between the way things are and the
way we think ought to be. Understandably, such an impulse toward
self-correction never leaves us wanting for social problems to
solve. Although it is a prerequisite to social progress, this
problem-solving orientation misdirects our attention. In order to
maximize public awareness we are apt to characterize situations
as being far worse than they really are. Because any activity is
commonly regarded as a move toward a solution, rhetoric and
stopgap legislation sometimes substitute for rational reflection.
We become so impressed with social engineering that we overlook
inherent human limitations. </p>

<p>Since the mid-sixties, American society has been increasingly
agitated by what has been defined as a marihuana problem. The
typical sequences of &quot;a national problem&quot; have
resulted: exaggeration, polarization and the inevitable demand
for a. solution. The appointment of this Commission and the
publication of this Report reflect the escalation of marihuana
use into the realm of social problem. Since the beginning of our
official life, we have grappled with the threshold question: Why
has the use of marihuana reached problem status in the public
mind? </p>

<hr>

<h2>Origins of the Marihuana Problem </h2>

<p>Marihuana has been used as an intoxicant in various parts of
the world for centuries and in this country for 75 years. Yet use
of the drug has been regarded as a problem of major proportions
for less than a decade. We will not find the reasons for
contemporary social concern in pharmacology texts or previous
governmental reports, for we are dealing with two separate
realities: a drug with certain pharmacologic properties and
determinable, although variable, effects on man; and a pattern of
human behavior, individual and group, which has, as a behavior,
created fear, anger, confusion, and uncertainty among a large
segment of the contemporary American public. The marihuana
behavior pattern is the source of the marihuana controversy. </p>

<p>The most apparent feature of the behavior is that it is
against the law. But inconsistency between behavior and the legal
norm is not sufficient, in itself, to create a social problem.
Marihuana, has been an illegal substance for several decades; and
the widespread violation of laws against gambling and adultery
have not excited the public to the same extent as has
marihuana-smoking in recent years. </p>

<p>At the same time, we suspect that illegality may play an
important role in problem definition where drugs are concerned.
Alcohol is of proven danger to individual and societal health and
the public is well aware of its dangers, yet use of this drug has
not been accorded the same problem status. Marihuana's illegality
may have been a necessary condition for the marihuana problem,
but the increased violation of the legal proscription does not by
itself explain the phenomenon. </p>

<p>The Commission believes that three interrelated factors have
fostered the definition of marihuana as a major national problem.
First, the illegal behavior is highly visible to all segments of
our society. Second, use of the drug is perceived to threaten the
health and morality not only of the individual but of the society
itself. Third, and most important, the drug has evolved in the
late sixties and early seventies, as a symbol of wider social
conflicts and public issues. </p>

<p><b>VISIBILITY</b> </p>

<p>More than anything else, the visibility of marihuana use by a
segment of our population previously unfamiliar with the drug is
what stirred public anxiety and thrust marihuana into the problem
area. Marihuana usage in the United States has been with us for a
very long period of time, dating back to the beginning of the
century. For decades its use was mainly confined to the
underprivileged socioeconomic groups in our cities and to certain
insulated social groups, such as jazz musicians and artists. As
long as use remained confined to these groups and had a
negligible impact on the dominant social order, the vast majority
of Americans remained unconcerned. From the other side, the
insulated marihuana user was in no position to demand careful
public or legislative scrutiny. </p>

<p>However, all this changed markedly in the mid-1960's. For
various reasons, marihuana use became a common form of recreation
for many middle and upper class college youth. The trend spread
across the country, into the colleges and high schools and into
the affluent suburbs as well. Use by American servicemen in
Vietnam was frequent. In recent years, use of the drug has
spanned every social class and geographic region. </p>

<p>The Commission-sponsored National Survey, &quot;A Nationwide
Study of Beliefs, Information and Experiences,&quot; indicated
that some 24 million Americans have tried marihuana at least once
and that at least 8.3 million are current users. </p>

<p>Other surveys uniformly indicate that more than 40% of the
U.S. college population have tried marihuana, and in some
universities the figure is much higher. Also, use of the drug has
become almost as common among young adults out of college, and
among older teenagers in high school. The National Survey
indicates that 39%, of young adults between 18 and 25 years of
age have tried marihuana. The stereotype of the marihuana user as
a marginal citizen has given way to a composite picture of large
segments of American youth, children of the dominant majority and
very much a part of the mainstream of American life. </p>

<p>Public confusion, anger, and fear over this development became
increasingly apparent during the mid and late 1960's. Such mass
deviance was a problem and the scope of the problem was augmented
by frequent publicity. The topic of the usage of marihuana by the
young received considerable attention from newspapermen and
television reporters. The drug's youthful users abetted the media
in this regard by flaunting their disregard of the law, Few of us
have not seen or heard of marihuana being used en masse at rock
concerts, political demonstrations and gatherings of campus
activists. </p>

<p>In addition, new scientific and medical interest in marihuana
and its use was stimulated by the sudden public interest. For the
first time in the American experience, the drug became the
subject of intensive scrutiny in the laboratories and clinics.
Unfortunately, this research was conducted in the spotlight of
public controversy. Isolated findings and incomplete information
have automatically been presented to the public, with little
attempt made to place such findings in a larger perspective or to
analyze their meanings. </p>

<p>Any new marihuana research has had ready access to the news
spotlight and often has been quickly assimilated into the
rhetoric of the marihuana, debate. Science has become a weapon in
a propaganda battle. Because neither the reporters nor the public
have the expertise to evaluate this information, the result has
been an array of conflicting anecdotal reports, clinical studies
on limited populations, and surveys of restricted utility. </p>

<p>Visibility, intense public interest, and fishbowl research are
all important components of the marihuana problem. </p>

<p><b>PERCEIVED THREATS</b> </p>

<p>Although marihuana is taken by most users for curiosity or
pleasure, the non-using public still feels seriously affected by
use of the drug. Several decades ago it was popularly asserted
that the drug brought about a large variety of social and
individual ills, including crime and insanity. As a result it was
prohibited by federal law in 1937. The marihuana explosion of the
mid-sixties occurred within the context of 30 years of instilled
fear. Although based much more on fantasy than on proven fact,
the marihuana &quot;evils&quot; took root in the public mind, and
now continue to color the public reaction to the marihuana
phenomenon. Even beyond the violation of law, the widespread use
of marihuana, is seen as a threat to society in other ways. And
the threats grow proportionately as the controversy swells. </p>

<p>It has been astutely observed that any statement frequently
repeated in public assumes the status of fact. With so many
people continually arguing about marihuana, the public has
understandably become alarmed and confused. </p>

<p>On the basis of the National Survey, we have tried to identify
the ways in which the public feels threatened by marihuana use.
Essentially these threats fall into three general categories:
threats to the public safety, threats to the public health, and
threats to the dominant social order. </p>

<p>In terms of public safety, the concern is with the
relationship between marihuana and aggressive behavior, crime and
juvenile delinquency. Threats to the public health usually refer
initially to the impact of marihuana on the user. Lethality,
psychosis, addiction potential and effects of chronic long-term
use, are major concerns. Additionally, the fear exists that
marihuana leads to the use of more dangerous drugs, especially
LSD and heroin. </p>

<p>The threat which marihuana use is thought to present to the
dominant social order is a major undercurrent of the marihuana
problem. Use of the drug is linked with idleness, lack of
motivation, hedonism and sexual promiscuity. Many see the drug as
fostering a counterculture which conflicts with basic moral
precepts as well as with the operating functions of our society.
The &quot;dropping out&quot; or rejection of the established
value system is viewed with alarm. Marihuana becomes more than a
drug; it becomes a symbol of the rejection of cherished values. </p>

<p><b>SYMBOLISM</b> </p>

<p>The symbolic aspects of marihuana are the, most intangible of
the items to which the Commission must address itself, and yet
they may be at the heart of the marihuana problem. Use of
marihuana was, and still is, age-specific. It was youth-related
at a time in American history when the adult society was alarmed
by the implications of the youth &quot; movement&quot;: defiance
of the established order, the adoption of new life styles, the
emergence of &quot;street people,&quot; campus unrest, drug use,
communal living, protest politics, and even political radicalism.
In an age characterized by the so-called generation gap,
marihuana symbolizes the cultural divide. </p>

<p>For youth, marihuana became a convenient symbol of
disaffection with traditional society, an allure which
supplemented its recreational attraction. Smoking marihuana may
have appealed to large numbers of youth who opposed certain
policies or trends, but who maintained faith in the American
system as a whole. In ;a time when symbolic speech is often
preferred to the literal form, marihuana was a convenient
instrument of mini-protest. It was also an agent of group
solidarity, as the widely-publicized rock concerts so well
illustrate. </p>

<p>For the adult society, the decade of the sixties was a
distressing time. The net effect of racial unrest, campus
disruption, political assassination, economic woes and an
unpopular war was widespread uneasiness. Attending a general fear
that the nation was witnessing its own disintegration was a
desire to shore up our institutions and hold the line. That line
was easy to define where drugs, particularly marihuana, were
concerned. </p>

<p>Use of drugs, including marihuana, is against the law. For
many, marihuana symbolized disorder in a society frustrated by
increasing lawlessness. Insistence on application of the law
tended also to harden views, thereby escalating still further the
use of marihuana as a symbolic issue. </p>

<p>The social conflicts underlying the drug's symbolic status
have dissipated somewhat in the past few years; and in some ways,
the Commission has similarly noted a partial deflation of the
marihuana problem and of the emotionalism surrounding it. We are
hopeful that our attempt to clarify the scientific and normative
dimensions of marihuana use will further deemphasize, the problem
orientation and facilitate rational decision-making. </p>

<h2>The Need for Perspective </h2>

<p>This Commission has the task of exploring the marihuana
controversy from as many vantage points as possible in its
attempt to make sound, realistic and workable policy
recommendations. Because we are dealing essentially with a
complex social concern rather than a simple pharmacologic
phenomenon, any social policy decision must discuss the realities
of marihuana as a drug, marihuana use as a form of behavior, and
marihuana as a symbol. </p>

<p>Particularly important is the determination of the longevity
of the behavior. Are we dealing with a behavior that is becoming
rooted in our culture or are we experiencing an aberration, a fad
that will in time, of its own accord, pass away? </p>

<p>The vortex of the marihuana controversy is the present, but
the prudent policy planner must not be blinded by the deluge of
recent statistics. It is important that we scan the past for
clues about the meaning of certain behavior and the promise
offered by various social policy responses. We are convinced that
a wider historical understanding will also go a long way toward
deflating marihuana as a problem. </p>

<h3>HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE </h3>

<p>When viewed in the context of American society's ambivalent
response to the non-medical use of drugs, the marihuana problem
is not unique. Both the existing social policy toward the drug
and its contemporary challenge have historical antecedents and
explanations. Somewhat surprisingly, until the last half of the
19th century, the only drugs used to any significant extent for
non-medical purposes in this country were alcohol and tobacco. </p>

<p>American opinion has always included some opposition to the
nonmedical use of any drug, including alcohol and tobacco. From
colonial times through the Civil War, abstentionist outcries
against alcohol and tobacco sporadically provoked prohibitory
legislation. One 18th century pamphleteer advised against the use
of any drink &quot;which is liable to steal away a man's senses
and render him foolish, irascible, uncontrollable and
dangerous.&quot; Similarly, one 19th century observer attributed
delirium tremens, perverted sexuality, impotency, insanity and
cancer to the smoking and chewing of tobacco. </p>

<p>Despite such warnings, alcohol and tobacco use took deep root
in American society. De Tocqueville noted what hard drinkers the
Americans were, and Dickens was compelled to report that &quot;in
all the public places of America, this filthy custom [tobacco
chewing] is recognized.&quot; Nonetheless, the strain in our
culture opposed to all non-medical drug use persisted and in the
late 19th century gained ardent adherents among larger segments
of the population. </p>

<p>Beginning in earnest around 1870, abstentionists focused the
public opinion process on alcohol. As science and politics were
called to the task, public attention was drawn to the liquor
problem. &quot;Liquor is responsible for 19% of the divorces, 25%
of the poverty, 25% of the insanity, 37% of the pauperism, 45% of
child desertion and 50% of the crime in this country,&quot;
declared the Anti-Saloon League. &quot;And this,&quot; it was
noted, &quot;is a very conservative estimate.&quot; </p>

<p>The Temperance advocates achieved political victory during the
second decade of the 20th century. By 1913, nine states were
under statewide prohibition, and in 31 other states local option
laws operated, with the ultimate effect that more than 50% of the
nation's population lived under prohibition. Four years later,
Congress approved the 18th Amendment and on January 16, 1919,
Nebraska became the 36th state to ratify the Amendment, thus
inscribing national Prohibition in the Constitution. </p>

<p>Although on a somewhat smaller scale and with lesser results,
public attention was simultaneously attracted to a growing
tobacco problem. Stemming partly from the immediate popularity of
cigarette-smoking, a practice introduced after the Civil War, and
partly from riding the coattails of abstentionist sentiment,
anti-tobacconists achieved a measure of success which had
previously eluded them. The New York Time editorialized in 1885
that: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>The decadence of Spain began when the Spaniards adopted
    cigarettes and if this pernicious habit obtains among adult
    Americans, the ruin of the Republic is close at hand. . . . </p>
</blockquote>

<p>Between 1895 and 1921, 14 states banned the sale of
cigarettes. </p>

<p>Although though there has been some posthumous debate about
the efficacy of alcohol Prohibition as a means of reducing
excessive or injurious use, the experiment failed to achieve its
declared purpose: elimination of the practice of alcohol
consumption. The habit was too ingrained in the society to be
excised simply by cutting off legitimate supply. </p>

<p>In addition, the 18th Amendment never commanded a. popular
consensus; in fact, the Wickersham Commission, appointed by
President Hoover in 1929 to study Prohibition, attributed the
Amendment's enactment primarily to public antipathy toward the
saloon, the large liquor dealers and intemperance rather than to
public opposition to use of the drug. </p>

<p>Subsequent observers have agreed that Prohibition was
motivated primarily by a desire to root out the institutional
evils associated with the drug's distribution and excessive use;
only a minority of its supporters opposed all use. And in this
respect, Prohibition succeeded. Upon repeal, 13 years after
ratification, liquor was back, but the pre-Prohibition saloon and
unrestrained distribution had been eliminated from the American
scene. </p>

<p>Both the scope of the alcohol habit and the ambivalence of
supporting opinion are manifested in the internal logic of
Prohibition legislation. The legal scheme was designed to cut off
supply, not to punish the consumer. Demand could be eliminated
effectively, if at all, only through educational efforts. Only
five states prohibited possession of alcohol for personal use in
the home. Otherwise, under both federal and state law, the
individual remained legally free to consume alcohol. </p>

<p>The anti-tobacco movement was not propelled by the
institutions outrage or the cultural symbolism surrounding the
alcohol problem It never succeeded on a national scale. Local
successes were attributable to the temporary strength of the
abstentionist impulse, together with the notion that
tobacco-smoking was a stepping-stone to alcohol use Lacking the
consensus necessary to reverse a spreading habit, tobacco
&quot;prohibition&quot; never extended to possession. Insofar as
the anti-tobacco movement was really a coattail consequence of
alcohol Prohibition, is not surprising that all 14 states which
had prohibited sale repealed their proscriptions by 1927. </p>

<p>By the early 1930's, the abstentionist thrust against alcohol
and tobacco had diminished. State and federal governments
contented themselves with regulating distribution and extracting
revenue. When the decade ended, the general public no longer
perceived alcohol and tobacco use as social problems. The two
drugs had achieved social legitimacy. </p>

<p>A comparison between the national flirtation with alcohol and
tobacco prohibition and the prohibition of the non-medical use of
other drugs is helpful in analyzing the marihuana issue. In 1900,
only a handful of states regulated traffic in
&quot;narcotic&quot; drugs--opium, morphine, heroin and cocaine
even though, proportionately, more persons probably were addicted
to those drugs at that time than at any time since. Estimates
from contemporary surveys are questionable, but a conservative
estimate is a quarter of a million people, comprising at least 1%
of the population. This large user population in 1900 included
more females than males, more whites than blacks, was not
confined to a particular geographic region or to the cities, and
was predominantly middle class. </p>

<p>This 19th century addiction was generally accidental and well
hidden. It stemmed in part from over-medication, careless
prescription practices, repeated refills and hidden distribution
of narcotic drugs in patent medicines. Society responded to this
largely invisible medical addiction in indirect, informal ways.
Self -regulation by the medical profession and pharmaceutical
industry, stricter prescription practices by the state
governments and regulation of labeling by the Federal Government
in 1906 all combined in the early years of the new century to
reduce the possibility of this accidental drug addiction. </p>

<p>About this same time, during the late 19th and early 20th
centuries, attention within the law enforcement and medical
communities was drawn to another use of narcotics----the
&quot;pleasure&quot; or &quot;street&quot; use of these drugs by
ethnic minorities in the nation's cities. Society reacted to this
narcotics problem by enacting criminal legislation, prohibiting
the non-medical production, distribution or consumption of these
drugs. Within a very few years, every state had passed
anti-narcotics legislation, and in 1914 the Federal Government
passed the Harrison Narcotics Act. </p>

<p>The major differences between the temperance and
anti-narcotics movements must be, emphasized. The temperance,
movement was a matter of vigorous public debate; the
anti-narcotics movement was not. Temperance legislation was the
product of a highly organized nation-wide lobby; narcotics
legislation was largely ad hoc. Temperance legislation was
designed to eradicate known problems resulting from alcohol
abuse; narcotic--, legislation was largely anticipatory.
Temperance legislation rarely restricted private activity;
narcotics legislation prohibited all drug-related behavior,
including possession and use. </p>

<p>These divergent policy patterns reflect the clear-cut
separation in the public and professional minds between alcohol
and tobacco on the one hand, and &quot;narcotics&quot; on the
other. Use of alcohol and tobacco were indigenous American
practices. The intoxicant use of narcotics was not native,
however, and the users of these drugs were either alien, like the
Chinese opium smokers, or perceived to be marginal members of
society. </p>

<p>As to the undesirability and immorality of nonmedical use of
narcotics, there was absolutely no debate. By causing its users
to be physically dependent, the narcotic drug was considered a
severe impediment to individual participation in the economic and
political systems. Use, it was thought, automatically escalated
to dependence and excess, which led to pauperism, crime and
insanity. From a sociological perspective, narcotics use was
thought to be prevalent among the slothful and immoral
populations, gamblers, prostitutes, and others who were already
&quot;undesirables.&quot; Most important was the threat that
narcotics posed to the vitality of the nation's youth. </p>

<p>In short, the narcotics question was answered in unison: the
nonmedical use of narcotics was a cancer which had to be removed
entirely from the social organism. </p>

<p>Marihuana smoking first became prominent on the American scene
in the decade following the Harrison Act. Mexican immigrants and
West Indian sailors introduced the practice in the border and
Gulf states. As the Mexicans spread throughout the West and
immigrated to the major cities, some of them carried the
marihuana habit with them. The practice also became common among
the same urban populations with whom opiate use was identified. </p>

<p>Under such circumstances, an immediate policy response toward
marihuana quite naturally followed the narcotics pattern rather
than the alcohol or tobacco pattern. In fact, marihuana was
incorrectly classified as a &quot;narcotic&quot; drug in
scientific literature and statutory provisions. By 1931, all but
two states west of the Mississippi and several more in the East
had enacted prohibitory legislation making it a criminal offense
to possess or use the drug. </p>

<p>In 1932, the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform
State Laws included an optional marihuana, provision in the
Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, and by 1937 every state, either by
adoption of the Uniform Act or by separate legislation, had
prohibited marihuana use. In late 1937, the Congress adopted the
Marihuana Tax Act, superimposing a, federal prohibitory scheme on
the state scheme. </p>

<p>Not once during this entire period was any comprehensive
scientific study undertaken in this country of marihuana, or its
effects. The drug was assumed to be a 'narcotic' to render the
user psychologically dependent, to provoke violent crime, and to
cause insanity. Although media attention was attracted to
marihuana use around 1935, public awareness was low and public
debate non-existent. As long as use remained confined to
insulated minorities throughout the next quarter century, the
situation remained stable. When penalties for narcotics
violations escalated in the 1950's, marihuana penalties went
right along with them, until a first-offense possessor was a
felon subject to lengthy incarceration. </p>

<p>With this historical overview in mind, it is not surprising
that the contemporary marihuana experience has been characterized
by fear and confusion on one side and outrage and protest on the
other. As scientific and medical opinion has become better known,
marihuana has lost its direct link with the narcotics in the
public mind and in the statute books. </p>

<p>But extensive ambivalence remains about the policies for
various drugs. Marihuana's advocates contend that it is no more
or less harmful than alcohol and tobacco and should therefore be
treated in similar fashion. The drug's adversaries contend that
it is a stepping-stone to the narcotics and should remain
prohibited. At the present time public opinion tends to consider
marihuana less harmful than the opiates and cocaine and more
harmful than alcohol and tobacco. </p>

<p>Interestingly, while marihuana. is perceived as less harmful
than before, alcohol and tobacco are regarded as more harmful
than before. In some ways, the duality which previously
characterized American drug policy has now been supplanted by an
enlightened skepticism as to the variety of approaches to the
non-medical use of various drugs. </p>

<p>Despite this shift in attitudes, however, the use of alcohol
and tobacco is not considered a major social problem by many
Americans, while marihuana use is still so perceived. </p>

<p>This remains true despite the fact that alcoholism afflicts
nine million Americans. According to the National Institute on
Alcohol Addiction and Alcoholism of the National Institute of
Mental Health: alcohol is a factor in half (30,000) of the
highway fatalities occurring each year; an economic cost to the
nation of $15 billion occurs as a result of acoholism and alcohol
abuse; one-half of the five million yearly arrests in the United
States are related to the misuse of alcohol (1.5 million offenses
for public drunkenness alone) ; and one-half of all homicides and
one-fourth of all suicides are alcohol related, accounting for a
total of 11,700 deaths annually. </p>

<p>Similarly, tobacco smoking is not considered a major public
concern despite its link to lung cancer and heart disease.
According to the Surgeon General in The Health Consequences of
Smoking, 1972: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>cigarette smoking is the, major &quot;cause&quot; of lung
    cancer in men and a significant &quot;cause&quot; of lung
    cancer in women; the risk of developing lung cancer in both
    men and women is directly related to an individual's exposure
    as measured by the number of cigarettes smoked, duration of
    smoking, earlier initiation, depth of inhalation, and the
    amount of &quot;tar&quot; produced by the cigarette; and data
    from numerous prospective and retrospective studies indicate
    that cigarette smoking is a significant risk factor
    contributing to the development of coronary heart disease
    (CHD) including fatal CHD and its most severe expression,
    sudden and unexpected death. </p>
</blockquote>

<h3>CULTURAL PERSPECTIVE </h3>

<p>Realizing the importance of social change in understanding the
issues surrounding the use of marihuana and other drugs, the
Commission decided early that an objective appraisal of cultural
trends was vital for the, development of policy recommendations.
Since neither the increase in marihuana use nor its attendant
controversy is an isolated phenomenon, we sought a wider cultural
perspective. To this end, the Commission sponsored a wide-ranging
seminar on &quot;Central Influences on American Life.&quot; With
the cooperation of the Council for Biology in Human Affairs of
the Salk Institute, we elicited a three-day conversation among 13
exceptionally thoughtful and perceptive observers of American
life.* </p>

<p>*The participants included Jacques Barzun, as moderator, Mary
Bingham, Claude T. Bissell, Kenneth Boulding, Robert R. Bowie,
Theodore Caplow, Jay W. Forrester, T. George Harris. Rollo May,
Jay Saunders Redding, Jonas Salk, Ernest van den Haag, and Leroy
S. Wehrle. </p>

<p>It is well beyond both our mandate and our competence to
attempt a definitive presentation of the status of the American
ethical system However, we shall try to suggest some of the more
salient influence in our changing society, recognizing that only
against the backdrop of society's fears, aspirations and values
can a rational response to marihuana be formulated. Although we
are not prepared to identify specific causal connections between
these social trends and marihuana use, we do believe that some of
the major points raised in the discussion of cultural change
provide essential background in understanding the marihuana
problem. </p>

<h2>The Search for Meaning </h2>

<p>One overriding influence in contemporary America is the
declining capacity of our institutions to help the individual
find his place in society. As one of the participants at the
Seminar observed: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>A society is stable, peaceful, happy, not when it has rid
    itself of the tensions-because you never get rid of the
    tensions, because people's drives will be satisfied in ways
    that clash and so on-but when a very high proportion of the
    people feel fulfillment of some sort within the context which
    the society normally provides. The long-term problem now, for
    many many people, not just young people, is that this
    condition is not met. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>Another noted: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>What is wrong with our social system, it seems to me, is
    that it no longer inspires in people a feeling of purpose,
    meaningfulness and so on. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>A number of institutional trends have joined to deprive the
individual of a sense of communal inspiration. Perhaps most
important is the economic element. Whereas the individual's
economic achievement formerly gave his life broad social meaning
and inspired his existence, automation and technological advance
have tended to depersonalize the individual's role in the
economy. Instead of the economic system being dependent on
individual productivity, the individual is increasingly dependent
on the system. As his work dwindles in significance to the total
society, it diminishes in meaning for him. Moreover, as more and
more of our people share the nation's affluence, Horatio Alger's
example is no longer needed to climb the economic ladder. </p>

<p>A particularly emphatic manifestation of the declining
economic demand on the individual is the institutionalization of
leisure time. Whereas the economy used to require long hours of
work, now it barely requires more than a five-day week. Expanding
vacation time and reduced work-weeks tend to diminish the
strength of the work ethic. The implications of enforced leisure
time are only now becoming apparent, and the concept of
&quot;idle hands are the devil's plaything&quot; has to be
reexamined in terms of acceptable forms of non-work behavior.
This new time component, allowing for the assertion of
individuality, has produced both privileges and problems. </p>

<p>In the last decade we have seen the beginnings of the
institutionalization of this leisure ethic. A leisure-time
industry has sprung up to organize this time period for the
individual. Many Americans, due to the nature of their jobs in an
automated economic system, find little personal satisfaction in
their work, and many are now searching for individual fulfillment
through the use of free time. Where meaning is not found in
either work or recreational pursuits, the outcome is likely to be
boredom and restlessness. Whether generated by a search for
individual fulfillment, group recreation or sheer boredom, the
increased use of drugs, including marihuana, should come as no
surprise. </p>

<p>Another social development which has chipped away at
individual identity is the loss of a vision of the future. In an
age where change is so rapid, the individual has no concept of
the future. If man could progress from land transportation to the
moon in 60 years, what, lies ahead? Paralleling the loss of the
technological horizon is the loss of a vision of what the future,
in terms of individual and social goals, ought to look like. Are
times moving too fast for man to be able to plan or -to adjust to
new ways and new styles? This sense of the collapsing time frame
was best summed up by one of the Seminar participants: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>.... there are great forces that have developed over the
    last several decades that cause one to lose sight of the
    distant future. Let me contrast a rural farm family of
    several decades ago which settled a farm. They expected their
    children to live there, they can imagine their grandchildren
    living there-there is an image of the future. There is really
    no one who [now] has any image of where his great
    grandchildren will he or what they will do. This comes about
    because of the nature of industrial society; it comes about
    because we have retirement plans instead of looking after
    one's own old age. There area whole set of these [factors]. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Now the morality, the ethics get tied into it because
    ethics are really a long-time horizon concept. It's something
    you engage in because it's contrary to immediate reward and
    immediate gratification and so you look to some distant
    future. But as one loses sight of any future then I think the
    ethics and morality creep up to the very near term also . . .
    We have no one who has got an image of this country two
    hundred years from now, who is trying to create a structure
    that be believes will exist that long. So a number of these
    things . . . tie together in terms of the long-term goals and
    how they have shifted. In any of our systems there tend to be
    a conflict between the short-term and the long-term goals. If
    the long-term goals are lost sight of then the short-term
    expediencies seem to be the things that well up. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>To the extent that planning for the future no longer gives the
individual his inspiration, he must look to the present. Such a
climate is conducive to pleasure-seeking, instant gratification
and an entire life-perspective which our society has always
previously disclaimed A third force depriving the individual of a
presumed place in society is the loss of a sense of community, a
sense of belonging. Mobility, mass living and rapid travel all
conspire to destroy the smaller community. The family moves from
place to place and then separates with each child going his own
way. This global thinking leaves little time for home-town
concern. </p>

<p>The dissipation of geographic roots parallels a social
uprooting. As one of our Seminar participants noted: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>When you grow up with a, small number of people with whom
    you have to live for a while, it does something which isn't
    done now. It forces you to face yourself. It forces you to
    ask what kind of pet-son you are, because you can't get away
    with it with a group you're going to have to live with. They
    know what you really are. The mobility has the effect of
    making it possible for people to live playing parts for
    years. It seems to me we see it among the youngsters: role
    playing as distinguished from being somebody. . . . </p>
</blockquote>

<p>All of these social trends have their most potent impact on
young people who are just beginning to develop their values,
beliefs and commitments. The adult society has found it easier to
adjust to the emergence of the leisure value. Having experienced
it as a gradual process, they see it as a reward for previous
toil. For many of our young, however, a substantial segment of
leisure time may be considered an essential part of living; they
have known no other experience. Similarly, an adult society,
increasingly influenced toward the present, at least has
developed an historical perspective. Also, adult values were
internalized at a time when a future vision was possible. For
many of the young, however, the present weighs more, heavily.
This notion is best reflected in the vociferous youth response to
the Vietnam conflict, the embodiment of a war fought for the
future, </p>

<p>Finally, all of these cultural changes have occurred,
especially for the young, in an environment of affluence. The
successful economic system has maximized individual freedom. But
the individual has been given unlimited choices at exactly the
time when a, value system within which to make such choices is in
doubt. Because he has no sense of direction, the result is
restlessness, boredom and an increase in the likelihood of
present-oriented choices. Self-destructive drug-taking is one
form such behavior may take. One of our Seminar participants
observed in this connection: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>It seems to me that you've got this affluence. So that
    while most of us grew up with the feeling that the channels
    within which we were going to have to move and make choices
    were very narrow, channels for these youngsters look
    absolutely open. It's an absolutely a, la carte menu-it's the
    biggest a la, carte menu you can imagine. [This occurs] in a
    situation in which this sense of radical change is going on
    so fast that you can't master it, together with a feeling
    that the society is being operated by very large
    organizations which you can't get a grip on, giving one a
    sense of helplessness, of not knowing where to take hold. All
    these things inherently are disorienting to youngsters and
    don't give them a, feeling of challenge, [but rather] a doubt
    as to the meaning of their own lives, of the significance of
    their being here, [a sense of] being atoms. So then they do
    act like children in the sense of behaving violently to call
    attention to themselves. They do a whole lot of other things
    which, it seems to me, are the sort of things you often see
    when people feel their lives have no meaning. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><b>Skepticism</b> </p>

<p>Another major influence in contemporary American life with
substantial relevance to the marihuana problem is the uneasy
relationship between the individual and society's institutions,
particularly the state. For 50 years, there has been a continuing
upward flow of power to large institutional units, whether they
be corporate conglomerates, labor unions, universities or the
Government. We have created a society which &quot;requires the
individual to lean on society,&quot; observed one of our Seminar
participants, &quot;in ways that formerly he did not have to do.
He used to lean on the clan, on the family, on the village. We
have used bureaucracy to deal with these problems.&quot; For
many, the Federal Government epitomizes this development,
bureaucratizing a social response to the most human of needs. </p>

<p>We suspect that the implications of this trend for the
individual, although inevitable, became more visibly apparent in
the 1960's. Mass institutions must deal through rules; the
individual becomes a number. &quot;Intuitively, [the individual]
feels that bureaucracies must make man into an object in order to
deal with him.&quot; So we have a depersonalization at exactly
the time that many individuals are casting about for identity and
fulfillment. </p>

<p>Simultaneously, technological advance poses the awesome
prospect of 1984: the intrusion of the omnipresent state into the
private affairs of the individual. Computerized data-banks and
electronic surveillance are perceived as restrictions on
individuality at a time when the desire for personal privacy is
ascendant. </p>

<p>Another cultural feature of governmental bureaucracy during
the sixties has been failure to match expectations. Government
promises the elimination of poverty, the dissipation of racial
discrimination, the excision of drug abuse, and creates rising
expectations. But government is often ill-equipped or unable to
perform such monumental tasks. As individual helplessness
increases, as the &quot;responsibility&quot; of the bureaucracy
enlarges, those in need often feel that the gap between public
declaration and performance must be the result of a conspiracy to
fail. And for the rest of us, there is the credibility gap. The
net result is a loss of confidence in society's institutions.
Viewed from this perspective, youthful dissent, cynicism and
disobedience of the 1960's were not such surprising consequences.
</p>

<p>Still another significant feature of institutional life in
contemporary America is the lag between purpose and
implementation. That is, some of our social institutions have not
yet begun to deal with the consequences of the social and
economic changes which have occurred over the last several
decades. The best example, and the one most germane to the youth,
is the educational system. Two generations ago, the labor force
could assimilate the large majority of the nation's youth.
Neither a high school nor a college education was prerequisite to
occupational choice or achievement. Increased educational
attainment was presumed to be limited to either the privileged or
the able and would be rewarded by certain careers. </p>

<p>Today, however, the labor force grows more quickly than the
system is able to assimilate it, and the educational system now
serves as custodian as well as teacher. Although we sincerely
wish to achieve the democratic ideal of a highly educated
populace, we also keep our children in school as long as possible
because we have nothing else for them to do. The trend is
strikingly apparent even in the last 20 years.<br>
</p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td></td>
        <td colspan="2"><b>Percent enrolled in school</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><b>Age</b></td>
        <td><b>1950</b></td>
        <td><b>1970</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>14-15</td>
        <td>94.7</td>
        <td>98.1</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>16-17</td>
        <td>71.3</td>
        <td>90.0</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>18-19</td>
        <td>29.4</td>
        <td>47.7</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>20-24</td>
        <td>9.0</td>
        <td>21.5</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>This custodial function confronts educators with a dilemma.
Attrition is not in society's best interest; thus, single-minded
devotion to the highest levels of achievement would be
dysfunctional. In a sense, because the system no longer wants to
turn away its subjects, the notion of failure has lost its
meaning. As one of the Seminar participants observed: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>I think one of the problems is that there is no longer a
    penalty for failure. We-the educators-have had to lower
    standards in order to accommodate these people who need no
    longer fear failure. Of course this has been a cyclical
    thing, a wheel within a wheel. [If ] there is no longer a
    penalty for failure, then there is no longer the need to
    acquire. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>The changing function of education has been felt in both the
secondary schools and in our institutions of higher learning.
Numerous high school graduates cannot read. Colleges and junior
colleges have sprung up overnight to accommodate the population,
but many provide classrooms with little specific purpose. Only
slowly is the educational system beginning to come to grips with
its role in a changed society. At the university level, many
educators have been appalled at sacrifices which have ensued from
the custodial feature; rote learning, they contend, has
supplanted citizen and character education. </p>

<p>Uncertainty about the role of the educational system has not
escaped the students, particularly at the college level. Many of
our youth, pressed into longer attendance, question its need or
desirability. The demand for &quot;relevance&quot; is but another
reflection of the search for meaning, for an understandable role
in society. Drug use has perhaps provided an outlet for some
members of this restless generation, uncertain of its place. </p>

<p><b>The Limits of Rationality</b> </p>

<p>The social response to the individual's search for meaning has
fostered an ambivalence, an unwillingness to act, a paralysis. In
large measure, according to one Seminar member, this default of
authority reveals the intensity of the search: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>In the same way we are getting universities that can't
    teach, families that can't socialize and police forces that
    can't catch criminals. In every case, the same issue is
    involved: the subject of authority questions the legitimacy
    of authority and the exerciser of it is unable to find-very
    often doesn't even try to find-a defense, because he feels in
    himself a sympathy, as do so many parents, with the
    challenge. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>To a significant extent, society is waiting, hoping that the
impulse for change will settle around certain fundamental
attributes of the American ethic. At the present time, however,
no consensus about the nature of these fundamentals exists. We
are all looking for values that have deep roots, as we attempt to
sort out the durable from the ephemeral. </p>

<p>All of the participants at our Central Influences Seminar
agreed that the unique feature of this search was its a rational
quality. As one observer put it: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>We have been discussing the question of how we change a
    society. I don't think it's changed by rational intention. As
    I understand societies, historically and our own, what really
    is required to change it is something on a deeper level that
    involves myth, ritual, sacrament-a number of these functions
    that have always been related to societies. On these you
    can't just suddenly make up your mind and then prescribe. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Regarding our problem of authority, you cannot really ask
    the question: why can't these people hang onto their
    authority? They can't hang onto it because what gave them
    authority is something not of themselves, but part of the
    society, part of a ritual, a sacrament: a way of behaving in
    the group which gave them authority, [whether] professorial,
    parental or policy authority. In each one of these cases,
    what we see is not the diminishing of these men so much but
    rather the developing emptiness, the lack of the particular
    ethic that gave them authority to start with. This is why we
    are in a terrible dilemma. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>What is essentially lacking is a system of ethics,
    morality or religion that gives birth -to the myths, the
    rituals, the sacraments that are its expression. These touch
    human beings on the unconscious level. These are the ways we
    see the world. They are not our conscious thought, but the
    ways we form ourselves, form each other, love each other or
    hate each other-in terms not so much of rational intention as
    a deeper unconscious-conscious and unconscious-which is my
    definition of a myth; much more of a feeling level, a living
    level. That is what is not present now. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>What we need, below and above all of our deliberations, is
    the growth and development of an ethical system. We just do
    not have this now. </p>
</blockquote>

<p>As we move into the 1970's, our society is collectively
engaged in the task -of determining what America means, and how
each individual should find fulfillment in `a changing age. From
this wider perspective of flux emerges an uncertainty about what
the increased prevalence of marihuana use means for the
individual and the total society. </p>

<h2>Formulating Marihuana Policy </h2>

<p>Present symbolism, past implications, and future apprehensions
all combine to give marihuana many meanings. These diverse
notions of what marihuana means constitute the marihuana problem.
In this atmosphere, the policy-maker's position is precarious
insofar as no assumption is beyond dispute. Accordingly, the
Commission has taken particular care to define the process by
which a social policy decision should be reached. </p>

<p>In studying the arguments of past and present observers to
justify a particular kind of marihuana policy, we conclude that a
major impediment to rational decision-making in this area is
oversimplification. As suggested earlier, many ingredients are
included in the marihuana mix-medical, legal, social,
philosophical, and moral. Many observers have tended to isolate
one element, highlight it and then extrapolate social policy from
that one premise. In an area where law, science and morality are
so intertwined, we must beware of the tendency toward such
selectivity. </p>

<p><b>SCIENTIFIC OVERSIMPLIFICATION</b> </p>

<p>It is wrong to assume, as many have done, that a particular
statement of marihuana's effects compels a given social policy or
legal implementation. An accurate statement of the effects of the
drug is obviously an important consideration, but it is
conclusive only if the effects are extreme one way or the other.
For example, if the use of a particular drug immediately causes
the user to murder anyone in his presence, we have no doubt that
a vigorous effort to eliminate use of that drug would be in
order. On the other hand, if the effects of the drug are purely
benign, presenting no danger whatsoever to the user or society,
no reason would exist to suppress it. </p>

<p>We know of no psychoactive substance, including marihuana,
which falls at either of these extremes. Thus, it begs the issue
to contend, as some have done, that because we don't know enough
about the effects of heavy, chronic use, we should maintain the
status quo. We know a lot about the adverse effects of alcoholism
and heavy cigarette smoking, and yet no responsible observer
suggests that we should adopt total prohibition for these drugs.
Similarly, previous estimates of marihuana's role in causing
crime and insanity were based quite erroneous information; but to
infer from this that marihuana should be considered totally
benign and hence made freely available is also not logical. Both
approaches are simplistic; both approaches fail to take into
account the social context in which the drug is used and the
dynamic factors affecting the role that marihuana use may or may
not play in the future. </p>

<p>A similar manifestation of scientific oversimplification is
the focus on causality. Many opponents of marihuana use feel
compelled to establish a causal connection between marihuana use
and crime, psychosis, and the use of other drugs, while, their
adversaries focus the dispute on negating such relationships. The
Commission believes that this tendency misses the mark. </p>

<p>The policy-maker's task is concerned primarily with the
effects of marihuana on human behavior. For both philosophical
and practical reasons, proof of causal relationships is next to
impossible. At the same time, however, the extent to which
marihuana use is associated with certain behaviors and whether
any significant relationships exist can offer important clues. </p>

<p>We must be cautious when dealing with such data. Yet we cannot
afford to paralyze the decision-making process simply because
absolute &quot;proof &quot; is lacking. Spokesmen on both sides
of the marihuana debate should focus not on causation but instead
on the relevance of the association between various behavioral
effects and marihuana use. </p>

<p><b>PHILOSOPHICAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION</b> </p>

<p>Some partisans stoutly maintain that the state has no right to
interfere with essentially private conduct or that the state has
no right to protect the individual from his own folly. Some of
the greatest minds of the Western world have struggled over such
philosophical issue always with the same outcome: a recognition
of the need to draw a line between the individual and his social
surroundings. That is, everything an individual does, in private
or not, potentially may affect others. The issue is really to
determine when the undesirable effect upon others is likely
enough or direct enough for society to take cognizance of it and
to deal with it. Coupled with this is the further question of
whether the nature of the behavior and its possible effect is
such that society should employ coercive measures. </p>

<p>Advocates of liberalization of the marihuana laws commonly
contend either that the decision to use marihuana is a private
moral decision or that any harm flowing from use of the drug
accrues only to the user. Defenders of the, present restrictions
insist that society not only has the right but is obligated to
protect the existing social order and to compel an individual to
abstain from a behavior which may impair his productivity.
Unfortunately, the issue is not so simple and the line often
drawn between the private conduct and behavior affecting the
public health and welfare, is not conclusive or absolutely
definable. </p>

<p>For example, a, decision to possess a firearm, while private
is considered by many to be of public magnitude, requiring
governmental control. A decision to engage in adulterous conduct,
although generally implemented in private, may have public
consequences if society believes strongly in the desirability of
the existing family structure. Similarly, excessive alcohol
consumption, in addition to its adverse effects on individual
health, may impair familial stability and economic productivity,
matters with which the total society is concerned. </p>

<p>So, while we agree with the basic philosophical precept that
society may interfere with individual conduct only in the public
interest, using coercive measures only when less restrictive
measures would not suffice this principle merely initiates
inquiry into a rational social policy but does not identify it.
We must take a careful look at this complicated question of the
social impact of private behavior. And we must recognize at the
outset the inherent difficulty in predicting effects on public
health and welfare, and the strong conflicting notions of what
constitutes the public interest. </p>

<p>Again and again during the course of our hearings, we have
been startled by the divergence of opinion within different
segments of our population. Sometimes the disagreement is quite
vehement, and relates to the underlying social concerns of
particular groups. For example, we were told repeatedly by
leaders of the urban black communities that they wanted to purge
all drug use from their midst, marihuana included, and that the
&quot;legalization&quot; of marihuana would be viewed as part of
a design to keep the black man enslaved. </p>

<p>On the other hand, we were informed repeatedly by the activist
student element that the pre-sent social policy regarding
marihuana was merely a tool for suppression of political dissent,
and until the law was changed, there could be no hope of
integrating the dissident population into the mainstream of
American society. </p>

<p>Such statements reemphasize the degree to which marihuana is
regarded as a symbol of a larger social concern. </p>

<p>The conflicting notions of the public interest by different
segments of the population reinforced in the Commission's
deliberations the realization that we have been called upon to
recommend public policy for all segments of the population, for
all of the American people. The public good cannot be defined by
one segment of the population, the old or the young, users or
non-users of marihuana, ethnic minorities or white majority. At
the same time, the fears of each of these groups must be taken
into consideration in arriving at the basic social objectives of
the Commission's public policy recommendation. Where such fears
are real, they must be confronted directly; where they are
imagined, however, they must be put in perspective and,
hopefully, laid to rest. </p>

<p><b>SOCIOLOGICAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION</b> </p>

<p>Public debate and decision-making in our society suffer from
the glorification of statistical data. After a particular social
phenomenon, such as marihuana use, has been defined as a problem,
armies of social scientific researchers set out to analyze and
describe the problem. A sophisticated computer technology
instantly translates millions of bits of data into correlations,
probabilities and trends. The most striking findings are then fed
to a data-hungry public. The result is data overload. </p>

<p>Descriptive information about the nature and scope of
marihuana use as a behavior is an essential component of the
policy-maker's knowledge-base. However, such information does not
in itself have social policy implications. The policy-maker must
define goals and evaluate means; only after he asks the right
questions will statistical data suggest useful answers.
Unfortunately, a tendency exists in the marihuana debate to
assign prescriptive meanings to descriptive data without testing
the underlying assumptions. Further, the data have often been
accumulating in a fragmented way. No overall plan was devised
beforehand; the result has been an ad hoc use of available data
triggered by individual research interests rather than by
long-term policy needs. </p>

<p>What does it mean that 24 million people have tried marihuana?
Some have suggested that it means marihuana ought to be
legalized. But does it mean the same thing if 15 million tried
the drug once and have decided not to use it again? And does it
mean the same thing if popular interest in the drug turns out to
be a passing fancy, which wanes as suddenly as it waxed? </p>

<p>On the other side of the controversy, what does it mean that a
substantial percentage of the public would favor increased
penalties for marihuana use? The prescriptive implications of a
democratic impulse may be offset by a preference for individual
freedom of choice. Also, this segment of public opinion may have
been influenced by incorrect information, such as unwarranted
belief in marihuana's lethality or addiction potential. So,
although the policy-maker must be aware of political realities,
he must not allow his function to be supplanted by public opinion
polls. This is an area which requires both awareness of public
attitudes and willingness to assert leadership based on the best
information available. </p>

<p><b>LEGAL OVERSIMPLIFICATION</b> </p>

<p>Perhaps the major impediment to rational decision-making is
the tendency to think only in terms of the legal system in
general and of the criminal justice system in particular. This
thinking is certainly understandable, given the history of
marihuana's involvement with the criminal law. Nonetheless, the
law does not exist in a social vacuum, and legal alternatives can
be evaluated only with reference to the values and policies which
they are designed to implement and the social context in which
they are designed to operate. </p>

<p>Legal fallacies are apparent on both sides of the marihuana
controversy. Many of the persons opposed to marihuana use look
exclusively to the law for social control. This reliance on the
law is stronger today because many of our fellow citizens are
uneasy about the diminishing effectiveness of our other
institutions, particularly when the non-legal institutions have
been relatively lax in controlling drug related behavior.
Increasing reliance is placed upon the legal system to act not
only as policeman, but as father confessor, disciplinarian,
educator, rehabilitator and standard-bearer of our moral code.
Little or no thought is given to what impact this over-reliance
on the law has on the viability of other social institutions, not
to mention it's effect on the legal process. </p>

<p>A society opposed to marihuana use need not implement that
policy through the criminal law. Non-legal institutions, such as
the church, the school and the family, have great potential for
molding individual behavior. Accordingly, the policy-maker must
delicately assess the capacity of the legal system to accomplish
its task and must consider the mutual impact of legal and
non-legal institutions in achieving social objectives. </p>

<p>We recognize the short-sightedness of an absolute assumption
that the criminal law is the necessary tool for implementing a
social policy opposed to marihuana use. But equally short-sighted
is the opposing contention which attempts to analyze the law
separately from its underlying social policy objective. This
argument assumes that if the law isn't working, or if the costs
of enforcing the law outweigh its benefits, the law should,
therefore, be repealed. </p>

<p>If society feels strongly enough about the impropriety of a
certain behavior, it may choose to utilize the criminal law even
though the behavior is largely invisible and will be minimized
only through effective operation of other agencies of social
control. Laws against incest and child-beating are good examples.
In weighing the costs and benefits of a particular law, one must
provide a scale and a system of weights. The scale is the
normative classification of behavior, and the system of weights
is the largely subjective evaluation of the importance of the
values breached by the behavior. This weighing process is what is
open to dispute. </p>

<p>In sum, no law works alone. Where an unquestioned consensus
exists about the undesirability of a particular behavior and all
social institutions are allied in the effort to prevent it, as is
the case with murder and theft, the law can be said to
&quot;work&quot; even though some murders and thefts may still be
committed. Where society is ambivalent about its attitude toward
the behavior and other institutions are not committed to its
discouragement, the law cannot be said to be working, even though
many people may not engage in the behavior because it is against
the law. </p>

<p>The question is whether the social policy, which the law is
designed to, implement, is being achieved to a satisfactory
extent. To determine the role of law regarding marihuana, we must
first look to society's values and aspirations, and then define
the social policy objective. If we seek to discourage certain
marihuana-related behavior, we must carefully assess the role of
the legal system in achieving that objective. </p>

<h2>The Report </h2>

<p>In this Chapter, we have tried to put the marihuana problem in
perspective. In the remainder of this Report, we explore several
aspects of the phenomenon of marihuana use, its effects, its
social impact and its social meaning, assessing their relative
importance in the formulation of social policy. </p>

<p>In Chapter II, we consider the effects of the drug on the
individual user, with particular attention to the size of the
user population for whom various effects are relevant. The
Commission emphasizes that this material is related only
indirectly to its policy-making function. The social policy
planner is concerned not about the effects on the individual per
se, but about the impact of any adverse effect on his behavior
and on the larger society and about the meaning of this behavior
in the larger social perspective. The material in Chapter II
serves primarily to educate and inform. </p>

<p>In Chapter III, the Commission evaluates the various threats
which marihuana use is perceived to present to the public safety,
public health, and dominant social order. This Chapter is
designed to assess the social impact of marihuana use, the
initial step in the policy making process. </p>

<p>In Chapter IV, we consider what role marihuana use plays and
will play in the life of American society. This is the dynamic
element of marihuana use and is the most intangible of the
marihuana realities, but is particularly important from a
policy-planning perspective. This consideration is the one most
overlooked by contemporary observers and participants in the
marihuana debate. </p>

<p>Because social meaning is not a directly measurable entity, we
must examine the ways in which society responds to the behavior
and whether such responses, both formal and informal, are fluid
or. static. After analyzing public opinion, law enforcement
behavior and the reactions of medical, educational, and other
segments of the population, we then discuss what marihuana use
has come to mean and is likely to mean in the future.
Particularly important in this highly speculative endeavor is the
wider cultural perspective which we described earlier in this
Chapter. </p>

<p>In Chapter V, we bring this information to bear on a
policy-making process. After establishing the philosophical
framework, we explore the spectrum of social policy options,
choosing the one we judge most suitable to the present time. Then
we consider the range of legal alternatives for implementing this
chosen policy, and select the one we believe to be most
appropriate for achieving it. </p>

<p>In an addendum to the Report, we present some ancillary
recommendations. Some of these recommendations flow from our
basic premise, others are a result of independent evaluation by
the Commission of other areas of concern. </p>

<p>We ask the reader to set his preconceptions aside as we have
tried to do, and discriminate with us between marihuana, the
drug, and marihuana, the problem. We hope that our conclusions
will be acceptable to the entire public, but barring that, we
hope at the least that the areas of disagreement and their
implications will be brought into sharper focus.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>