
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B031-188</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065506 text/html 35442
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:54:58 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:32:01 GMT
Content-length: 35223
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Chapter 11</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>11. Humanistic psychology</h2>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It is said that Freud had an almost pathologic fear
of metaphysics. According to Jung, Freud was appalled by the
&quot;occult&quot; implications he encountered in his exploration
of the human psyche. Probing ever deeper into the mysteries of
the unconscious region, he heard whispers perhaps from that
unseen world William James talked about&#151;and they frightened
him. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Freud confessed to him, said Jung, &quot;that it
was necessary to make a dogma of his sexual theory because this
was the sole bulwark of reason against a possible 'outburst of
the black flood of occultism.&quot;' Consider, for example, the
idea of intra-uterine memories, or recollections of life in the
womb. If carried further this might suggest the possibility at
least of pre-uterine memories&#151;which in turn might lend some
support to the Eastern doctrine of reincarnation. Freud refused
to consider such implications, and this necessarily resulted in
his negative attitude toward the unconscious, which he regarded
as a sort of garbage heap for man's brute instincts. As a
consequence, said Jung, psychology became for the most part
&quot;the science of conscious contents, measured as far as
possible by collective standards.&quot; But suppose for a moment
that the unconscious is something more than this. What if it is
in fact man's link to ultimate reality and the Ground of his
Being? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Psychology has finally started to consider this
possibility, urged on in part by psychedelic evidence. In a
pioneering study, humanistic psychologist Abraham H. Maslow
proposed that his fellow psychologists move <i>Toward a
Psychology of Being</i>, and Maslow's unorthodox theories have
recently inspired something of a Freud is Dead movement. The
development is comparable in many ways to the radical upheaval in
theology, and Maslow might well be described as the Bonhoeffer or
Robinson of psychology. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; What does this mean, a psychology of Being? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Maslow began by agreeing in a sense with Robinson
and disagreeing with Sartre. He began with the assertion that
every man has <i>&quot;an essential biologically based inner
nature.&quot;</i> This inner nature &quot;is to some degree
'natural,' intrinsic, given, and, in a certain limited sense,
unchangeable, or, at least, unchanging.&quot; (That is to say, it
is unconditional&#151;from Robinson's viewpoint, transcendent.)
Moreover, it is not bad or evil: it is either neutral in
character or positively good. Man therefore would do well to
discover and develop it; rather than suppress it, he should
follow it: he should live his life according to its dictates.
Psychology likewise should acknowledge it and seek to understand
it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Freudian psychology is preoccupied with pathology;
it is primarily a sick psychology, or a psychology of sickness.
But it fails to define health. Or rather it tends simply to
equate healthy behavior with successful adjustment to the social
environment, nothing more, and it regards conscience as a sort of
learned response: an internalization of one's &quot;shall&quot;
and &quot;shall not&quot; parents. It is situational and
subjective. It does not suggest the existence of any values,
goals, or ideals in any sense absolute, objective, or
unconditional, and it does not provide for the possibility of an
ultimate reality or ultimate state of Being. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; On the other hand, Being psychology is a psychology
of health. It defines healthy behavior in terms of successful
adjustment to one's essential inner nature, and it regards
conscience as the &quot;unconscious or preconscious&quot;
perception of that nature. It affirms, of course, the existence
(or potential existence) of an ultimate reality or state of
Being, and it says, in effect, &quot;to thine own Self be
true.&quot; It does not ask what men do: it asks what they should
do. It asks what men are, but it also asks what men might be and
should become. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Being psychology indicates that man has a built-in
potential, as it were, like the oak which is hidden in the acorn,
and conscience is the intuitive awareness of that potential. The
Freudian superego may also exist, but its demands are imposed
from outside: from the society and the culture, transmitted by
the parents. The conscience of Being, by comparison, is
intrinsic; its demands are imposed from within, by the essential
inner nature: it is an inner voice which insists that we be true
to that nature, true to the future, true to the truth. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Being psychology, or B-psychology, is different
from Deficiency psychology, or D-psychology. D-psychology studies
sick people whose basic needs have not been satisfied&#151;who
are afflicted, so to speak, with psychic deficiency diseases.
B-psychology studies healthy people whose basic needs have been
satisfied&#151; and who therefore can devote their energies to
life, to the world, and to growth: to the actualization of their
essential inner natures. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Maslow developed his theories in part by studying a
class of healthy people he described variously as meta-motivated,
growth-dominated, and self-actualizing. He also referred to this
type as inner-determined rather than outer-determined, recalling
the sociologist David Riesman's distinction between the
inner-directed individualist and the other-directed conformist.
He said further that self-actualizing people appear to be capable
of a special kind of love and a special kind of cognition. These
he termed B-love and B-cognition, as opposed to D-love and
D-Cognition, the letters again standing for Being on the one hand
and Deficiency on the other. What is more, he said, a capacity
for B-love and B-cognition will sometimes enable a
self-actualizer to achieve a special kind of experience&#151;an
intense, if fleeting, moment of utter joy and complete
fulfillment. This Maslow called a &quot;peak experience.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; D-love is a selfish love in which the lover seeks
primarily to satisfy his own needs; in short, it is I-It love.
B-love is unselfish, non-possessive admiration for the Being of
another person; in short, it is I-Thou love. Similarly,
D-cognition can be summed up here as the I-It mode of perception
and understanding, while B-cognition refers to an I-Thou view of
the world. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In B-cognition during a peak experience, said
Maslow, an object is not perceived in terms of use, purpose, or
relation to anything else; it is perceived as a whole. &quot;It
is seen as if it were all there was in the universe, as if it
were all of Being, synonymous with the universe.&quot; The
B-cognizer becomes totally absorbed with the object to the
exclusion of all else, and he admires it without comparing it,
evaluating it, judging it, or desiring to possess it; above all,
he does not <i>rubricize</i> the object, which means to say he
does not attempt to classify it or put it in a category with
other objects. The B-cognizer, moreover, is relatively
&quot;ego-transcending, self-forgetful, ego-less.&quot; He also
is non-motivated in terms of future action; he regards the peak
experience as a &quot;self-validating&quot; end in itself and not
as the means to some future end. A &quot;very characteristic
disorientation to time and space&quot; occurs, and the B-cognizer
finds himself, subjectively, outside of time and space. He is
&quot;most here-now, most free of the past and of the
future.&quot; He is therefore &quot;non-striving, non-needing,
non-wishing.&quot; His perception is nondualistic, and he thus
denies the existence of evil&#151;or views it rather as
&quot;only a partial phenomenon, a product of not seeing the
world whole and unified.&quot; Being as such is good, or neutral.
And finally, the peak experience is beyond
abstractions&#151;including verbal abstractions. It cannot really
be put into words, since it is after all a view of the whole, and
words cannot express the whole. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; B-psychology's description of a healthy person's
peak experience sounds very much, of course, like James's
description of mystical religious experience, Buber's description
of I-Thou experience, the drug cultist's description of
psychedelic experience, and the Zen Buddhist's description of
satori. Maslow's essential inner nature, as we have already
indicated, sounds very much like Tillich's Ground of Being and
Bishop Robinson's transcendent or unconditional God. And the
B-psychologist's attitude toward the unconscious would certainly
appear to support the view of James and Jung. &quot;Because the
roots of ill health were found first in the unconscious,&quot;
wrote Maslow, &quot;it has been our tendency to think of the
unconscious as bad, evil, crazy, dirty or dangerous, and to think
of the primary processes as <i>distorting</i> the truth. But now
that we have found these depths to be also the source of
creativeness, of art, of love, of humor and play, and even of
certain kinds of truth and knowledge, we can begin to speak of a
healthy unconscious, of healthy regressions. . . . We can now go
into primary process cognitions for certain kinds of knowledge,
not only about the self but also about the world.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Maslow, unlike Robinson, did not attempt to say in
so many words what man's essential inner nature might be. But a
clue to his thought is provided perhaps by his expression of
wonder at &quot;the mystery of communication between alone-nesses
via, e.g., intuition and empathy, love and altruism,
identification with others, and homonomy in general.&quot; Maslow
added: &quot;We take these for granted. It would be better if we
regarded them as miracles to be explained.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The scientist Lecomte du Nouy expressed the same
idea in his book <i>Human Destiny</i> when he pointed out that
&quot;the appearance of moral and spiritual ideas remains an
absolute mystery.&quot; How, then, are we to account for our
&quot;unaccountable aspirations&quot;? The scientific unbeliever
insists upon cause and effect &#151;and then refuses to
acknowledge any cause creating such effects as love, conscience,
charity, and sacrifice. The cause is denied because it cannot be
seen. Thus, as physicist David Bohm has noted, nineteenth-century
positivists such as Mach held that the idea of atoms was
meaningless and &quot;nonsensical&quot; because atoms could not
then be observed. But even science will sometimes accept the
evidence of things not seen, as in the case of the outer planets.
The existence of some unseen planet was first suspected because
of perturbations in the orbit of Uranus; when a proper telescope
was brought to bear, giant Neptune swam into view&#151;and Pluto
later was similarly discovered. So what would happen if we were
to focus our attention on the phenomena of love and morality,
searching in the same way for the source of these perturbations?
What might swim into view in this case? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Evidence of an essential inner nature led Maslow to
reconsider the possibility that mankind might be able to develop
a humanistic morality or scientific ethic. As it is, Western
morality tends to be legalistic and authoritarian; our basic
rules of conduct are handed down from above, as it were, in the
form of commandments, on tablets of stone, and we are expected to
obey them without asking questions. Thou shalt not kill, for
example. No doubt that is a very good law, and there is probably
a very good reason for it&#151;but we are not told what the
reason is. Similarly, no particular reason is given for the less
basic rules of conduct which are imposed upon us by mundane
authority. As a general proposition, all in all, we are expected
to behave this way or that way because God said so, or our
parents said so, or Congress said so, or Emily Post said so. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The system does work, in a fashion, if we sense
that the laws in question are for some reason good ones. Thus
most of us feel intuitively that the law against killing is a
good law, which explains why it has remained on the books for so
many years in so many lands, and most of us therefore do not kill
other people, unless of course we are told to by Congress or the
President. But the system breaks down too, and especially so in
an age of empiricism when people develop the disturbing habit of
demanding a reason for everything. We are distressed, for
example, when criminals and juvenile delinquents band together in
gangs, make their own rules, and refuse to honor the laws of
society. We wonder why it happens. But society itself is a gang
&#151;it is simply a very big gang&#151;and its rules are no more
sacrosanct than the Mafia's unless some valid reason can be
produced to recommend them: a reason, preferably, which will
demonstrate that the rules as such are grounded in the very
nature of things. This is why men have dreamed of discovering a
&quot;natural law&quot; which is grounded in the nature of Being
itself, demonstrably true and irrefutable: a law which no man
could possibly deny, having once understood it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Such a law indeed is central to the Tibetan concept
of <i>Dharmakaya</i>. As the Evans-Wentz edition of the <i>Tibetan
Book of the Dead</i> tells us: <i>&quot;Dharmakaya</i> is the
norm of all existence, the standard of truth, the measure of
righteousness, the good law; it is that in the constitution of
things which makes certain modes of conduct beneficial and
certain other modes detrimental.&quot; In the East, for instance,
human compassion is a matter of elementary logic based upon the
supposedly monistic character of mankind. &quot;When you're cut,
I bleed. Therefore, I had better see to it that you are not
cut.&quot; In the West the idea of a natural law can be traced
back to Plato's assertion that virtue and knowledge are the same
thing: that all real virtue springs from knowledge alone. Saint
Augustine perhaps was hinting at something of this sort when,
addressing himself to God, he bemoaned the crimes of Sodom.
&quot;But how can men's insults touch you, who are undefiled? Or
what injury can be committed against you, who cannot be hurt? But
your vengeance is in that which men do against themselves,
because when they sin against you, they are acting wickedly
against their own souls, and <i>iniquity gives itself the
lie.&quot;</i> Robinson likewise in his New Morality was
attempting to establish an ethic based on love, the Ground of
Being, and he believed that this could be accomplished by de
mythologizing the legalistic Christian ethic. The West of course
insists that the character of mankind is pluralistic and
personal, not monistic and impersonal; in East and West alike,
however, those who affirm the existence of a natural law are in
fundamental agreement on one point: they all base their arguments
on the existence of a primary state of Being. Natural morality is
not possible unless Sartre was wrong and such a primary state of
Being actually exists; it matters not in this case whether you
refer to that state as Atman or as an essential inner nature.
Here, then, we discover a critical point of convergence which
brings together the drug movement, radical theology,
B-psychology, and Eastern metaphysics. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Maslow, for his own part, conceded that all past
attempts to realize a natural morality had failed. But he added
that contemporary developments in psychology &quot;make it
possible for us for the first time to feel confident that this
age-old hope may be fulfilled if only we work hard enough.&quot;
If men knew what they really were like, and what they were meant
to become, the very nature of their Being would emerge as &quot;a
court of ultimate appeal for the determination of good and
bad.&quot; It would at last become possible to establish a system
of &quot;morals-from-within.&quot;In the past, all efforts to
establish such a system have been frustrated by man's apparent
inability to determine what his essential inner nature actually
is. It is all very well to say there is a primary state of
Being&#151;but how does one form any precise knowledge of it? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Maslow thought he now saw a way to solve this
problem. The first step would be for psychology to abandon its
exclusive interest in sickness. Let psychology turn its attention
also to a study of health, and of ends and values as well.
Specifically, let it study the habits and attitudes of healthy,
self-actualizing people: the growth-dominated B-cognizers and
B-lovers who have peak experiences. Maslow said that &quot;it
looks as if <i>there were</i> a single ultimate value for
mankind, a far goal toward which all men strive.&quot; All men to
some degree are struggling to attain that goal, which is the
realization of their essential inner nature; but the
self-actualizers by comparison have the goal already in sight.
Presumably, then, psychology could learn a good deal by keeping
the self-actualizers under close observation&#151;by examining,
for example, the hedonic <i>choices</i> they make in the course
of their daily lives: by taking careful note of the things that
delight them. And why do this? Because, said Maslow, such people
will automatically make the right choices. They will choose
virtue just as we choose a dessert, because virtue delights them.
&quot;They spontaneously tend to do right because that is what
they <i>want</i> to do, what they <i>need</i> to do, what they
enjoy . . .&quot; To such self-disciplined people, said Maslow,
we can safely say: &quot;Do as you will, and it will probably be
all right.&quot; And if this sounds familiar, it may remind us of
that Augustinian directive from which Robinson constructed his
New Morality. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Through the self-actualizers, therefore, psychology
can discover &quot;which values men trend toward.&quot; Indeed,
said Maslow, &quot;it is possible that we may soon even <i>define</i>
therapy as a search for values.&quot; This in turn calls to mind
a cartoon which appeared in the <i>New Yorker</i>, I believe,
quite a long time ago. A psychiatrist glares down at the
free-associating patient on his couch and snarls, &quot;You
cur!&quot; Or something to that effect. The idea seemed funny at
the time, but in a sense it is just the sort of attitude Maslow
has proposed. Psychology should start making value judgments. It
should say: &quot;Here is what it is like to be fully
human.&quot; &quot;This is wrong.&quot; &quot;That is
right.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Maslow failed to dispose entirely of one problem:
who decides what health is, and who chooses the self-actualizers?
If such an all-wise person exists, then why bother with the
self-actualizers? Why not study him instead? Again we meet one of
those saber-toothed circles, and here again the matter might
rest&#151;if Maslow stood alone in the witness box. As we have
already indicated, however, the case for a primary state of Being
is bolstered by the supporting testimony of psychedelic
experience, mystical experience, radical theology, and the
Eastern movement as such. Coming together as they do, all of
these give added weight to Maslow's argument, just as Maslow's
argument gives added weight to them. Also, each of them provides
as it were an additional laboratory tool with which to probe the
unconscious&#151;and thereby to test the assertions of
B-psychology. It is not necessary to depend upon peak experience
alone, or any one person's definition of a peak experience. The
psychedelics would appear to be especially promising in this
connection, and, in so far as it enables men to know themselves
better, LSD makes a natural morality far more of a possibility
than it has ever been before. There is some evidence that LSD in
effect anesthetizes the Freudian superego&#151;puts to sleep
those internalized parents&#151;and thus allows the intrinsic
conscience to take over. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; If you grant the validity of a primary state of
Being, what are the practical implications of this? What would a
natural morality actually mean in terms of human conduct? The
answer is obvious if you assume that the primary state is
monistic in character&#151;you're cut, I bleed&#151;and this
interpretation in fact suggests a possible distinction between
law and justice. If mankind were a single man, and that man had a
gangrenous arm, law would simply whack off the arm to save the
man. Justice would first do all it could to save the arm. Justice
would not be interested in punishing the arm, for the sake of
punishment&#151;and while justice itself might consent finally to
radical surgery, it would do so only as a last resort. Law
recognizes the integrity of the whole. Justice recognizes the
integrity of the whole, but it recognizes also the parts'
participation in that whole. Monism therefore provides a firm
basis for decision-making in interpersonal relationships. It is a
question simply of how much you are willing to hurt yourself. Are
the gains worth the pains&#151;always remembering that the pains
are really yours? (If Stalin had been a monist, for example, he
might have hesitated over his decision to liquidate the kulaks.)
Indeed, this does seem to be the direction in which our court
system is presently moving, to the despair of many good citizens.
<br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As a general observation, in fact, whatever our
voiced convictions, it might be said that we act as if life were
monistic. I am struck by this personally whenever I see a fire
engine racing to a fire, or the United Nations in emergency
session&#151;whenever society mobilizes its resources in some
dramatic fashion to protect the welfare of individuals or the
common good. And what, for that matter, is the real meaning of
our personal and social gregariousness? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But after all, it is possible to account for such
phenomena without resorting to an unqualified monism. While it
seeks to preserve the integrity of individual personality,
Western religious tradition has been just as insistent that there
are bonds which in some ineffable way unite us all. We are told
this again now by radical theology, by B-psychology, and
especially perhaps by the drug movement. Whether or not mankind
is utterly monistic, psychedelic experience does seem to hint at
a brotherhood which is something more than brotherhood&#151;and
to this extent it may help to provide a rationale for social
action, including civil rights. As the LSD researcher Willis W.
Harman has said in connection with those who somehow manage to
break the spell of cultural hypnosis, whatever the means, a man
who is privileged to look at ultimate reality will know
thereafter from his own experience &quot;that we are elements of
a greater whole, and that what one does to another he does
ineluctably to himself.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A monistic awareness, qualified or not, might also
explain why LSD has proved helpful in treating alcoholics, who
say they no longer feel isolated from the rest of the world, and
in easing the anguish of terminal patients, who have reported new
insights into the real meaning of life, death, and immortality. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In so far as it confirms an unconditional human
nature, LSD might also be helpful in solving another
philosophical problem. Implicit in the idea of a natural ethic
based upon a primary state of Being is a possible validation of
free will&#151;as opposed to a mechanistic determinism. The
modern argument for free will has been founded very often upon
the science of quantum physics and Heisenberg's famous Principle
of Uncertainty or Indeterminacy. Heisenberg said it is impossible
for science to predict the behavior of an individual particle at
the atomic level, since the very act of observation and
measurement will influence the behavior of the particle. (This
has been compared with the difficulty a blind man would encounter
if he attempted to learn about a snowflake by touching one. ) But
some physicists have gone even further; carrying uncertainty to
the point of indeterminacy, they have asserted that individual
particles actually behave in a chaotic, capricious, and lawless
manner. You can never tell what a particular particle is going to
do next, and thus there is no causality or determinism in the
microcosmos. The laws of nature are derived only when you apply
the theory of statistical probability to a vast number of
particles; then individual capriciousness will cancel out, and it
is possible to predict how matter will behave in the macrocosmos.
Flip a coin once and it will come up either heads or tails. Flip
it a million times and it will almost certainly come up heads a
half-million times and tails a half-million times. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Some philosophers and theologians have seized upon
this idea, finding in microcosmic anarchy a possible
justification for the thesis that man himself has free will. This
of course links free will inexorably to physics, and it is
perhaps a rather dangerous position. In the first place, there
are those who suggest that the lawlessness of the particles is
only apparent; as Bohm has proposed, an explanation for
microcosmic behavior may yet be discovered at some deeper level
of causation below the atomic and subatomic. And where would that
leave free will, if not on a sawed-off limb? More to the point,
as philosopher Ernst Cassirer has argued, ethics would surely be
in a sorry position if it had to take refuge in the gaps of
scientific knowledge&#151;in a mere possibility which is,
essentially, negative in nature. Should freedom be equated with
causelessness? Is that the kind of ethic you would really prefer
if you had your choice? Could you trust such an ethic, and could
you trust any person whose actions were determined by a
capricious whim? Or would you prefer instead an ethic which is
grounded in reason, and would you rather do business with
somebody whose conduct is determined by his essential inner
nature? Describing Spinoza's views on the subject, Cassirer
wrote: &quot;To act freely does not mean to act arbitrarily or
without prior decision; it means rather to act in accordance with
a decision which is in harmony with the essence of our reason.
This essence and with it the specific priority of reason consists
of the knowledge of the whole.&quot; True ethical judgment, said
Cassirer, does not put a high value on capricious behavior;
rather, &quot;it values a course of action that springs from the
basic substratum of the personality and is firmly anchored in
it.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Natural morality is predicated of course on just
such a substratum&#151;on a primary state of Being&#151;and it
suggests in turn a kind of freedom we might describe as <i>ontological
freedom</i>. This has nothing to do with anarchy or lawlessness.
It implies a freedom to be yourself&#151;or more exactly, a
freedom to become that which you were meant to be. In this sense,
freedom for Beethoven would not mean a freedom to become a sailor
or an architect or an outlaw: it would mean simply a freedom to
become a composer of music. In the same sense, freedom for the
acorn would be a freedom to become an oak tree&#151;not a
hibiscus or a sugar maple, but only an oak. Freedom, in other
words, means the freedom to realize your essential inner nature,
and Beethoven for example would be subject to a blind determinism
only if his father, say, forced him to study medicine.
Ontological freedom applies both to the individual and to the
whole, and it is valid even if the whole should prove to be in
fact monistic. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Here too Spinoza has spoken. If we <i>are</i>
nothing more than parts of a whole which is in the process of
realizing itself, we nevertheless contribute to that whole, each
and every one of us. It is an expression of us, just as much as
we are an expression of it. In so far as we partake of the whole,
we each of us determine in part what the whole is and shall be.
If we are cogs in a machine, we are not merely the servants of
the machine: we each of us in part comprise the machine, and it
is just as much subservient to us as we are subservient to it. In
fact, we are the machine, and the machine is us. (What was it
Bergson said? The universe is a machine for the making of God?)
In so far as the whole is free, then we also are free&#151;in so
far as we partake of the whole. The sense of a dictatorial
determinism arises only when we fail to recognize our true
identity or essential inner nature, and it matters not whether
that identity is pluralistic or monistic. The sense of freedom
arises with our <i>awareness</i> of our identity&#151;of our
destiny, if you will&#151;and we recognize that we are free when
we understand that we are responding either to our own inner
nature or to the inner nature of a whole in which we partake.
This perhaps is a deeper meaning of the saying &quot;You shall
know the truth and the truth shall set you free.&quot; The truth
is our essential inner nature, pluralistic or otherwise, and, to
the extent that it provides us with a greater awareness of the
truth, the psychedelic experience sets us free&#151;as do also
the peak and mystical experiences. Or so at least the argument
might run. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In his important book <i>The Secular City</i>,
Harvey Cox has asserted that &quot;the era of metaphysics is
dead&quot; and that &quot;politics replaces metaphysics as the
language of theology.&quot; Perhaps metaphysics is dead for Cox,
who apparently subscribes to the doctrine of God's hiddenness.
But obviously it is very much alive for Altizer, for Bishop
Robinson, for B-psychology, for the drug cults, for the Eastern
movement. In this case Cox may have completely misread the signs
of the times, for it appears far more likely that we are
witnesses today to a significant rebirth of metaphysics. As we
have shown, even psychology is now asking ultimate ontological
questions about the nature of Being. And perhaps it was
inevitable that psychology should do this. As Tillich has
indicated, there are two kinds of anxiety&#151;neurotic and
existential&#151;and only ontology can distinguish the one from
the other. Neurotic anxiety is unreal, or rather has a misplaced
object of attention, while existential anxiety is the result of a
realistic analysis of the way things actually are. Clearly it is
important to distinguish the two, and that is why Tillich
complained about &quot;the lack of an ontological analysis of
anxiety and a sharp distinction between existential and
pathological anxiety.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Two decades ago, at the end of the war, Jacques
Maritain wrote: &quot;What is essentially needed is a renewal of
metaphysics. . . . What is needed first and foremost is a
rediscovery of Being, and by the same token a rediscovery of
love. This means, axiomatically, a rediscovery of God. The
existential philosophies which are today in fashion are but a
sign of a certain deep want and desire to find again the sense of
Being.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; He said further: &quot;In perceiving Being Reason
knows God.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Those words have a prophetic ring now. A
rediscovery of Being is central to the contemporary developments
we have discussed, and from one point of view it might be said
that man today is making another desperate effort to find his God
again. But, as noted, the rediscovered God has seemed more often
than not to be the Eastern God, and the new metaphysics has been
deeply influenced by mysticism. Today's radical ontology may
therefore be subject to a Western-oriented criticism, including a
major objection which was expressed some years ago, in another
connection, by no one less than Tillich: <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Mysticism,&quot; said Tillich, &quot;does not
take seriously the concrete and the doubt concerning the
concrete. It plunges directly into the ground of being and
meaning, and leaves the concrete, the world of finite values and
meanings, behind. Therefore it does not solve the problem of
meaninglessness. In terms of the present religious situation this
means that Eastern mysticism is not the solution of the problems
of Western Existentialism, although many people attempt this
solution.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Buber raised the same point in rejecting the
Eastern concept of a mystical union with the godhead: &quot;What
does it help my soul that it can be withdrawn anew from this
world here into unity, when this world itself has of necessity no
part in the unity&#151;what does all 'enjoyment of God' profit a
life that is rent in two? If that abundantly rich heavenly moment
has nothing to do with my poor earthly moment&#151;what has it
then to do with me, who have still to live, in all seriousness
still to live, on earth?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This brings us back to questions we asked earlier.
Are the East and the West as diametrically opposed as they appear
to be? Or are they both perhaps attempting to say the same thing,
in different ways? </p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | <a
    href="braden12.htm">Chapter 12</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>