
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-73</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-338</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/arab1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044140 text/html 8997
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:41:33 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:03 GMT
Content-length: 8780
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Tale of Two Hashish-Eaters from 1001 Arabian Nights</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<h1>THE TALE OF TWO HASHISH-EATERS (Traditional) </h1>

<p><b>From 1001 Arabian Nights</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>There was once, my lord and crown upon my head, a man in a
certain city, who was a fisherman by trade and a hashish-eater by
occupation. When he had earned his daily wage, he would spend a
little of it on food and the rest on a sufficiency of that
hilarious herb. He took his hashish three times a day: once in
the morning on an empty stomach, once at noon, and once at
sundown. Thus he was never lacking in extravagent gaity. Yet he
worked hard enough at his fishing, though sometimes in a very
extravagent fashion. </p>

<p>On a certain evening, for instance, when he had taken a larger
dose of his favorite drug than usual, he lit a tallow candle and
sat in front of it, asking himself eager questions and answering
with obliging wit. After some hours of this delight, he became
aware of the cool silence of the night about him and the clear
light of a full moon abouve his head, and exclaimed affably to
himself: &quot;Dear friend, the silent streets and the cool of
the moon invite us to a walk. Let us go forth, while all the
world is in bed and none may mar our solitary exaltation.&quot;
Speaking in this way to himself, the fisherman left his house and
began to walk towards the river; but, as he went, he saw the
light of the full moon lying in the roadway and took it to be the
water of the river. &quot;My dear old friend the fisherman,&quot;
he said, &quot;get your line and take the best of the fishing,
while your rivals are indoors.&quot; So he ran back and fetched
his hook and line, and cast into the glittering patch of
moonlight on the road. </p>

<p>Soon an enormous dog, tempted by the smell of the bait,
swallowed the hook greedily and then, feeling the barb, made
desperate efforts to get loose. The fisherman struggled for some
time against this enormous fish, but at last he was pulled over
and rolled into the moonlight. Even then he would not let go his
line, but held on grimly, uttering frightened cries. &quot;Help,
help, good Mussulmans!&quot; he shouted. &quot;Help me to secure
this mighty fish, for he is dragging me into the deeps! Help,
help, good friends, for I am drowning!&quot; The guards of that
quarter ran up at the noise and began laughing at the fisherman's
antics; but when he yelled: &quot;Allah curse you, O sons of
bitches! Is it a time to laugh when I am drowning?&quot; they
grew angry and, after giving him a sound beating, dragged him
into the presence of the kadi. </p>

<p>At this point Shahrazad saw the approach of morning and
discreetly fell silent. </p>

<p>BUT WHEN THE SEVEN-HUNDRED-AND-NINETY-EIGHTH NIGHT HAD COME
SHE said: </p>

<p>Allah had willed that the kadi should also be addicted to the
use of hashish; recognizing that the prisoner was under that
jocund influence, he rated the guards soundly and dismissed them.
Then he handed over the fisherman to his slaves that they might
give him a bed for calm sleep. After a pleasant night and a day
given up to the consumption of excellent food, the fisherman was
called to the kadi in the evening and received by him like a
brother. His host supped with him; and then the two sat opposite
the lighted candles and each swallowed enough hashish to destroy
a hundred-year-old elephant. When the drug exalted their natural
dispositions, they undressed completely and began to dance about,
singing and committing a thousand extravagances. </p>

<p>Now it happened that the Sultan and his wazir were walking
through the city, disguised as merchants, and heard a strange
noise rising from the kadi's house. They entered through the
unlatched door and found two naked men, who stopped dancing at
their entrance and welcomed them without the least embarrassment.
The Sultan sat down to watch his venerable kadi dance again; but
when he saw that the other man had a dark and lively zabb, so
long that the eye might not carry to the end of it, he whispered
in his wazir's startled ear: &quot;As Allah lives, our kadi is
not as well hung as his guest!&quot; &quot;What are you
whispering about?&quot; cried the fisherman. &quot;I am the
Sultan of this city and I order you to watch my dance
respectfully, otherwise I will have your head cut off. I am the
Sultan, this is my wazir; I hold the whole world like a fish in
the palm of my right hand.&quot; The Sultan and his wazir
realized that they were in the presence of two hashish-eaters,
and the wazir, to amuse his master, addressed the fisherman,
saying: &quot;How long have you been Sultan, dear master, and can
you tell me what has happened to your predecessor?&quot; &quot;I
deposed the fellow,&quot; answered the fisherman. &quot;I said:
'Go Away!' and he went away.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Did he not protest?&quot; asked the wazir. </p>

<p>&quot;Not at all,&quot; replied the fisherman. &quot;He was
delighted to be relased from the burden of kingship. He abdicated
with such good grace that I keep him by me as a servant. He is an
excellent dancer. When he pines for his throne, I tell him
stories. Now I want to piss.&quot; So saying, he lifted up his
interminable tool and, walking over to the Sultan, seemed to be
about to discharge upon him. </p>

<p>&quot;I also want to piss,&quot; exclaimed the kadi, and took
up the same threatening position in front of the wazir. The two
victims shouted with laughter and fled from that house, crying
over their shoulders: &quot;God's curse on all
hashish-eaters!&quot; </p>

<p>Next morning, that the jest might be complete, the Sultan
called the kadi and his guest before him. &quot;O discreet pillar
of our law,&quot; he said, &quot;I have called you to me because
I wish to learn the most convenient manner of pissing. Should one
squat and carefully lift the robe, as religion prescribes? Should
one stand up, as is the unclean habit of unbelievers? Or should
one undress completely and piss against one's friends, as is the
custom of two hashish-eaters of my acquaintance?&quot; </p>

<p>Knowing that the Sultan used to walk about the city in
disguise, the kadi realized in a flash the identity of his last
night's visitors, and fell on his knees, crying: &quot;My lord,
my lord, the hashish spake in these indelicacies, not I!&quot; </p>

<p>But the fisherman, who by his careful daily taking of the drug
was always under its effect, called somewhat sharply: &quot;And
what of it? You are in your palace this morning, we were in our
palace last night.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;O sweetest noise in all our kingdom,&quot; answered the
delighted King, &quot;as we are both Sultans of this city, I
think you had better henceforth stay with me in my palace. If you
can tell stories, I trust that you will at once sweeten our
hearing with a chosen one.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;I will do so gladly, as soon as you have pardoned my
wazir,&quot; replied the fisherman; so the Sultan bade the kadi
rise and sent him back forgiven to his duties. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>