
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-81</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B018-181</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044442 text/html 37768
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:44:15 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:53:34 GMT
Content-length: 37550
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Statement of Clinton M. Hester</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/schindhemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->

<p>TAXATION OF MARIHUANA </p>

<p>HEARINGS BEFORE THE </p>

<p>COMMITTEE ON WAYS AND MEANS </p>

<p>HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES </p>

<p>SEVENTY-FIFTH CONGRESS </p>

<p>FIRST SESSION ON H.R. 6385 </p>

<p>APRIL 27, 28, 29, 30, AND MAY 4, 1937 </p>

<p>STATEMENT OF CLINTON M. HESTER, ASSISTANT GENERAL COUNSEL FOR
THE DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY; AND S.G TIPTON, OFFICE OF GENERAL
COUNSEL </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: Mr. Chairman and members of the Ways and Means
Committee, for the past two years the Treasury Department has
been making a study of the subject of marihuana, a drug which is
found in the flowering tops, seeds, and leaves of Indian hemp and
is now being used extensively by high-school children in
cigarettes. Its effect is deadly. </p>

<p>I would like to say at this point that we have with us this
morning Commissioner Anslinger, of the Bureau of Narcotics, who
has had charge of the enforcement of the Harrison Narcotics Act,
and who will have charge of the enforcement of this act, if this
bill is enacted into law. We also have with use a pharmacologist
who is prepared to testify as to the effect of the drug on human
beings. We also have an expert chemist, and one of the
outstanding botanists in the country, who are prepared to testify
with reference to the bill, if you desire to hear them. </p>

<p>The leading newspapers of the United States have recognized
the seriousness of this problem and many of them have advocated
Federal legislation to control the traffic in marihuana. In fact,
several newspapers in the city of Washington have advocated such
legislation. In a recent editorial, the Washington Times stated: </p>

<p>The marihuana cigarette is one of the most insidious of all
forms of dope, largely because of he failure of the public to
understand its fatal qualities. </p>

<p>The Nation is almost defenseless against it, having no Federal
laws to cope with it and virtually no organized campaign for
combating it. The result is tragic. </p>

<p>School children are the prey of peddlers who infest school
neighborhoods. </p>

<p>High-school boys and girls buy the destructive weed without
knowledge of it capacity for harm, and conscienceless dealers
sell it with impunity. </p>

<p>This is a national problem and it must have national
attention. </p>

<p>The fatal marihuana cigarette must be recognized as a deadly
drug and American children must be protected against it. </p>

<p>As recently as the 17th of this month, there appeared in the
editorial columns of the Washington Post and editorial on this
subject, advocating the speedy enactment by Congress of this very
bill introduced by Chairman Doughton, and now before this
committee for consideration. In its concluding paragraph, the
editorial stated: </p>

<p>With a Federal law on the books a more ambitious attack can be
launched. It is time to wipe out the evil before its
potentialities for national degeneracy become more apparent. The
legislation just introduced in Congress by Representative
Doughton would further this end. Its speedy passage is desirable.
</p>

<p>In an editorial on this subject appearing in its editorial
columns on April 10, 1937, the Washington Herald quoted the
Journal of the American Medical Association, in part, as follows:
</p>

<p>The problems of greatest menace in the United States seem to
be the rise in use of Indian hemp (marihuana) with inadequate
control laws. </p>

<p>A cartoon unusually illustrative of the insidiousness of the
illicit traffic in marihuana appeared in the Washington Herald of
April 15, under the title &quot;Another Pied Piper&quot;. The
cartoon pictured the Pied Piper in the form of a marihuana
cigarette, marching down a road described as &quot;The Dope
Habit&quot;, playing his pipe and being followed by a group of
children portrayed as &quot;Our High School Youth&quot;. </p>

<p>Apropos the seriousness of the problem which H.R. 6385 is
designed to correct, is a statement made by Commissioner
Anslinger of the Bureau of Narcotics, before a House judiciary
subcommittee on Friday of last week. In the course of his
testimony in support of two bills, which, like H.R. 6385 are
designed to aid the Federal Government in its fight to stamp out
the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs, Mr. Anslinger made the
statement, supported by statistics of the Department of Justice,
that the major criminal in the United States is the drug addict;
that of all the offenses committed against the laws of this
country, the narcotic addict is the most frequent offender. </p>

<p>The purpose of H.R. 6385 is to employ the Federal taxing power
not only to raise revenue from the marihuana traffic, but also to
discourage the current and widespread undesirable use of
marihuana by smokers and drug addicts and thus drive the traffic
into channels where the plant will be put to valuable industrial,
medical, and scientific uses. In accomplishing this general
purpose two objectives should dictate the form of the proposed
legislation: First, the development of a scheme of taxation which
would raise revenue and which would also render virtually
impossible the acquisition of marihuana by person who would put
it to illicit uses without unduly interfering with the use of the
plant for industrial , medical, and scientific purposes; and
second, the development of an adequate means of publicizing
dealings in marihuana in order that the traffic may be
effectively taxed and controlled. </p>

<p>The Harrison Narcotics Act (U.S.C. title 26, sec 1040-1054
1383-1391), was designed to accomplish these same general
objectives with reference to opium and coca leaves and their
derivatives. That act required all legitimate handlers of
narcotics to register, pay an occupational tax, and file
information returns setting forth the details surrounding their
use of the drugs. It further provided that no transfer of
narcotics (with a few exceptions, notably by practicioners in
their bona-fide practice and druggists who dispense on
prescription) could be made except upon written order forms.
Since it was also provided that no one except registered persons
could legally acquire these order forms and since illicit
consumers were not eligible to register, the order-form
requirement serves the double purpose of publicizing transfers of
narcotics and restricting them to legitimate users. </p>

<p>The same objectives impelled Congress to enact the National
Firearms Act (U.S.C. title 26, sec. 1132-1132q) In that act, in
order to accomplish them, it was provided that all manufacturers,
dealers, and importers of firearms should register and pay
special taxes ranging from $200 to $500 per year. It was further
provided that firearms could not be transferred except in
pursuance of a written order form and upon payment of a $200 tax
for each transfer, transfers made to law enforcement officers
being excepted. Thus, provision was made for publicizing dealings
in firearms and for restricting their use to those persons who
would have legitimate use for them. </p>

<p>The proposed marihuana bill is something of a synthesis of
both of these statutes. It provides that all manufacturers,
compounders, importers, producers, dealers, laboratory users, and
practicioners must register and pay a special occupational tax
ranging from one dollar for practicioners and scientific users to
fifty dollars for importers compounders, and manufacturers. The
filing of information returns is also required in order to
publicize the dealings in the plant. As an additional means of
bringing the marihuana traffic out into the open, the bill also
makes it illegal, with certain exceptions, to transfer marihuana
except in pursuance of a written order form setting forth the
facts surrounding the transaction. Substantial criminal penalties
are imposed for violating the order form or registry provisions
of this bill. </p>

<p>In order to raise additional revenue and to stamp out
transfers to persons who would use marihuana for undesirable
purposes, it is further required that on any transfer which is
required to be made in pursuance of an order form a transfer tax
shall be imposed. This tax will be at the comparatively low rate
of one dollar per ounce, or fraction thereof, for transfers to
registered persons, but at the rate of $100 per ounce, or
fraction thereof, on transfers to persons who have not registered
and paid the special occupational tax whether or not they are
required to register and pay the tax. It is made a criminal
offense to acquire marihuana without having paid the transfer
tax, when payment of such tax is required. Since those who would
consume marihuana are not eligible to register under the bill,
and since the $100 tax on unregistered persons is designed to be
prohibitive, such persons could not acquire marihuana. </p>

<p>The form of the bill is such, however, as not to interfere
materially with any industrial, medical, or scientific uses which
the plant may have. Since hemp fiber and articles manufactured
therefrom are obtained from the harmless mature stalk of the
plant, all such products have been completely eliminated from the
purview of the bill by defining the term &quot;marihuana&quot; in
the bill, so as to exclude from it provisions the mature stalks
and its compounds or manufactures. </p>

<p>There are also some dealings in marihuana seeds for planting
purposes and for use in the manufacture of oil which is
ultimately employed by the paint and varnish industry. As the
seeds, unlike the mature stalk, contain the drug, the same
complete exemption could not be applied in this instance. But
this type of transaction, as well as any transfer of completed
paint or varnish products, has been exempted from transfer tax.
Any negligible medical use which marihuana may have will also be
left largely unrestricted by this bill. </p>

<p>It is provided, as in the Harrison Act, that dispensations by
registered practicioners in the course of their professional
practice and transfers made in good faith by druggists in
pursuant of a written prescription issued by a registered
practicioner shall be exempt from the order-form provisions and
from the transfer tax. Moreover, we are informed by authorities
in the Public Health Service that there is no real medical use
for the drug marihuana for the reason that its effect on human
beings is so variable and also because there are better
substitutes. </p>

<p>The heart of this bill is contained in sections 2, 6, and 7.
Section 2 imposes an occupational excise tax in the case of (1)
importers, manufacturers, and compounders of marihuana, $50 per
year; (2) producers of marihuana, $25 per year; (3) physicians,
dentists, veterinary surgeons and other practicioners one dollar
per year; (4) persons who use marihuana for research, instruction
or analysis, $1 per year; (5) dealers, $15 per year. </p>

<p>Upon payment of the tax, the taxpayer is required to register
with the collector. These occupational taxes and registration
provisions are similar to those imposed by the Harrison Narcotic
Act and the National Firearms Act. The constitutionality of such
provisions in the Harrison Narcotics Act was sustained by the
Supreme Court in Doremus vs. United States (249 U.S. 86) and on
the 29th of March of this year, the Supreme Court sustained the
validity of the similar occupational taxes and registration
provisions imposed by the National Firearms Act in the case of
Sonzinsky vs. United States (57 S. Ct. 554). </p>

<p>Section 6 of the bill makes in unlawful for anyone to transfer
marihuana except in pursuance of a written order of the person to
whom such marihuana is transferred on a form to be issued in
blank, for that purpose by the Secretary of the Treasury. This
order form requirement does not apply, however, to a transfer of
marihuana by a practicioner to his patient, or by a druggist to a
consumer who presents to the druggist a prescription issued by a
practicioner registered under the act. Nor does it apply to
exportations of marihuana, transfers of marihuana to Government
officials, transfers to paint or varnish of which marihuana is an
ingredient, transfers of marihuana to registered persons for use
in the manufacture of paint or varnish and transfers of seeds of
the marihuana plant. This order form requirement is similar to
that contained in the Harrison Narcotics Act and the National
Firearms Act. </p>

<p>Section 7 imposes a tax of one dollar per ounce upon all
transfers of marihuana to person who have paid the special
occupational tax and registered under Section 2 of the bill. It
imposes a tax of $100 per ounce on transfers of marihuana to
nonregistered person. The types of transfer exempted form the
order form requirements under section 6, such as those by
practicioners and druggists, are likewise exempted from the
payment of any tax under the provisions of this section. </p>

<p>At this point, this bill, like the National Firearms Act,
departs from the plan of the Harrison Narcotics Act which limits
the right to purchase narcotic drugs to those persons who are
permitted to register under that act. This limitation was the
focal point of attack against the constitutionality of the
Harrison Narcotics Act in the case of Doremus vs. United States,
supra, and Nigro vs. United States (1927) (276 U.S. 332). In the
latter case, the minority of the court expressed the view that
this provision in the Harrison Narcotics Act, which limited the
persons entitled to purchase narcotic drugs, was unconstitutional
on the ground that it manifested an intention on the part of the
Congress to regulate a subject matter reserved to the States
under the Tenth Amendment. </p>

<p>Thus, in order to obviate the possibility of a similar attack
up the constitutionality of this bill, it , like the National
Firearms Act, permits the transfer of marihuana to nonregistered
persons upon the payment of a heavy transfer tax. The bill would
permit the transfer of marihuana to anyone, but would impose a
$100 per ounce tax upon a transfer to a person who might use it
for purposes which are dangerous and harmful to the public, just
as the National Firearms Act permits a transfer of a machine gun
to anyone but imposes a $200 tax upon a transfer to a person who
would be likely to put it to an illegal use. </p>

<p>Although the $100 transfer tax in this bill is intended to be
prohibitive, as is the $200 transfer tax in the National Firearms
Act, it is submitted that it is constitutional as a revenue
measure. </p>

<p>In the case of Veazie Bank v. Fenno (1869, 8 Wall, 533) the
Supreme Court sustained as a proper exercise of the taxing power
a ten percent tax upon state-bank notes, notwithstanding the tax,
as it was intended to be, was so heavy as to drive such notes out
of circulation. The Court said that the fact that a tax was
prohibitive would not invalidate it if, on its face, it appeared
to be a revenue raising measure, and the fact that a tax is
burdensome or tends to restrict or suppress the thing taxed, does
not make it any the less a valid exercise of the taxing power.
Where the taxing act appears on its face to be a revenue measure,
the Court stated that it is not within the province of the
judiciary to inquire other motives that may have influenced the
Congress in enacting the tax. </p>

<p>In 1913 the Ways and Means Committee reported out a bill which
became the Smoking Opium Act of January 17, 1914 (38 Stat. 277).
That act imposed a prohibitive tax of $300 per pound upon the
manufacture of smoking opium. The act further required anyone
desiring to engage in the business of manufacturing smoking opium
to give to the United States a bond in the minimum amount of
$100,000 to insure the collection of this tax. The
constitutionality of this prohibitive tax was considered by the
Circuit Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in the case of
Lee Mow Lin v. United States (195 U.S. 27), in which the court
considered the constitutionality of the Oleomargarine Act of
1902. That act imposed a tax of one-quarter cent per pound upon
the manufacture or white oleomargarine and a tax of ten cents per
pound upon the manufacture of yellow oleomargarine. The latter
tax was deliberately designed to discourage the manufacture of
yellow oleomargarine. The constitutionality of the ten cent tax
on yellow oleomargarine was challenged on the grounds, first,
that it was so heavy as to indicate an intention by Congress to
regulate a subject-matter reserved to the States by the tenth
amendment; and second, that it was an unreasonable classification
in that the ten cent tax arbitrarily discriminated against yellow
oleomargarine and in favor of white oleomargarine in violation of
the due process clause of the fifth amendment. </p>

<p>The Supreme Court overruled both of these contentions. IN
answer to the first, it held that, although the ten cent tax was
prohibitive, it was nevertheless within the power of Congress to
impose such a tax. The Court repeated the rule that so long as a
statute appears upon its face to be a revenue measure, the Court
cannot go behind the statute and inquire as to the motives which
impelled Congress to enact it, although these motives may have
been to regulate, rather than to raise revenue. </p>

<p>In answer to the second contention, namely, that the
classification as between the two kinds of oleomargarine violated
the due process clause of the fifth amendment, the Court stated
that a classification need be based only on a reasonable
difference between the subjects of the classification. Since
yellow oleomargarine was likely to deceive the public into buying
it as butter, the classification was held to be a reasonable one.
Just as many of the States now prohibit the manufacture of
marihuana, many of the States then prohibited the manufacture of
yellow oleomargarine. Since there is obviously a material
difference between a transfer of marihuana which may be used for
purposes dangerous or harmful to the public, and a transfer of
marihuana to a legitimate dealer who will put it to industrial,
scientific, or medical uses, it is submitted that the imposition
of the one dollar tax upon transfers of marihuana to registered
persons and the $100 tax upon transfers to nonregistered persons
is a reasonable classification and, therefore, valid. </p>

<p>Finally these same principles were reiterated in the recent
case of Sonzinsky v. United States, supra. In that case, the
defendant was indicted and convicted for failing to pay the
occupational tax and register under the National Firearms Act. He
contended that the whole act was an unconstitutional, regulatory
scheme, because of the cumulative effect of the heavy
occupational tax, coupled with the transfer taxes, was to
prohibit traffic in firearms. Although the court did not pass
upon the validity of the transfer tax standing by itself, the
court brushed aside this argument, remarking: </p>

<p>It has long been established that an act of Congress which on
its face purports to be an exercise of the taxing power is not
any the less so because the tax is burdensome, or tends to
restrict or suppress the thing taxed. </p>

<p>It is urged, therefore, that the $100 transfer tax imposed by
H.R. 6385 is a valid taxing provision on the authority of the
banknote, smoking opium, oleomargarine, and firearms cases,
supra, which hold that if a statute is on its face a revenue
measure, the court will not inquire as to what other motives may
have impelled Congress to enact it. Of course if a purported
taxing measure appears on its face to be regulatory, that is,
contains regulatory provisions which are not reasonably necessary
to protect or aid in the collection of the revenue, but the tax
is imposed to compel obedience to such regulatory provisions, the
statute will be held unconstitutional as an attempt by Congress
to regulate a subject-matter which is reserved to the States by
the tenth amendment. The court so held in the Child Labor Tax
Case (1921) 259 U.S. 20 and Hill v. Wallace (1922 259 U.S. 44) </p>

<p>In the Child Labor Case, the court considered a statute which
levied a ten percent tax upon the annual net earnings of
employers who had at any time during the year employed child
labor except where it was done in an honest mistake as to the
employee's age. The statute was held unconstitutional as an
attempt to regulate a subject matter reserved to the States by
the tenth amendment, because the purported excise was not a tax,
but a penalty to enforce the regulation of child labor. </p>

<p>As indicative of this fact, the court pointed out that the act
provided a heavy exaction for departure from a detailed and
specific course of conduct n business set out on the face of the
law, without basing the amount of the so-called tax in any degree
upon the extent or frequency of the departures. The element of
intent involved in the act was also associated, the court
thought, with criminal penalties rather than taxes. Finally, the
court pointed to the fact that the Secretary of Labor was to
participate in the administration of the act, and stated that
this also indicated that the law was not a revenue measure, since
revenue laws are administered by the Secretary of the Treasury. </p>

<p>The Grains Futures Trading Act which was held unconstitutional
in Hill v. Wallace, imposed a tax of twenty cents a bushel on all
contracts for the sale of grain for future delivery,. but
exempted contracts, consummated on boards of trade designated as
contract markets by the Secretary of Agriculture, the designation
being reserved for those markets which had complied with a large
number of stringent regulations set out in the act. The court
found it impossible to escape the conclusion that the act under
consideration was regulatory on its face, and that the tax was
merely imposed as a penalty to compel boards of trade to comply
with these regulations, many of which were not relevant to the
collection of the tax. </p>

<p>The court pointed out that the elaborate mechanism set up in
the statute for hearings by the Secretary of Agriculture to
determine whether or not a particular board of trade had complied
with the prescribed regulations and the fact that the title of
the act expressly recited that one of its purposes was that of
regulating boards of trade were also strong evidence of the
regulatory nature of the act. </p>

<p>It is submitted that the $100 tax imposed by H.R. 6385 could
not be held unconstitutional under these cases, for the only
regulation is that bill with which the taxpayer need comply is
that which requires him to make a transfer of marihuana upon an
order form. This order form requirement cannot be resorted to,
however, as indicating that the $100 transfer tax is intended to
regulate a subject-matter reserved to the States under the tenth
amendment, for the reason that the much more drastic order form
requirement in the Harrison Narcotic Act was upheld by the
Supreme Court in Doremus v. United States, supra, as a regulation
reasonably necessary to aid in the collection of the occupational
taxes imposed by that act. In the course of its decision the
Court stated: </p>

<p>Congress, with full power over the subject, short of arbitrary
and unreasonable action which is not to be assumed, inserted
these provisions in an act specifically providing for the raising
of revenue. Considered of themselves, we think they tend to keep
the traffic aboveboard and subject to the inspection of those
authorized to collect the revenue. They tend to diminish the
opportunity of unauthorized persons to obtain the drugs and sell
them clandestinely without paying the tax imposed by the Federal
law. </p>

<p>After the Doremus case, Congress amended the Harrison Narcotic
Act, raising the occupational taxes and imposing a manufacturer
excise tax on narcotics. In Nigro v. United States, supra, the
Supreme Court again sustained the order for requirement as
reasonable and necessary to aid in the collection of the
occupational taxes and, in passing, stated that it was also
reasonably necessary to aid the collection of the manufacturers'
excise taxes. Furthermore, the Supreme Court sustained the
additional and more stringent requirement absent in the National
Firearms Act and in this bill, which limits the persons to whom
the order forms may be sold and, consequently, those to whom
narcotics may be sold. In that decision, the Court stated: </p>

<p>It would seem admissible and wise, in a law seeking to impose
taxes for the sale of an elusive subject, to require conformity
to a prescribed method of sale and delivery calculated to
disclose or make more difficult any escape from the tax. If this
may be done, any departure from the steps enjoined may be
punished, and added penalties may be fixed for successive
omissions, but all for the one ultimate purpose of making it
difficult to sell opium or other narcotics without registering or
paying the tax. </p>

<p>The reasonableness of such requirements is will illustrated in
the many limitations which were imposed upon the ancient freedom
in the making and sales of distilled spirits, to the end that the
collection of the heavy tax on the subject matter might be
successfully secured in spite of the temptation to avoid the tax.
The provision of section 2 making it an offense to sell unless
the purchaser gives a particular official form of order to the
seller was enacted with a like object. The sale without such an
order thus carries its illegality on its face. Its absence
dispenses with the necessity of sending to examine the list of
those registered to learn whether the seller is engaged in a
legal sale. The requirement that the official forms can only be
bought and obtained by one entitled to buy, who name shall be
stamped on the order form, and that after the sale the order form
shall be recorded, effects a kind off registration of lawful
purchasers, in addition to one of lawful sellers, and keeps
selling and buying on a plane where evasion of the tax will be
difficult. </p>

<p>Since the similar order-form requirement in the Harrison Act
was sustained as a regulation reasonably necessary to aid in the
collection of the occupational taxes imposed by that act, anyone
challenging the constitutionality of the $100 transfer tax
imposed by this bill will be unable to rely upon the order-form
requirement as indicating that the $100 tax is regulatory in
character, but will be compelled to rely solely upon the fact
that the tax is too heavy. Thus, the $100 transfer tax is brought
squarely within the bank-note, smoking-opium, and oleomargarine
cases which establish the proposition that the prohibitive
character of a tax does not make it any the less a valid revenue
measure. </p>

<p>In the final analysis, after the committee has given full
consideration to the subject of marihuana, it is not beyond the
realm of possibility that the committee may conclude that the
legitimate uses of marihuana are so negligible as compared to the
injurious effect it has upon the public health and morals of the
people of this country, that the committee will conclude to
impose a prohibitive tax upon the production, manufacture, and
sale of marihuana, and thus discourage its use in any form in
this country. </p>

<p>MR. LEWIS: The treatment of this subject as a matter of
method, and so far as constitutional basis is concerned, is about
the same as the Harrison Narcotic Act, is it not? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: With one exception. </p>

<p>MR. LEWIS: I was thinking you might add this drug as an
amendment to the Harrison Narcotic Act. </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: No; there are three reasons why we think that
would be a bad thing to do. </p>

<p>The first is that while the Harrison Narcotic Act would
include producers, there are actually no producers in the United
States of the plant from which opium and coca leaves are
obtained. Therefore, we have never had a problem under the
Harrison Narcotic Act with respect to products which are produced
in this country but have only been concerned with products which
are imported from abroad. </p>

<p>here we have the reverse situation. Practically all of this
marihuana is grown in the United States and for that reason,
instead of being concerned only with importation and sale as
under the Harrison Act, provision must also be made for
regulation of production of marihuana. </p>

<p>There is the further point that opium and coca leaves, which
are the subjects of the Harrison Act, are legitimately used
almost exclusively as medicines, whereas there are many
industrial uses for marihuana. That is another distinction
between the Harrison Act and this bill. </p>

<p>The third is this, that the Harrison Narcotic Act has twice
been sustained by the Supreme Court of the United States and
lawyers are no longer challenging its constitutionality. If an
entirely new and different subject matter were to be inserted in
its provisions, the act might be subjected to further
constitutional attacks. </p>

<p>We feel, in view of the reasons I have cited, that this
problem is one that should be dealt with under a separate act. </p>

<p>We have departed from the Harrison Narcotic Act in one major
respect, and we have done that because the Ways and Means
Committee departed from the plan of the Harrison Act in preparing
the National Firearms Act. </p>

<p>Under the Harrison Narcotic Act no one can buy narcotics
unless he has registered and paid the occupational tax. In the
National Firearms Act the committee did not follow that plan.
Anyone is permitted to buy a machine gun or a submachine gun, but
he must pay a $200 transfer tax, and carry out the purchase on an
official order form. </p>

<p>The focal point of attack on the Harrison Narcotic Act by the
judges who dissented in the Doremus case and the Nigro case, was
that the provision of the act which limited the persons to whom
narcotics could be sold clearly indicated that the primary
purpose of the act was not to raise revenue but to regulate
matters which were reserved to the States under the tenth
amendment. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON How did the Court stand in those cases? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: In the first case the Court stood 5 to 4, and in
the second case the Court stood 66 to 3. </p>

<p>MR. MCCORMACK: What was the firearms case? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: The firearms case involved only the occupational
tax under the Firearms Act. </p>

<p>MR. MCCORMACK: Was that decision unanimous? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: Yes, that was a unanimous decision. That is the
decision of March 29, In the Firearms Act you arranged it of that
anybody can buy a machine gun but he must pay a transfer tax of
$200 and would have to use an order form. </p>

<p>We have looked into the records in connection with the
transfer tax in the Firearms Act, and we found that only one
machine gun was purchased at $200 last year. </p>

<p>MR. DINGELL: Legitimately? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: Yes, this bill would permit anyone to purchase
marihuana, as was done in the National Firearms Act in permitting
anyone to buy a machine gun, but he would have to pay a tax of
$100 per ounce of marihuana and make his purchase on an official
order form. A person who wants to buy marihuana would have to go
to the collector and get an order form in duplicate, and buy the
$100 tax stamp and put it on the original order form there. He
would take the original to the vendor, and keep the duplicate. If
the purchaser wants to transfer it, the person who purchases the
marihuana from him has to do the same thing and pay the $100 tax.
That is the scheme that has been adopted to sto high-school
children from getting marihuana. </p>

<p>MR.VINSON: What is the fair market value, per ounce, of
marihuana? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: In its raw state it is about a dollar per ounce,
as a drug. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON: I notice in your statement -- and I want to say it
is a good statement; the gentleman does not have any other kind
of a statement when he comes before our committee. </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: I thank you. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON: You say in your statement that ---- </p>

<p>It is provided, as in the Harrison Act, that dispensations by
registered practitioners in the course of their professional
practice and transfers made in god faith by druggists in
pursuance f a written prescription issued by registered
practitioners shall be exempt from the order-form provisions and
from the transfer tax. </p>

<p>I was wondering whether the good-faith requirement was in the
Harrison Act. </p>

<p>MR. TIPTON: The good-faith requirement is not in the Harrison
Act. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON: It seems to me that is a weakness of the Harrison
Act. I think the good-faith provisions in this act will
strengthen the law. </p>

<p>MR. TIPTON: Exactly. That is the reason we put that in there.
That provision is not in the Harrison Act. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON: It is not included in the Harrison Act? </p>

<p>MR. TIPTON: No. </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: Mr. Tipton says they have had difficulty in
enforcing the Harrison Act because of the absence of that
requirement. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON: I had the notion that the provision would really
strengthen the law in regard to a menace of this kind. </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: That is right. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON: I would like to have some information as to where
you get this plant. </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: I have completed my statement, and I may say, Mr.
Vinson, that we have here a pharmacologist, a chemist, and an
outstanding botanist, who can give you information of that
nature. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON: I take it, Mr. Hester, from your citations of the
decisions in the Doremus case, and in the Firearms case, together
with the decision in the Veazie case and the McCray, or
Oleomargarine case - - - </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: (interposing) We have cited five cases. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON: What is the fifth one? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: that is a decision from the Circuit Court of
Appeals of the Eighth Circuit which sustained the imposition of a
tax of $300 per pound upon smoking opium. </p>

<p>MR. VINSON: In view of these cases you have no doubt as to the
power of Congress to enact this character of legislation? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: My answer to that is, no; we have given it a great
deal of consideration. In the final analysis we submit it to your
judgment. </p>

<p>The Supreme court, in the Nigro case and in the Doremus case
held that the regulatory provisions of the act, which even
limited the class of people who could buy narcotics, were
constitutional, since they were regulations reasonably necessary
to aid in collecting the revenue. Therefore in considering the
constitutionality of H.R. 6385 we do not even have to consider
the order-form provision in that bill. Consequently, there is
nothing left in the bill to consider but the prohibitive tax, and
the McCray case, which held constitutional ten percent tax on
yellow oleomargarine, and the Bank Note case and other cases
which we have cited clearly hold that, although the tax may be
prohibitive, if there are no regulatory provisions on the face of
the act which the court may say are not reasonable and necessary
to aid in the collection of the tax, the tax is constitutional. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schindhemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>