
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B016-124</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/fact1_10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043340 text/html 28982
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:33:25 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:51:08 GMT
Content-length: 28764
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp Facts 1-10</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<h1>Hemp Facts 1 - 10 </h1>

<p><b>By Alan D. Bryan</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><b>1. HEMP FOR FUEL:</b> </p>

<p>About 6% of contiguous United States land area put into
cultivation for biomass could supply all current demands for oil
and gas. Very few people know what &quot;biomass conversion&quot;
or &quot;pyrolysis&quot; mean--not only in terms of their
dictionary definitions, but in terms of what they mean as
alternative sources of energy, to the limited, expensive and
dirty petro-chemical, nuclear, or coal sources. The only reason
the U.S.-- and every other nation on earth--can't once again
become energy independent and smog free is because people are not
educated concerning the facts about solutions to the
environment/energy &quot;crisis&quot; continuously lamented and
tepidly addressed &quot;leaders&quot;, claiming they are the best
informed to decide what to do. The knowledge exists right now for
our lifeline to the future and the health and well-being of the
Seventh Generation yet unborn. Everyone of us must learn about
this existent lifeline and teach everyone else we know what the
facts are the way out of the current &quot;crisis&quot;. </p>

<p>HEMP IS THE NUMBER ONE biomass producer on earth: 10 tons per
acre in approximately four months. It is a woody plant containing
77% cellulose. Wood producers 60% cellulose. This energy crop can
be harvested with equipment readily available. It can be
&quot;cubed&quot; by modifying cubing equipment. This </p>

<p>method condenses the bulk, reducing trucking costs from the
field to the pyrolysis reactor. And the biomass cubes are ready
for conversion. </p>

<p>Hemp is drought resistant, making it an ideal crop in the dry
western regions of the country. Hemp is the only biomass resource
capable of making America energy independent and our government
outlawed it in 1938. </p>

<p>The argument against hemp production does not hold up to
scrutiny: hemp grown for biomass makes very poor grade marijuana.
The 20-40 million Americans who smoke marijuana would loath to
smoke hemp grown for biomass, so a farmer's hemp biomass crop is
worthless as marijuana. </p>

<p>Excerpt from Herer &quot;Emperor Wears No Clothes&quot; 1991
edition p. 136 </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT of the Day #2 </h3>

<p><b>Dewey and Merrill, &quot;bulletin #404, Hemp Hurds As
Paper-Making Material&quot; U.S.D.A. Washington, D.C. Oct. 14,
1916.</b> </p>

<p>There appears to be little doubt that under the present system
of forest use and consumption the present supply cannot withstand
the demands placed upon it. By the time improved methods of
forestry have established an equilibrium between production and
consumption, the price of pulp wood may be such that a knowledge
of other raw materials may be imperative. </p>

<p>Semi-commercial paper-making tests were conducted, therefore,
on hemp hurds, in cooperation with a paper manufacturer. After
several trials, under conditions of treatment and manufacture
which are regarded as favorable in comparison with those used
with pulp wood, paper was produced which received </p>

<p>very favorable comment both from investigators and from the
trade which according to official tests would be classified as
No. 1 finished printing paper. (p. 25) </p>

<p>The new paper process used hemp &quot;hurds&quot;--77% of the
hemp stalk's weight, which was then a wasted by-product of the
fiber-stripping process. In 1916, USDA Bulletin #404, reported
that ONE ACRE OF CANNABIS HEMP, in annual rotation over a 20-year
period, WOULD PRODUCE AS MUCH PULP FOR PAPER AS 4.1 ACRES OF
TREES BEING CUT DOWN over the same 20 year period. This process
would use only 1/4 to 1/7 as much polluting sulfur-based acid
chemicals to break down the lignin that binds the fibers of the
pulp, or even none at all using soda ash. The problem of dioxin
contamination of rivers is avoided in the hemp making process.
HEMP PROVIDES FOUR TIMES AS MUCH PULP WITH AT LEAST 4-7 TIMES
LESS POLLUTION. </p>

<p>As an example: If the new (1916) hemp pulp paper process were
legal today, it would soon replace about 70% of all wood paper,
including computer printout paper, corrugated boxes and paper
bags. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT of the Day #3 </h3>

<p><b>Pinch Hitters for Defense - Popular Mechanics - December
1941</b> </p>

<p>Over in England it's saccharine for sugar; on the continent
it's charcoal &quot;gasogenes&quot; in the rumble seat instead of
gasoline in the tank. Here in America there's plenty of sugar,
plenty of gasoline. Yet there's an industrial revolution in
progress just the same, a revolution in materials that will
affect every home. </p>

<p>After 12 years of research, the Ford Motor Company has
completed an experimental automobile with a plastic body.
Although its design takes advantages of the properties of
plastics, the streamline car does not differ greatly in
appearance from its steel counterpart. The only steel in the
hand-made body is found in the tubular welded frame on which are
mounted 14 plastic panels, 3/16&quot; thick. Composed of a
mixture of farm crops and synthetic chemicals, the plastic is
reported to withstand a blow 10 times as great as steel without
denting. Even the windows are of plastic. The total weight of the
plastic car is about 2,000 lbs., compared with 3,000 lbs. for a
steel auto of the same size. Although no hint has been given as
to when plastic cars may go into production, the experimental
model is pictured as a step toward materialization of Henry
Ford's belief that some day he would &quot;grow automobiles from
the soil&quot;. </p>

<p>When Henry Ford recently unveiled his plastic car, the result
of 12 years of research, he gave the world a glimpse of the
automobile of tomorrow, it's tough panel molded under hydraulic
pressure of 1500 lbs. per square inch from a recipe that calls
for 70% of cellulose fibers from wheat straw, HEMP, and sisal
plus 30% resin binder. The only steel in the car is its tubular
welded frame. The plastic car weighs a ton less than a comparable
steel car. Manufacturers are already taking a low-priced plastic
car to test the public's taste by 1943. </p>

<p>Poster's note: If anyone remembers this process, I would be
interested in hearing comments. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT of the Day #4 </h3>

<p><b>Paints and Varnishes</b> </p>

<p>For thousands of years, virtually all good paints and
varnishes were made with hemp seed oil and/or linseed oil. </p>

<p>For instance, in 1935 alone, 116 million lbs. [National
Institute of Oilseed Products congressional testimony *against*
the 1937 Marijuana Transfer Tax Law] of hemp seed were used in
America just for paint and varnish. As a comparison, consider
that the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency, along with all America's
state and local police agencies, claim to have seized for all of
1988, 651.5 tons of American-grown marijuana--seed, plant, root,
dirt clump and all. [National Narcotics Intelligence (duh)
Consumer's Committee, NNICC Report, 1988 DEA Office Release, El
Paso, TX, April, 1989.] The hemp drying oil business went
principally to DuPont petro-chemicals/[Slomand, Larry,
&quot;Reefer Madness&quot; Grove Press N.Y, N.Y. 1979, pg 72]. </p>

<p>Congress and the Treasury Dept. were assured through SECRET
TESTIMONY given by DuPont in 1935-37 directly to Herman Oliphant,
Chief Counsel for the Treasury Dept., that hemp seed oil could be
replaced with synthetic petro-chemical oils MADE PRINCIPALLY BY
DUPONT. (Poster's note: Sound like a conspiracy.) </p>

<p>Oliphant was solely responsible for drafting the Marijuana Tax
Act that was submitted to Congress.[Richard Bonnie and Charles
Whitebread, &quot;The Marijuana Conviction&quot;, Univ. of
Virginia Press 1974]. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT of the Day #5 </h3>

<p><b>Building Materials and Housing</b> </p>

<p>Because one acre of hemp produces as much cellouse fiber pulp
as 4.1 acres of trees (Dewey &amp; Merrill, &quot;Bulletin
#404,&quot; U.S. Dept Ag., 1916), hemp is the perfect material to
replace trees for pressed board, particle board and core concrete
construction molds. </p>

<p>Pratical, inexpensive construction material which is fire
resistant, with excellent thermal and sound insulating qualities,
can be made using a process called Environcore(c). This process,
developed by Mansion Industries, applies heat and compression to
agricultural fiber to create strong contruction </p>

<p>paneling, replacing dry wall and plywood. </p>

<p>Hemp has been used throughout history for carpet backing. Hemp
fiber has potential in the manufacture of strong, rot resistant
carpeting--eliminalting the poisonous fumes of burning synthetic
materials in a house or commerical fire, along with allergic
reactions associated with new synthetic carpeting. </p>

<p>Plastic plumbing pipe (PVC) can be manufactured using
renewable hemp cellulose as the chemical feedstocks, replacing
non-renewable petroleum-based chemical feedstocks. </p>

<p>So we can envision a house of the future built, plumbed,
painted and furnished with THE WORLD'S NUMBER ONE RENEWABLE
SOURCE--HEMP. </p>

<p>Herer,&quot;The Emperor Wears No Clothes: 1991 edition p. 10. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT of the Day #6 </h3>

<p><b>HEMP FOR VICTORY</b> </p>

<p>Transcript of the original 1942 U.S.D.A. film, &quot;Hemp for
Victory&quot; extolling some of the many uses of this ancient
plant and premier world resource. </p>

<p>Long ago when these ancient Grecian temples were new, hemp was
already old in the service of mankind. For thousands of years,
even then, this plant had been grown for cordage and cloth in
china and elsewhere in the East. For centuries prior to about
1850 all the ships that sailed the western seas were rigged with
hempen rope and sails. For the sailor, no less that the hangman,
hemp was indispensable. </p>

<p>A 44-gun frigate like our cherished Old Ironsides took over 60
tons of hemp for rigging, including an anchor cable of 25&quot;
in circumference. The Conestoga wagons and prairie schooners of
pioneer days were covered with hemp canvas. Indeed the very word
canvas comes from the Arabic word for hemp. In those days hemp
was an important crop in Kentucky and Missouri. Then came cheaper
imported fibers for cordage, like jute, sisal and Manila hemp,
and the culture of hemp in America declined. </p>

<p>But now with Philippine and East Indian hemp in the hands of
the Japanese, and shipment of jute from India curtailed, American
hemp must meet the needs of our Army and Navy as well as of our
Industry. In 1942, patriotic farmers at the government's request
planted 36,000 acres of seed hemp, an increase of several
thousand percent. The goal for 1943 is 50,000 acres of seed hemp.
</p>

<p>In Kentucky much of the hemp acreage is on river bottom land
such as this. Some of these fields are inaccessible except by
boat. Thus plans are afoot for a great expansion of a hemp
industry as a part of the war program. This film is designed to
tell farmers how to handle this ancient crop now little known
outside Kentucky and Wisconsin. </p>

<p>This is hemp seed. Be careful how you use it. For to grow hemp
legally you must have federal registration and tax stamp. This is
provided for in your contract. Ask your county agent about it. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT of the Day #7 </h3>

<p><b>Introduction from &quot;Marijuana: Medical Papers,&quot;
Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D.,</b> </p>

<p>Medi-Comp Press, 1973, pp. xiii-xxvii, describing some of the
recent history of western medical explorations into the salutory
medicinal benefits of hemp drugs_a history that is almost
completely unknown to people at the end of the 20th century, but,
throughout the majority of the 19th century, was commonly known
and experienced by much of the population: </p>

<p><b>Introduction</b> </p>

<p>Medicine in the Western World has forgotten almost all it once
knew about therapeutic properties of marijuana, or cannabis. </p>

<p>Analgesia, anticonvulsant action, appetite stimulation,
ataraxia, antibiotic properties and low toxicity were described
throughout medical literature, beginning in 1839, when
O'Shaughnessy introduced cannabis into the Western pharmacopoeia.
</p>

<p>As these findings were reported throughout Western medicine,
cannabis attained wide use. Cannabis therapy was described in
most pharmacopoeial texts as a treatment for a variety of disease
conditions. </p>

<p>During the second half of the 1800s and in the present
century, medical researchers in some measure corroborated the
early reports of the therapeutic potential of cannabis. In
addition, much laboratory research has been concerned with
bioassay, determination of the mode of action, and attempts to
solve the </p>

<p>problems of insolubility in water and variability of strength
among different cannabis specimens. </p>

<p>&quot;Recreational&quot; smoking of cannabis in the twentieth
century and the resultant restrictive federal legislation have
functionally ended all medical uses of marijuana. </p>

<p>In light of such assets as minimal toxicity, no buildup of
tolerance, no physical dependence, and minimal autonomic
disturbance, immediate major clinical reinvestigation of cannabis
preparations is indicated in the management of pain, chronic
neurologic diseases, convulsive disorders, migraine headache,
anorexia, </p>

<p>mental illness, and bacterial infections. </p>

<p>Recently declassified secret U.S. Defense Department studies
reconfirm marijuana's congeners to have therapeutic utility. </p>

<p>Cannabis indica, Cannabis sativa, Cannabis americana, Indian
hemp and marijuana (or marihuana) all refer to the same plant.
Cannabis is used throughout the world for diverse purposes and
has a long history </p>

<p>characterized by usefulness, euphoria or evil_depending on
one's point of view. To the agriculturist cannabis is a fiber
crop; to the physician of a century ago it was a valuable
medicine; to the physician of today it is an enigma; to the user,
a euphoriant; to the police, a menace; to the traffickers, a
source of profitable danger; to the convict or parolee and his
family, a source of sorrow. </p>

<p>This book is concerned primarily with the medicinal aspects of
cannabis. </p>

<p>The Chinese emperor Shen-nung is reported to have taught his
peopleto grow hemp for fiber in the twenty-eighth century B.C. A
text fromthe period 1500-1200 B.C. documents a knowledge of the
plant in China--but not for use as fiber. In 200 A.D., the use of
cannabis as an analgesic was described by the physician
Hoa-tho.[44] </p>

<p>In India the use of hemp preparations as a remedy was
described before 1000 B.C. In Persia, cannabis was known several
centuries before Christ. In Assyria, about 650 B.C., its
intoxicating properties were noted.[44] Except for Herodotus'
report that the Scythians used the smoke from burning hemp seeds
for intoxication, the ancient Greeks seemed to be unaware of the
psychoactive properties of cannabis. Dioscorides in the first
century A.D. rendered an accurate morphologic description of the
plant, but made no note of it's intoxicating properties. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT of the Day #8 </h3>

<p><b>More Info on Medical Uses.</b> </p>

<p>In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, Arabic writers
described the social use of cannabis and resultant cruel but
unsuccessful attempts to suppress its non-medical use. [44]
Although Galen described the use of the seeds for creating
warmth, he did not describe the intoxicating qualities of hemp.
Of interest is the paucity of references to hemp's intoxicating
properties in the lay and medical literature of Europe before the
1800s.[44] The therapeutic use of cannabis was introduced into
Western medicine in 1839, in a forty-page article by W. B.
O'Shaughnessy, a thirty-year-old physician serving with the
British in India.[27] </p>

<p>His discussion of the history of the use of cannabis products
in the East reveals an awareness that these drugs had not only
been used in medicine for therapeutic purposes, but had also been
used for recreational and religious purposes. </p>

<p>O'Shaughnessy is not primarily known for his discovery of hemp
drugs, but rather for his basic studies on intravenous
electrolyte therapy in 1831, and his introduction of the
telegraph into India in the 1850s.[26] After studying the
literature on cannabis and conferring with contemporary Hindu and
Mohammedan </p>

<p>scholars O'Shaughnessy tested the effects of various hemp
preparations on animals, before attempting to use them to treat
humans. Satisfied that the drug was reasonably safe, he
administered preparations of cannabis extract to patients, and
discovered that it had analgesic and sedative properties. </p>

<p>O'Shaughnessy successfully relieved the pain of rheumatism and
stilled the convulsions of an infant with this strange new drug.
His most spectacular success came, however, when he quelled the
wrenching muscle spasms of tetanus and rabies with the fragrant
resin. Psychic effects resembling a curious delirium, when an
overdose was given, were treated with strong purgatives, emetics
with a blister to the nape of the neck, and leeches on the
temples.[27] </p>

<p>The use of cannabis derivatives for medicinal purposes spread
rapidly throughout Western medicine, as is evidenced in the
report of the Committee on Cannabis Indica of the Ohio State
Medical Society, published in 1860. In that report physicians
told of success in treating stomach pain, childbirth psychosis,
chronic cough, and gonorrhea with hemp products.[25] </p>

<p>A Dr. Fronmueller, of Fuerth, Ohio, summarized his experiences
with the drug as follows: </p>

<p>I have used hemp many hundred times to relieve local pains of
an inflammatory as well as neuralgic nature, and judging from
these experiments, I have to assign to the Indian hemp a place
among the so-called hypnotic medicines next to opium; its effects
are less intense, and the secretions are not so much suppressed
by it. Digestion is not disturbed; the appetite rather increased;
sickness of the stomach seldom induced; congestion never. Hemp
may consequently be employed in inflammatory conditions. It
disturbs the expectoration far less than opium; the nervous
system is also not so much affected. The whole effect of hemp
being less violent, and producing a more natural sleep, without
interfering with the actions of the internal organs, it is
certainly often preferable to opium, although it is not equal to
that drug in strength and reliability. An alternating course of
opium and Indian hemp seems particularly adapted to those cases
where opium alone fails in producing the desired effect. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT of the Day #9 </h3>

<p><b>More Interesting Medical Stuff</b> </p>

<p>Because cannabis did not lead to physical dependence, it was
found to be superior to the opiates for a number of therapeutic
purposes. Birch, in 1889, reported success in treating opiate and
chloral addiction with cannabis,[5] and Mattison in 1891
recommended its use to the young physician, comparing it
favorably with the opiates. He quoted his colleague Suckling: </p>

<p>With a wish for speedy effect, it is so easy to use that
modern mischief-maker, hypodermic morphia, that they [young
physicians] are prone to forget remote results of incautious
opiate giving. </p>

<p>Would that the wisdom which has come to their professional
fathers through, it may be, a hapless experience, might serve
them to steer clear of narcotic shoals on which many a patient
has gone awreck. </p>

<p>Indian hemp is not here lauded as a specific. It will, at
times, fail. So do other drugs. But the many cases in which it
acts well, entitle it to a large and lasting confidence. </p>

<p>My experience warrants this statement: cannabis indica is,
often, a safe and successful anodyne and hypnotic.[23] In their
study of the medical applications of cannabis, physicians of the
nineteenth century repeatedly encountered a number of
difficulties. Recognizing the therapeutic potential of the drug,
many experimenters sought ways of overcoming these drawbacks to
its use in medicine, in particular the following: </p>

<p>Cannabis products are insoluble in water. </p>

<p>The onset of the effects of medicinal preparations of cannabis
takes an hour or so; its action is therefore slower than that of
many other drugs. Different batches of cannabis derivatives vary
greatly in strength; moreover, the common procedure for
standardization of cannabis samples, by administration to test
animals, is subject to error owing to variability of reactions
among the animals. </p>

<p>There is wide variation among humans in their individual
responses to cannabis. Despite these problems regarding the
uncertainty of potency and dosage and the difficulties in mode of
administration, cannabis has several important advantages over
other substances used as analgesics, sedatives, and hypnotics: </p>

<p>The prolonged use of cannabis does not lead to the development
of physical dependence. [11, 13, 14, 24, 39, 44] There is minimal
development of tolerance to cannabis products. (Loewe notes a
slight &quot;beginner's </p>

<p>habituation&quot; in dogs, during the first few trials with
the drug, as the only noticeable tolerance effect.[20]) [11, 13,
14, 24, 44] Cannabis products have exceedingly low toxicity.[9,
21, 22, 24] (The oral dose required to kill a mouse has been
found to be about 40,000 times the dose required to produce
typical symptoms of intoxication in man.)[21] Cannabis produces
no disturbance of vegetative functioning, whereas the opiates
inhibit the gastrointestinal tract, the flow of bile and the
cough reflex.[1, 2, 24, 44, 46] Besides investigating the
physical effects of medicinal preparations of cannabis,
nineteenth-century physicians observed the psychic effects of the
drug in its therapeutic applications.[4, 27, 33] They found that
cannabis first mildly stimulates, and then sedates the higher
centers of the brain. Hare suggested in 1887 a possible mechanism
of cannabis' analgesic properties: During the time that this
remarkable drug is relieving pain a very curious psychical
condition manifests itself; namely, that the diminution of the
pain seems to be due to its fading away in the distance, so that
the pain becomes less and less, just as the pain in a delicate
ear would grow less and less as a beaten drum was carried farther
and farther out of the range of hearing. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT of the Day #10 </h3>

<p><b>Even more good medical stuff....</b> </p>

<p>In his definitive survey of the literature and report of his
own studies, deceptively titled &quot;Marihuana, America's New
Drug Problem,&quot; Walton notes that cannabis was widely used
during the latter half of the nineteenth century, and
particularly before new drugs were developed: </p>

<p>This popularity of the hemp drugs can be attributed partly to
the fact that they were introduced before the synthetic hypnotics
and analgesics. Chloral hydrate was not introduced until 1869 and
was followed in the next thirty years by paraldehyde, sulfonal
and the barbitals. Antipyrine and acetanilide, the first of their
particular group of analgesics, were introduced about 1884. For
general sedative and analgesic purposes, the only drugs commonly
used at this time were the morphine derivatives and their
disadvantages were very well known. In fact, the most attractive
feature of the hemp narcotics was probably the fact that they did
not exhibit certain of the notorious disadvantages of the
opiates. The hemp narcotics do not constipate at all, they more
often increase than decrease appetite, they do not particularly
depress the respiratory center even in large doses, they rarely
or never cause pruritis or cutaneous eruptions and, most
important, the liability of developing addiction is very much
less than with opiates.[44] The use of cannabis in American
medicine was seriously affected by the increased use of opiates
in the latter half of the nineteenth century. </p>

<p>With the introduction of the hypodermic syringe into American
medicine from England in 1856 by Barker and Ruppaner, the use of
the faster acting, water-soluble opiate drugs rapidly increased.
The Civil War helped to spread the use of opiates in this
country; the injected drugs were administered widely-and often
indiscriminately-to relieve the pain of maimed soldiers returning
from combat. (Opiate addiction was once called the &quot;army
disease.&quot;[41]) As the use of injected opiates increased,
cannabis declined in popularity. </p>

<p>Cannabis preparations were still widely available in legend
and over-the-counter forms in the 1930s. Crump (Chairman,
Investigating Committee, American Medical Association) in 1931
mentioned the proprietaries &quot;Piso's Cure,&quot; &quot;One
Day Cough Cure&quot; and &quot;Neurosine&quot; as containing
cannabis.[44] In 1937 Sasman listed twenty-eight pharmaceuticals
containing cannabis.[36] Cannabis was still recognized as a
medicinal agent in that year, when the committee on legislative
activities of the American Medical Association concluded as
follows: </p>

<p>. . . there is positively no evidence to indicate the abuse of
cannabis as a medicinal agent or to show that its medicinal use
is leading to the development of cannabis addiction. Cannabis at
the present time is slightly used for medicinal purposes, but it
would seem worthwhile to maintain its status as a medicinal agent
for such purposes as it now has. There is a possibility that a
re-study of the drug by modern means may show other advantages to
be derived from its medicinal use.[32] Meanwhile, in Mexico, the
poor were smoking marijuana to relax and to endure heat and
fatigue. (Originally marijuana was the Mexican slang word for the
smoking preparation of dried leaves and flowering tops of the
Cannabis sativa plant-the indigenous variety of the hemp plant.) </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general/general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="41429" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>