
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-61</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B007-359</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om16.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034455 text/html 18020
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:46 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:17 GMT
Content-length: 17802
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Opium Monopoly - Conclusion</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM MONOPOLY </h1>

<p><b>BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE</b> </p>

<h2>XVI -- CONCLUSION</h2>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"> </p>

<p>THERE are many people who advocate the use of opium, and who
defend the policy of the Opium Monopoly. They argue that it is
not harmful-if taken in moderation. They even assert that it is
no more objectionable than alcohol or tobacco. Leaving out of
account, therefore, the consensus of opinion of the medical
profession as to the evils of habit-forming drugs, and accepting
the theory that opium is harmless, we should then like to ask why
the use of opium is so carefully restricted to the peoples of
subject states, who have no voice in their own affairs? Why
should the benefits of opium be confined to Oriental races, and
why should not the white race be given the same opportunities for
indulgence? Is there any reason for this discrimination? As a
source of revenue, it certainly has advantages. Yet curiously
enough, those European countries which derive much profit through
the sale of opium to their subject races, seem to have an
aversion to introducing it to their people at home. And there is
a further coincidence in the fact that none of the self-governing
colonies of European countries-Australia, New Zealand and
Canada-permit this traffic. It appears to be only the subject
peoples, whose well-being has become the White Man's Burden, who
receive the blessings of this peculiar form of altruism. Is it
because the white race is worth preserving, worth protecting, and
because subject nations are fair game for exploitation of any
kind? </p>

<p>Another argument advanced by advocates of Government opium is
that the Oriental peoples are &quot;different&quot;-that opium
does them no harm. Every writer on the subject of opium in China,
produces evidence to show the shocking results upon that country,
during the hey-dey of the deluge. The complete moral degradation,
and economic ruin of thousands of helpless individuals. Nor do we
think the medical profession would agree with this assumption
that opium is harmless to Orientals, because they are
&quot;different.&quot; Their only real difference lies in their
helplessness to protect themselves from foreign aggression. </p>

<p>Another argument advanced by the upholders of the Monopoly is
that the Orientals have always been users of opium, that they
like it, it suits them, it would be unfair to deprive them of it.
We have seen to what extent the Chinese liked it, and how it was
forced upon them by two wars. Not until they were completely
crushed, and had to accept the terms of the conquerer, did they
submit. It can hardly, therefore, be called a vice indigenous to
the Chinese. Japan is another Oriental nation that disproves this
argument. As we have said before, there are no opium shops in
Japan, and the sale of opium is not conducted by the Japanese
Government. On the contrary, the Japanese have the same fear of
this drug that a European nation has, and exercises the same
precautions to protect its people. But, as we have said before,
Japan is the only Oriental nation that has not been subjugated by
a European nation, and therefore has never had opium thrust upon
her. She is the only country in the Far East that has managed to
preserve her sovereignty, and has never been subject to certain
blighting influences of European culture. </p>

<p>Another exception to this assumption that the Orientals cannot
do without opium lies in the Philippines. When America acquired
those islands some twenty years ago, our first act was to
eliminate the opium traffic, which had been established there by
our predecessors. It had been in existence for decades, but we
immediately set about to abolish it. Root and branch we did away
with it, and shed no crocodile tears as to the &quot; hardship
&quot; this would be to the people who had come under our
protection. We wished no revenue coming from such a source as
this. Yet we might have cut in half the cost of our Philippine
budget had we followed the example set by other nations. We have
seen that certain British colonies, Hongkong and the Straits
Settlements, for example, derive from one-third to one-half of
their upkeep expenses from this traffic. But we refrained from
treating our Filipinos in this manner. We are called
sentimentalists out in the East-at such times as we are not
called money-getters. To-day, the Philippines are very nearly
ready for self government. Would they have been so nearly ready
had we continued to drug them as they had been drugged before we
took possession? Drugged peoples are usually docile and
submissive-perhaps that is the secret of much of the successful
colonizing, about which we hear so much. </p>

<p>But let us leave aside the question of the Orientals, and
whether or no opium is good for them. We recognize quite clearly
that it is not good for ourselves, for Americans. We recognize
that fact quite as clearly as England realizes that it is not
good for the inhabitants of the British Isles. Quite as clearly
as France, while setting up opium shops in her colony of
Indo-China, refuses to establish them in Paris or Marseilles.
America is unique in the fact that although we have colonial
possessions, we do not have a double standard of morality. We
attempt to throw around our colonies the same safeguards that we
throw around ourselves at home. But the question arises, how
successful are we in protecting ourselves at home? Not
particularly so, according to the daily press. </p>

<p>How great the danger to ourselves was recognized some
thirty-seven years ago by an Episcopal missionary to China, the
Rev. John Liggins. In 1882 he published a small book, already
referred to, entitled: &quot;England's Coercive Opium Policy and
Its Disastrous Results in China and India.&quot; The preface to
this unheeded warning runs thus. &quot;Our aim in this sketch is
to present, as briefly as possible, the most important facts and
testimonies concerning a traffic which is as disgraceful to
England as it is ruinous to China and hurtful to India. . . . It
is also of the highest importance that the people throughout our
wide domain should be aroused concerning the new, fascinating and
deadly foe which has entered our country through the Golden Gate,
and which already numbers its victims by the thousands, and will
soon do so by the tens of thousands.&quot; </p>

<p>The Rev. Mr. Liggins saw it coming-that danger which is almost
ready to overwhelm us to-day. He recognized clearly that the
Opium Monopoly of that great nation which rules nearly one-third
of the world-the British Empire would in time reach further and
further afield for new victims. It is too lucrative a trade to be
confined to only a few countries. Markets must not only be
created and legalized in subject states, but new ones added in
outside countries, through smuggling. All too fatally easy of
accomplishment, and so profitable, financially, as to be worth
any risk and effort. The prediction as to our own danger, made in
i882, seems to be abundantly realized. </p>

<p>The number of drug addicts in America to-day are fairly
startling. The number is variously estimated in New York City
alone as from ten thousand to one hundred thousand. It is said
that there may be a million in the country. Yet these figures are
the merest guesswork, by no means substantiated. Certain it is
that the campaign of the New York Health Department has uncovered
thousands of them, and any other city that chose to do so, could
produce facts equally startling. </p>

<p>The laws on our statute books concerning the prescription of
narcotic drugs are powerless to deal with the situation. It is
shooting into the air to try to &quot;regulate&quot; this
condition. It is as thoroughly well &quot;regulated&quot; as it
can ever be by the Harrison Anti-Narcotic Act, a Federal Law
whose enforcement is in the hands of the Internal Revenue
Department. By the provisions of this Act, every pound of opium
or its derivatives that comes into this country, legitimately, is
accounted for, and its distribution, both wholesale and retail,
made a matter of record. Thus, the Board of Trade returns show
the amount imported by the big wholesale drug houses. These must
account for their sales to the retail drug stores, and the
amounts must tally. The drug stores can only sell narcotic drugs
on a physician's prescription, and the prescriptions are kept on
file, and the quantity sold must correspond to the quantity
called for by these prescriptions, as well as to the amount
obtained from the wholesale drug house. In prescribing narcotics,
the physician is obliged to write his prescription in
triplicate--one copy for his own protection, one copy for the
local druggist, and one copy to be filed with the health
department. Nor is he allowed to prescribe narcotics for an
addict without decreasing the dosage. His prescription cannot
call for thirty grains of morphia day after day, it must show, in
a chronic case of this kind, a daily diminution of the amount
prescribed, thus indicating a desire to get the patient off the
drug, eventually. All these records are kept on file, open to
inspection whenever an accounting is demanded, consequently any
leak can be instantly accounted for. This Harrison Act is as
comprehensive and as nearly perfect as possible, yet it does not
cover the situation. By this means, violations can be detected,
whether on the part of an unscrupulous physician or druggist, or
even the wholesale house, but these violations are only
occasional. The root of the evil remains untouched. </p>

<p>At one time, it was believed that carelessness on the part of
the physician was chiefly responsible for creating drug addicts,
but the recent campaign against violators of the Harrison Act
seems to have completely exonerated him of this charge. For one
patient who becomes a drug addict while under a doctor's care,
through the accidental misuse of morphia, there are a hundred who
form the habit through other ways. It is not the occasional,
accidental victim, given morphia for the relief of pain, which is
creating our thousands of drug users. It is not the occasional
unscrupulous physician who is responsible. If this was all, we
could easily cope with these unwitting abuses, or even deliberate
instances of misuse. But the question goes deeper than this. </p>

<p>The Opium Monopoly was not established for any humane or
altruistic purpose. It was not established to provide the medical
profession with a drug for the relief of pain, to ease the agony
of the injured and wounded, or to calm the last days of those
dying with an incurable disease. This, which may be called the
legitimate use of opium, is not the object of the Opium Monopoly.
Used only in this manner, there would be no money in it. It is
only when opium is produced in quantities far in excess of the
legitimate needs of the world that it becomes worth while-to the
Opium Monopoly. That Monopoly was established not to relieve pain
and suffering, but with the deliberate intention of creating pain
and suffering, by creating drug victims by the thousand. It is
these hundreds of thousands of customers that are profitable. The
menace to America lies in the large amounts of opium which are
smuggled into the country for this purpose. Boys and girls o
sixteen and seventeen first acquire this habit through curiosity,
through association with what they call &quot;bad company,&quot;
peddlers who first offer it free, as a gift, well knowing that
after a few doses the fatal habit will be formed. Where do these
vendors obtain their supplies? </p>

<p>The daily papers often contain suggestive paragraphs. Thus the
&quot; New York Times,&quot; under date of February 28, 1919:
&quot; Seize Opium in Schenectady. Opium, valued by Federal
officials at $10,000 was seized in Schenectady, and four Chinamen
were arrested in a raid on Chinese places of business on Centre
street today. The Federal officials expressed the belief that
opium had been smuggled, and that Schenectady is the distributing
point for this part of the State.&quot; </p>

<p>An item in the &quot;Seattle Union Record,&quot; of June 24,
1919, gives us cause for further consideration. </p>

<p>BRITISH DRUG SHIP HELD BY UNITED STATES </p>

<p>FINE OF $49,265 ASSESSED FOR BRINGING &quot;DOPE&quot; TO
AMERICA </p>

<p>LINER ALLOWED TO MOVE UNDER BOND </p>

<p>NO ARRESTS MADE, THOUGH BOOZE IS FOUND ABOARD </p>

<p>No arrests were made up to Tuesday noon in connection with the
enormous seizure of opium, cocaine and liquor on the Blue Funnel
liner Cyclops, although the investigation is being continued by
federal officials. </p>

<p>The ship has been seized and a fine of $49,265 has been
assessed against her for having drugs not listed in the ship's
manifest. </p>

<p>United States District Attorney Robert C. Saunders filed a
libel Monday night against the Cyclops, the boat being seized
later by the customs service. Bond was fixed at $100,00, or twice
the fine. The Fidelity Surety Company filed the bond Monday. The
ship was released Tuesday morning. </p>

<p>A civil libel suit may be filed against Capt. W. Duncan,
holding him responsible for the liquor found on the ship. Captain
Duncan, questioned Monday by customs officials, claimed to know
nothing about the contraband. </p>

<p>The result of Monday's checking of the opium and cocaine
showed that the seizure amounted to 778 tins of opium, 670 ounces
of cocaine and 16 ounces of morphine. </p>

<p>A small paragraph in a New York paper, dated June 12, 1919,
reads thus: &quot;Two New Yorkers jailed for smuggling opium.
Pleas of guilty to charges of opium smuggling were entered in the
Federal Court today by Albertus Schneitzer and Maxwell Auerbach,
of New York. They were fined $500 each, and sent to Atlanta
penitentiary, the former for two years, and the latter for one
year. The men were arrested in connection with the seizure of
opium on the Canadian border.&quot; </p>

<p>We cannot grapple with our problem unless we face the facts;
if we ignore the source of supply and distribution, and the
reasons for this immense overproduction of opium on the part of
the British Opium Monopoly. The anti-narcotic laws on our statute
books are powerless to protect us. With Canada, a British
province, to the north, and all Mexico on the south, what chance
have we against such exposure? Of what use to send two smugglers
to the penitentiary, when at the Calcutta opium sales, once a
month opium is auctioned off under the auspices of the British
Government, to be disposed of as the buyers may see fit? Much of
it, as we have seen, goes to those helpless states and colonies
which have no control over their own affairs, where the opium
traffic is conducted under the administration of the alien
government. Much of the rest of it goes out for smuggling
purposes, to be distributed in devious, roundabout, underhand
channels throughout the world. We are coming in for our share in
this distribution. </p>

<p>We feel that our country is in grave peril. Our politicians
and our diplomats have been too careful all these years, to speak
of this business, through fear of offending a powerful nation.
But we feel that the time has now come to speak. England has been
relying upon our silence to &quot;get away with it.&quot; Upon
our ignorance, and upon that silence which gives consent. But in
this new, changed world, reborn out of the blood and agony of the
great war, is it not time to practice some of the decencies which
we have proclaimed so loudly? </p>

<p>As we have said before, no stronger opponents of this policy
are to be found than among a section of the people of England
itself. We look to them to join us, in this great issue, and we
feel that we shall not look in vain. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>