
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B028-50</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/opiumhabit1888.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095716 text/html 13663
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:57:09 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:51 GMT
Content-length: 13447
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>How the Opium Habit is Acquired - 1888</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">The Popular Science Monthly 33, Sept. 1888,
663-67 </font></p>

<p><font size="3">How the Opium Habit is Acquired </font></p>

<p><font size="3">by Virgil G. Eaton</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I am not one of the persons who raise a great
cry about the evils of the &quot;opium-habit.&quot; I have no
doubt that the continued use of narcotics, whether they be
tobacco or opium, is injurious to the nervous system; but I also
firmly believe that the recuperative powers of the body are such
that they can largely overcome any harmful results coming from
the regular use of these substances. For instance, I know a
stonecutter who resides at Cape Elizabeth, Me., who for the past
twenty years has used twenty cents' worth of black &quot;navy
plug&quot; tobacco every day. He is a large, vigorous man,
weighing over two hundred pounds. His appetite is good; he sleeps
well, and, save for a little heart disturbance caused by
overstimulation, he is perfectly healthy, and is likely to live
until he is fourscore. He is now fifty-one years of age, and he
assures me he has used tobacco since he was fourteen, and never
had a fit of &quot;swearing off&quot; in his life. A peculiar
and, I should say, a rather troublesome habit of his, is to go to
bed every night with a big &quot;quid&quot; of hard
&quot;plug&quot; tobacco between his molars. As this is always
gone in the morning, and the pillow shows no traces of the weed,
he thinks he chews it and swallows it in his sleep, though he
never knows anything about the process.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">There is a widow who keeps a lodging-house in
Oak Street, Boston, Mass., who takes three drachms of morphia
sulphate every day, in three one- drachm doses, morning, noon,
and night. When it is remembered that an eighth of a grain is the
usual dose for an adult, while two grains are sufficient to kill
a man, the amount she takes seems startling. I asked her why she
did not try and substitute tobacco, or bromide, or chloral
hydrate for morphine, and she said they made her stick, so she
could not use them. This woman is sixty years old, very pale and
emaciated. Her appetite is poor. She attends to her duties
faithfully, however, and is able, with the help of a girl, to
carry on a large lodging-house.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I might give scores of instances similar to the
above, but these will do for my purpose. I believe that the
person who takes liquor or tobacco or opium, in regular
quantities at stated intervals, is able to withstand their effect
after getting fixed in the habit, and that it is the irregular,
spasmodic use of these articles which brings delirium and death.
It is the man who goes on a &quot;spree,&quot; and then quits for
a time, who has the weak stomach and aching head. His neighbor,
who takes his regular toddy and his his usual smoke, feels no
inconvenience.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">For the past year or more I have studied the
growth of the opium-habit in Boston. It is increasing rapidly.
Not only are there more Chinese &quot;joints&quot; and
respectable resorts kept by Americans than there were a year ago,
but the number of individuals who &quot;hit the pipe&quot; at
home and in their offices is growing very fast. A whole opium
&quot;lay-out,&quot; including pipe, fork, lamp, and spoon, can
now be had for less than five dollars. This affords a chance for
those who have acquired the habit to follow their desires in
private, without having to reveal their secret to anyone. How
largely this is practiced I do not know, but, judging from the
telltale pallor of the faces I see, I feel sure the habit is
claiming more slaves every day.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In order to approximate to the amount of opium
in its various forms which is used in Boston, I have made a
thorough scrutiny of the physicians' recipes left at the
drugstores to be filled. As is well known, all recipes given by
physicians are numbered, dated, and kept on file at the
drugstores, so that they may be referred to at any time. To these
I went in search of information.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I was surprised to learn how extensively opium
and its alkaloids-- particularly sulphate of morphia--are used by
physicians. I found them prescribed for every ailment which flesh
is heir to. They are used for headache, sore eyes, toothache,
sore throat, laryngitis, diphtheria, bronchitis, congestion,
pneumonia, consumption, gastritis, liver- complaint, stone in the
gall-duct, carditis, aneurism, hypertrophy, peritonitis,
calculus, kidney trouble, rheumatism, neuralgia, and all general
or special maladies of the body. It is the great panacea and
cure-all.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">During my leisure time I have looked up more
than 10,000 recipes. It has been my practice to go to the files,
open the book, or take up a spindle at random, and take 300
recipes just as they come. The first store I visited found 42
recipes which contained morphine out of the 300 examined. Close
by, a smaller store, patronized by poorer people, had 36. Up in
the aristocratic quarters, where the customers call in carriages,
I found 49 morphine recipes in looking over 300. At the North
End, among the poor Italian laborers, the lowest proportion of 32
in 300 was discovered. Without detailing all the places visited,
I will summarize by saying that, in 10,200 recipes taken in 34
drugstores, I found 1,481 recipes which prescribed some
preparation of opium, or an average of fourteen and one half
percent of the whole.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This was surprising enough; but my
investigations did not end here. Of the prescriptions furnished
by physicians I found that forty-two percent were filled the
second time, and of those refilled twenty-three percent contained
opium in some form. Again, twenty-eight percent of all
prescriptions are filled a third time; and of these, sixty-one
percent were for opiates; while of the twenty percent taken for
the fourth filling, seventy-eight percent were for the narcotic
drug, proving, beyond a doubt, that it was the opiate qualities
of the medicine that afforded relief and caused the renewal.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">From conversations with the druggists, I
learned that the proprietary or &quot;patent&quot; medicines
which have the largest sales were those containing opiates. One
apothecary told me of an old lady who formerly came to him as
often as four times a week and purchased a fifty-cent bottle of
&quot;cough-balsam.&quot; She informed him that it &quot;quieted
her nerves&quot; and afforded rest when everything else had
failed. After she had made her regular visits for over a year, he
told her one day that he had sold out of the medicine required,
and suggested a substitute, which was a preparation containing
about the same amount of morphine. On trial, the woman found the
new mixture answered every purpose of the old. The druggist then
told her she had acquired the morphine-habit, and from that time
on she was a constant morphine-user.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">It was hard to learn just what proportion of
those who began by taking medicines containing opiates became
addicted to the habit. I should say, from what I learned, that
the number was fully twenty-five percent-- perhaps more. The
proportion of those who, having taken up the habit in earnest,
left it off later on, was very small--not over ten percent. When
a person once becomes an opium-slave, the habit usually holds
through life.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I was told many stories about the injurious
effects of morphine and opium upon the morals of those who use
it. One peculiarity of a majority is that, whenever a confirmed
user of the narcotic obtains credit at the drugstore, he at once
stops trading at that place and goes elsewhere. All the druggists
know this habit very well, and take pains to guard against it.
Whenever a customer asks for credit for a bottle of morphine, the
druggist informs him that the store never trusts anyone; but if
he has no money with him the druggist will gladly give him enough
to last a day or two. In this way the druggist keeps his
customer, whereas he would have lost his trade if the present had
not been made at the time credit was refused.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Of course, I heard much about the irresistible
desire which confirmed slaves to the habit have for their
delight. There is nothing too degrading for them to do in order
to obtain the narcotic. Many druggists firmly believe that a
majority of the seemingly motiveless crimes which are perpetrated
by reputable people are due to this habit. In pursuit of opium
the slaves will resort to every trick and art which human
ingenuity can invent. There is a prisoner now confined in the
Concord (Mass.) Reformatory who has his opium smuggled in to him
in the shape of English walnuts donated by a friend. The friend
buys the opium and, opening the walnut-shells, extracts the meat,
and fills up the spaces with the gum. Then he sticks the shells
together with glue and sends them to the prison.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">At present our clergymen, physicians, and
reformers are asking for more stringent laws against the sale of
these narcotics. The law compelling every person who purchases
opium or other poisons to &quot;register,&quot; giving his name
and place of residence to the druggist, has been in force in
Massachusetts for several years, and all this time the sales have
increased. No registration law can control the traffic.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The parties who are responsible for the
increase of the habit are the physicians who give the
prescriptions. In these days of great mental strain, when men
take their business home with them and think of it from waking to
sleeping, the nerves are the first to feel the effects of
overwork. Opium effects immediate relief, and the doctors,
knowing this, and wishing to stand well with their patients,
prescribe it more and more. Their design is to effect a cure. The
result is to convert their patients into opium-slaves. The
doctors are to blame for so large a consumption of opium, and
they are the men who need reforming.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Two means of preventing the spread of the habit
suggest themselves to every thoughtful person:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1. Pass a law that no prescriptions containing
opium or its preparations can be filled more than once at the
druggist's without having the physician renew it. The extra cost
of calling on a doctor when the medicine ran out would deter many
poor people from acquiring the habit. Such a law would also make
the doctors more guarded in prescribing opiates for trivial
ailments. With the law in force, and the druggists guarded by
strict registration laws, we could soon trace the responsibility
to its proper source, and then, if these safeguards were not
enough, physicians could be fined for administering opiates save
in exceptional cases.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2. The great preventive to the habit is to keep
the body in such a state that it will not require sedatives or
stimulants. The young men and women in our cites have too big
heads, too small necks, and too flabby muscles. They should
forsake medicine, and patronize the gymnasium. Let them develop
their muscles and rest their nerves, and the family doctor, who
means well, but who cannot resist the tendency of the age, can
take a protracted vacation. Unless something of the kind is done
soon, the residents of our American cities will be all
opium-slaves.</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>