
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B009-178</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/urchild.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040459 text/html 13690
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:04:49 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:41:37 GMT
Content-length: 13472
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Your Child and Stimulants</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#f2f2f2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->

<p>Your Child and Stimulants </p>

<p><b>Growing up and exploring limits.</b> </p>

<p>from &quot;your child and stimulants, ISBN 90-71187-53-5, </p>

<p>Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs, The Netherlands. </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h3>Trying is learning </h3>

<p>Young people will try out everything: arrive home late, drink
more alcohol than thirst dictates, challenge parents by ignoring
rules and generally pay no attention to well meant advice. One
moment they may reject any support the family may want to offer,
the next moment they apparently invite it. Similarly, one moment
they may wish to be left alone, the next they may look for warmth
and comfort. </p>

<p>You as a parent are almost certain to regognise this type of
behavior, if only because we all, at one stage, went through a
phase like this. This kind of &quot;testing&quot; behavior does
of course have a function. Young people have to try out different
things in order to be able to determine their own position and
their own behavior. </p>

<p>Anyone who is trying to discover what the limits are will have
first have to go beyond them. There is therefore no great cause
for alarm: for most adoloscents this is a normal step in their
development toward independence. Most young people are most
heavily influenced by the codes and norms that exist in their
peer group, for instance in the way they dress. It may surprise
you, but it is of the greatest importance to your child. It may
make the difference between belonging to the group or not, and
young people in particular want to be part of the group. </p>

<h3>First experience of stimulants </h3>

<p>Tobacco, alcohol, drugs and certain types of medicine can
endanger a person's health. Even so, they are widely used because
they provide a certain degree of enjoyment and pleasure as does
gambling. </p>

<p>Such stimulants are very easy to get hold of. Most children go
through a phase in which they want to try out that which is
unknown to them. It is therefore highly likely that your child,
also, will at one point be confronted with the choice;
&quot;shall I use this or shall I not use this.&quot; Your child
is perfectly capable to decide responsibly for him or herself. </p>

<p>The crucial question is how this decision will be perceived by
peers. If the decision matches the norms of the peer group, then
there is nothing to worry about. It is when the decision is
rejected that problems arise. For instance, when most members of
the peer group are used to drinking a lot of alcohol it may be
difficult for an individual child to say no to alcohol. Only very
few children are able to resist this kind of peer pressure
successfully and avoid placing themselves outside the group. </p>

<h3>The freedom to choose </h3>

<p>Every person has the right to make his own choices. Those who
are growing up still have to learn to deal with that freedom, if
only because their educators are not always present. Parents can
of course offer guidance but at the end of the way young people
have to be responsible for their own behavior. They therefore
must explore the limits of their own freedom, including
stimulants. </p>

<p>However,this is not all. There are a number of stimulants that
are highly addictive (see table at end). It is obvious that such
substances should never be offered to youngsters just to try them
out. In this respect, a gambling machine can cause similar
addiction. </p>

<h3>Minimizing the risks </h3>

<p>There is always a certain risk involved in trying out
stimulants. This does not necessarily mean, however, that you
should forbid their use just like that. If you do so your child
will simply try them out when you are not present thus making it
impossible for you to exert any kind of influence whatsoever.
Amuch better way of trying to minimize possible risk is to
monitor and guide your child as much as possible in this process
of trying out. </p>

<h2>THE STIMULANTS </h2>

<h3>The importance of knowledge </h3>

<p>If you want to talk about stimulants effectively and sensibly
it is important that you have the right basic knowledge about
them. Knowledge can take away unfounded fear. Lots of people
believe that smoking marijuana automatically leads to dependency
on hard drugs. This is absolutely not the case. The word
addiction, used in a general sense, often leads to all kinds of
misunderstandings. People can also be addicted to food or work
for instance. That is why the other term &quot;dependency&quot;
is used, and there is a difference between physical dependency
and mental dependency. </p>

<p>Physical dependency means that a person's body adjusts to a
substance that the person uses intensively. </p>

<p>Without that substance the body no longer functions prperly.
When the substance is withheld, different kinds of withdrawal
systoms bnegin to surface such as fever or nausea. </p>

<p>The use of certain substances has to be progressive in order
to achieve the same effect. This is what is called
&quot;tolerance&quot;. Physical dependency and tolerance are both
determined to a large extent by the stimulant and not the user. </p>

<p>Mental dependency is entirely different. It is determined to a
large extent by the user and not the stimulant. Mental dependency
is a simple matter of &quot;feeling good&quot; something tastes
&quot;good&quot; or makes you feel &quot;good&quot;, so much so
that you cannot do without it. The desire for the substance is
very strong and completely dominates a person's thinking. </p>

<p>The tables below illustrate mental dependency, physical
dependency, tolerance, short-term effects and long-term effects,
based on intensive use of stimulants. </p>

<p>We warn you that this overview is necessarily concise and
therfore not entirely complete. </p>

<h3>ALCOHOL </h3>

<p>mental dependency - high risk </p>

<p>physical dependency- yes </p>

<p>tolerance -yes </p>

<p>short term effect - person feels less inhibited (one or two
glasses), </p>

<p>sedating ( more than one or two glasses) impairs sense of
judgement, delayed </p>

<p>response, leads to over-confidence and indiffrence </p>

<p>long-term effects - serious damage to liver, brain, heart and
stomach. </p>

<p>important - dangerous in combination with other stimulants </p>

<h3>CAFFEINE (coffee, tea, cola) </h3>

<p>mental dependency - small chance </p>

<p>physical dependency - small chance </p>

<p>tolerance - yes </p>

<p>short-term effects - enhances concentration, suppresses
tiredness. </p>

<p>long-term effects - sleeplessness, restlessness </p>

<p>important - intensive use carries risk of cardio vascular
diseases. </p>

<h3>CANNABIS (marijuana, hash) </h3>

<p>mental dependency - small chance </p>

<p>physical dependency - no </p>

<p>tolerance - no </p>

<p>short-term effects - relaxing, boosts emotions, impairs
concentration and </p>

<p>response. High dose may lead to loss of consciousness. </p>

<p>Long-term effects - lung cancer </p>

<p>important - in combination with alcohol increases the effects
of alcohol </p>

<p>considerably. Risk of overdose when eaten (spacecake) </p>

<h3>COCAINE (including base &amp; crack) </h3>

<p>mental derpendency - high risk </p>

<p>physical dependency - no </p>

<p>tolerance - no </p>

<p>short-term effects - stimulating, surpresses tiredness and
appetite </p>

<p>long-terms effects - loss of weight, sleeplessness, delusions </p>

<p>important - exhaustion, dpression after stopping. the smokable
form of </p>

<p>cocaine is called crack or base. crack causes a much greater
degree of </p>

<p>dependency than cocaine. </p>

<h3>TRANQUILLIZERS </h3>

<p>mental dependency - high risk </p>

<p>physical dependency - small chance </p>

<p>tolernace - yes </p>

<p>short-term effects - relaxing, sedating, indifference,
overconfidence </p>

<p>long-terms effects - weight gain, inactivity, muscular
weakness </p>

<p>important - in combination with alcohol increases the effects
of alcohol </p>

<p>considerably. </p>

<h3>OPIATES (opium, morphine, heroin, methadone) </h3>

<p>mental dependency - high risk </p>

<p>physical dependency yes </p>

<p>tolerance - yes </p>

<p>short-term effects - decreased awareness of pain, euphoria,
reduced </p>

<p>awareness of fear, emotional numbness, constipation </p>

<p>long-term effects - indifference, reduced sexual activity </p>

<p>important - malnutrition, neglect of the body due to
indiffrence </p>

<h3>AMPHETAMINES (uppers) </h3>

<p>mental dependency - high risk </p>

<p>physical depency - no </p>

<p>tolerance - yes </p>

<p>short-term effects - increased ability to concentrate,
tiredness and sleep </p>

<p>are surpressed. loss of appetite, overconfidence </p>

<p>long-term effects - restlessness, irritablity, loss of weight,
fears and </p>

<p>suspicions, delusions and agressiveness </p>

<p>important - exhaustion o f the body. dangerous for people
withncardio </p>

<p>vascular problems. </p>

<h3>BARBITURATES </h3>

<p>menatl depndency - high risk </p>

<p>physical depndency - yes </p>

<p>tolerance - yes </p>

<p>short-term effects - drowsiness, judgement and response
affected, loss of </p>

<p>coordination and control </p>

<p>long term effects - loss of weight, irritablity, confused
behavior </p>

<p>important - dangerous in combination with alcohol </p>

<h3>GLUE, PETROL, ETHER </h3>

<p>mental dependency - high risk </p>

<p>physical dependency - no </p>

<p>tolerance - yes </p>

<p>short-term effects - slight drowsiness, loss of coordination,
reduced sense </p>

<p>of judgement, loss of consciousness at high dose </p>

<p>long-term effects - brain-, liver-, kidney- and
mucous-membrane damage. </p>

<p>important - not possible to trace overdose </p>

<h3>TOBACCO </h3>

<p>mental dependency - high risk </p>

<p>physical dependency - slight </p>

<p>tolerance - yes </p>

<p>short-term effects - stimulating, tremor in the hands,
coughing, reduced </p>

<p>temperature in extremities, irritation of eyes and nose </p>

<p>long-term effects - loss of fitness, cardio vascular diseases,
bronchitis, </p>

<p>throat and lung cancer </p>

<h3>LSD, PSILOCYBINE, MESCALINE </h3>

<p>mental dependency - no </p>

<p>physical dependency - no </p>

<p>tolerance - no </p>

<p>short-term effects - heightening of the emotions, visual
hallucinations </p>

<p>long-term effects - mental disturbances (long lasting) </p>

<p>important - reduced sense of reality. increased sense of fear
and can lead </p>

<p>to temporary insanity. </p>

<h3>XTC, MDMA, ECSTASY </h3>

<p>mental dependency - small chance </p>

<p>physical dependency - no </p>

<p>tolerance - yes, for stimulating effect. no, for social effect
</p>

<p>short-term effects - stimulating, socially relaxing </p>

<p>long-term effects - not known </p>

<p>important - dangerous in combination with other stimulants.
dangerous for </p>

<p>people with cardio vascular problems </p>

<h3>GAMBLING </h3>

<p>mental dependency - high risk </p>

<p>physical dependency - rarely applicable </p>

<p>tolerance - not applicable </p>

<p>effects - nervousness, tension, sleeplessness, loss of
concentration, </p>

<p>neglect of health. </p>

<p>important - high risk of financial problems. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22"
height="22"> </p>

<p>from &quot;your child and stimulants, ISBN 90-71187-53-5, </p>

<p>Netherlands Institute on Alcohol and Drugs, The Netherlands. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>