
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B28-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B022-100</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/fada/fadafin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122135745 text/html 58660
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:57:35 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:25 GMT
Content-length: 58442
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Facts About Drug Abuse Final Report Of The Drug Abuse
Counci </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<h1>The Facts About Drug Abuse </h1>

<p> <b>The Drug Abuse Council, 1980</b> </p>

<p> <font size="5">Final Report Of The Drug Abuse Council</font> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> IN 1972 <i>Dealing with Drug Abuse: A Report to the Ford
Foundation </i>concluded that the national drug policies at that
time were not effective and were not likely to eliminate or even
greatly affect &quot;drug abuse.&quot; That report, describing
the complex nature of psychoactive drug use and misuse,
identified flaws in programs and laws which had been designed to
reduce the harm to individuals and society of the indiscriminate,
nonmedical use of psychoactive drugs. Public policy was found to
be unrealistic and unresponsive to cultural, social,
psychological, and economic factors underlying the widespread use
of drugs. </p>

<p> The report to the Ford Foundation was issued at the end of a
decade of increasing drug use and increasing concern about such
use. Drugs seemed to be everywhere; a generation of young
Americans had been urged to &quot;turn on, tune in, and drop
out&quot; with a wide variety of mood-altering drugs. The United
States was described as a nation of &quot;pill poppers. &quot;
Deeply held public fears were heightened as city after city
reported heroin addiction of epidemic proportions. From suburban
neighborhoods, long considered secure and stable, came reports of
heroin experimentation by high school students from middle- and
upper-income families. Thousands of American soldiers in Vietnam
were said to be addicted to heroin. New words and
phrases-&quot;pot,&quot; &quot;downers,&quot; &quot;uppers,&quot;
drug &quot;trips&quot;-became part of the popular vocabulary. </p>

<p> In 1972 it was estimated that between three- and six-hundred
thousand Americans-the vast majority of whom were said to be
inner-city blacks and Hispanics-were addicted to heroin. Nearly
25 million Americans were reported to have tried marijuana and 10
million were said to use it regularly. Millions of others
regularly used stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens, and
tranquilizers for non-medical purposes. However, alcohol and
nicotine continued to be the most widely used and misused drugs
illicit drugs-marijuana, heroin, and cocaine in particular-were
singled out for attention, yet the misuse of legally available
drugs was often ignored. While various methods or approaches for
&quot;solving the drug problem&quot; were presented, confusion
prevailed. Drug issues, particularly that of the relationship
between drug use and crime, were constantly publicized and
politicized. Many Americans thought the increase in street crime
during the late 1960s resulted largely from illicit drug use and
therefore responded enthusiastically to calls for a war on drugs
to keep illicit drugs and their users apart. Heroin was labelled
&quot;Public Enemy Number One.&quot; New &quot;get tough&quot;
laws were proposed, and many were enacted. Hundreds of millions
of dollars were appropriated for programs to stiffen law
enforcement, improve public education, and expand treatment
efforts. </p>

<p> At the height of public concern in 1972, <i>Dealing with </i>Drug
Abuse urged caution and restraint. It called for a climate of
reason which would permit identification of the real risks of
drug misuse and rejection of policies and programs based on
misinformation and sensationalism. It pointed out that drug use
and drug problems were not new but have persisted throughout
history, not only in the United States but in many other
countries, cultures, and societies as well. It noted that
knowledge about the causes of drug misuse was inadequate, as was
knowledge about its -grevention and treatment. Moreover, the
report revealed much of what was then accepted as fact to be
erroneous, out of date, or misleading. </p>

<p> The authors of <i>Dealing with Drug Abuse, </i>the sponsoring
private organizations which funded the Drug Abuse Council, and,
subsequently, the council's board of directors perceived a
pressing need for independent analyses of public drug policies
and programs. They felt that lawmakers and public officials,
particularly in the federal government, were reacting to
drug-related problems from a limited, crisis-oriented perspective
when a longer-range view was necessary, and that the
effectiveness of law enforcement and treatment strategies was
often overstated by public officials, which led to unrealistic
expectations of rapid and sweeping solutions. Thus these
individuals and groups agreed to sponsor an independent
organization capable of providing the public with a less
emotional, more apolitical perspective. As a result the Drug
Abuse Council was established in early 1972. </p>

<p> As of this writing, the Drug Abuse Council has been in
existence for nearly seven years. During this time the council
has, through staff-directed projects, research grants, and
contracts, assessed many aspects of the use and misuse of
psychoactive drugs.2 This work has been undertaken with the
unhampered view and resources of a national, independent,
nonprofit, nongovernmental organization. </p>

<p> The council has had resources sufficient to examine
drug-related issues in depth and over time. It began by analyzing
the assumptions underlying public perceptions and policies. It
examined the accepted knowledge of the interaction of chemical
substances with the human body and mind. It studied various
aspects of contemporary society to identify socioeconomic and
cultural factors relating to drug use and misuse. The council has
reviewed and assessed laws, programs, and projects-federal,
state, and local; governmental and private-which have been
adopted in response to psychoactive drug use and misuse. </p>

<p> In pursuit of its efforts to learn more about drug use and
misuse, the council gathered information from public officials,
scientists, historians, and law enforcement and treatment program
personnel. It canvassed widely and deeply the experiences and
views of current and former drug users, of minority groups and
individuals, and of other informed or concerned persons. </p>

<p> The council has periodically published its findings on many
aspects of drugs and has sought to bring about changes in
policies and programs it considers unsound. Through these
activities, it has sought to provide leadership in the private
sector. </p>

<p> When operations began in 1972, a five-year period of activity
was planned. In the fifth year, the board of directors decided to
continue some of the council's functions for an additional two
years. Now, as this seven year period comes to an end, we feel a
responsibility to share our major observations, findings, and
suggestions for the future in the form of a final report. </p>

<p> This final report consists of two major sections: first, the
report of the directors of the Drug Abuse Council; and second,
six chapters on various drug policy topics prepared by the
council's staff and consultants. While not every judgment or
suggestion advanced in these staff report chapters is
specifically endorsed by the council's board of directors, they
do form the analytic base from which the board drew its
observations, conclusions, and recommendations. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>The Report of the Directors</b> </p>

<p> As this report developed, it became increasingly clear that
the most valuable document we could provide would be one
addressed to the concerned citizen, not just to the professional
in the drug field. We stepped back from the day-to-day concerns
of those who work in research, treatment, prevention, and law
enforcement to begin to address the broader philosophical,
social, moral, legal, and pragmatic issues influencing national
drug policies and the expenditure of public funds. Thus readers
of this report will find few recommendations about the
particulars of program efforts in treatment, prevention, or
enforcement. We do not mean by this to suggest that there are no
improvements that can be made in program operations; there are in
fact many. We have, however, chosen to focus our discussion
instead on the public policies and attitudes from which these
program efforts stem. We believe that substantial benefits can
come only as a result of a significant rethinking of our approach
to drugs, not from tinkering with the mechanisms of our public
program response. </p>

<p> This report is a conscious effort to stimulate public
interest in drug policy issues and to promote greater public
understanding of them. By indicating the costs and benefits of
past and present efforts, we can begin to formulate and accept
principles with which more reasonable and effective alternative
approaches to drug misuse can be constructed. We have no
blueprint for a step-by-step solution to the nation's -problems
with drugs; in our opinion it would be a mistake for anyone to
think such a plan could be devised, given present knowledge. It
would, however, be equally erroneous to think that nothing can be
done to improve the current situation. </p>

<p> Since the creation of the Drug Abuse Council in 1972, what is
often termed &quot;the American drug scene&quot; has changed in
several ways. As a general observation, more Americans appear to
be using more psychoactive substances. Drug use and misuse have
become among the most compelling realities of contemporary
existence. Among legally available drugs, alcohol has increased
in the number of its users, particularly among younger people.
Among illicit drugs, marijuana has steadily increased in use, as
has cocaine more recently. Although recent research has provided
evidence of substantial numbers of occasional, nonaddicted heroin
users, federal officials report that heroin addiction has
declined over the past two to three years. </p>

<p> Greater changes can be observed in the nation's response to
drug use and misuse in terms of changes in laws and publicly
supported programs. In some respects, the situation has improved.
Given the magnitude of federal expenditures on drug treatment
programs and law enforcement efforts-estimated to be nearly $6
billion since 1971-some improvements should be demonstrable. For
example, the passage of the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act
of 1972 has led to the creation of a nationwide network of drug
treatment programs, chiefly for heroin dependence. As a result,
treatment for those dependent on heroin is now more readily
available. The federal National Institute on Drug Abuse reports
that between 1971 and 1978 hundreds of thousands of individuals
have received treatment in about two thousand federally funded
clinics throughout the country. However, many more have not
voluntarily sought treatment. </p>

<p> Another area of improvement over the past few years is in
basic research, work which has broadened understanding of the
addictive process and the biochemistry of the brain and central
nervous system. More questions remain unanswered than have been
answered, but recent progress is encouraging. </p>

<p> Perhaps the most significant change may be the decline in the
emotional fervor that once dominated public discussion of drugs.
Public concern is still intense; nonetheless, there is wider
public acknowledgment that simple, quick solutions to our drug
problems will not be forthcoming. As a result, public
expectations are more moderated development that may encourage
more realistic law enforcement and control objectives. </p>

<p> While we consider these to be changes for the better, the
basic situation remains: Despite progress in a number of areas,
more Americans use and misuse more psychoactive drugs than ever.
Since in our considered judgment this situation will prevail at
least through the next few years, it is necessary for us as a
nation to plan carefully and thoughtfully how to handle it most
responsibly. This planning requires a basic rethinking of
national goals, policies, and strategies regarding the use and
misuse of psychoactive drugs. The underlying social dynamics and
problems that lead to drug misuse are so exceedingly complex as
to as yet elude totally satisfactory solutions; the rational
course, then, is to begin with what has been learned from
history, particularly from the experience of the past several
years. </p>

<p> The council has several general observations that we regard
as of central importance to this process of rethinking, but
before submitting them, we emphasize again that we have no
step-by-step blueprint for solving the nation's drug problems. We
can, however, indicate where past experience and current analysis
should direct us, and we can begin to strive toward more
consistent, coherent, and responsible approaches to drug use and
misuse in the future. The following observations are, in our
view, central to this process. </p>

<p> 1. Psychoactive substances have been available for use since
the beginning of recorded time and will predictably remain so.
Man will undoubtedly continue to use such substances for a
variety of reasons: to relax, to escape, to enjoy, to worship, to
delude, to destroy. At given times in history certain drugs have
had greater appeal or easier availability and have consequently
been used more widely, but the essential point is that <i>some
psychoactive drugs are almost always readily available </i>to
enable people to achieve what they wish or need for alteration of
mood or mind. As we search for more effective policies and
programs, this certainty of drug availability should be at the
forefront of our thinking. </p>

<p> 2. <i>While the use of psychoactive drugs is pervasive,
misuse is </i>much <i>less frequent. </i>A failure to distinguish
between the misuse and the use of drugs creates the impression
that all use is misuse or &quot;drug abuse.&quot; This is
particularly true in the case of illicit drugs. For example,
while millions of Americans of high-school and college age have
experimented with various drugs and many use some of them
regularly, clearly the majority exercises personal restraint or
obeys social controls in drug-taking behavior. To state this in
another way, the number of young Americans who are in serious
personal difficulty because of the misuse of drugs is relatively
small. However, the frequent depiction of the minority who do
misuse drugs, especially illicit ones, as typical conveys the
mistaken impression that misuse is pervasive if not inevitable. </p>

<p> 3. While not enough is known about why certain individuals
misuse drugs, it is known that <i>there is a definite correlation
between pervasive societal ills-such as </i>poverty,
unemployment, and <i>racial </i>discrimination-and drug misuse.
When such conditions predominate-as they do in the inner-city
areas of many large American cities-the manifestations of
widespread drug misuse and trafficking in illicit drugs can be
seen in their most pernicious forms. So long as these adverse
social conditions persist, -widespread -drug misuse <b>care </b>be,
expected. Drug misuse resulting from such societal conditions
aggravates other urban problems, and makes restoring the vitality
of our inner cities more difficult to achieve. </p>

<p> 4. Attempts <i>to control </i>the availability <i>of drugs
often present a conflict between the desires of </i>individuals
and <i>the aspirations of society. </i>When harm to both the
individual and society is clearly demonstrable, the conflict may
be resolved. When harm to either is less clearly demonstrable, it
is less easily resolved. This may lead to dissension of
considerable magnitude, involving sensitive questions of
individual rights and the limits of governmental powers. To state
it plainly, the price of an effective strategy for eliminating
drug misuse would be perceived by many Americans as too high in
terms of the invasion of privacy and the abrogation of individual
freedoms. National drug policies must reflect careful balancing
of these concerns in order to enjoy substantial public support. </p>

<p> 5. Drug-related laws and policies center too often on the
drugs themselves and not often enough on the problems of the
people misusing them. This leads to <i>preoccupation with and
elaboration of the adverse aspects of certain drugs, </i>as if
they themselves were somehow culpable. Such thinking can
reinforce a focus on eliminating or legalizing the availability
of certain drugs as &quot;solutions&quot; to related problems.
Drug policies should instead be primarily focused on people and
their problems. </p>

<p> 6. Too many Americans have <i>unrealistic expectations about
what </i>drug <i>laws and programs can </i>accomplish. All too
often, these laws and programs are expected to eliminate drug
problems. More disturbing, drug laws and programs have been
expected to contribute substantially to other social objectives
as well, such as reducing crime, increasing employment, or
restoring family cohesion. Such expectations place overwhelming
and unfair burdens on laws, programs, and those administering
them, and make failure and public frustration commonplace. Our
drug policies and laws need to be more realistically stated to
command public support. </p>

<p> 7. Finally, we Americans should resist the temptation to
blame our drug problems on others. We have done this too often in
the past. Our <i>drug problems are peculiar to our own national
experience. </i>They derive from our history and cultural
traditions, our mistakes and prejudices, our societal ills and
flaws-not those of Turks, Mexicans, Burmese, or Colombians.
Certainly, many aspects <b>of </b>drug problems are international
in scope, and much can be gained by multinational research and
education efforts. At times we must seek the cooperation of other
peoples and other countries in order to try to curtail the flow
of illicit drugs into this country. However, the chances for
success in these cooperative efforts would be enhanced, in our
view, if they were undertaken with an acceptance that the most
fundamental aspect of American drug problems is the magnitude of
demand for drugs and that the problems leading people to mis<b>use
</b>drugs will not vanish even if the supply of one or two drugs
is eliminated. </p>

<p> It is against the backdrop of these general observations that
the council submits its conclusions and recommendations. We
repeat, they will not dispose of our drug problems. However, if
applied they would, in our view, mitigate much of the harm that
comes from present policies and approaches-harm that in the minds
of many is damaging in a free society. </p>

<p> As we observed above, Americans tend to overlook the capacity
for misuse of licit drugs and overestimate the misuse of illicit
drugs. As a consequence, we pursue widely divergent courses,
depending upon the legal status of a particular psychoactive
substance. </p>

<p> For example, some drugs, such as caffeine, are freely
available in a wide variety of forms. Use is frequently promoted
and misuse largely unacknowledged. Other drugs, such as nicotine
and alcohol, are considered potentially more harmful, but their
use is largely controlled by social attitudes and their misuse,
though discouraged, is not prohibited. Actions taken under the
influence of such drugs that have a potential for injury to
others-drunken driving, for instance-are subject to criminal
sanctions, although misuse itself is not. </p>

<p> Still other drugs, such as barbiturates, amphetamines, and
tranquilizers, have generally recognized legitimate medical uses,
yet they also have significant potential for harm if misused.
There is growing public awareness of this potential harm, and the
availability of these drugs is more carefully controlled, as, for
example, by prescription of licensed physicians. Criminal
sanctions are employed to discourage diversion from legitimate
channels. </p>

<p> Then there are some drugs, such as heroin and marijuana,
which are considered to be harmful to individuals and society and
without legitimate medical uses. National policy toward these
drugs over the past seven years has been a two-pronged effort to
control the supply or availability and reduce the demand. Thus,
laws are designed to eliminate the availability of these drugs by
prohibiting their use, production, or distribution, and criminal
sanctions are employed to enforce them. On the demand side,
assistance-primarily treatment for heroin addiction through
publicly funded clinics-is offered and sometimes mandated for
those using these drugs. </p>

<p> Public drug policies are in essence a reflection of
prevailing attitudes about psychoactive drugs, and current
attitudes are, conversely, strongly influenced by past and
present policy. In this manner current policies reflect
assumptions and events more than a half century old, despite the
fact that many of those assumptions were erroneous or founded in
demogoguery. Unfortunately, in the view of the council, drug
policies and prevailing public attitudes continue to represent
misunderstanding and wishful thinking more than sober analysis.
For example, it is still widely believed that by prohibiting the
use of a particular drug through the criminal law, that drug can
be eliminated from society. Despite sobering experiences to the
contrary, it is still hoped that more resources for law
enforcement and treatment or more stringent laws will end
problems with drugs. </p>

<p> Individuals use and misuse all kinds of licit and illicit
drugs for a wide variety of reasons, some with greater potential
for harm to themselves and society than others. For example, some
drug use is clearly experimental or inquisitive; individuals want
to know what a drug will do to them, how it will make them feel
and act. Other drug use is recreational; individuals use drugs to
relax, to enhance enjoyment of a social situation. Still other
drug use is demonstrably harmful and antisocial; individuals use
drugs in ways harmful to themselves or society. </p>

<p> As it is now constituted, however, national drug policy does
not reflect an adequate appreciation of these very real
differences in drug-using behavior-yet at the same time most
Americans in their day-to-day experience are at least generally
aware of such differences. For example, most are aware of the
difference between social drinking and alcoholism. They perceive
the difference between taking an occasional tranquilizer and
taking tranquilizers compulsively, between taking prescribed
narcotics to relieve pain and being addicted to them. Many
Americans have begun to recognize the difference between smoking
an occasional marijuana cigarette and being constantly
&quot;high&quot; on marijuana. To command in<i>formed public
support, public policies must recognize these differences in the
patterns and circumstances of drug use.</i> </p>

<p> Public policy regarding heroin can probably never be the same
as policy respecting marijuana or alcohol. These drugs differ
pharmacologically, and people generally use them for different
reasons and in different situations. However, the principles upon
which the control mechanisms of public drug policies are based
can and should be consistent. As the public begins to appreciate
the differences in drug use patterns and behavior, some changes
in attitudes and policy approaches are occurring. </p>

<p> For example, many states have lessened the severity of their
laws regarding marijuana possession. The use and misuse of
sedatives and tranquilizers are under scrutiny. Responsible
national organizations such as the National League of Cities and
the U.S. Conference of Mayors have publicly called for new
approaches to heroin addition. Others have urged caution in our
response to the observed increase in cocaine use, lest an
illadvised response make matters worse. </p>

<p> The federal government's attitude about drugs also has been
affected. The Ford administration's 1975 <i>White Paper on Drug
Abuse, </i>which expressed the federal strategy, differed
dramatically in tone from the &quot;war on drugs&quot; approach
of the early 1970s. Although the White <i>Pa</i>per had little
immediate impact, it opened the door for substantial future
changes. The Carter administration's appeal for the
&quot;decriminalization&quot; of marijuana has provided
additional evidence that change is possible. </p>

<p> Because the country does appear to be in a relatively calm
mood regarding drugs and a process of rethinking is evident, it
is a good time to look to the future. Given the council's belief
that in the future there will in all probability be more, not
less, use and misuse of psychoactive drugs, it is essential to
consider ways in which society may face this situation. </p>

<p> <b>Suggestions for the Future. </b>To state it plainly, the
challenge facing America regarding drugs is to determine how best
to live with the inevitable availability of psychoactive drugs
while mitigating the harmful aspects of their misuse. A case can
be made that we are, in fact, learning to do just that. </p>

<p> For example, the latest national survey indicates that
two-thirds of American adults regularly use alcohol and some 13
million adult and youthful drinkers are said to be problem
drinkers. Currently, federal efforts are increasingly focused on
determining the underlying causes of alcohol misuse in the hope
of developing more effective preventive and treatment measures.
However, despite very deep concerns, there are no serious
proposals for a return to Prohibition. The lessons of that
experience were well learned-the criminal justice system could
not and should not be society's chief agent for controlling
alcohol abuse. Instead, attention is now directed at more
effective public education and health measures. The public seems
to wish to reduce the dangers and risks associated with the
misuse of alcohol and yet continue to enjoy the perceived
benefits derived from responsible use. While no one argues that
we have been successful in eliminating the enormous social costs
of alcoholism and alcohol related problems, current policies are
largely regarded as both reasonable and responsible. </p>

<p> Similarly, a case can be made that, with nearly 50 million
Americans having tried marijuana and 16 million of these
reporting current use, the public (on the basis of opinion polls)
believes that marijuana use will not decrease markedly over the
next few years and that society must adapt to this use in a more
reasonable, responsible manner. While this usage, too, is seen by
many as a disturbing development, appreciable numbers think that
responsible adaptation is possible. To date, eleven state
legislatures have removed the threat of criminal arrest and
imprisonment for the possession or use of small amounts of
marijuana. This development reflects an understanding that severe
criminal sanctions against the use of small amounts of marijuana
are neither appropriate nor effective. The harm to society
associated with the use of small amounts of marijuana is not seen
as sufficient to justify the use of criminal sanctions in
attempts to control it. </p>

<p> Another case in point is the great increase in public
awareness during the past ten to fifteen years of the potential
harm of excessive cigarette smoking. Increased awareness has led
to new approaches in education and to ordinances and laws
imposing civil fines for smoking in designated &quot;no
smoking&quot; areas. Yet there have been no serious proposals to
jail those who smoke. Since smoking is perceived as at worst a
public health problem, not a criminal activity, more effective
public education and health measures are seen as the most
appropriate policy response. </p>

<p> These changes are encouraging. Perhaps they offer directions
for changes in public policy regarding the use of other
psychoactive drugs. In developing such new approaches to the use
and misuse of these drugs, the nation must first set realistic,
consistent goals. In <i>this regard, the </i>primary <i>goal the
council urges is that society seek to </i>minimize the <i>harm
and dysfunction that can accompany the misuse of any psychoactive
substance, whether that drug is currently classified as licit or
illicit,</i> </p>

<p> To accept this goal entails accepting factors which up to now
have not enjoyed wide acceptance-e.g., the continued use of
illicit drugs by many Americans. It also entails accepting that
not all illicit drug use is necessarily harmful. Further, it
indicates that seeking to minimize harm from drug misuse is not
synonymous with seeking to eliminate drug use. </p>

<p> If our goal is to minimize harm and dysfunction, then the
target of national efforts should logically be the harm and
dysfunction which come from indiscriminate drug use. <i>Such a
target calls primarily for education, public health, treatment,
and rehabilitation measures. </i>Such measures could be more
effective in reducing the misuse of drugs if other drug policies
themselves were more reasonable, consistent, and realistic. The
experience of decades makes it clear that only in reducing the
misuse of drugs is there real hope for effectively reducing drug
problems. This is not to say that society should sanction the
unbridled use of psychoactive drugs. To the contrary, public
policy should make clear society's strong disapproval of the
misuse of such drugs. This disapproval will be more persuasive if
it is expressed in terms of concern for individual health and
well-being. </p>

<p> This is also not to say that the nation should immediately
abandon all domestic and international law enforcement efforts
aimed at reducing the availability of illicit drugs. Though by no
means are all drug law enforcement and control efforts effective,
it would be highly inaccurate to say that they have produced no
benefits. While many of these benefits (e.g., reduction in the
availability of particular drugs) have proved temporary in the
past, even such temporary gains are welcome developments. To the
extent that law enforcement efforts curtail the supply of illicit
drugs in a responsible manner, they should be continued. </p>

<p> The problems with drug law enforcement are complicated.
Americans have historically overemphasized drug law enforcement
and control measures and, at least until recently,
underemphasized policies aimed at reducing the misuse of drugs.
In so doing we have paid enormous costs in both dollars and
other, less quantifiable ways, such as increased burdens on the
criminal justice system, corruption, and decreased respect for
law and those enforcing it. All too often these law enforcement
efforts have continued blindly and repetitiously without a
careful assessment and balancing of their costs and benefits. </p>

<p> Perhaps the greatest costs have been those attendant to
criminalizing users of illicit drugs. For example, to brand as
criminals hundreds of thousands of American youths otherwise
leading normal lives, by virtue of their experimental or
recreational marijuana use, presents a fundamental problem in a
society founded on principles of justice and respect for law. It
leads directly to suspicion of and disrespect for the law.
Similarly, to -persist <b>in </b>depicting addiction to opiate
drugs as leading inexorably to violent criminal behavior fosters
further disrespect for law. As is well documented, many opiate
addicts do engage in certain kinds of criminal behavior,
particularly &quot;crimes against property&quot; in order to
raise funds to support their drug habits; but addiction itself,
whether to narcotics, alcohol, or nicotine, is essentially a
psychological and physiological phenomenon. There are social,
cultural, and economic factors which demonstrably influence this
phenomenon or are intimately related to it, but addiction is a
&quot;crime&quot; only because we have traditionally labeled it
as such. </p>

<p> At this stage in our history, there is a clear need to
redress the longstanding imbalance between publicly funded
efforts to reduce misuse and efforts to reduce supply. The
primary focus of public policy should be on the former. We submit
that such a redressing would encourage more realistic
expectations-even public acceptance-of what law enforcement
strategies and agencies can accomplish in reducing drug
availability. </p>

<p> The most important aspect of such a change in emphasis would
be that public policy would reflect contemporary and foreseeable
realities in a straightforward manner. </p>

<p> By placing the major emphasis on reducing the misuse of
drugs, society will be confronted with the necessity of improving
program effectiveness in that regard; the record of the past is
not exemplary. There is an urgent need to expand the base of
knowledge concerning educational, preventive, and treatment
methodologies and techniques. This means a far greater investment
in basic and applied research and evaluation. In addition to
increasing the research investment, it will be necessary to
develop a national research strategy which can provide direction
and coordination to these efforts. Since it is unlikely that
answers will be instantly forthcoming, this strategy should be
applied for the next several years and assure continuity of the
research effort. Public officials must also be more willing to
change policies if necessary in response to expanded knowledge.
Only by taking these steps can there be a realistic expectation
of attracting the calibre of research scientists that could make
a difference. </p>

<p> While we think such an expanded research effort will produce
more understanding and better guidance for educational,
preventive, and treatment approaches, certain steps can be taken
now, based on available knowledge and experience, to make the
publicly funded response to drugs more reasonable and more
effective. </p>

<p> At the federal administrative level, for instance, there
should be much closer coordination between domestic and
international drug law enforcement efforts and agencies on the
one hand and prevention and treatment strategies and agencies on
the other. Effective coordination can occur only at the highest
levels of the executive branch of government, whether by a
special-purpose, cabinet-level committee or by a special staff in
the executive office, because the important drug program
functions are lodged in several departments and agencies
throughout the executive branch. </p>

<p> Such a high-level coordinating body or staff could meet two
essential criteria for greater effectiveness in national drug
policy development and implementation: First, it could develop a
cohesive policy, and, second, it could advise the President and
provide accountability to Congress, and thereby to the public. </p>

<p> This concept is, of course, not new. The 1972 Drug Abuse
Office and Treatment Act created the White House Special Action
Office on Drug Abuse Prevention which was succeeded in 1976 by
the Office for Drug Abuse Prevention. This latter office ceased
to function in 1978, to be succeeded-at least in some of its
functions-by a Special Assistant to the President for drug
issues, a small staff within the White House's Domestic Policy
Staff, and a Federal Strategy Council composed of public
officials and private citizens. However, while it thus appears
that a coordinating mechanism does now exist at the highest level
of the executive branch, it is our impression that this mechanism
is not currently achieving its major objectives, namely, the
development and implementation of a cohesive national drug policy
and closer coordination of law enforcement and treatment
agencies. </p>

<p> In addition to the more effective coordination mechanism that
we recommend, other improvements in the performances of drug
agencies are possible. This is as true for treatment and
prevention programs as it is for law enforcement agencies,
particularly as they relate to heroin addiction. Again, however,
we stress that for such improvements to make a lasting impact
they must be preceded by substantial changes in public policy. </p>

<p> In drug treatment activities at present, improvements are
both possible and needed. Some improvements can come by applying
the new knowledge gained in recent years; others can come by
seeking more aggressively to increase that knowledge. At the same
time there is a need to acknowledge the limitations of drug,
treatment, imposed by social and economic conditions well beyond
the influence of drug treatment programs. </p>

<p> One development that has begun to affect drug treatment
during recent years is change in the concept of heroin addiction.
There is convincing evidence that more individuals use heroin
than are addicted to it. Since most heroin treatment has been
founded on the principle that to use heroin is to be addicted to
it, the existence of large numbers of nonaddicted heroin users
has substantial implications. It is also known that the typical
heroin addict, once thought to use heroin to the exclusion of all
other drugs, is more likely to use many drugs, some in concert
with heroin, others when heroin is unavailable. One implication
of this is that when heroin is unavailable today's heroin addicts
are as likely to turn to other drugs as they are to treatment. </p>

<p> The past eight to ten years have seen substantial progress in
the treatment of heroin addiction. Various treatment approaches
have evolved, the most widely publicized of which has been the
use of the synthetic opiate methadone as a
&quot;maintenance&quot; drug for individuals addicted to heroin.
There are currently seventy-eight thousand individuals enrolled
in methadone maintenance programs throughout the country, the
majority of which are publicly funded. </p>

<p> During this same period there has been a corresponding
increase in the number of individuals enrolled in what are most
often termed &quot;drug free&quot; treatment programs, i.e.,
those based on the principle of abstinence from drug use and
using psychological and behavior modification techniques to
achieve this goal. There are currently an estimated 132,000
individuals receiving treatment in this type of program. </p>

<p> There now exists a nationwide network of treatment programs
and facilities none of which existed prior to 1972. This network
was initiated primarily by federal grants and contracts through
state drug abuse coordinating agencies to local governmental or
nonprofit programs. As a result, federal officials are frequently
quoted as saying that any heroin addict who wants treatment can
receive it. While this statement may be theoretically accurate,
there are two major caveats. First, the accomplishments of
treatment efforts are limited by lack of funding, societal
conditions (e.g., the general employment picture), and the
difficulties of providing &quot;successful&quot; treatment under
any circumstances. Second, for every heroin addict who is in
treatment on any given day, there are an estimated three who are
not. They have neither volunteered nor been referred by the
criminal justice system. </p>

<p> While there has been dramatic progress in making treatment
more available, serious problems remain. Perhaps the most
frustrating of these problems is the fact that no one-including
the council-appears able at this time to provide definitive,
persuasive answers about the comparative effectiveness of the
various treatment approaches. The basic problem with ascertaining
treatment effectiveness is that there is no public or
professional consensus about what treatment should accomplish or
what constitutes &quot;successful&quot; treatment. Different
approaches-e.g. abstinence, methadone maintenance, and
detoxification-are needed to respond to the broad diversity of
people in trouble from the misuse of drugs. Treatment success
should be gauged by the improved function of the individual in
society as measured by personal stability, employment, and
related criteria. Treatment for drug dependence need not have as
its primary goal abstinence from all drug use for its own sake.
To the extent that abstinence is attainable for certain
individuals, it should be a goal; for others, such a goal may be
unrealistic, premature, or even self-defeating. Treatment goals
should reflect the complex nature of drug dependence, which
varies from person to person. </p>

<p> Successful treatment for drug dependence may-foster-such a <i>degree
</i>of stability in an individual that he or she is able to be
gainfully employed; employment may in turn become a major
reinforcing factor in the success of treatment. It is, however,
unrealistic to expect too much regarding employment from
treatment and rehabilitation efforts since the individuals in
treatment often have little or no work experience and few skills
to offer in a job market characterized by fluctuating economic
conditions. Successful treatment may also result in such
stability that the individual no longer engages in criminal
activities to support a costly drug habit. In each case, the goal
of drug treatment should be the degree of stability necessary to
lead to later developments, not those developments themselves.
While some may brand such differences as only matters of
semantics, we believe they are of crucial importance to the
search for realistic goals in the treatment of drug dependence. </p>

<p> Further problems with treatment become evident when attention
is focused on the quality of different programs. There are not
enough programs which offer the wide range of assistance needed
by those dependent on drugs who seek rehabilitation. Numerous
factors have contributed to this situation, not the least of
which is the rapid proliferation of programs which occurred in
the early 1970s. Many weak programs were funded then and are
still in existence. The nature and quality of the clinical
process in many programs have also been adversely affected by the
increased number of treatment clients coming to them by referral
from the criminal justice system. This development has led some
drug treatment programs away from a properly therapeutic function
into an increasingly custodial role with their patients. </p>

<p> Health and drug treatment providers should not have to become
society's agents for the control of social deviance or criminal
activity. The primary responsibility of treatment systems should
be treatment. If modification of drug-taking behavior, even of
life styles, is a component of treatment then it should be
presented as such. Treatment for <i>drug dependence should be
available chiefly because people need help, not as a behavior or
crime control </i>measure. Conversely, efforts to curtail
drug-related crime should be presented as such and not mislabeled
as therapeutic approaches to drug dependency. </p>

<p> For now, pending the outcome of further study and evaluation
as well as research developments, there is a clear need to
integrate the treatment of heroin addiction more closely with the
general health care system. Drug treatment is now too isolated;
the cross-fertilization of new ideas and trends from other
disciplines which should be occurring is not observable. For drug
treatment to retain its vitality in the immediate future, it
cannot remain entirely apart from the mainstream of traditional
physical and mental health care, nor on the other hand can it be
totally absorbed by that system. </p>

<p> <i>Our final suggestion on treatment is that we should </i>immediately
en<i>ter into a more active phase of research and experimentation
with heroin, particularly regarding the potential of using the
drug itself in the treat</i>ment <i>of heroin addiction. </i>We
do not know enough about the treatment of heroin addiction or
about what types of treatment are effective to be able to close
our minds to alternative approaches. Through experience we have
learned much about the use of methadone in treatment; we need to
learn more about the potential of similar use of heroin. Several
highly qualified research scientists have designed a variety of
research protocols which call for the use of heroin at some stage
in the addiction treatment process. Under present law, these
projects could be funded; we are convinced that the most
promising of them should be. </p>

<p> This research should emphasize local and state options and
flexibility. What may prove efficacious in one setting may not in
others, and what may prove effective for one individual may be
inappropriate for another. While we have much to learn from the
experience of other countries, particularly England, heroin
addiction in America presents unique problems requiring creative
approaches. Thus, our call for research and experimentation into
the use of heroin in treatment should not be misconstrued as an
endorsement of the concept of heroin maintenance (i.e., the
provision of heroin to registered addicts). We have serious
reservations as to whether such an approach would prove
beneficial in this country. On the other hand, we submit that we
do need direct experience with the use of heroin in treatment
settings; otherwise, we will not be able to learn what we should
know before making decisions regarding fundamental policy
changes. </p>

<p> just as we think treatment program efforts and policies can
be improved, we feel that drug law enforcement can also be
improved. The basic problem with law enforcement efforts lies
with the drug laws themselves. As long as these laws separate
drugs into licit and illicit categories, there will be a
necessity for such agencies as the Drug Enforcement
Administration, with its primary mission of controlling the
availability of illicit drugs. The elimination of the
availability of these drugs is in our view unachievable; still,
as long as the laws remain in effect, they should be responsibly
enforced. </p>

<p> Earlier we indicated our belief that national drug policy
ought to be based on the way in which a drug is used rather than
on the properties of specific drugs. This enlightened approach is
generally characteristic of our public policies with respect to
alcohol, tranquilizers, and a host of other potentially abusable
drugs. Society accepts responsible use of these drugs, while
seeking to prevent their misuse and, if necessary, punishing both
those who jeopardize the safety of others by irresponsible usage
behavior and those who illegally manufacture or sell such drugs.
However, our laws regarding illicit drugs such as marijuana,
cocaine, and heroin do not distinguish responsible from
irresponsible use; thus, under the law, any use of these drugs
constitutes misuse or &quot;drug abuse.&quot; Drug law
enforcement is consequently directed, at least theoretically,
against all users and suppliers of illicit drugs. This is where
problems with drug law enforcement begin. It is not, however,
where they end. </p>

<p> Many proponents of a national policy of total prohibition of
illicit drug use are beginning to acknowledge the impossibility
of achieving such a goal. Revised goals, such as containment
rather than elimination of availability, are now being advanced.
Infrequently acknowledged, however, even with the more cautious
goals, are the attendant costs of attempted prohibition, such as
criminalizing and stigmatizing hundreds of thousands of users and
using questionable practices in developing cases against them. </p>

<p> Nor are we convinced of the supposed benefits of many current
drug law enforcement efforts. It is commonplace to assume that
laws and law enforcement efforts decrease the number of people
who would otherwise use these contraband substances. However,
there are reasons to doubt this assumption. Exhaustive study has
revealed little deterrent impact from the so-called &quot;get
tough&quot; drug laws of New York State. This study showed little
change in the incidence and prevalence of heroin or other illicit
drug use as a result of the new law. Similarly, in Oregon, where
annual surveys have been conducted to assess the impact of that
state's enactment of <font size="2">marijuana
&quot;decriminalization,&quot; no appreciable increase in use has
been observed over time or in comparison to other jurisdictions
where marijuana penalties have remained stringent. In fact, other
surveys indicate that the primary reason people have chosen
either not to begin use or to discontinue it is simple lack of
interest; -the existence of criminal sanctions against use ranks
quite low as a reason given for not using marijuana. While such
examples do not offer sufficient evidence from which to draw firm
conclusions, they do raise important questions requiring careful
examination.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The most important recommendation the Drug
Abuse Council can make in the area of drug law enforcement has
little to do with specific law enforcement approaches. <i>We
propose a major research effort to </i>analyze <i>the actual
effects of drug laws </i>and drug <i>law enforcement on personal
decisions to use or not use illicit drugs. </i>A well-designed
national study, similar to that of New York drug laws undertaken
in 1974 by the Bar Association of the City of New York, could
furnish much useful guidance in this sensitive area.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">In addition to encouraging us to recommend
such general policy research, our years of examination of the
issues involved in the widespread use of marijuana in
contemporary society have convinced us, beyond a doubt, that the
use of criminal law and criminal procedures to deter marijuana
use results in more harm to society than is warranted by present
knowledge regarding its potential harm with moderate use. This
conviction should not be misconstrued as giving marijuana a clean
bill of health. Much about this drug remains unknown. Research
should continue, particularly multi-year studies which seek to
examine the consequences of marijuana use by humans over long
periods of time. Enough is now known to warrant considerable
caution with its use, particularly heavy use; use by pregnant
women and by adolescents should be avoided. <i>However, we also
believe that legislative efforts to decriminalize atfederal and
state levels the possession of small amounts of marijuana for
personal use should continue. States should be encouraged to try
different legislative models, the effects of which could be
assessed over time, </i>in an <i>effort to learn which works most
effectively to </i>minimize potential harm from <i>the
indiscriminate use of </i>marijuana.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">The above observations and suggestions about
drug treatment and law enforcement lead us to the conclusion
that, by adhering to an unrealistic goal of total abstinence from
the use of illicit drugs, opportunities to encourage responsible
drug-using behavior are missed. Individual decisions about drug
use invoke value judgments seldom made in isolation; peer
pressure and social, economic, and cultural variables must all be
taken into consideration as we seek to minimize harm and prevent
misuse.</font> </p>

<p> <font size="2">Public education efforts should attempt to
place the use and misuse of psychoactive drugs in accurate
perspective for all members of society, </font><font size="4">not
just younger members. In order to be helpful in minimizing the
harm of drug misuse, information must be credible, coherent, and
verifiable. It must be believable when placed in the context of
life experiences. For example, it strikes us as inconsistent to
issue calls for total abstinence from some drugs while
&quot;happy hours&quot; with two drinks for the price of one are
promoted for another. Such inconsistencies are readily apparent
to the youth of our country and engender skepticism on their part
as to the wisdom of official drug policies-and of the older
generation in general.</font> </p>

<p> Many of our suggestions and observations have been directed
toward policyrnakers in the public sector, those elected and
appointed public officials who make national drug policy through
their actions and decisions at federal, state, and local levels.
It is no less true today than it was seven years ago when the
Drug Abuse Council was created that the views of these officials
tend to be crisis-oriented and short-range. While public
officials have a duty to lead as well as to administer, there are
limitations to their ability to go much beyond prevailing public
attitudes in matters as volatile as drug issues. The private
sector, on the other hand, can and should play a critical,
responsible role in developing longer-range views and policies
and improved public attitudes. </p>

<p> The Drug Abuse Council has been one such effort in the
private sector. Other alternatives either already exist or could
be created. Any such entity will require the exertion of
private-sector leadership and the investment of resources
sufficient to undertake independent research and legislative,
budgetary, and policy analyses. Much basic examination and
reexamination has occurred and does not require repeating. With
modest annual expenditures, an organization within the private
sector could help keep the American public informed and provide
leadership for the development of broad public support for
sensible drug policies and programs. <i>It is our conviction that
the private sector needs to continue to take an active role in
both developing and assessing public drug policies and pro</i>grams.<br>
</p>

<p> A Final Thought and Suggestion. The goal of the council was
stated in its 1972 Annual Report. The chairman said, </p>

<p> The Directors of the Drug Abuse Council, widely
representative in personal and professional exposure and
involvement, are determined not to look to exhortations or crash
programs for illusory solutions or cures. Instead, because the
Council was initiated and is supported as a private independent
agency, unencumbered by shibboleths or taboos or political or
bureaucratic pressures, the Directors have been free-and have
exercised their freedom-to begin to learn, and to publish what
they have learned, about drug abuse and treatment in. a drug
using society. </p>

<p> Since 1972 the many publications of the council-and of
persons and agencies supported by the council-have reported what
we have learned about drugs, about their use, misuse, and our
response to them. In the concluding paragraphs of one of the last
and most significant studies initiated and supported by the
council, <i>The Nation's Toughest Drug </i>Law: Evaluating-the <i>New
York Experience ' </i>it is stated that, </p>

<p> First, the use of heroin and other opiates is but one element
of a larger problem. The misuse of all dangerous drugs-alcohol,
cocaine, opiates, and other mood-changing drugs, some prescribed
and some sold over the counter-all together constitutes &quot;the
drug problem.&quot; Problems with so many components do not yield
to one-dimensional solutions. As no single drug treatment method
is suitable for all users, so there is not likely to be a single
legal approach that is suitable for all offenders. </p>

<p> Second, whether or not illicit drug use is for the most part
a medical concern as some contend, it is incontrovertibly deeply
rooted in broader social &quot;maladies.&quot; Narcotics use in
particular is intimately associated with, and part of, a wider
complex of problems that includes family break-up, unemployment,
poor income and education, feeble institutional structures. and
loss of hope. </p>

<p> The final observation is a corollary of the second: it is
implausible that social problems as basic as these can be
effectively solved by the criminal law. </p>

<p> If this statement is accurate-and we are convinced that it
is-it reinforces our considered judgment that drug misuse is
primarily a social, medical, and public health problem, a problem
that will not yield to single or simplistic solutions or
approaches. And it reinforces our judgment that solutions or
approaches that might be useful in one place or with some
individuals would not necessarily be so in another setting or
with other people. </p>

<p> Recognizing that deeply felt attitudes and established
policies reflect fears and judgments that will yield slowly, if
ever, to facts and conditions described in the council's
publications, we recommend that serious consideration be given to
the use of individual state or local option as a means of
attempting solutions appropriate in one place but not in others.
Local option could encourage greater flexibility and ingenuity
rather than reliance upon an unrealistic, rigid homogeneity in
national drug policy. We need to respond to the diversity of
people who use and misuse drugs, base all our policies on a
consistent set of principles seeking to discourage misuse, and
keep our seemingly innate drug-using behavior within reasonable
limits through means which do not themselves cause more harm than
they prevent.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>