
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-107</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B026-348</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/heroin/opifaq.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122061300 text/html 24717
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:12:28 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:42:31 GMT
Content-length: 24499
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Frequently Asked Questions about heroin, morphine, and
opioids </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Frequently Asked Questions About the Opioids </h1>

<p> <b>Editor: Mike Hamilton &lt;mdh@debug.cuc.ab.ca&gt;</b> </p>

<p> <b>Last Update: 10 Jan. 94</b> </p>

<p> <b>Editors Note:</b> </p>

<p> If anyone has any info that they would like to share with me
and possibly have included in this FAQ, please send all mail to
my mailbox at mdh@debug.cuc.ab.ca </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>Contents </h2>

<hr>

<p> <a href="#Glossary">Glossary on terms used in FAQ</a> </p>

<p> <b>Opioid Info:</b> </p>

<p> <b>Natural (known as opiates):</b> </p>

<p> <a href="#Morphine">Morphine</a> </p>

<p> <a href="#Codeine">Codeine</a> </p>

<p> <b>Semi-Synthetic (known as opioids):</b> </p>

<p> Heroin </p>

<p> Hydrocodone (Hycodan) </p>

<p> <a href="#Hydromorphone">Hydromorphone (Dilaudid)</a> </p>

<p> <a href="#Meperidine">Meperidine (Demerol)</a> </p>

<p> <a href="#Oxycodone">Oxycodone (Percodan)</a> </p>

<p> <b>Synthetic (also known as opioids):</b> </p>

<p> <a href="#Fentanyl">Fentanyl (Sublimaze)</a> </p>

<p> <a href="#Methadone">Methadone (Dolophine)</a> </p>

<p> <a href="#Propoxyphene">Propoxyphene (Darvon)</a> </p>

<p> <a href="#Pentazocine">Pentazocine (Talwin)</a> </p>

<p> <a href="#OpiodDependence">Opioid Addiction and Withdrawal</a>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <b>The FAQ will use morphine as the standard opioid and base
all other opioids in relation to it. </b> </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Glossary">Glossary:</a> </h2>

<p> <b>opiate </b>- narcotic analgesic derived from a natural
source(opium poppy) </p>

<p> <b>opioid</b> - narcotic analgesic that is either semi or
fully synthetic - also refers to entire family of both opiates
and opioids </p>

<p> <b>IM</b> - intramuscular injection </p>

<p> <b>SC</b> - subcutaneous injection </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Morphine">Morphine</a> </h2>

<h3>Synopsis </h3>

<p> Morphine is naturally occurring substance in the opium poppy,
Papaver somniferum. It is a potent narcotic analgesic, and its
primary clinical use is in the management of moderately severe
and severe pain. After heroin, morphine has the greatest
dependence liability of the narcotic analgesics in common use. </p>

<p> Morphine is administered by several routes (injected, smoked,
sniffed, or swallowed); but when injected particularly
intravenously, morphine can produce intense euphoria and a
general state of well-being and relaxation. Regular use can
result in the rapid development of tolerance to these effects.
Profound physical and psychological dependence can also rapidly
develop, and withdrawal sickness upon abrupt cessation of heroin
use; many of the symptoms resemble those produced by a case of
moderately severe flu. </p>

<p> Morphine is infrequently encountered in the North American
street drug culture. However, mainly because of its availability
in hospitals, there have been several documented cases of
morphine dependence among health professionals. </p>

<h3>Drug Source </h3>

<p> Morphine is isolated from crude opium, which is a resinous
prep of the opium poppy, Papaver somniferum. </p>

<h3>Trade Name </h3>

<p> Roxinal, MS Contin, Morphine Sulfate </p>

<h3>Street Names </h3>

<p> &quot;M&quot;, morph, Miss Emma </p>

<h3>Drug Combinations </h3>

<p> Use of morphine plus cocaine, as well as of morphine plus
methamphetamine, has been reported. However, such combinations
are not frequently encountered. </p>

<h3>Medical Uses </h3>

<p> * symptomatic relief of moderately severe to severe pain; </p>

<p> * relief of certain types of difficult or labored breathing; </p>

<p> * suppression of severe cough (rarely); </p>

<p> * suppression of severe diarrhea (e.g., that produced by
cholera). </p>

<h3>Physical Appearance </h3>

<p> Morphine is legally available only in the form of its
water-soluble salts. Most common are morphine sulfate and
morphine hydrochloride. Both are fine white crystalline powders,
bitter to the taste. Both are soluble in water and slightly
soluble in alcohol. </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h3>Medical </h3>

<p> For moderate to severe pain the optimal intramuscular dosage
is considered to be 10 mg per 70 kg body weight every four hours.
The typical dose range is from 5 to 20 mg every four hours,
depending on the severity of the pain. The oral dose range is
between 8 and 20 mg; but with oral administration morphine has
substantially less analgesic potency (approximately one-tenth of
the effect produced by subcutaneous injection) because it is
rapidly destroyed as it passes through the liver immediately
after absorption. The intravenous route is employed primarily for
severe post-operative pain or in an emergency; in this case the
dose range is between 4 and 10 mg, and the analgesic effect
ensues almost immediately. </p>

<h3>Nonmedical </h3>

<p> Irregular or intermittent users (who are not substituting the
drug for another narcotic analgesic) may start and continue to
use doses within the therapeutic range (e.i., up to 20 mg).
However, regular users who employ morphine for its subjectively
pleasurable effects frequently increase the dose as tolerance
develops. To take several hundred milligrams per day is common,
and there are reliable reports of up to four or five grams (4000
- 5000 mg) per day. </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> Morphine may be taken orally in tablet form, and can also
injected subcutaneously, intramuscularly, or intravenously; the
last is the route preferred by those who are dependent on
morphine. </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<p> Low Doses (single doses of 5 - 10 mg administered by S.C or
IM injection in non-tolerant users) </p>

<p> CNS, behavioral, subjective: </p>

<p> suppression the sensation of and emotional response to pain;
euphoria; drowsiness, lethargy, relaxation; difficulty in
concentrating; decreased physical activity in some users and
increased physical activity in others; mild anxiety or fear;
pupillary constriction, blurred vision, impaired night vision,
suppression of cough reflex. </p>

<p> Respiratory: </p>

<p> slightly reduced respiratory rate. </p>

<p> Gastrointestinal: </p>

<p> nausea and vomiting; constipation; loss of appetite;
decreased gastric motility. </p>

<h3>Other: </h3>

<p> slight drop in body temperature; sweating; reduced libido;
prickly or tingling sensation on the skin (particularly after
intravenous injection). </p>

<h3>Duration </h3>

<p> 4 - 5 hours </p>

<h3>Dependency Potential </h3>

<p> high, continued use results in both psychological and
physical dependency </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Codeine">Codeine</a> </h2>

<h3>Drug Source </h3>

<p> Codeine is found in opium in concentrations between %0.1 and
%2. Because of the small concentration found in nature, most
codeine found in medical products is synthesized from morphine
via the methylation of the hydroxyl group found on the second
non-aromatic ring. </p>

<h3>Trade Name </h3>

<p> There are no commercial name for products containing only
codeine in US. Found under common name of codeine. Canada does
have a codeine only syrup available under Paveral. Mainly found
in combination products. </p>

<h3>Street Name </h3>

<p> T-three's (Tylenol #3 w/ codeine), schoolboy, cough syrup </p>

<h3>Medical Uses </h3>

<p> * relief of mild to moderate pain </p>

<p> * relief of non-productive cough </p>

<p> * relief of diarrhea </p>

<h3>Drug Combinations </h3>

<p> Sold under many name brand products, the most popular being
theTylenol with Codeine series, the number on the tablet
corresponds to the amount of codeine and caffeine found in the
each tablet. </p>

<p> Tylenol #1 w/ codeine - 8 mg codeine, 15 mg caffeine </p>

<p> Tylenol #2 w/ codeine - 15 mg codeine, 15 mg caffeine </p>

<p> Tylenol #3 w/ codeine - 30 mg codeine, 30 mg caffeine </p>

<p> Tylenol #4 w/ codeine - 60 mg codeine, no caffeine </p>

<p> note: all tablets contain same amount of acetaminophen (300
mg) </p>

<p> Fiorinal (aspirin, caffeine, barbital, codeine) </p>

<p> Many other brand name product combinations. </p>

<h3>Physical Appearance </h3>

<p> Tylenol w/ codeine series are imprinted with number on one
side and other side is Tylenol label(McNeil). </p>

<h3>Controlled Substance Status </h3>

<p> As a single product codeine is a schedule II controlled
substance in the US. When combined with other non-controlled
substance, and depending on amount per dose unit, codeine
combined products range from schedule III to V. </p>

<p> Canada has OTC codeine products available if product has no
more than 8 mg of codeine per unit dose. Some US areas may have
codeine preps available OTC, but usually require release form. </p>

<p> As an interesting fact, a travelers handbook noted that
Greece has banned codeine in that country (no idea on what it's
status is now) so be careful when traveling there. </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>Medical </h4>

<p> Pain relief : 30mg - 220mg oral or equivalent dose SC or IM </p>

<p> Diarrhea relief : 10mg - 20mg orally </p>

<p> Cough suppressant : 5mg - 15mg orally </p>

<h4>Nonmedical </h4>

<p> Doses can range from 30mg up to 400mg. LD50 for codeine is
800mg in a average nontolerant person. At doses of &gt; 250mg
adverse effects tend to arise, including intense itching, flushed
skin, dizziness, sedation, nausea and vomiting </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> Usually taken orally but can be injected IM or SC. The IV
route is not recommended as reactions such as facial swelling,
pulmonary edema and convulsions can occur. </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>CNS, Behavioral, Subjective: </h4>

<p> Effects begin at 30mg and tend to mimic those of morphine,
except sedation and euphoria are less intense. </p>

<h4>Respiratory: </h4>

<p> same as morphine but less intense. </p>

<h4>Gastrointestinal: </h4>

<p> same as morphine but nausea and vomiting are less common and
constipation less severe. </p>

<h3>Other: </h3>

<p> alleocodone is a schedule II drug, and when combined with
other non-controlled drugs, is found from schedule III-IV. </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>Medical </h4>

<p> as a cough suppressant 5mg - 10mg </p>

<p> for pain relief 10mg - 30mg </p>

<h4>Nonmedical </h4>

<p> doses are similar to those for pain relief </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> Usually taken orally but can be inject via three routes.
Unknown if hydrocodone can be sniffed or smoked. Sniffing is
likely possible. </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<p> CNS, Behavioral, Subjective: </p>

<p> Has similar effects as morphine but less sedation and
euphoria </p>

<p> Respiratory: </p>

<p> Less depression than morphine. </p>

<p> Gastrointestinal: </p>

<p> Less likely to cause nausea and vomiting than morphine. </p>

<h3>Other: </h3>

<p> Hydrocodone is a weaker opioid than morphine but still a
effective opioid with similar potency to oxycodone. </p>

<h3>Duration </h3>

<p> 3 - 4 hours </p>

<h3>Dependency Potential </h3>

<p> moderately low, much less potential than morphine </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Hydromorphone">Hydromorphone</a> </h2>

<h3>Drug Source </h3>

<p> Synthetically produced from morphine. </p>

<h3>Trade Name </h3>

<p> Dilaudid </p>

<h3>Street Name </h3>

<p> Dillies </p>

<h3>Medical Uses </h3>

<p> * relief of moderate to severe pain </p>

<p> * relief of severe cough </p>

<h3>Drug Combinations </h3>

<p> most commonly used as a single product </p>

<h3>Physical Appearance </h3>

<p> usually bought as tablets, or injectable solution </p>

<h3>Controlled Substance Status </h3>

<p> Hydromorphone, like most single product opioids, is a
schedule II opioid. </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>Medical </h4>

<p> for pain relief 1mg - 2mg </p>

<h4>Nonmedical </h4>

<p> same as pain relief doses </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> Can be administered orally, by three routes of injection, and
by sniffing. Unknown if smoking is an effective route. </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<p> CNS, Behavioral, Subjective: </p>

<p> Hydrocodone has effects similar to morphine, except euphoria
is similar to codeine, nausea and vomiting is quite rare, and
sedation is practically non-existent </p>

<p> Respiratory: </p>

<p> Hydrocodone depresses respiration minimally. </p>

<p> Gastrointestinal: </p>

<p> Hydromorphone effects GI tract very little. </p>

<h3>Other: </h3>

<p> Although hydromorphone's euphoria pales with other opioids
it's abuse potential comes from the fact the rush experienced
from IV use is very similar to heroin's. </p>

<p> Hydromorphone is one of the most used opioids in the relief
of pain for the terminally ill. The reasons being it's minimal
side effects, and high potency. </p>

<h3>Duration </h3>

<p> 3 - 4 hours </p>

<h3>Dependency Potential </h3>

<p> moderately high </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Meperidine">Meperidine</a> </h2>

<h3>Drug Source </h3>

<p> Meperidine is completely synthetic and can be produced with
dichlorodiethyl methylamine and benzyl cyanide. </p>

<h3>Trade Name </h3>

<p> Demerol </p>

<h3>Street Name </h3>

<p> Demmies </p>

<h3>Medical Uses </h3>

<p> * originally found to be useful for muscle spasms but the
discovery of it's analgesic properties has resulted in it's
almost exclusive use for relief of moderate to severe pain </p>

<h3>Drug Combinations </h3>

<p> usually found as a single product, with few combination
products. Is found in combination with acetaminophen in Demerol
APAP </p>

<h3>Physical Appearance </h3>

<p> Demerol tablets are small white tablets with the name
Winthrop on one side </p>

<h3>Controlled Substance Status </h3>

<p> Schedule II substance in US </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>Medical </h4>

<p> pain relief is achieved with approx. 50mg - 150mg injected or
200mg - 300mg oral </p>

<h4>Nonmedical </h4>

<p> doses similar to those used in medical settings are used in
recreational use. </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> orally, three injection routes, and sniffing are possible,
unknown if smoking is possible </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>CNS, Behavioral, Subjective: </h4>

<p> same as morphine but less sedation, less intense euphoria </p>

<h4>Respiratory: </h4>

<p> respiratory depression tends to be less common and less
intense than morphine </p>

<h4>Gastrointestinal: </h4>

<p> nausea and vomiting are reportedly common with oral use, but
less when administered via injection </p>

<h3>Duration </h3>

<p> 3 - 4 hours </p>

<h3>Dependency Potential </h3>

<p> reported to be less than or equal to that of morphine </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Oxycodone">Oxycodone</a> </h2>

<h3>Drug Source </h3>

<p> synthesized from codeine </p>

<h3>Trade Name </h3>

<p> only found as a compound product combined with aspirin or
acetaminophen. Available in Canada as a single product in the
form of a suppository </p>

<h3>Street Name </h3>

<p> Percs </p>

<h3>Medical Uses </h3>

<p> * relief of moderate to severe pain </p>

<h3>Drug Combinations </h3>

<p> Percodan is aspirin and oxycodone </p>

<p> Percocet is acetaminophen and oxycodone </p>

<h3>Physical Appearance </h3>

<p> Percodan tablets are color coded according to quantity of
oxycodone in each tablet, the pink have ~2.5mg and the orange and
green having twice as much </p>

<h3>Controlled Substance Status </h3>

<p> Schedule II in US </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>Medical </h4>

<p> 10 - 20mg oral for pain relief </p>

<p> 5 - 15mg injection </p>

<h4>Nonmedical </h4>

<p> Doses similar to those used in a medical setting are used </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> Can be administered orally, three injection routes, sniffed
and possibly smoked. </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>CNS, Behavioral, Subjective: </h4>

<p> Same as morphine but milder. </p>

<h4>Respiratory: </h4>

<p> Less respiratory depression than morphine </p>

<h4>Gastrointestinal: </h4>

<p> Less constipating than morphine </p>

<h3>Duration </h3>

<p> 3 - 4 hours </p>

<h3>Dependency Potential </h3>

<p> Moderate </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Fentanyl">Fentanyl</a> </h2>

<h3>Drug Source </h3>

<p> Synthetically produced </p>

<h3>Trade Name </h3>

<p> Sublimaze </p>

<h3>Street Name </h3>

<p> China white </p>

<h3>Medical Uses </h3>

<p> Mainly relief of moderate to severe pain and as a surgical
anesthetic </p>

<h3>Drug Combinations </h3>

<p> none </p>

<h3>Physical Appearance </h3>

<p> Found as a injectable solution, and a transdermal patch </p>

<h3>Controlled Substance Status </h3>

<p> Schedule II in US </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>Medical </h4>

<p> 50ug - 200ug </p>

<h4>Nonmedical </h4>

<p> same range as medical use </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> can be administered via three injection routes, sniffed and
smoked </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>CNS, Behavioral, Subjective: </h4>

<p> euphoria is less than morphine </p>

<h4>Respiratory: </h4>

<p> same as morphine but has potential to cause respiratory
muscles </p>

<p> to go into spasm and result in respiratory arrest </p>

<h4>Gastrointestinal: </h4>

<p> less constipating that morphine </p>

<h3>Duration </h3>

<p> 1 - 2 hours </p>

<h3>Dependency Potential </h3>

<p> moderately high </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Methadone">Methadone</a> </h2>

<h3>Drug Source </h3>

<p> synthetically produced </p>

<h3>Trade Name </h3>

<p> Dolophine </p>

<h3>Street Name </h3>

<p> Dollies </p>

<h3>Medical Uses </h3>

<p> occasionally used for pain relief, but main use is in opioid
withdrawal treatment as a substitute drug </p>

<h3>Drug Combinations </h3>

<p> none </p>

<h3>Physical Appearance </h3>

<p> found as a fruity solution for oral use, in wafers, and
tablets also found as a injectable solution </p>

<h3>Controlled Substance Status </h3>

<p> Schedule II in US </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>Medical </h4>

<p> 3 - 5mg provides same pain relief as 10mg morphine </p>

<h4>Nonmedical </h4>

<p> rarely used non-medically, but doses used are approx. same </p>

<p> as medical doses </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> can be injected via three routes, taken orally, unknown if </p>

<p> methadone can be smoked, can be sniffed </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>CNS, Behavioral, Subjective: </h4>

<p> Oral use provides little euphoria and tends to block opioid
receptors in brain, so commonly used as a maintenance drug during
rehab. </p>

<h4>Respiratory: </h4>

<p> Produces little depression in contrast to morphine </p>

<h4>Gastrointestinal: </h4>

<p> produces constipation of less intensity than morphine </p>

<h3>Other: </h3>

<p> Developed by Nazi Germany during WWII as Germany was unable
to acquire adequate supplies of morphine. </p>

<h3>Duration </h3>

<p> first dose last approx. 8 hours and subsequent doses last 18
- 24 hours. </p>

<h3>Dependency Potential </h3>

<p> oral use provides little euphoria so little abuse potential
in that form. When injected, methadone give very similar effects
to morphine so has similar addiction potential. </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Propoxyphene">Propoxyphene</a> </h2>

<h3>Drug Source </h3>

<p> Synthetically produced with similar structure to that of
methadone </p>

<h3>Trade Name </h3>

<p> Darvon, Darvon N </p>

<h3>Street Name </h3>

<p> none </p>

<h3>Medical Uses </h3>

<p> for relief of mild pain </p>

<h3>Drug Combinations </h3>

<p> Darvon compound is aspirin and propoxyphene </p>

<h3>Physical Appearance </h3>

<p> Darvon N as pink oval pills </p>

<h3>Controlled Substance Status </h3>

<p> Schedule III in US </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>Medical </h4>

<p> range from 50mg - 150mg of hydrochloride </p>

<h4>Nonmedical </h4>

<p> similar to medical dose ranges. </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> can be taken orally, three possible injection routes, no info
on possible intranasal or smoked administration </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>CNS, Behavioral, Subjective: </h4>

<p> oral use provides very little euphoria, mild sedation; at
larger doses sedation becomes quite prominent and symptoms such
as staggering and slurred speech become apparent. </p>

<h4>Respiratory: </h4>

<p> little respiratory depression in medical dose range </p>

<h4>Gastrointestinal: </h4>

<p> little effect on GI tract </p>

<h3>Other: </h3>

<p> IV use is reported to give rush similar to heroin; poor
analgesic with standard dose providing less pain relief than
standard aspirin dose </p>

<h3>Duration </h3>

<p> 3 - 4 hours </p>

<h3>Dependency Potential </h3>

<p> low </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Pentazocine">Pentazocine</a> </h2>

<h3>Drug Source </h3>

<p> synthetically produced </p>

<h3>Trade Name </h3>

<p> Talwin </p>

<h3>Street Name </h3>

<p> yellow footballs </p>

<h3>Medical Uses </h3>

<p> for relief of moderate to moderately severe pain </p>

<h3>Drug Combinations </h3>

<p> Talwin NX - pentazocine and nalaxone (opioid antagonist) </p>

<h3>Physical Appearance </h3>

<p> usually found in orange-yellow tablets </p>

<h3>Controlled Substance Status </h3>

<p> Schedule III </p>

<h3>Dosage </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>Medical </h4>

<p> 50mg - 100mg for pain relief </p>

<h4>Nonmedical </h4>

<p> similar to medical dosage </p>

<h3>Routes Of Administration </h3>

<p> can be taken orally, three injection routes, and sniffed </p>

<p> possibly smoked </p>

<h3>Short Term Use </h3>

<p> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ </p>

<h4>CNS, Behavioral, Subjective: </h4>

<p> poor opioid, very little euphoria, mainly just sedates and
clouds mind, little recreational use </p>

<h4>Respiratory: </h4>

<p> less depression than morphine </p>

<h4>Gastrointestinal: </h4>

<p> very little constipation or nausea, vomiting occurs </p>

<h3>Other: </h3>

<p> as a opioid agonist/antagonist has potential to cause
psychotic effects such as hallucinations, severe confusion </p>

<h3>Duration </h3>

<p> 3 - 4 hours </p>

<h3>Dependency Potential </h3>

<p> moderate potential, similar to hydrocodone </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="OpiodDependence">Opioid Dependence And Withdrawal</a>
</h2>

<p> Opioids have specific withdrawal and dependence
characteristics common to all opioids, varying according to the
specific drug. All opioids cause both physical and psychological
dependence with prolonged use. Depending on the opioid in
question withdrawal can become evident after continued use in as
little time as 2 weeks or as long as 2 months. </p>

<p> Withdrawal is commonly overstated by media and tends to be
similar to bad case of flu. This is due to the fact that most
opioid users don't tend to be able to acquire enough drug to
result in severe withdrawal. It must be noted that physical
symptoms may be similar to flu, psychological symptoms can be
quite painful. Depression, mood swings, hypersensitivity to pain
are some common symptoms. Opioid withdrawal DOES NOT endanger
life as does alcohol and other depressant withdrawal. </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>