
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B039-335</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113118 text/html 53265
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:31:09 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:16 GMT
Content-length: 53047
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Marijuana -- Factors Influencing Psychopharmacological
Effect </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<h1>Factors Influencing Psychopharmacological Effect<br>
</h1>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> A renewed interest in marihuana studies has been prompted by
the recent clarification of the complexities of its chemistry,
new techniques to quantity the amounts of active drug in natural
materials, and the availability of purified
tetrahydrocannabinols. These advances allow more precise
scientific research on psychiopharmacological effect.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>DOSE-RESPONSE RELATIONSHIP<br>
</b> </p>

<p> A major advance has been a quantification of dose of THC in
relation to clinically observable phenomena. This has been
extensively studied over a wide dose range for marihuana (Rodin
and Domino, 1970; Melges et al., 1970; Tinklenberg et al., 197O;
Weil et al., 1968; Meyer et al., 1971; Clark and Nakashima, 1968;
Clark et al., 1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Mayor's Committee,
1944; Manno et al., 1970) and Delta 9 tetrahydrocannabinol
(Isbell et al., 1967; Waskow et al., 1970; Hollister et al.,
1968; Perez-Reyes and Lipton, 1971; Lemberger et -al., 1971;
Dornbush and Freedman, 1971).<br>
</p>

<p> Investigations by Isbell et al. (1967), Kiplinger et al.
(1971) and Renault et al. (1971) have clearly demonstrated that
when reliable quantities of smoked marihuana or THC are delivered
to the subject, a reproducible linear dose-dependent effect
occurs on indices of physiologic, psychomotor, and mental
performance as well as on mood and subjective experiences over a
dose range of 12.50 to 200 micrograms of Delta 9 THC per kilogram
of body weight.<br>
</p>

<p> In a 154 pound man this is comparable to consuming 0.88 to
17.5 milligrams of Delta 9 THC or 88 to 150 milligrams of
marihuana containing one percent Delta 9 THC. It is generally
assumed that good quality marihuana available in the United
States contains 1% Delta 9 THC and an average marihuana cigarette
consists of 500 milligrams of marihuana; thus, 5 milligrams of
Delta 9 THC (Hollister, 1971). </p>

<p> As with most drugs, the larger the dose taken, the greater
the psychopharmacologic effect. Isbell et al. (1967) noted that
clinical syndromes vary from a mild euphoric feeling of
relaxation at low doses (25 micrograms per kilogram) to an
intensive hallucinogenic-like experience at high doses (250
micrograms per kilogram).<br>
</p>

<p> <b>DOSE-TIME RELATIONSHIP<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Similar time-action curves have been demonstrated for smoked
Delta 9 THC and equivalent quantities of smoked marihuana
(Hollister et al.,1968; Isbell et al., 1967 Renault et ai., 1971
Kiplinger et al., 1971). Symptoms began almost immediately after
smoking (2-3 minutes). At lower doses, the peak effect is seen at
10 to 20 minutes and the duration of effect is 90 minutes to two
hours. At higher doses, symptoms persist for three to four hours.
</p>

<p> Therefore, as with most drugs, the larger the dose taken, the
longer the action. The subjective symptoms experienced by the
subject appear to parallel in time the subjective effects and
some physiological indices such as pulse rate (Isbell et al.,
1967; Hollister, 1968 - Renault and Schuster, 1971; Kiplinger et
al., 1971; Galanter et al., 1972; Lemberger et al., 1971). Others
such as reddening of the eyes have a delayed peak response and
longer duration (Kiplinger et al., 1971).<br>
</p>

<p> <b>ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION<br>
</b> </p>

<p> A second factor which influences the effect experienced by
the user is the manner in which the substance is consumed. That
is, whether it is smoked, swallowed or injected. </p>

<p> Isbell et al. (1967) demonstrated that smoked material is two
and a half to three times as effective as orally consumed
marihuana in the form of a 95% ethanolic solution in producing
equivalent physiologic and subjective effects.<br>
</p>

<p> In addition, the oral time-action curve is extended with
onset of symptoms one-half to one hour after administration. A
peak effect is reached in two to three hours and the effect
persists for three to five hours at low doses and six to eight
hours at larger doses (Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell, et -al.,
1967; Lemberger et al., 1971; Perez-Reyes, and Lipton, 1971). </p>

<p> In general, the effects produced by ingested THC or ingested
marihuana extract are comparable to those produced by nearly
one-third the amount of smoked and inhaled THC or marihuana
(Hollister, 1971). </p>

<p> Recent work has been reported which clarifies these findings.
Lemberger et a]. (1971) studied absorption into the blood
utilizing radioactive labeled THC by three routes of
administration: smoked, ingested in 95% ethanolic solution in
cherry syrup, and intravenously injected. The first appearance of
the drug into the, blood was immediate intravenously; almost
immediate, by inhalation; and delayed for 15 to 30 minutes when
ingested. </p>

<p> Perez-Reyes and Lipton (1971) using labeled AO THC
demonstrated that rate of absorption by the gastrointestinal
tract, and the duration of action is greatly influenced by the
vehicle used to ingest the drug. Speed and completeness of
absorption varied when the THC was dissolved in 100% ethanol or
sesame oil or emulsified with a bile salt (sodium glycocholate),
and administered to a subject who had fasted 12 hours. With the
bile salt vehicle, the physiologic and subjective effects were
noted between 15 to 30 minutes after ingestion and lasted two to
three hours. In contrast, the effects, with ethanol or sesame
oil, appeared after one ,hour and lasted four to six hours.<br>
</p>

<p> Hollister and Gillespie (1970) hypothesized that this delayed
gastrointestinal absorption of THC might be accounted for by the
nonpolar vehicle required to dissolve TUC or marihuana extracts. <br>
</p>

<p> Furthermore, Perez-Reyes and Lipton (1971) found that the
peak levels and duration of radioactivity in the plasma
paralleled the physiologic and subjective effects, although the
plasma levels remained high for a longer period of time than the
effect. Subjects receiving the drug emulsified in sodium
glycocholate or dissolved in sesame oil had three times higher
plasma levels of radioactivity with much less excreted in the
feces than those receiving the drug dissolved in ethanol. </p>

<p> These results indicate that the THC was poorly absorbed from
the gastrointestinal tract when given in all alcoholic solution.
The sesame oil solution and the glycocholic acid preparation
allowed more complete absorption and the latter preparation was
much faster. It is of interest that the degree of subjective high
after ingestion of 37 milligrams Delta 9 THC also parallels the
plasma radioactivity. </p>

<p> Thus, the subjects reported their experience, as intense and
unpleasant both with the bile salt and the sesame oil, and as
moderate and entirely pleasant with ethanol. (Perez-Reyes and
Lipton, 1971) This correlates well with earlier findings of
Hollister et a]. (1968).<br>
</p>

<p> <b>QUANTIFICATION OF DOSE DELIVERED<br>
</b> </p>

<p> The problem in quantifying the THC dose delivered by
different routes of administration has been clarified by several
studies using radioactive compounds. However, until a method for
determining the THC blood concentration is developed, only
estimates oil amount delivered are possible. </p>

<p> Radioautographic studies clearly demonstrate that intravenous
injection gives the, most complete and consistent delivery
(Lemberger et a]., 1971; Me Isaac et M., 1971; Ho et a]., 1971;
Kennedy and Waddell, 1971; Idanpaan-Heikkila, 1971). These
investigators have demonstrated that THC is poorly absorbed from
the injection site after intraperitoneal or subcutaneous
injection. </p>

<p> As discussed earlier, the completeness of absorption ocurring
after oral administration of THC appears to depend upon the
vehicle. Judged by radioactivity levels, almost complete
absorption of the THC occurs with an oil or bile acid vehicle,
but absorption is incomplete with an alcohol vehicle.
(Perez-Reyes et al., 1971) <br>
</p>

<p> Recent animal studies performed for NIMH indicated that the
oral dose necessary to produce comparable gross behavioral
changes in lab animals is about three times higher than the
intravenous dose (Marihuana and Health. 1971: 171). Ferraro
(1971) demonstrated the comparability of effective oral doses of
THC in chimpanzees and humans. Furthermore, preliminary work
performed in the laboratories of M. Isaac (1971) and Harris
(1971) and Mechoulam (1971) appear to indicate that the
intravenously administered dose of Delta 9 THC necessary to
produce detectable behavioral changes in monkeys (20 to 50
microgram/ kg) on conditioned learning tasks is comparable to
that in man. (Kiplinger et a]., 1971; Lemberger et al., 1971). <br>
</p>

<p> The dose of THC absorbed from natural marihuana extracts
ingested orally is uncertain. THC is present as an acid in
variable quantities in natural marihuana. THC acid has not
presently been proven to be active. Claussen and Korte (1968)
reported that the THC carboxylic acid is converted to free THC
during the smoking process. Whether these, acids are active
themselves; are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract or
converted there into THC; or are decarboxylated in the, body is
unknown presently.<br>
</p>

<p> Because inhalation is the most widely used route of
administration of marihuana, several laboratories have
investigated the effect of combustion and smoking oil marihuana.
Because techniques and conditions varied between laboratories,
precise quantification of the delivery to the smoker's lungs is
uncertain.<br>
</p>

<p> Manno, et al. (1970) calculated that about 50% of the THC
contained in a marihuana cigarette would be delivered to the
smoker's lungs for absorption if the entire cigarette were smoked
in 10 minutes and each inhalation was retained for 30 seconds
with no sidestream loss. Truitt (1971) and co-workers (Foltz et
al., 1971) found that 50%c of THC was pyrolyzed and 6% was lost
in the side stream while noting that almost 21% of the THC
remained in the butt when three-fourths of the cigarette is
consumed. </p>

<p> Agurell and Leander (1971) studied the transfer of THC using
actual smoking subjects where only the main stream smoke was
collected. They found that 14-29%% of the THC was transferred in
the mainstream smoke for a cigarette and 45% for a pipe. However,
they stated that this amount transferred would be comparable if
no butt was left. </p>

<p> Agurell and Leander found that the amount transferred was not
effected by depth of inhalation but that smokers using deep
inhalation retained 80% of the transferred THC while those using
superficial inhalation tended to exhale more than 20% of the
transferred THC. Mikes and Waser (1971) also found about 22% in
the mainstream smoke. </p>

<p> These divergent data appear to be comparable when corrected
for loss to sidestream and retention in the unsmoked portion.
Thus, the efficiency of delivery of THC by smoking and inhalation
using good techniques, and smoking the entire cigarette
approximates 40-50% of the original THC contained. A small
fraction is lost in the uninhaled sidestream smoke, about 50% is
destroyed during pyrolysis and a variable amount is exhaled from
the respiratory dead space. </p>

<p> In apparent confirmation, Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972),
using radiolabeled THC added to a marihuana cigarette, found that
the initial plasma level of radioactivity after smoking was about
onehalf the level after intravenous injection. Oral
administration of the same dose of THC in an alcohol vehicle
produced about one-half the peak level as smoking. However,
Galanter et al. (1972) noted marked variability in the amount of
THC absorbed using a standardized routine of inhaling,
breath-holding and finishing the cigarette within a set time
period.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>EFFECT OF PYROLYSIS ON THE CANNABINOIDS<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Several investigators have studied the effect of pyrolysis on
the cannabinoids. Most have concluded that only negligible
changes occur in the original cannabinoid fraction of marihuana
except for decarboxylation of the acids to the cannabinoids. No
evidence was found for isomerization of Delta 9 THC or Delta 8
THC nor the formation of any new pyrolysis products (Manno et
al., 1970; Coutselinis &amp; Miras, 1970; Claussen and Korte,
1968; Foltz et al., 1971; Agurell and Leander, 1971). Mikes and
Waser (1971) suggested that a small percentage of cannabidiol was
converted to Delta 9 THC, but this observation was not confirmed
by the other groups. </p>

<p> Coutselinis and Miras (1970) noted that less THC was
destroyed during smoking when Delta 9 THC was the only
cannabinoid present rather than when a resin or a mixture of
cannabinoids were present. This was believed to be at least
partially accounted for by the distribution of THC in the
cigarette. More destruction occurred when the THC was evenly
distributed in the cigarette than when it was present in a
well-defined lump.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>SET AND SETTING</b> </p>

<p> A most important variable encountered when evaluating the
effect of marihuana is the interaction of the drug with the
non-drug factors, set and setting. Set refers to the drug-taker's
biological make-up including personality, past drug experiences,
personal expectations of drug effect, and mood at the time of the
drug experience. Setting refers to the external surroundings and
social context in which the individual takes the drug. Set and
setting exert their largest effect on psychoactive drugs, like
marihuana, with subtle subjective mental effect and minimal
physiological effect. Set and setting exert a variable but often
marked influence on the potential drug effects (Waskow et al.,
1970; Wickler, 1970). </p>

<p> The results of a series of experiments by Jones (1971)
suggests the subjective state produced by &quot;a socially
relevant dose of smoked marihuana.... 9mg THC&quot; is determined
more by set and setting than by the THC content of the marihuana.
</p>

<p> In one experiment, a greater variety and more intense
pleasurable symptoms occurred in a fourman group allowing
unstructured interpersonal interaction than in unstructured
solitary test situations. Contrasting behavioral patterns were
observed by the investigator and reported subjectively by the
individuals. Subjects tested individually demonstrated a relaxed,
slightly drowsy, undramatic state as they read, listened to the
radio, or sit doing nothing. In the group setting there was
elation, euphoria, uncontrolled laughter, a marked lack of
sedation and much conversation. (Jones, 1971) </p>

<p> This strongly emphasizes the importance of setting in the
marihuana experience. The reason is apparent why marihuana is
usually used with other people. However, most investigators
studying its effects evaluate their subjects alone, in
well-controlled, sterile, scientific laboratories. </p>

<p> The importance of the placebo effect (the subject experiences
a drug effect from an inert material) to the &quot;social
high&quot; obtained from marihuana was studied in another
experiment (Jones and stone, 1970; Jones, 1971). Misjudgments of
the pharmacologic potency of both the smoked placebo (marihuana
without THC) and active marihuana were commonly made by the
subjects although physiologic and performance indices routinely
matched the distinction correctly. The smoking of a material that
smells and tastes like marihuana by individuals with marihuana
experience appeared to produce a mental state that is interpreted
as being high if combined with the expectation of becoming high. </p>

<p> The importance of learning to get high was demonstrated when
individuals who smoked marihuana less than twice a month were
compared with those who used marihuana at least seven times a
week. Although both groups rated the active marihuana equally
potent, the frequent users rated the placebo equally to the
active drug, while the infrequent users experienced significantly
less high from the placebo. </p>

<p> The infrequent users' experiences appears to reflect mainly
pharmacologic factors with moderate set-setting influence.
However, the frequent users' response to the placebo appears to
reflect mainly learned set-setting influence and minimal
pharmacologic factors. (Jones, 1971) </p>

<p> Smith and Mehl (1970) call learning to get high &quot;
reverse tolerance.&quot; During the early exposures to marihuana
the individual learns to appreciate the subtle drug effect with
repeated experience with the drug. Consequently, less drug may be
required to experience the desired high in the early stages of
marihuana use. </p>

<p> Further evidence for this is seen when the familiar smoking
route and smell and taste cues are made ineffective by giving the
active and inactive material by the oral route (Jones and Stone,
1970). Both groups of users can significantly distinguish the
intoxication produced by 25mg of active material. But the
frequent user rates this high significantly poorer than his
smoking high while the infrequent user rates them correctly.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>TOLERANCE<br>
</b> </p>

<p> The development of tolerance is another important factor that
may influence the psychophysiological effects of marihuana.
Although tolerance occurs with many drugs and the process has
been studied for over a century, the mechanism of this complex
phenomenon is not completely known. Kalant et a]., (1971) have
extensively discussed tolerance to the psychotropic drugs. </p>

<p> Tolerance has two different connotations. The first, termed
&quot;initial tolerance,&quot; is an expression of the dose of
the drug which the subject must receive at his first exposure to
produce a designated degree of effect. These authors state that a
variety of congenital and environmental factors contribute to the
wide range of differences in &quot;initial tolerance&quot;
observed among different individuals, sexes, species, age groups
and so on. </p>

<p> The second meaning of tolerance is that of an &quot;acquired
change in tolerance&quot; within the same individual as a result
of repeated drug exposures so that an increased drug dose is
required to produce the same specified degree of effect, or the
same dose produces less effect. In this chapter, tolerance will
be used synonymously with &quot;acquired increase in
tolerance.&quot; -Tolerance can only be discussed for each
specific drug action and not for all the actions of a given drug
on the body. That is, tolerance occurs at different rates for
some of the various effects of the same drug on the body and may
not occur for other effects of the same drug. The relationship
between &quot;initial tolerance&quot; and &quot;acquired change
in tolerance&quot; has not been clearly established. </p>

<p> There are two classes of tolerance based on possible
mechanisms. The first, dispositional tolerance refers to changes
in absorption, distribution, excretion and metabolism which
produce a reduction in the intensity and duration of contact
between the drug and the target tissue on which it acts. </p>

<p> The second, functional tolerance includes changes in the
properties and functions of the target tissue making it less
sensitive to the same dose of the drug. Physiological tolerance
implies a, change in the target organ while psychological or
&quot;learned tolerance&quot; implies the acquisition of new
skills or functions to replace those changed in the target tissue
(Kalant et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Considerable evidence is accumulating which demonstrates that
tolerance does develop in numerous animal species (pigeons, rats,
dogs, monkeys, chimpanzees, mice) to the behavioral and
physiological effects of marihuana and THC in doses many times
larger (from 1 mg. to 500 mg./ kg/day) than the minimal active
dose (Carlini, 1968; Silva et al., 1968; McMillan et al., 1970,
1971; Frankenheim et al., 1971; Carlini et al., 1970; Thompson et
al., 1971; Pirch et al., 1972; Ferraro, 1971; Elsinore, 1970;
Cole et al., 1971). <br>
</p>

<p> Lipparini et al. (1969) were not able to demonstrate
tolerance in the rabbit. </p>

<p> Tolerance, appears to develop rapidly to high doses even when
injections are spaced up to about a week apart. Tolerance to high
doses appears to be long-lasting with little loss of tolerance
even after a month. But at low doses in the behavioral range,
tolerance appears to completely dissipate in a few days after a
single dose. The magnitude of tolerance development can be large.
After repeated exposure, a dose of over one hundred times the
original produces little effect (McMillan et al., 1971). </p>

<p> The development of tolerance to THC in animals occurs for
some effects but not for others (McMillan et al., 1971; Pirch et
al., 1972; Thompson et al., 1971 ). This differential development
of tolerance may explain why tolerance to certain effects studied
has not been demonstrated (Masur and Khazan, 1970; McMillan et
al., 1971; Barry and Kubena, 1971; Kubena et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Lomax (1971) and Thompson et al. (1971) have noted that the
development of tolerance to one effect of the drug (hypothermia
or sedation) may allow the expression of the opposite effect
(hyperthermia or stimulation) to which tolerance does not
develop. </p>

<p> Cross tolerance has been demonstrated between delta-9-THC,
delta-8-THC and its synthetic analogues. Cross tolerance, has not
been demonstrated between THC and lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD), mescaline or morphine (McMillan et al., 1970). </p>

<p> Preliminary work performed by McIsaac (1971) and Harris et
al., (1972) demonstrated a reduction in the duration and quality
of response on a conditioned learning task by monkeys on the
seeond intravenously administered dose of THC. Tolerance
developed extremely rapidly so that no effect on behavior was
seen after five days. After a. two-week period without THC, the
animals were retested and the same degree of tolerance had
persisted. The researchers believe these observations might
indicate a rapid behavioral adaption or &quot;learned&quot;
functional tolerance. </p>

<p> However, evidence indicates that dispositional tolerance
and/or physiological type of functional tolerance also plays a
role at least at higher doses. Tolerance develops to the central
nervous system depressant effects, hypotherma hypopnea (Thompson
et al., 1971) and the EEG effects (Pirch et al., 1971) of the
drug. McMillan et al., (1971) have demonstrated that tolerance to
the effects of THC on behavior can be blocked by the hepatic
microsomal enzyme inhibitor, SKF-525-A which has been shown to be
a potent inhibitor of THC metabolism (Dingell et al., 1971).
Methodological techniques must be, developed which will allow
microdistribution studies to be performed in tolerant animals
with low doses of THC before the mechanism of tolerance
development can be clarified. </p>

<p> Evidence for the development of marked tolerance by man has
been suggested by studies of heavy daily very long term users of
hashish, charas or ganja in foreign countries. Reports from the,
Eastern literature (Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Dhunjibhoy, 1930;
Ewans, 1904) and more recently from Greece (Miras, 1965; Fink et
al., 1971) and Afghanistan (Weiss, 1971) relate daily consumption
of enormous quantities of potent cannabis preparation estimated
to contain up to about one gram of THC per day. </p>

<p> Weiss (1971) has noted that daily charas smokers start with
small doses and then in order to achieve the same effect
gradually increase their daily dose about 5-6 times over a 20 to
30 year period. Generally, most reach their maximum dose by age
40 and then gradually decrease their daily dose by 50% usually
ceasing use by their 60's. Some smokers have been noted to raise
their original daily dose up to a maximum of 10 times within the
first two years. </p>

<p> Others have noted that moderate use for many years does not
necessitate increased doses (Sigg, 1963). </p>

<p> At least part of the increase in daily amount of drug used is
accounted for by the finding that the duration -of the
intoxication becomes shorter over the years so that the very
heavy smoker must consume the drug more frequently to remain
intoxicated. Additionally, smokers report that they have on
occasion discontinued use for days or months after which they
experienced similar effects at smaller doses (Weiss, 1971). </p>

<p> Fink et al. (1971) noted that as hashish users total daily
dose was decreased by more than half over the years, the
frequency of use per day declined correspondingly. </p>

<p> Rubin and Comitas (1972) noted that very long term Jamaican
ganja smokers generally consumed an average of seven spliffs
daily (a ganja cigarette several times the size of an American
marihuana cigarette) with a maximum of 24. </p>

<p> Further evidence for the development of tolerance, at least
to certain of the depressant effects, is that these very long
term smokers apparently tolerate the extremely high doses well
without dysphoria or decreased ability to perform their usual
activities (Weiss, 1971; Fink et al., 1971; Rubin and Comitas,
1972). </p>

<p> Smith and Mehl (1970) noted the, accumulating American
anecdotal evidence of mild tolerance development after heavy
daily use for a number of years. Jones (1971) and Meyer et a].
(1971) have suggested diminished effect on physiologic and
psyochomotor performance, that is, little or no impairment of
function in daily users compared with infrequent, intermittent
users of marihuana. Additionally, several investigators have
noted that frequent users had little or no impairment on
psychomotor performance tasks while marihuananaive individuals
given the same dose had impaired function. (Clark et al., 1968,
1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Weil et
al., 1968). </p>

<p> Subsequently (Mendelson et al., 1972) repetitive daily (free
access) use over a 21-day period by groups of long-term
intermittent (average 7.7 sessions per month) and moderate,
marihuana users (daily average, 33 smoking sessions per month)
was studied. The development, of tolerance was strongly suggested
to the physiological pulse rate and general depressant effect on
activity as well as psychological effects which impair recent
memory, time estimation and psychomotor coordination. </p>

<p> No tolerance development occurred to the subjective effects
of marihuana for experienced users over the 21-day period (global
&quot;highness&quot;, somatic, perceptual, awareness, feeling,
control, friendliness, ambivalence and altered thinking).
Furthermore, with the exception of a higher ambivalence rating
for the daily riser group, there were no differences in the
subjective reports of the daily users or intermittent users.
(Mendelson et al., 1972). The ambivalence score is believed (Katz
et al., 1968) to be the best measure of &quot;psychedelic ef
fects&quot; of hallucinogenic drugs. </p>

<p> In a prior study (Meyer et al., 1971) found that while the
heavy smokers experienced more profound subjective effects soon
after smoking, they were less intoxicated than the intermittent
users one hour later. </p>

<p> These findings suggest to the investigators that the quality
of the &quot;high&quot; may be different for heavy and
intermittent users and may change with heavy use. Tolerance, to
the subjective effects of marihuana may occur predominantly to
the depressant effects so that the stimulatory effects (or
hallucinatory-like) would be predominant in the heavy users. The
intermittent users who smoked marihuana several times daily in
the, current study showed no increase in the ambivalence, rating.
</p>

<p> The increased daily frequency of marihuana use by both groups
over time by shortening the interval between smoking sessions
appears consistent with earlier observations (Meyer et al., 1971)
that the duration of the desired &quot;high&quot; is shorter in
heavy users than in intermittent users. </p>

<p> Fink et al. (1971) confirmed several of these findings in a
study in which intermittent users smoked a fixed dose (14 mg. of
THC) of marihuana. They noted a suggestion of development of
tolerance to pulse rate, short-term memory, digit symbol
substitution but not to the subjective high or EEG changes.
However, the subjects did feel that the duration of the
intoxication shortened progressively during the second half of
the experiment. </p>

<p> Schuster and Renault (1971) administered twice daily fixed
doses of marihuana (smoke from 430 mg. of marihuana with 1.5% THC
content) to intermittent users over a 10-day period. A peak
tachycardia, of 20 to 30 beats per minute and a usual social high
were produced. Preliminary observations revealed the development
of tolerance to time estimation in a few days, but no evidence
for tolerance to the tachycardia, orthostatic blood pressure, or
rating of the high. </p>

<p> Hollister (1971), in preliminary studies found no significant
evidence of tolerance after five daily oral doses of 20 mg. of
THC. Clinical responses measured were subjective judgment of the
high, mood, pulse rate, reading comprehension or excretion of
urinary metabolites.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>REVERSE TOLERANCE<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Smith and Mehl's (1970) clinical observations of many
marihuana smokers suggest a J-shaped time curve of tolerance to
marihuana. A novice marihuana smoker often reports feeling no
high or requiring considerably more drug to get high on his first
few trials with the drug than after he obtains more experience
with the drug. This phenomenon has been called &quot;reverse
tolerance.&quot; These clinicians believed this represented
&quot;learning to get high&quot; or acquiring the ability to
appreciate or become sensitive to the subtle aspects of the
intoxication.<br>
</p>

<p> Goode (1971) found that more frequent and term marihuana
smokers tend to require fewer &quot;joints&quot; to get high but
differences were not statistically significant. </p>

<p> Weil et al. (1968) reported that experienced users of
marihuana achieved a &quot;high&quot; after being given the same
dose as naive (non-users) persons who did not experience a high
but did demonstrate objective physiologic and psychomotor drug
effects. </p>

<p> Meyer et al. (1971) found that heavy marihuana, users (daily
for three years) were most sensitive to the &quot;high&quot; and
required less marihuana to achieve a social high than infrequent
intermittent users (use one to four times per month for less than
two years). </p>

<p> Phillips et al. (1971) reported an increase in severity of
symptoms after repeated administration of THC to rats. This
&quot;sensitization&quot; may be a correlate of reverse
tolerance. </p>

<p> Lemberger et al. (1971) supplied additional evidence for
reverse tolerance based on the intravenous administration of 0.5
mg of THC to experimental subjects. Naive subjects experienced no
effect from this small dose. However, daily marihuana users, who
were told they were receiving a non-pharmacologically active dose
of THC, reported a &quot;marihuana high,&quot; which lasted up to
90 minutes. </p>

<p> Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972) and Mechoulam (1970) suggested
the possibility that enzymes necessary to convert THC to a more
active compound require prior use of marihuana. </p>

<p> Reverse tolerance appears to be a complex phenomenon. Jones
(1971) presented evidence which stressed the importance of
expectation, setting and prior drug experience on learning to get
&quot;high.&quot; As the user gains more experience with
marihuana, the more the individual's mind is able to respond to
the expectation of the &quot;high&quot; by actually becoming high
when given an inert material which smells and looks like
marihuana. </p>

<p> Weil (1971) believes that the capacity to get
&quot;high&quot; is an inherent characteristic of each
individual's mind. He, believes that marihuana facilitates the
user's abilitv to achieve this altered state of consciousness,
that is, learn how to get high. </p>

<p> Mendelson et al. (1972) did not find evidence for reverse
tolerance. In fact, the daily users were more likely than the
intermittent users to smoke two cigarettes per occasion. Both
groups had had an average of five years of marihuana use. Several
other investigators did not obtain any evidence of reverse
tolerance after repetitive daily use in experienced subjects
(Hollister, 1971; Schuster and Renault, 1971; Fink et al., 1971).<br>
</p>

<p> <b>METABOLISM<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Metabolism of the drug by the body exerts an important
influence on the psychopharmacologic effect of marihuana. Many
laboratories in many countries have been examining the
metabolism, of the cannabinoids using in vitro liver microsomal
enzyme preparations.<br>
</p>

<p> With the recent availability of radiolabeled Delta 9 and
Delta l THC, cannabinol and cannabidiol much activity has
occurred in vivo in animals. A comprehensive review of these
areas including studies of absorption, disposition, excretion,
metabolism and stimulation-inhibition of metabolism is beyond the
scope of this report. Readers interested in further details in
this area are referred to an excellent comprehensive review by
Lemberger (1972). <br>
</p>

<p> From animal and in vitro studies it appears that the liver
rapidly changes Delta 9 and Delta 11 THC in a similar manner by
hydroxylation to 11-OH THC. This compound appears to be as potent
or possibly more potent pharmacologically than the parent
compounds This metabolite appears to be, rapidly hydroxylated to
8-11 dihydroxy Delta 9 THC (7-11 dihydroxy All THC) which is
inactive. The 8-OH Delta THC appears to be a minor active
metabolite (Christensen et al., 1971; Burstein et 1970; Ben-Zvi
et al., 1970; Foltz et al., 1970; Wall et al., 1970,71; Nilsson
et al., 1970). </p>

<p> These metabolites are excreted primarily into the bile and
then to the feces. Some evidence exists for an enterohepatic
circulation returning the drug to the blood. (Miras and
Coutselinis, 1970; Klausner and Dingell, 1971) </p>

<p> Another metabolic pathway appears to be present resulting in
a series of acidic metabolites excreted primarily in the urine
(Agurell et al, I., 1970). Recently, Burstein and Rosenfeld
(1971) isolated and identified a majo r rabbit urinary
metabolite, 11-carboxy-2'-hydroxy-Delta 9 THC. They postulate
that other acidic metabolites might be esters or amides of this
compound (Figure 7). </p>

<p> Recently, Nakazawa and Costa (1971) demonstrated that A' THC
was metabolized by lung microsomes forming two unidentified
products not found in liver homogenates.<br>
</p>

<p> Lemberger et al. (1970, 1971, 1972) and Galanter et al.
(1972) have performed metabolic studies in mail using
intravenous, oral and smoked Delta 9 THC. These studies indicate
that the THC disappears from the plasma in two phases. </p>

<p> The initial rapid phase has two components and represents
metabolism by the liver and redistribution from the blood to the
tissues. The slower second phase represents tissue retention and
slow release and subsequent metabolism. </p>

<p> The plasma 1/2 life of THC was significantly shorter in daily
users than nonusers at both the first component of phase one (10
minutes versus 13 minutes) and phase two (27 hours versus 56
hours). Tissue distribution was similar in daily and nonuser (1/2
life 2 hours). </p>

<p> Therefore, immediate metabolism of THC and subsequent
metabolism is more rapid for daily user than the non-user
implying specific enzyme induction. THC persists in the plasma
for a considerable period of time, at least three days, with a
half life of 57 hours for nonusers and 28 hours for daily users. </p>

<p> The presence of 11-hydroxy THC and more polar metabolites in
the plasma of both users and nonusers within 10 minutes indicates
that the metabolite probably accounts for the pharmacological
activity of marihuana, not THC. </p>

<p> Further metabolism of the 11-hydroxy THC to more polar
inactive 8-11 dihydroxy A' THC metabolite occurs more rapidly in
users than nonusers. During the first few hours after injection,
unchanged THC, its polar metabolites and nonpolar metabolites in
the plasma, decline rapidly and then level off as they are
distributed to the tissues. THC persists in the plasma, for at
least three days, and both users and non-users excrete
metabolites in the urine and feces for more than a week.<br>
<br>
Delta-9-THC is extensively metabolized to more polar compounds
which were excreted in the urine and feces. Urinary excretion and
biliary excretion (reflected a day later in the feces) was
greatest during the initial 24 hours, then gradually tapered off.
All THC is metabolized since no unchanged THC was excreted in the
feces or urine. No difference in total cumulative excretion was
observed but a significantly larger percentage of the metabolites
were excreted in the urine of users than nonusers. About 40-45%
of the metabolites were collected in the feces in both groups in
one week. Urinary excretion in this period accounted for 30% in
daily users and 22% in nonusers. (Lemberger et al., 1970, 1971,
1972) </p>

<p> Perez-Reyes et al. (1971) found a similar pattern of
excretion of metabolites after oral administration. </p>

<p> Urine contained no Delta 9 THC, only a small quantity (3%) of
11-hydroxy THC and 90% more polar acidic compounds as yet
unidentified. (Lemberger, 1971). Preliminary studies by Burstein
and Rosenfeld ('1971) suggest that these human acidic urinary
metabolites are identical to the 11-carboxy-2' hydroxy THC found
in rabbits. </p>

<p> In man, Lemberger et al. (1971, 1972) found that 11-OH THC
and 8-11-OH THC were primarily excreted in the feces. Twenty-two
percent of the metabolites in the feces were unchanged 11-hydroxy
THC and slightly less were 8-11-dihyd-roxy THC. The remainder
were unidentified more polar compounds, perhaps conjugates of
these metabolites. </p>

<p> All user subjects (Lemberger et al., 1970, 1971, 1972) but no
non-user noted a high after intravenous injection of the 0.5 mg
dose of Delta 9 THC. This would be a dose range of 5 to 7
micrograms/kg. Highs have been noted by Kiplinger et al. (1971)
with smoking THC to deliver a dose of 6.25 micrograms/kg. The
high for some lasted up to 90 minutes. Thus, the plasma levels of
Delta 9 THC and its metabolites seen after intravenous injection
suggest that psychopharmacologic effects are seen in the first
component of the rapid phase and terminated by redistribution and
metabolism after the initial phase. The 11-hydroxy Delta 9 THC
would be present at this early phase and is probably responsible
for the activity of Delta 9 THC in marihuana. </p>

<p> Further evidence that the 11-OH Delta 9 THC is responsible
for marihuana's effect was seen in oral and inhalation studies.
By the oral route, blood levels of unchanged THC were relatively
low compared to the radioactivity levels of the metabolic
products at the time of peak subjective effect. While the blood
level of unchanged THC at the peak oral effect was identical to
that after intravenous injection of the 0.5 mg. dose, the
psychologic, effect was much more pronounced after oral
administration of the larger 20 mg. dose of THC. Again after
inhalation, the plasma levels of the metabolites correlate
temporally with the subjective effects but the plasma levels of
unchanged Delta 9 THC do not. (Lemberger, 1970, 1971, 1972;
Galanter, 1972)<br>
</p>

<p> <b>PATTERN OF USE<br>
</b> </p>

<p> The drug effect of marihuana can only be realistically
discussed within the context of who the user is, how long he has
used, how much and how frequently he uses and what is the social
context of the use. In general, for virtually any drug the
heavier the use pattern, that is the longer the duration, the
more frequently the use and the larger the quantity used on each
occasion, the greater the risk for either direct or indirect
damage. </p>

<p> Tolerance development is only one of a variety of occurrences
which are related to the repetitive use of marihuana. Any
discussion of drug effect must take into account the time period
over which the drug is used (duration of use). This is necessary
in order to detect cumulative effects or more subtle
gradually-occurring changes. Of course, the issue of causality is
quite complex because of the multitude of factors other than
marihuana use that have a direct or indirect effect on the
individual over a period of years. </p>

<p> For the purposes of this report, immediate or acute effects
will refer to those drug effects which occur during the drug
intoxication or shortly following it. Short-term or sub-acute
will arbitrarily refer to periods of less than two years;
long-term, from two to 10 years; and very long term (or chronic),
greater than 10 years. </p>

<p> Frequency of use, will arbitrarily be designated in the
following manner: experimental use refers to use of marihuana at
least one time but not more than once a month; intermittent use
refers to use more than once a month but not more than 10 times a
month (several times a week) ; moderate use refers to use of the
drug more than 10 times a month but not more than once a day;
heavy use designates use more than once, daily and very heart use
refers to use many times a day, usually with potent preparations
(high THC content), producing almost continual intoxication so
that the smoker's brain is rarely drug free.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>AMOUNT OF DRUG CONSUMED<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Relatively little actual data are available on the amount of
marihuana, smoked per occasion or per day by current users in the
United States. (McGlothlin, 1971, 1972). Estimates of the
quantity of THC consumed are difficult because of the variability
of potency as well as weight and size of the marihuana cigarette
(&quot;joint&quot;) and the degree of cleaning of stems and seeds
from the dried leaves manicuring&quot;). </p>

<p> The analytic data available indicates most of the marihuana
used in the United States is of Mexican origin and averages about
I % THC per dry cleaned weight of marihuana (Lerner and Zeffert,
1968; Jones, 1971). Subjective ratings by experienced marihuana
users appear to substantiate the data that marihuana containing
1% THC is of average quality (Jones and Stone, 1970; Weil et al.,
1968). </p>

<p> Marihuana cigarettes are estimated (McGlothlin, 1971, 1972)
to average about 0.5 g in weight and, therefore, contain about 5
mg of THC. Cigarettes used in the eastern states are generally
smaller than those, rolled in the west (McGlothlin, 1971; New
York Police Department, 1969, 1970) </p>

<p> Most data indicates that for the large majority of users
one-half to one cigarette (2.5 to 5 mg THC) is sufficient to
&quot;get high&quot; in intermittent moderate users, although
often two or more cigarettes were smoked to achieve additional
effect (Nisbet and Vakil, 1972; Shean and Fechtmann, 1971;
McGlothlin et al., 1970- McGlothlin, 1972; Jones, 1971; Goode,
1970). </p>

<p> Current American daily users appear to consume one to two
cigarettes per occasion (Jones, 1971) although some users
estimate they smoke three to five cigarettes per occasion
(McGlothlin et al., 1970). Goode (1971), however, found
practically no relationship between amount required to get high
and frequency of use (daily to less than monthly) or duration of
use (less than two years to six or more years). In fact, the
heavy and longer term users were less likely to require more
&quot;joints.&quot; </p>

<p> Thus, the estimated 15 mg THC for current daily users is
about one-half that estimated for confirmed regular users 30
years ago in the United States (Mayor's Committee, 1944; Charen
and Perelman, 1946) and one-third to one-fourth the median daily
consumption of daily users in North Africa and India. </p>

<p> The maximum daily consumption of 10 cigarettes (50 mg THC)
for current heavy U.S. marihuana smokers (Jones, 1971;
McGlothlin, 1972) is about the same as the average amount
consumed by daily chronic users in other countries, and about
one-fourth or less of the maximum in these countries (Soueif,
1967; Sigg, 1963; Indian Hemp Drug Commission's Report,
1893-1894; Chopra, 1940; Chopra and Chopra, 1939). </p>

<p> Studies of American military in Vietnam (U.S. Congress, 1971;
Colbach and Crowe, 1970; Forrest, 1970), and Germany (Tennant et
al., 1971) described the daily use of quantities of hashish or
potent marihuana comparable to amounts consumed by regular
chronic users in other countries. </p>

<p> Experimental data appear to confirm these estimates of
quantity of THC consumed. Isbell et al. (1967) and Jones (1971)
found that most subjects reported a normal &quot;high&quot; after
smoking 5-10 mg of THC. Meyer et al. (1971) found that a
&quot;very high&quot; state was attained by ad libitum smoking of
3.12 mg THC by daily users and 3.78 mg THC by intermittent users.<br>
</p>

<p> In experiments by Johnson and Domino (1971), subjects were
urged to smoke until they were as high as they had ever been on
marihuana and felt they could not smoke any more. These subjects
smoked from one to four cigarettes containing 8.7 mg of THC to
reach this level of intoxication. The range was from 8.7 to 30 mg
of THC with a mean of about 20 mg THC. </p>

<p> Intermittent and daily users were allowed to smoke marihuana
on a free choice basis over a 21day period in studies by
Mendelson et al. (1972). Each cigarette contained one gram of
marihuana of approximately 2% THC content, or about 20 mg of THC.
</p>

<p> Subjects were asked to rate their high on a 10 point scale
with 10 corresponding to highest ever; five as moderately high
and zero, no effect. Ratings for the daily user group ranged from
zero to nine with an average of about six for all cigarettes
rated. Individual means ranged f rom three to about seven. On
almost all occasions, subjects in both groups smoked the entire
cigarette. </p>

<p> Kiplinger et al. (1971) and Lemberger, et al. (1971) noted
that daily long-term users were able to detect effects of the
&quot;high&quot; at doses calculated to deliver as low as 5-7
micrograms/kg THC (equivalent to smoking about 100 mgs. of
marihuana containing 1 % THC). Perhaps this explains the finding
that many users are able to &quot;get high&quot; smoking US
wild-growing marihuana containing front near zero to 0.5% THC
(Lerner, 1969; Phillips et al., 1970; Fetterman et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Several ad libitum experiments were performed with marihuana
of unknown composition (Williams et al., 1946; Siler et al.,
1933) using &quot;confirmed regular marihuana users&quot;
confined over a 39 and six-day period. The users, who generally
consumed three cigarettes per day, under these rather artificial
conditions of the, experiment consumed means of 17 (range nine to
26) and five (range one to 20) cigarettes per day respectively. </p>

<p> Miras and Coutsilinis (1970) reported recent experimental
data on chronic Greek hashish users who routinely use, single
smoked doses of hashish containing 100 mg of THC. Under ad
libitum conditions, these users averaged 150-350 mg of THC per
day over a 30-day period. </p>

<p> The subjects studied during a 21-day period of free choice
Marihuana consumption by Mendelson et al. (1972) generally
consumed all of one cigarette containing 20 mg of THC per smoking
session. 'The subjects who were previously daily users were more
likely during the experiment to consumer more, than one,
cigarette per session than the, previously intermittent users. </p>

<p> Individual consumption by the intermittent users ranged from
an average of about one-half to<br>
six cigarettes per day (group mean three) while the daily users
consumed an average of three-anda-half to nine cigarettes per day
(group mean six-and-a-half). Reasons given by the subjects for
the dramatic shift in the frequency of marihuana use included
boredom, testing the limits of their endurance, demonstrating its
harmlessness to the research staff, and subtle social pressure. </p>

<p> <b>DURATION OF USE</b> </p>

<p> Very little American data exists on the duration of marihuana
use. Practically no data exists which demonstrates the extent
that persons who initiated marihuana use some 20-40 years ago
have continued its use. Robins and Murphy (1967) in a follow-up
study of St. Louis black males noted that 20% of those who had
tried marihuana by age 24 were still using it to some degree 15
years later. McGlothlin et a]. (1970, 1971) reported on a sample
of predominantly white adults who began using, marihuana in
adolescence and had continued infrequent use for more than 20
years. </p>

<p> In the case of Western and particularly middle class American
use of marihuana, the rapid climb to prominence of the phenomenon
since the midsixties raises the question of whether the entire
drug movement is transient or permanent. Certainly, the majority
of the youthful users and many of the adults have used the drug
less than 10 years and probably less than five years. </p>

<p> One 1970 survey (Lipp, 1970) revealed that 77% of those
students who initiated marihuana use four to five years earlier
were still using it to some degree. A recent study (Walters et
a]., 1972) indicates that students who first used marihuana
before entering college in September 1965 and had continued use
of marihuana in February 1969 (&quot;old user&quot;) differed
from the, vast majority of users who began their drug use in
college (&quot;new user&quot;). </p>

<p> The old user is more likely to experiment with a wide variety
of drugs, to be extremely active in radical political
organizations, to be alienated from American society, to be less
definite about career plans, and to have more heterosexual
activities. </p>

<p> The Commission-sponsored National Survey indicated that
marihuana use by both youth (12-17 years of age) and adults (18
and over) is experimental in approximately 75% of those who have
ever used marihuana. These individuals have, either stopped using
it (66% of adults and 57% of youth) or are, using, it once, a
month or less. In contrast, 13% of the ever used subsample (12%
adults, 16% youth) use marihuana once a week or more. </p>

<p> In other non-Western countries, cannabis use frequently
persists for long periods. Especially in the East, persons using
it for 20-40 years or more are not uncommon. In other cultures,
initiation is most common in adolescence. Once the habit is
established it is likely to continue on a daily basis for many
years and frequently continues as a lifetime practice (Weiss,
1971; Sigg, 1963; Soueif, 1967; Watt, 1936; Chopra and Chopra,
1939; Bouquet, 1951; VN, 1957). </p>

<p> Probably the duration of use will vary considerably depending
on cultural acceptance or rejection (McGlothlin, 1972). </p>

<p> <b>INTERACTION WITH OTHER DRUGS</b> </p>

<p> Little experimental work has been done on the interaction
between marihuana and other drugs used socially or medically
although this will become an important area as usage increases. </p>

<p> Marihuana is often used with sweet wines to enhance its
effect. Some evidence for an additive effect of marihuana and
alcohol on motor and mental performance and subjective effect has
been seen experimentally (Manno et al., 1971; Jones and Stone,
1970). Some degree of additive effects would be expected with
barbiturates based on their similarity to alcohol. A more
complex, mixed pattern of effect might be expected with
amphetamines and hallucinogens. These latter combinations are
rarely used socially (Hollister, 1971).<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>