
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-62</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B037-27</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/jcepilog.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064738 text/html 17745
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:47:29 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:24:46 GMT
Content-length: 17526
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Joyous Cosmology - Epilogue</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
</head>

<body>

<hr>

<h2>Epilogue</h2>

<hr>

<p> THIS IS, as I have said, a record not of one experiment with
consciousness-changing drugs, but of several, compressed for
reasons of poetic unity into a single day. At the same time I
have more or less kept to the basic form which every individual
experiment seems to take---a sort of cycle in which one's
personality is taken apart and then put together again, in what
one hopes is a more intelligent fashion. For example, one's true
identity is first of all felt as something extremely ancient,
familiarly distant ---with overtones of the magical,
mythological, and archaic. But in the end it revolves back to
what one is in the immediate present, for the moment of the
world's creation is seen to lie, not in some unthinkably remote
past, but in the eternal now. Similarly, the play of life is at
first apprehended rather cynically as an extremely intricate
contest in one-upmanship, expressing itself deviously even in the
most altruistic of human endeavors. Later, one begins to feel a
&quot;good old rascal&quot; attitude toward the system; humor
gets the better of cynicism. But finally, rapacious and
all-embracing cosmic selfishness turns out to be a disguise for
the unmotivated play of love. </p>

<p> But I do not mean to generalize. I am speaking only of what I
have experienced for myself, and I wish to repeat that drugs of
this kind are in no sense bottled and predigested wisdom. I feel
that had I no skill as a writer or philosopher, drugs which
dissolve some of the barriers between ordinary, pedestrian
consciousness and the multidimensional superconsciousness of the
organism would bring little but delightful, or sometimes
terrifying, confusion. I am not saying that only intellectuals
can benefit from them, but that there must be sufficient
discipline or insight to relate this expanded consciousness to
our normal, everyday life. </p>

<p> Such aids to perception are medicines, not diets, and as the
use of a medicine should lead on to a more healthful mode of
living, so the experiences which I have described suggest
measures we might take to maintain a sounder form of sanity. Of
these, the most important is the practice of what I would like to
call meditation---were it not that this word often connotes
spiritual or mental gymnastics. But by meditation I do not mean a
practice or exercise undertaken as a preparation for something,
as a means to some future end, or as a discipline in which one is
concerned with progress. A better word may be
&quot;contemplation&quot; or even &quot;centering,&quot; for what
I mean is a slowing down of time, of mental hurry, and an
allowing of one's attention to rest in the present---so coming to
the unseeking observation, not of what should be, but of what is.
It is quite possible, even easy, to do this without the aid of
any drug, though these chemicals have the advantage of
&quot;doing it for you&quot; in a peculiarly deep and prolonged
fashion. </p>

<p> But those of us who live in this driven and over-purposeful
civilization need, more than anyone else, to lay aside some span
of clock time for ignoring time, and for allowing the contents of
consciousness to happen without interference. Within such
timeless spaces, perception has an opportunity to develop and
deepen in much the same way that I have described. Because one
stops forcing experience with the conscious will and looking at
things as if one were confronting them, or standing aside from
them to manage them, it is possible for one's fundamental and
unitive apprehension of the world to rise to the surface. But it
is of no use to make this a goal or to try to work oneself into
that way of seeing things. Every effort to change what is being
felt or seen presupposes and confirms the illusion of the
independent knower or ego, and to try to get rid of what isn't
there is only to prolong confusion. On the whole, it is better to
try to be aware of one's ego than to get rid of it. We can then
discover that the &quot;knower&quot; is no different from the
sensation of the &quot;known,&quot; whether the known be
&quot;external&quot; objects or &quot;internal&quot; thoughts and
memories. </p>

<p> In this way it begins to appear that instead of knowers and
knowns there are simply knowings, and instead of doers and deeds
simply doings. Divided matter and form becomes unified
pattern-in-process. Thus when Buddhists say that reality is
&quot;void&quot; they mean simply that life, the
pattern-in-process, does not proceed from or fall upon some
substantial basis. At first, this may seem rather disconcerting,
but in principle the idea is no more difficult to abandon than
that of the crystalline spheres which were once supposed to
support and move the planets. </p>

<p> Eventually this unified and timeless mode of perception
&quot;caps&quot; our ordinary way of thinking and acting in the
practical world: it includes it without destroying it. But it
also modifies it by making it clear that the function of
practical action is to serve the abiding present rather than the
ever-receding future, and the living organism rather than the
mechanical system of the state or the social order. </p>

<p> In addition to this quiet and contemplative mode of
meditation there seems to me to be an important place for
another, somewhat akin to the spiritual exercises of the
dervishes. No one is more dangerously insane than one who is sane
all the time: he is like a steel bridge without flexibility, and
the order of his life is rigid and brittle. The manners and mores
of Western civilization force this perpetual sanity upon us to an
extreme degree, for there is no accepted corner in our lives for
the art of pure nonsense. Our play is never real play because it
is almost invariably rationalized; we do it on the pretext that
it is good for us, enabling us to go back to work refreshed.
There is no protected situation in which we can really let
ourselves go. Day in and day out we must tick obediently like
clocks, and &quot;strange thoughts&quot; frighten us so much that
we rush to the nearest head-doctor. Our difficulty is that we
have perverted the Sabbath into a day for laying on rationality
and listening to sermons instead of letting off steam. </p>

<p> If our sanity is to be strong and flexible, there must be
occasional periods for the expression of completely spontaneous
movement---for dancing, singing, howling, babbling, jumping,
groaning, wailing---in short, for following any motion to which
the organism as a whole seems to be inclined. It is by no means
impossible to set up physical and moral boundaries within which
this freedom of action is expressible---sensible contexts in
which nonsense may have its way. Those who provide for this
essential irrationality will never become stuffy or dull, and,
what is far more important, they will be opening up the channels
through which the formative and intelligent spontaneity of the
organism can at last flow into consciousness. This is why free
association is such a valuable technique in psychotherapy; its
limitation is that it is purely verbal. The function of such
intervals for nonsense is not merely to be an outlet for pent-up
emotion or unused psychic energy, but to set in motion a mode of
spontaneous action which, though at first appearing as nonsense,
can eventually express itself in intelligible forms. </p>

<p> Disciplined action is generally mistaken for forced action,
done in the dualistic spirit of compelling oneself, as if the
will were quite other than the rest of the organism. But a
unified and integrated concept of human nature requires a new
concept of discipline---the control, not of forced action, but of
spontaneous action. It is necessary to see discipline as a
technique which the organism uses, as a carpenter uses tools, and
not as a system to which the organism must be conformed.
Otherwise the purely mechanical and organizational ends of the
system assume greater importance than those of the organism. We
find ourselves in the situation where man is made for the
Sabbath, instead of the Sabbath for man. But before spontaneous
action can be expressed in controlled patterns, its current must
be set in motion. That is to say, we must acquire a far greater
sensitivity to what the organism itself wants to do, and learn
responsiveness to its inner motions. </p>

<p> Our language almost compels us to express this point in the
wrong way ---as if the &quot;we&quot; that must be sensitive to
the organism and respond to it were something apart.
Unfortunately our forms of speech follow the design of the social
fiction which separates the conscious will from the rest of the
organism, making it the independent agent which causes and
regulates our actions. It is thus that we fail to recognize what
the ego, the agent, or the conscious will is. We do not see that
it is a social convention, like the intervals of clock time, as
distinct from a biological or even psychological entity. For the
conscious will, working against the grain of instinct, is the
interiorization, the inner echo, of social demands upon the
individual coupled with the picture of his role or identity which
he acquires from parents, teachers, and early associates. It is
an imaginary, socially fabricated self working against the
organism, the self that is biologically grown. By means of this
fiction the child is taught to control himself and conform
himself to the requirements of social life. </p>

<p> At first sight this seems to be an ingenious and highly
necessary device for maintaining an orderly society based upon
individual responsibility. In fact it is a penny-wise,
pound-foolish blunder which is creating many more problems than
it solves. To the degree that society teaches the individual to
identify himself with a controlling will separate from his total
organism, it merely intensifies his feeling of separateness, from
himself and from others. In the long run it aggravates the
problem that it is designed to solve, because it creates a style
of personality in which an acute sense of responsibility is
coupled with an acute sense of alienation. </p>

<p> The mystical experience, whether induced by chemicals or
other means, enables the individual to be so peculiarly open and
sensitive to organic reality that the ego begins to be seen for
the transparent abstraction that it is. In its place there arises
(especially in the latter phases of the drug experience) a strong
sensation of oneness with others, presumably akin to the
sensitivity which enables a flock of birds to twist and turn as
one body. A sensation of this kind would seem to provide a far
better basis for social love and order than the fiction of the
separate will. </p>

<p> The general effect of the drugs seems to be that they
diminish defensive attitudes without blurring perception, as in
the case of alcohol. We become aware of things against which we
normally protect ourselves, and this accounts, I feel, for the
high susceptibility to anxiety in the early phases of the
experience. But when defenses are down we begin to see, not
hallucinations, but customarily ignored aspects of
reality---including a sense of social unity which civilized man
has long since lost. To regain this sense we do not need to
abandon culture and return to some precivilized level, for
neither in the drug experience nor in more general forms of
mystical experience does one lose the skills or the knowledge
which civilization has produced. </p>

<p> I have suggested that in these experiences we acquire clues
and insights which should be followed up through certain forms of
meditation. Are there not also ways in which we can, even without
using the drugs, come back to this sense of unity with other
people? The cultured Westerner has a very healthy distaste for
crowds and for the loss of personal identity in &quot;herd-
consciousness.&quot; But there is an enormous difference between
a formless crowd and an organic social group. The latter is a
relatively small association in which every member is in
communication with every other member. The former is a relatively
large association in which the members are in communication only
with a leader, and because of this crude structure a crowd is not
really an organism. To think of people as &quot;the masses&quot;
is to think of them by analogy with a subhuman style of order. </p>

<p> The corporate worship of churches might have been the natural
answer to this need, were it not that church services follow the
crowd pattern instead of the group pattern. Participants sit in
rows looking at the backs of each other's necks, and are in
communication only with the leader ---whether preacher, priest,
or some symbol of an autocratic God. Many churches try to make up
for this lack of communion by &quot;socials&quot; and dances
outside the regular services. But these events have a secular
connotation, and the type of communion involved is always
somewhat distant and demure. There are, indeed, discussion groups
in which the leader or &quot;resource person&quot; encourages
every member to have his say, but, again, the communion so
achieved is merely verbal and ideational. </p>

<p> The difficulty is that the defended defensiveness of the ego
recoils from the very thing that would allay it---from
associations with others based on physical gestures of affection,
from rites, dances, or forms of play which clearly symbolize
mutual love between the members of the group. Sometimes a play of
this kind will occur naturally and unexpectedly between close
friends, but how embarrassing it might be to be involved in the
deliberate organization of such a relationship with total
strangers ! Nevertheless, there are countless associations of
people who, claiming to be firm friends, still lack the nerve to
represent their affection for each other by physical and erotic
contact which might raise friendship to the level of love. Our
trouble is that we have ignored and thus feel insecure in the
enormous spectrum of love which lies between rather formal
friendship and genital sexuality, and thus are always afraid that
once we overstep the bounds of formal friendship we must slide
inevitably to the extreme of sexual promiscuity, or worse, to
homosexuality. </p>

<p> This unoccupied gulf between spiritual or brotherly love and
sexual love corresponds to the cleft between spirit and matter,
mind and body, so divided that our affections or our activities
are assigned either to one or to the other. There is no continuum
between the two, and the lack of any connection, any intervening
spectrum, makes spiritual love insipid and sexual love brutal. To
overstep the limits of brotherly love cannot, therefore, be
understood as anything but an immediate swing to its opposite
pole. Thus the subtle and wonderful gradations that lie between
the two are almost entirely lost. In other words, the greater
part of love is a relationship that we hardly allow, for love
experienced only in its extreme forms is like buying a loaf of
bread and being given only the two heels. </p>

<p> I have no idea what can be done to correct this in a culture
where personal identity seems to depend on being physically
aloof, and where many people shrink even from holding the hand of
someone with whom they have no formally sexual or familial tie.
To force or make propaganda for more affectionate contacts with
others would bring little more than embarrassment. One can but
hope that in the years to come our defenses will crack
spontaneously, like eggshells when the birds are ready to hatch.
This hope may gain some encouragement from all those trends in
philosophy and psychology, religion and science, from which we
are beginning to evolve a new image of man, not as a spirit
imprisoned in incompatible flesh, but as an organism inseparable
from his social and natural environment. </p>

<p> This is certainly the view of man disclosed by these
remarkable medicines which temporarily dissolve our defenses and
permit us to see what separative consciousness normally
ignores---the world as an interrelated whole. This vision is
assuredly far beyond any drug-induced hallucination or
superstitious fantasy. It wears a striking resemblance to the
unfamiliar universe that physicists and biologists are trying to
describe here and now. For the clear direction of their thought
is toward the revelation of a unified cosmology, no longer
sundered by the ancient irreconcilables of mind and matter,
substance and attribute, thing and event, agent and act, stuff
and energy. And if this should come to be a universe in which man
is neither thought nor felt to be a lonely subject confronted by
alien and threatening objects, we shall have a cosmology not only
unified but also joyous. </p>

<hr>

<p> <a
href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm">LSD
and the Psychedelics Menu Page</a> </p>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>