
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-53</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B039-140</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/General/family10.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122071527 text/html 18334
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:15:15 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:30:50 GMT
Content-length: 18116
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Richardson-Taylor Reunion News February 13, 1994</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<h1>Richardson-Taylor Reunion News </h1>

<hr>

<p>February 13, 1994 </p>

<p>David &quot;Bigfoot&quot; Leard wrote to me with a reunion
update, so I thought I would pass it along. </p>

<p>As you all may know, there was something of an earthquake down
here. Some people said it was God's reaction to the thought that
Laurence might reproduce but I take a more charitable view. That
big freeway overpass that collapsed that you saw on TV is about
five miles from where I live, and I go over that exact stretch of
road every morning on the way to work. It woke us up (to be sure,
it woke us up) at 4:30. The whole house was flying around and all
the lights were out, except for the flashes of the explosions in
the distance. We crawled over the junk to get out of our bedroom
and located the kids and they were OK, except that Serena had
gotten buried by falling furniture but was none the worst for
wear. Bonnie evidently got hit in the shoulder by a falling lamp.
That is all we can figure anyway, because she did not notice it
at the time and did not even report any pain until several hours
later. </p>

<p>When these things happens, all the best laid plans go right
out the window. We had bought rechargeable flashlights for years
and had them all over the house most of the time, in addition to
numerous regular flashlights of various types and sizes. In the
first two hours we could not find any of them. After that, the
sun was up. Luckily, however, we did happen to have adequate
supplies of food and drinkable water to last through the next few
days. There were no utilities at all for about 24 hours, then we
got electricity, and two days later we got running water, but had
to boil it or put bleach in it to drink it for about three weeks.
There were people passing out free bottled water all over the
place and the Miller beer company even bottled up a bunch of
water in beer bottles and passed it out, two cases for each
person, for free. </p>

<p>There was a lot of damage to nearly everything. The roads were
buckled all over the place, and some had inch-wide cracks which I
tracked for more than a mile. Water was seeping up through the
pavement from the broken water mains and most of the concrete
block walls I saw had fallen down. There were several buildings
around which suffered severe structural damage and there were
three people that Bonnie works with whose homes were destroyed. </p>

<p>Basically, the whole house was trashed. All of the bookcases,
entertainment centers, and cabinets in the house fell over. The
china cabinet fell on the dining room table and pulverized our
crystal, china, and miscellaneous other collectibles. Every
television in the house was face down on the floor and we lost a
few VCRs and other appliances. </p>

<p>We found out later that the fault ran from Northridge, right
up through the center of Santa Clarita and broke the surface just
a little north of us. Considering the size of the quake and its
proximity to us we were pretty lucky. </p>

<p>The freeway which collapsed was, of course, the only major
road into Los Angeles, so that means, naturally, that there are
huge traffic jams at that point nearly all day long because they
have to steer all that freeway traffic through a bunch of old
surface roads. (Not real good planning, guys!) As a result,
thousands of people who never would have dreamed of taking the
brand-new Metrolink commuter train are now taking it every day.
As fate would have, among this crowd was my eldest daughter
Alyssa. </p>

<p>As a result of the earthquake, Alyssa was on national
television twice in the same day. The second time was when she
got back to the train depot in Santa Clarita on her way home.
When she got off the train, she saw a Channel 7 KABC television
crew and recognized the cameraman as a guy who lives just down
the street from us. They interviewed her about the quake (One of
those typical news interviews -- &quot;You have just seen half
your town destroyed in a few seconds -- how do you feel?&quot;)
and what she was doing to solve her commuting problems. The
interview wound up on the national news feed and was shown all
over the US. </p>

<p>But that wasn't the good one. </p>

<p>It seems that, earlier in the day, Alyssa had been waiting on
the train platform in Burbank and there was a KNBC Channel 4 crew
down there doing a live remote. KNBC was showing the world how
all these people were now crowding into the trains and all the
rest. While this was going on, the train people started making
announcements to the crowd to tell them to move in back of the
yellow line, because the training was coming. Alyssa said the
television lights were in everybody's eyes so they could not
where the yellow line was. So she turned to the cameraman and
asked him, &quot;Would you please turn down the lights or point
them in another direction? Because we can't see where the yellow
line is.&quot; </p>

<p>The cameraman did not respond, so Alyssa tapped him on the
shoulder (she said he was about 6-2, she says she is a full five
feet) and said, &quot;Could you please turn down the lights or
point them in another direction? We can't see the yellow
line.&quot; </p>

<p>The cameraman did not respond, so Alyssa stuck her hand in
front of the lens and said, a little louder this time,
&quot;Would you please turn down the lights or point them in
another direction?&quot; </p>

<p>At that point, the cameraman grabbed her hand and twisted it
away rather roughly which hurt her, so Alyssa gave him a few
choice words but the crowd held her back from an all-out assault.
A few minutes later, the camera crew and the dippy newscaster
were looking around for someone to interview and they walked over
to Alyssa to interview her. Alyssa was pissed. </p>

<p>&quot;You want to interview something?,&quot; she said,
&quot;Why don't you interview this finger you almost broke?&quot;
And she presented it to them -- on live television. That's my
little lady. </p>

<p>The earthquake was quite a shaker but equally unnerving is the
fact that ever since the big one we have had other earthquakes, 3
to 5 pointers, several times a day. For the first few days we
were having them every five or ten minutes around the clock. It
made it difficult to sleep because every time you would doze off
another one would come rolling around. It is slowing down lately
though. I can only recall a couple of earthquakes today. </p>

<p>The roads were out, the utilities were out, and the phones
were out so there was nothing left to do but party. A bunch of
Serena's friends came over because our house was in better shape
than their condo and they did not want to be in their condo while
the rock and roll continued. So we all broke out just about
everything drinkable, and barbecued all the fish and meat that we
thought would spoil and partied hardy for a couple of days. It
was a major inconvenience to be sure, but we'll make it. </p>

<p>Anyway, David sent me a letter, reproduced below, which lays
out most of his latest information on the reunion. David always
types his letters on a computer, which makes them very neat. He
is different from Becky who is liable to write her letters across
the face of Ed McMahon to save paper, or Pete who has Sandy write
his letters so there will be no spelling errors, or Joanne, who .
. . . well, we won't talk about Joanne's letters. </p>

<p>Here's the latest on reunion bookings at Mountain Home Lodge.
The Lodge's reservations have gone very well. The rooms at the
Lodge were all booked by January 3. I called them and arranged to
also use one of the owner's cabins. (They call it a cabin, it's
really much more than a cabin.) There were four additional rooms
available, now only three. Bud Richardson reserved one of the
rooms on January 4. </p>

<p>If all the rooms at the cabin are taken, I have the names of a
B&amp;B and two motels in Leavenworth, WA </p>

<p>&quot;Run of the River&quot;, a Bed and Breakfast, just south
of town, views of the river. 1-800-288-6491. </p>

<p>Ritterhauf, Motel, 55 Units, lower cost, with kitchens in some
1-800-255-5845 </p>

<p>Leavenworth Village Inn, newer place, a little more expensive
that Ritterhauf. 1-800-343-8198. </p>

<p>There are other motels in and around Leavenworth, I don't have
specific information on them. I have no new information on the
campground reservations of how they are going. But, this
campground is really not any more expensive than others used in
the past that were in resort areas. The Icicle River RV Park,
7305 Icicle Road, Leavenworth, WA 98826 (509) 548-5420 </p>

<p>Now that the Lodge is filled (and possibly the extra cabin), I
am negotiating with the owners next week (January 15) to
eliminate the day-use fees for family members who will be eating
lunch and/or dinner at the lodge. Drive your own vehicles to the
Lodge and save another few dollars. This will keep the costs
down. In addition, those folks who are flying up to the area, may
be able to share rental car expense by meeting at SEATAC Airport
and driving together to the lodge. There is also the option of
sharing room(s) at the Lodge or the cabin. Another options is
helping out those who are have special financial difficulties
with money from the Reunion Kitty and any contributions from
those willing to part with a dollar or two. Kids will be welcome
now that we have booked the entire lodge. </p>

<p>Kids will be welcome as long as they are kept on chains. </p>

<p>This reunion is a little different from past versions and
proving to be more popular than first thought. Give it a try. But
move quickly, the accommodations are going fast. </p>

<p>After the letter came I got a call from Michael who said that
David had more news so I called him. When I first called he said
he couldn't talk right then because Pat had broken her foot while
trying escape back to her people and he had to go drag her back
into the house before the neighbors saw her, or something like
that. When he called back he told me this tremendously long tale
about how he was out of work because there had been a lot of
securities fraud, and embezzlement, and a couple of liquor store
stick-ups by employees of the firm and the whole thing had been
shut down by various vice squads. He assured me that he did not
steal near as much as the other employees and, therefore,
expected to be able to plea bargain his way out of it. As usual,
I wish him the best and I will attempt to protect his rapidly
deteriorating reputation at every opportunity. </p>

<p>Then he told me that Pete had sent him an ungodly sum of money
which was left over from the hamburger sales at the previous
reunion. He asked me to tell everyone that being poor and
destitute and generally socially undesirable should be no
impediment to attending the reunion. He said that money is
available to help out those who need it. Those who need help
should just ask, he said. I immediately made a suggestion as to
how this money could be most constructively used but David,
thick-headed as he is, did not go for it. </p>

<p>He said also that, because the other paying customers had
canceled all their reservations when they heard that we were
coming, the day use fee has been eliminated, and children will be
granted free run of the facilities, including the deer-hunting
range next door. </p>

<p>For those who have too much common decency too stay with the
rest of the group, David said that he had discovered a KOA
campground half a mile or so away from the road to the lodge, and
a pretty dumpy RV place at the bottom of the hill. He also
mentioned the Linderhof motel and the Icicle Inn, a particularly
inviting place, just from its name alone. He says that the
campgrounds are going pretty fast up there so you better make
your reservations fast or you will be sleeping by the side of the
road as usual. </p>

<p>And now a spot of news for the drug legalizers among you. You
will be pleased to know that our Resolution has recently received
endorsements from, among others, the LA Times, the Mayor of
Minneapolis, the President of the Detroit City Council, a Senator
from Colombia, the entire staff of the San Bernardino County
Probation Department, the entire staff of the Harbor/UCLA Medical
Center, the Berkeley City Council, and every District Attorney in
Rotterdam, The Netherlands, just to name a few. </p>

<p>Judge Gray and I have made numerous appearances on radio and
television down here and we almost never get even a single
opposing phone call. In fact, one of Judge Gray's appearances on
radio brought so many favorable letters that the station decided
to run it again. Two weeks ago we appeared together on a TV talk
show in Palmdale. Prior to the show the producers had arranged
for representatives of the Drug Enforcement Administration, the
District Attorney, and the Sheriff to come on the show and take
the other side. The morning of the show the producers got phone
calls from each of the groups and, when they heard who was going
to be on against them, they all suddenly remembered that they had
conflicting appointments, or could not find a baby-sitter, or
something. The real problem, of course, is that they have been
getting the snot beat out of them every time they showed up. As a
result, the judge and I had about two hours of free TV air time
to say what we wanted. They did manage to find a drug abuse
counselor to oppose us, but he wound up agreeing with us and
volunteered to help with the Resolution. </p>

<p>The major national drug policy organizations such as the Drug
Policy Foundation, NORML, and various other groups are beginning
to see the wisdom in our strategy and have adopted the proposals
I have outlined as their primary strategy. If you were reading
the news lately, you know that Surgeon-General Joycelyn Elders
stated that the issue of drug legalization should be studied.
This remark was a direct result of our Resolution. You may not
know that, in a later interview she referred to some things I had
written (which someone else had sent her) and said that she had
read some of the research on the subject and was more convinced
than ever that legalization should be seriously considered. You
may expect to hear more from her on this subject in the near
future. </p>

<p>H.R. 3100, the bill which calls for a 13-member Federal
commission to study drug policy is alive and well and gaining
sponsors in Congress. Basically, the bill calls for a panel of
thirteen people to be appointed, five by the President and four
each by the Senate and House. The panel is supposed to hear all
of the relevant evidence on drug policy and make a report on the
findings within eighteen months. This is an intelligent,
reasonable approach to solving the drug problem and I hope
everyone will write to their Senators and Representatives and ask
them to support this bill. </p>

<p>We are also producing a television show for local access cable
TV. I don't know if you know it or not, but if you have a
television show that you think ought to be aired, the cable TV
companies are required to show it at no cost to you. (Provided
the content is not obscene, etc.) As a result, we have people all
over the country showing these shows on television. </p>

<p>One of the most interesting shows is on the history of
marijuana. It includes a United States Department of Agriculture
film called &quot;Hemp for Victory.&quot; The film was made in
1942 and encourages farmers to grow hemp (marijuana) because the
US Navy literally could not sail without it. It was so vital to
the US military during World War II that farmers who grew hemp
were exempted from military duty. Prior to 1937, marijuana was
grown throughout the United States in industrial quantities. It
was the primary source of durable cloth such as the sixty tons of
sail and ropes carried by the average large sailing ship, or the
canvas which covered the Conestoga wagons of the pioneers. It was
also the primary source of oil-based fuels, paints, and other
products. &quot;Hemp for Victory&quot; really makes people wonder
how it came to be illegal in the first place. </p>

<p>That's it for now. Call David if you have any questions. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>