
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-9</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-1</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf71_80.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043610 text/html 39415
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:36:02 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:35 GMT
Content-length: 39197
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp facts 71 - 80</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>Hemp FACT #71- Atl. Mthly-15 </p>

<p>Date: 95-03-28 10:50:19 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 15</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Inside The Industry--cont. </p>

<p>Take a map of the United States and draw a circle, including
within its circumference Indiana, Illinois, and Michigan, with
portions of Ohio to the east, Kentucky and Tennessee to the
south, and Missouri, Iowa, and Nebraska to the west. The region
within that circle, Steve White believes, is producing the
majority of the marijuana grown in the United States. The
highest-quality marijuana is cultivated indoors on the West
Coast, but for sheer volume, no other area surpasses the U.S.
heartland. White does not find this surprising. During the Second
World War the U.S. government encouraged farmers throughout the
Corn Belt to plant almost 300,000 acres of marijuana, in the
hopes of replacing fiber supplies from Asia which had been cut
off by the Japanese. The program, whose slogan was &quot;Hemp for
Victory,&quot; turned out to be a financial disaster and left
marijuana growing wild throughout the region. Known as ditchweed,
this marijuana now blankets tens of thousands of acres. For years
it had a negligible delta-9-THC content, and was used mainly as
filler by drug dealers, but there is evidence that the ditchweed
may be cross-pollinating with the potent marijuana now cultivated
outdoors. The same growing conditions and soil that are ideal for
corn are also ideal for marijuana. Most local sheriff's
departments employ only three to five officers, with more
important things to do than hunt for marijuana. And over the past
fifteen years there have been a lot of people with strong
agricultural skills who have badly needed money--or have wanted
more of it than almost any other job in the region could provide.
A bushel of corn sells for roughly $2.50, a bushel of manicured
marijuana for about $70,000. White thinks that marijuana is the
largest cash crop in the United States, and if not the largest in
Indiana, then right up there with corn and soybeans. Though he is
proud of what his office has accomplished, White has no
illusions: &quot;There's more than we think.&quot; </p>

<p>During the 1960s and early 1970s nearly all the marijuana
smoked in the United States was imported, mainly from Mexico,
Colombia, and Jamaica. Domestic production rose in reaction to a
number of events. The spraying of an herbicide, paraquat, over
Mexican marijuana fields, begun in 1975, created uneasiness about
that nation's product. Successful interdiction efforts by the
U.S. Border Patrol and the Coast Guard made smuggling marijuana
more difficult. And the tougher legal sanctions against
trafficking led some foreign drug dealers to switch from
marijuana, a bulk agricultural good with a strong smell, to
cocaine, which is easier to conceal and brings a far higher
return per pound. As marijuana prices rose, American growers
responded to consumer demand. Mark A.R. Kleiman, an associate
professor at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government,
finds this to be a rare instance in which protectionism actually
worked. The anti-drug movement and the burgeoning American
marijuana crop led the DEA to devote more of its resources to
marijuana investigations. Kleiman estimates that by 1988 federal
anti-marijuana efforts totaled approximately $970 million--about
20 to 25 percent of all federal drug-enforcement expenditures. By
1992 federal convictions for marijuana outnumbered those for
heroin, crack cocaine, and LSD combined. The DEA's Cannabis
Eradication/Suppression Program began in 1979 in two states,
California and Hawaii; it now looks for marijuana-farming
operations--called &quot;grows&quot; or &quot;gardens&quot; by
members of the trade--in all fifty states. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #71- Atl. Mthly-16 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-29 11:14:36 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 16</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Inside The Industry--cont. </p>

<p>No one knows exactly how much marijuana is cultivated in the
United States. The numbers published by the government--or anyone
else--are largely speculative. In 1992 the DEA eradicated 3,405
metric tons of cultivated marijuana in the United States, an
amount the DEA says represents more than half the total domestic
output. Critics believe that the DEA actually finds only 10 to 20
percent of the marijuana being grown in this country. With prices
ranging from $500 a pound, for low-quality New Mexican marijuana,
to more than $5,000 a pound for &quot;boutique&quot; strains like
Northern Lights and Afghan Kush, it can be confidently stated
that the black market for American marijuana, whatever the actual
tonnage, is immense. </p>

<p>Growers are increasingly moving their crops indoors, using
artificial light and hydroponics, to avoid theft, reduce the risk
of detection, control the growing process, and profit from up to
six harvests a year. Thirty mature plants can easily be grown in
an area the size of a bathtub. I asked Steve White to list some
of the places where he has discovered indoor grow operations. He
laughed. &quot;It would be tough for me to say places we haven't
found them.&quot; Often a false wall hides a grow room in a
house, or a house's foundation doesn't match its basement, which
seems oddly smaller, or there are second stories with no
stairwells, or crawl spaces are hidden beneath floors. Once White
rummaged through a child's closet and found the entrance to a
grow area behind the toys. Without need of a search warrant, the
DEA employs thermal-imaging devices, mounted on helicopters and
low-flying airplanes, to detect abnormal heat sources that may
indicate the presence of an indoor growing operation--or a
pottery kiln, or a Jacuzzi. What is found depends upon the skill
of the technician. White has learned that one of the best ways to
find an indoor grow area is with his nose: no matter how
well-vented the operation, and despite electronic devices that
can neutralize odors in the air, marijuana will exude a powerful
scent. A few years ago indoor grows were often huge. A group of
janitors in Anderson, Indiana, who had traveled to Israel to
study hydroponics, were caught with 8,100 plants in a building
with walls constructed a foot thick to thwart infrared detection.
Nowadays growers rent storage units and apartments, using phony
names and paying in cash, and build small grow operations at
different locations, with timing devices and automatic controls.
The authorities may find one or two--a loss anticipated in the
grower's business plan--without being able to trace ownership. </p>

<p>White has smoked marijuana once, while working undercover, and
did not enjoy the experience. He chain-smokes cigarettes, regrets
it, and sees no need to add marijuana to the nation's list of
legal drugs. &quot;We've got tobacco, we've got alcohol,&quot; he
said. &quot;Jesus Christ, do we need another hallucinogenic,
carcinogenic substance on the market?&quot; What disturbs him
most about marijuana is the phenomenal sums of money it funnels
into an underground economy, and the great resulting potential
for corruption among public officials. I asked whether a sense of
futility ever creeps into his work, given the extent of
cultivation in his state. &quot;I'm not such a fool as to sit
here and tell you that we're going to wipe out marijuana,&quot;
he replied. But there is no doubt in his mind that the DEA exerts
a deterrent effect. &quot;Every time we have a helicopter go up
on a mission,&quot; White said, &quot;there's someone down below
who sees it and thinks, 'Maybe I better not.'&quot; </p>

<p>Part 17 tommorow. Anyone wishing entire text of article,
email. Request Word or Text format. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #72- Atl. Mthly-17 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-30 10:55:19 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 17</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Inside The Industry--cont. </p>

<p>Ralph Weisheit, a professor of criminal justice at Illinois
State University, does not know Steve White but has come to many
of the same conclusions about marijuana cultivation in the
Midwest. Weisheit first became interested in the subject eight
years ago, when he saw, on the television news, an old Illinois
farmer being arrested for cultivating marijuana. The farmer and
his son never smoked marijuana; they grew it to save their farm
from foreclosure. Weisheit was intrigued. With a grant from the
research arm of the U.S. Justice Department, he conducted a
two-year study of marijuana cultivation, interviewing
law-enforcement officials in five states and dozens of Illinois
growers who had been caught and convicted. The book based on that
study, Domestic Marijuana: A Neglected Industry (1992),
chronicles the rise of marijuana production in the United States
and offers a fascinating portrait of the growers. Weisheit agrees
that the majority of marijuana grown in America probably
originates in the nine-state region described by Steve White. He
also thinks that marijuana is the nation's largest cash crop, by
a very wide margin. </p>

<p>Estimates of how many Americans grow marijuana range from one
to three million, of which anywhere from 100,000 to 200,000 are
commercial growers. Weisheit found that aside from being
predominantly white and male, marijuana growers generally do not
fit any common stereotypes. Some are pragmatists, growing the
drug purely for the money; during the farm crisis of the 1980s
many farmers in the Marijuana Belt started cultivating marijuana
out of desperation. They found it not only easy money but also
easy work. As one farmer told Weisheit, &quot;You know, I spent
most of my life trying to kill weeds, so trying to keep one alive
was hardly a challenge.&quot; Other growers are hustlers by
nature, classic American entrepreneurs; they might as well be
selling time-shares in a vacation condominium. They try to build
marijuana empires. The risks of the trade only add to its appeal.
Other growers are less competitive, giving away marijuana to
friends or selling it at slightly above cost, sharing
agricultural techniques, comparing their crops the way neighbors
might compare homegrown tomatoes. Marijuana growers are educated
and uneducated, liberal and conservative. They are extremely
secretive, worrying more about thieves than about the police. Few
belong to NORML (the National Organization for the Reform of
Marijuana Laws) and few read High Times magazine or add their
names to any list that might arouse suspicion. Indoor growing
often attracts people who love gizmos. There are endless
contraptions that can be added to a grow room, from
computer-controlled watering systems to electric tables that
distribute nutrients evenly by tilting back and forth. Some
growers become connoisseurs, producing high-quality marijuana in
small quantities, manipulating not only the level of delta-9-THC
through cross-breeding but also the proportions of all the other
cannabinoids to subtly--or not so subtly--affect the nature of
the high. Weisheit met growers and law-enforcement officers alike
who were extraordinarily passionate about marijuana, eager to
discuss its arcane details for hours. He was surprised, after the
publication of his book, by how little controversy it generated
in either camp. His mother was disturbed, however, by one of its
central implications: &quot;She's very anti-drug,&quot; Weisheit
says, &quot;and her comment was, 'The thing I don't like about
this book is that it makes these people seem so normal.'&quot; </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #73- Atl. Mthly-18 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-31 10:40:47 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 18</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Inside The Industry--cont. </p>

<p>Late one night I met a commercial marijuana grower who
introduced himself as &quot;Dave.&quot; He has been growing
marijuana on and off for more than a decade, beginning outdoors
and graduating to a series of increasingly complex indoor grow
systems. Understandably paranoid and suspicious, Dave is also
quite proud of his work and regrets being unable to discuss it
with friends. His grow operation had to be built surreptitiously,
over a period of weeks, like a factory assembled by hand. It
utilizes about $50,000 worth of high-tech hydroponic equipment.
When the construction was complete, the whole thing looked so
beautiful that Dave wanted to throw an opening-night party, but
he decided that would not be a good idea. Though he always hated
gardening and never passed a science class in his life, he now
has a grasp of marijuana botany, plant biology, and advanced
greenhouse-management techniques which only Special Agent White
could fully appreciate. As he smoked some of his most recent
harvest, Dave shared with me some of the pleasures, risks,
rewards, and bizarre phenomena associated with his profession. </p>

<p>Hidden behind a fake wall, entered through a secret door, in a
neighborhood where you would never, ever, expect to find it,
Dave's operation is much larger than most. There are hundreds of
marijuana plants in long rows, growing from cubes of rock wool, a
soil-less medium spun from synthetic fibers, connected through an
intricate system of white plastic pipes. Suspended above them are
extremely bright high-pressure sodium lights, which require a
surge of power from special ballasts to start up. On the ceiling
is the bluish flame of a carbon-dioxide generator burning natural
gas. The windows have been sealed and blacked out. The room is
quite warm, the air thick and humid, the whole place filled with
a pungent smell reminiscent of fresh hay. Like a greenhouse
without glass, it feels very still and quiet, except for the
sound of water rushing through narrow pipes. </p>

<p>When everything is running smoothly, Dave controls the
elements necessary for his plants: air, light, heat, and water.
In a closed chamber there is no wind; here a ventilation system
provides it, circulating air rich in carbon dioxide. When outdoor
temperatures drop too low, Dave uses the CO2 generator on the
ceiling--in effect &quot;fertilizing the air.&quot; Pumps and
timers automatically water the plants, also delivering nutrients
such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, which would normally
be derived from soil. One of the critical factors in growing
marijuana is the proportion of darkness to light. Sometimes
Dave's high-pressure sodium lights burn eighteen hours a day,
raising the temperature in the grow room to as high as 110
degrees. During the female plant's reproductive stage there must
be long periods of total, uninterrupted darkness. As little as
two footcandles of light can disrupt the delicate process by
which delta-9-THC accumulates in the buds. Turning on a
flashlight at the wrong moment, Dave says, is enough to ruin his
plants. </p>

<p>He is truly a connoisseur, growing an expensive strain of
marijuana from the northern Hindu Kush. As he describes how some
outdoor growers stuff marijuana into plastic garbage bags while
it is still wet, he grimaces, like a master vintner appalled by
the improper handling of grapes. The buds are very fragile, he
says: &quot;You're trying to coax this mature flower to retain
its essence--and then store it and seal it at that instant in
time.&quot; His finished product is deep green and aromatic, like
some rare, exotic spice. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #74- Atl. Mthly-19 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-01 11:03:34 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 19</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Inside The Industry--cont. </p>

<p>Growing marijuana indoors requires much more work than
cultivating it outdoors. There is also more potential for
disaster. A splash of liquid on a hot light will cause it to
explode. A broken pipe can flood the room with hundreds of
gallons of water. A power outage shuts the whole system down. The
nutrient solution, if improperly monitored, can quickly turn too
acidic and, as Dave puts it, &quot;give the plants a heart
attack.&quot; More common, and yet somehow more surreal, are
insect infestations that can harm valuable young plants. Dave has
battled spider mites, greenhouse whiteflies, and aphids.
Insecticides are not an option in an enclosed room, with a crop
that will be smoked. Dave uses biological controls, unleashing
hungry young predators upon unwanted bugs. Recently he released
thousands of miniature wasps. This is insanity, he thought; but
it worked. Inside a nearby refrigerator he always keeps 500
ladybug eggs, next to the soda, in case of an emergency. At the
moment Dave is contending with gnats, who leave his plants alone
but swarm and bite him as he walks about the grow room in the
dark. </p>

<p>Someone At The Door </p>

<p>On March 18, 1990, a pair of deputy sheriffs in Johnson
County, Indiana, spotted a red Jeep being driven erratically and
signaled for its driver to pull off the road. Behind the wheel
they found Jerry Montgomery, obviously intoxicated; littering the
truck were three empty vodka bottles, a five-gallon bucket full
of marijuana, and a gray box containing more than $13,000 in
cash. After obtaining a warrant, sheriffs searched Montgomery's
house, finding more marijuana and a locked briefcase hidden under
his bed. Deputy John Myers pried it open with a screwdriver. In
the briefcase were receipts for farm equipment; documents
mentioning R.P.Z. Investments, Claude Atkinson, and Ernest
Montgomery; an option to buy a property owned by Martha Brummett;
and a number of books suggesting that this arrest was the
beginning, not the end, of a trail: Indoor Marijuana
Horticulture, The Primo Plant, and How to Grow Marijuana Indoors
Under Lights. </p>

<p>The investigation eventually led authorities to a 500-acre
farm close to Solsberry, in Greene County, owned by Arno Zepp, of
Investment Holdings, Inc. On August 22 federal, state, and local
law-enforcement agents arrested Claude Atkinson, raided the farm,
and, with the help of volunteers from the Indiana National Guard,
destroyed 10,000 marijuana plants. Atkinson soon began to talk.
In May of 1991 Ernest Montgomery was arrested at his Gosport
cabin, where 7,000 marijuana seedlings sat in little pots, ready
for planting. Early that same morning Mark Young was awakened by
someone at the front door. Unlike his former business associates,
Young was not growing anything. He and his girlfriend, Patricia,
were in the process of moving to Florida. When he saw a man with
a badge and a gun, Young had no idea what was happening, but
assumed that it must have something to do with unpaid taxes. </p>

<p>Tomorrow (or Mon.) will be the final part of this article, but
don't worry I have more :-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #75- Atl. Mthly-Finale </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-03 10:40:31 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Finale</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>More than a dozen law-enforcement officers surrounded the
house. Their commander, a DEA agent, treated Young politely,
allowing him to get dressed and agreeing not to handcuff him in
front of the neighbors. At the station Young read his indictment.
He was being charged, under federal law, not only for his role in
distributing 700 pounds of marijuana but also for conspiring to
manufacture all 12,500 marijuana plants grown on Martha
Brummett's farm. Young was unaware of the punishment he might
face until later that day. John Hollywood, a bail bondsman in
Indianapolis, arrived in the afternoon to secure his release. But
the government refused to set bail. Under Indiana's strict state
law, the same charges would bring a maximum sentence of
twenty-eight years--at most, fourteen years served in prison, and
probably much less. But under federal law Young's two prior state
felony convictions, one of them more than seventeen years old,
classified him as a career drug offender. This arrest could prove
his third strike. At the U.S. attorney's discretion, he faced a
possible mandatory-minimum sentence of life imprisonment without
possibility of parole. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #76- A True Story </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-04 11:19:51 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This next series of posts will be a sad, but true story. It's
not near as long as the Atlantic Monthly article. </p>

<p>From: delisle@eskimo.com (Ben Delisle) </p>

<p>Date: Thu, 27 May 1993 05:19:52 GMT </p>

<p>[Forwarded] </p>

<p><b>&quot;Justice Goes To Pot&quot;</b> </p>

<p><b>by B. J. Oppenheimer</b> </p>

<p>As you read this, I'll probably be behind bars, serving a
possible five to 40 years in federal prison with no hope of
parole. My house will have been confiscated by the government,
and a fine of $340,000 will have been levied against me. </p>

<p>I'm a nonviolent offender with no prior record. Married for 20
years with two small children, I'm a college graduate and
published writer. I have a good reputation in the community and
have been involved in many charitable organizations. My only
crime was planting a handful of marijuana seeds... </p>

<p>When I was first arrested for growing pot last August, I
freely admitted my guilt, fully expecting to receive the
relatively minor sentence usually meted out in marijuana cases.
Until recently, marijuana use and cultivation was decriminalized
in many places, and even now it's only a misdemeanor in most
states (including my own). It usually warrants nothing more than
a suspended sentence and a small fine when prosecuted at the
state level. Last year a man in Upstate New York was convicted of
growing 154 plants - many more than I am charged with - and his
only punishment was a $100 fine - less than a dollar a plant. </p>

<p>My penalty probably would have been similar - if I'd been
tried in state court. But more and more, these cases are being
turned over to the federal government for prosecution, where
penalties are much stiffer. What would've earned me, at most, a
fine and probation in state court carries a mandatory minimum
sentence of five years (and a maximum of 40) when prosecuted at
the federal level. </p>

<p>It's all because of recently enacted mandatory
minimum-sentencing laws. They impose statutory minimums for all
drug crimes and prohibit the judge from any exercise of judicial
discretion in arriving at a sentence. The judge is enjoined
against taking into account things like my reputation in the
community, charitable works, or lack of prior record. Since
there's no such thing as parole in federal prison anymore, if I'm
sentenced to five years (assuming I lose my case), that's how
many I'll serve. </p>

<p>Chalk it up to the government's &quot;get tough on crime&quot;
policy: So what if a few undeserving people serve inflated
sentences? It's worth it to keep the streets free from crime. The
problem is, rather on being tough on crime, the net effect of
mandatory minimums is to be soft on crime - violent crime. Since
the are no mandatory minimum sentences for offenses like rape,
child molestation, murder, aggravated assault, et cetera, violent
criminals are often released early to make room for nonviolent
first offenders like me. The average murderer now serves only six
and a half years in jail (versus the five years minimum I'll
serve). But if our jail terms are similar, there's one important
difference between the murderer and me: He doesn't lose his
house. </p>

<p>Even though my house was bought with legitimate earnings, and
there was no marijuana grown on my property, it was confiscated
by the police shortly after I was arrested. The primary reason
given was that fertilizer was found in my basement. My house was
thus considered a &quot;facilitator&quot; of the crime, which
justifies its forfeiture. When I learned that the government had
seized my property on such flimsy pretenses, it infuriated me,
but what bothered me even more was that they did it without even
trying me first. </p>

<p>cont. Tomorrow. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #77- A True Story-2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-05 10:34:53 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Part 2. of the sad story </p>

<p>From: delisle@eskimo.com (Ben Delisle) </p>

<p>Date: Thu, 27 May 1993 05:19:52 GMT </p>

<p><b>[Forwarded]</b> </p>

<p><b>&quot;Justice Goes To Pot&quot;</b> </p>

<p><b>by B. J. Oppenheimer</b> </p>

<p>Since passage of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984,
property can be seized if one is merely suspected of using it in
a crime. It's not even necessary to be charged, much less
convicted. It's up to the individual to prove that he didn't use
it illegally. And since this is a civil forfeiture, and public
defenders are only provided in criminal cases, he's forced to
foot the bill for a lawyer. Often he also must put up a bond,
sometimes as much as $10,000, which usually makes fighting the
forfeiture cost-prohibitive. </p>

<p>In the majority of cases, the government simply steps in and
takes the property without even bothering to charge anyone with a
crime, and there's not a thing to be done about it. Since 1984
almost two and a half billion dollars in property has been seized
this way. There's another difference between the murderer and me.
He isn't subject to penalties for tax-stamp violation. Even
though marijuana is illegal, in many states you're required by
law to buy tax stamps for its cultivation - at a cost of $1,000
per plant - something that's virtually impossible to do without
incriminating yourself. Yet even if you are somehow able to
purchase the stamps without getting arrested but don't actually
affix the stamps to the plants - in the wind and rain - you're
still liable for a heavy fine. And they don't just count the
living, growing plants. They count the dead ones and even the
cutoff stems from plants that were thinned from the garden and
thrown away earlier. </p>

<p>Even though the total weight of marijuana in my case was under
five pounds, with all these other factors added in, the fine was
$340,000. When I asked my lawyer how the government expected me
to pay such an astronomical fine, he said, &quot;They don't. They
want to wipe out your assets. Then when - and if - you get out of
jail, they intend to garnish your wages for the remainder. Of
course, by that time there'll be all that interest....&quot; </p>

<p>But the fine is just part of my penalty for tax-stamp
violation. It also carries criminal (versus civil) penalties of
up to five years in state prison. That's on top of the five to 40
years I'll already be serving in </p>

<p>federal prison. All for the crime of putting a handful of
marijuana seeds in the ground. If this seems like a violation of
the Eighth Amendment (&quot;Let the punishment fit the
crime&quot;), it's not the only time the Constitution's been
ignored when it comes to drug law. Confiscation of property
without due process is a violation of the Fifth Amendment. Police
can now obtain search warrants based on anonymous tips, which is
a violation of the Fourth Amendment. And a defense attorney's
legal fees can be seized in drug cases, a violation of the Sixth
Amendment. </p>

<p>But if drug laws are chipping away at the Constitution,
they're wreaking havoc on our prison system. Federal prisons are
currently at 146 percent of capacity, and drug offenders serving
mandatory minimum sentences make up 57 percent of the population
(more than half had no prior arrests). At the current rate of
incarceration, nearly 70 percent of all federal inmates will be
drug offenders serving mandatory minimums by 1995. </p>

<p>The United States now imprisons more of its citizens per
capita than any other country in the world (455 per 100,000
people). That's compared to the No. 2 country, South Africa, with
311 per 100,000. As stated earlier, violent offenders often must
be granted early release to make room for this influx. In a
recent four-year period in Florida more than 130,000 inmates
(including muggers, armed robbers, et cetera) were released, and
one out of three went on to commit new crimes. The F.B.I. reports
that the rate of violent crimes in America increased by 24
percent from 1987 to 1991, and many people feel that mandatory
minimums have a lot to do with it. </p>

<p>cont. tomorrow </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #78- A True Story-3 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-06 10:40:59 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>The final part of the &quot;Sad Story&quot;. What a waste!!!!!
What a disgrace!!!! Don't it make you proud to be an American? My
family came to this land in 1637. They would probably turn around
and go home if they saw the travesty of the American injustice
system today. </p>

<p>From: delisle@eskimo.com (Ben Delisle) </p>

<p>Date: Thu, 27 May 1993 05:19:52 GMT </p>

<p>[Forwarded] </p>

<p><b>&quot;Justice Goes To Pot&quot;</b> </p>

<p><b>by B. J. Oppenheimer</b> </p>

<p>But apart from the hypothetical increase in violent crime due
to mandatory minimums, there's the undeniable increase in
taxpayer costs. The National Institute of Corrections estimates
that in 1992, the United States built facilities for 2,000 cells
(at a cost of $100 million) per week to accommodate the exploding
prison population - and construction costs were only a part of
the total. It's been estimated that in five years, the financial
obligations incurred by U.S. corrections could be double the
current national deficit. On top of that, it costs on average
over $20,000 a year to house, feed, clothe, and guard each of the
81,426 federal prisoners. </p>

<p>And this is to say nothing of the increased cost of social
services of inmates' families, which were previously being
provided for by the inmates themselves. Over 30 million Americans
regularly smoke marijuana, so it's not surprising that a lot of
people in this country feel that it should be decriminalized. I'm
sure that many people would disagree, but I doubt they'd dispute
the fact that the penalties for marijuana use are not only unjust
and illogical, but make an unconscionable waste of taxpayer
dollars. With violent crime making us all live like prisoners,
it's time to stop freeing murders to make room for marijuana
users. </p>

<p>Stayed tuned tomorrow as I search the vastness of the Internet
for more info. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #79- G. Washington </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-07 10:53:57 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Way to go ABC!!. A very good show. I thought it might be
appropriate to go back to the Father of Our Country for this
post. Looks like old George may not have grown all of his hemp
for fiber. ;-) </p>

<p>From _Licit &amp; Illicit Drugs_, by Consumer Reports, p. 403:
</p>

<p>...In 1762, &quot;Virginia awarded bounties for hempculture
and manufacture, and imposed penalties upon those who did not
produce it.&quot; </p>

<p>George Washington was growing hemp at Mount Vernon three years
later--presumably for its fiber, though it has been argued that
Washington was also concerned to increase the medicinal or
intoxicating potency of his marijuana plants.* </p>

<p>The asterisk footnote: </p>

<p>* The argument depends on a curious tradition, which may or
may not be sound, that the quality or quantity of marijuana resin
(hashish) is enhanced if the male and female plants are separated
*before* the females are pollinated. There can be no doubt that
Washington separated the males and the females. Two entries in
his diary supply the evidence: </p>

<p>May 12-13 1765: &quot;Sowed Hemp at Muddy hole by Swamp.&quot;
</p>

<p>August 7, 1765: &quot;--began to seperate (sic) the Male from
the Female Hemp at Do--rather too late.&quot; </p>

<p>George Andrews has argued, in _The Book of Grass: An Anthology
of Indian Hemp_ (1967), that Washington's August 7 diary entry
&quot;clearly indiactes that he was cultivating the plant for
medicinal purposes as well for its fiber.&quot; [7] He might have
separated the males from the females to get better fiber, Andrew
concedes--but his phrase &quot;rather too late&quot; suggests
that he wanted to complete the separation *before the female
plants were fertilized*--and this was a practice related to drug
potency rather that to fiber culture. </p>

<p>----------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>That's all for today. A nice short one parter. I might go out
of town this weekend and if so, I'll be back Monday. Same hemp
time...Same hemp station.. </p>

<p>-- </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #80- D. Miller pt.1 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-10 11:47:27 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Wow, what alot of catching up on all the boards. Mucho good
talk, especially in the ABC news area. Had a wonderful trip to
Austin. The fields all looked like they were painted blue , red
and yellow. No, I wasn't doing drugs, it was the wildflowers in
bloom and man were they bloomin'. My wife was amazed. </p>

<p>Here's an old standby I've had saved for a time when I didn't
have time to search the net for more useful info. </p>

<p>-----------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p><b>Part 1.</b> </p>

<p><b>From &quot;Dennis Miller Live&quot; on HBO, Friday, Nov.
11, 1994, 10:00 pm</b> </p>

<p><b>[ After joking about recent DC Mayoral elect Marion Barry]</b>
</p>

<p>&quot;Maybe he deserves a second chance, I mean who did he
really hurt besides himself? Maybe it's time that we as a nation
start staying out of people's personal problems and vices. What
are we doing spending billions of dollars trying to keep people's
private lives in order? And I'm talking about legal age
consenting adults here, not kids, we obviously have to take
special precautions to protect kids. But what is this Orwellian
hang-up of ours of sticking our nose into other grown-up's
affairs? What concern is it of ours if some mindless stoner wants
to spend his his life hooked up to a Turkish skull bong? Now, I'm
not pro-drug, they obviously cause a lot of damage, but I am
pro-logic and you're never going to stop the human need for
release through altered consciousness. The government can take
away all the drugs in the world and people will just spin around
on their lawn until they fell down and saw God. </p>

<p>&quot;Now I don't want to get off on a rant here, but it seems
to really enrage the vast cheese dog and beer quaffing nation out
there when someone decides to waste his own life chasing down
chemical euphoria and I'm not sure why. Our displeasure with
someone hell-bent on self-ruination through drug use seems really
disproportionate to its direct impact on us. And as a matter of
fact, I believe we amplify that impact when we attempt to enforce
unenforceable laws. It not only costs us billions of dollars, but
it puts us in harms way as addicts are driven to crime as a means
to an end. Why do we chase druggies down like villagers after
Karlov? Let them legally have what they already have and defuse
the bomb. You know, I think the hysteria about drugs is often
times baseless. And this comes from me, a man who has never done
cocaine in his life, although I did smoke dope upon occasion
during my stint as a student at Oxford in the late 60s. And you
know, the war on drugs is more often than not fruitless and
patently hypocritical, be honest with yourselves now. What drugs
are the most dangerous to the most Americans? Its a no brainer:
cigarettes and alcohol. Those are the statistical champions by
hundreds of thousands of deaths. And wouldn't you rather shoot a
game of pool with a guy smoking a joint than a guy drinking
whisky and beer? </p>

<p>Someone smoking a joint doesn't all of the sudden rear back
and stab his partner in the eye socket with a cue stick, ok? He's
too busy laughing at the balls. </p>

<p>&quot;And you know as far as harder drugs go, if somebody
wants to shoot up and die right in front of you, more power to
him, you know? It's his call. And you know the herd always has a
way of thinning itself out. We aren't stupid people here in
America, no more than anyone else in the world, so why are we
obsessing on habits that harm no one but the habitual, while we
let real problems slip ever further out of reach. We seem to be
willfully turning away from reality, and from logic might I add,
to punish people, who in many instances are doing an extremely
fine job of punishing themselves, thank you. And in some cases
they're not even punishing themselves, but rather just following
age old spawning instincts that are as woven as deeply into their
brain as their need to watch Home Improvement. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>