
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B001-74</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/amhab/amhabc6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122031728 text/html 35275
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:17:21 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:07 GMT
Content-length: 35057
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Drugs --Current Supply Strategies: Analysis and
Recommendations</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter VI Part 1: Current Supply Strategies: Analysis and
Recommendations </h2>

<p>Introduction </p>

<p>Currently, the great bulk of our Federal drug abuse budget is
devoted to strategies aimed at cutting off the supply of drugs
available to users and prospective users. These strategies, such
as source country eradication, interdiction, and domestic
enforcement, are frequently attacked as expensive, too slow in
producing perceptible results, and frequently dangerous for the
public officials charged with carrying them out. Far too often
such criticism seems to be the result of isolated examination
without regard to the programs' proper long-term goal or
relationship to strategic approaches to reduce demand. </p>

<p>This report attempts to avoid such pitfalls, and in this
chapter, examines and analyzes in its proper context, each of our
Federal efforts to reduce supply. It makes recommendations to
encourage a coordinated, comprehensive effort at restricting the
flow of drugs to the maximum extent possible, while complementary
demand reduction programs take hold. </p>

<p>Legalization of Illicit Drugs </p>

<p>The debate over strategies to reduce supply has produced a
wide range of proposals, including at one extreme the suggestion
that currently illicit drugs be legalized. Profits in the drug
trade are enormous, primarily because drugs are in high demand
and because traffickers charge prices high enough to justify the
risks involved. Proponents of legalization argue that because of
the clear connection between illegal drug trafficking and
organized crime, making drugs legal would remove the enormous
profits in the illicit drug industry a priority. </p>

<p>On the surface, this argument appears to have some merit.
However, it omits any consideration of the health costs of drug
abuse to the individual and to society, a dimension this
Commission views as fundamental. The drugs discussed in this
report are inherently destructive to mind and body.
&quot;Legalized&quot; drugs would still alter behavior, impair
productivity and educational potential, damage vital organs, and
kill. Moreover, legalization would almost certainly increase
demand, and therefore spread this destruction. Finally, this
Commission is not persuaded that legalization would result in
organized crime's abandonment of the drug business. While demand
for drugs in the United States represents a significant share of
global drug consumption, many other countries have a considerable
demand for drugs that would continue to be met by some or the
same organized crime groups now confronting this country. </p>

<p>It is the position of this Commission that legalizing
substances, which by their very nature destroy rather than
benefit the individual and society, will not solve the problem of
drug trafficking and is therefore not a viable option. This
Commission is emphatic in its position that legalization of drug
use is not a viable option. </p>

<p>National Drug Enforcement Policy Board </p>

<p>The National Drug Enforcement Policy Board (&quot;the
Board&quot;), presents a rare, possibly even unique, opportunity
to bring focus and singularity of purpose to the Federal
anti-drug effort. That fact is explicitly recognized in the
legislation creating the Board, wherein Congress acknowledges
that for the first time, a single, competent, and responsible
high-level Board of the United States Government, chaired by the
Attorney General, will be charged with this responsibility of
coordinating United States policy with respect to national and
international drug law enforcement. </p>

<p>The sentiment is echoed by the Justice Department's own
handbook discussing the National Narcotics Act of 1984, which
identifies the Act as &quot;a substantially revised version of
earlier 'Drug Czar' proposals.&quot; </p>

<p>This Commission recognizes and has pointed out repeatedly in
this report that drug abuse, a term including all of the medical,
social, and legal costs imposed on the American people by illegal
drugs, is a problem of proportions unmatched in any other area of
law enforcement. A problem of such dimensions demands a
coordinated response by the Federal government. The creation of
the Board is a major step toward a truly unified, coordinated
enforcement effort. </p>

<p>The performance of the Board to date has been somewhat
ambiguous. On the positive side, the Board has begun to meet, has
adopted an effective and comprehensive membership list for its
Coordinating Group, and has assembled a professional staff,
composed of experienced and able agency representatives. </p>

<p>It is troubling to note, however, that in light of the
acknowledged urgency of the drug abuse situation, characterized
by Congress as an &quot;epidemic,&quot; marked by
&quot;soaring&quot; death rates and a &quot;key to reducing the
crime epidemic confronting every region of the country,&quot; the
Board has yet to assert a clear leadership role. Instead, it has
adopted a more relaxed and collegial approach, waiting three
months after the effective date of the Act to hold its first
meeting. The Board began its work with a suggestion from the
Justice Department that the Board's mandate is &quot;. . . quite
broad and allows a range of possible roles - from an essentially
passive research and analysis to active implementation of drug
policies.&quot; This Commission notes with alarm that this
contemplative expression does not even extend to policy
formulation, which is the core of the Act's mandate. This concern
is heightened by the Board's initial choice of agenda items:
&quot;designer drugs,&quot; drug seizure statistics, and drug
management. These topics are certainly important, but only one,
seizure statistics, would have an impact on the formulation of a
coordinated drug enforcement policy. Even that connection is
remote. Uniform statistics are an important step toward
compilation of the reliable data base necessary to formulate
policy and measure its effectiveness, but that is all they are.
It is also troubling that the Board's first Interim Report to
Congress consists almost entirely of a verbatim recitation of
portions of the 1984 National Strategy. </p>

<p>An urgent but rational approach to the problem of drug abuse
is needed. This must begin with the statement of a goal. What is
the ultimate objective of the policy Board and of our drug
enforcement effort generally? This Commission is of the opinion
that the success of a national drug enforcement effort should
ultimately be measured in terms of reduced usage. The poisoning
of minds and bodies is the evil we are combatting. All other
targets - manufacture or cultivation, processing, smuggling,
distribution, and so on - would be of no consequence were it not
for the terrible destructive force of the use of illegal drugs.
Eliminating drug use, then, must be the cornerstone of a national
policy, and our national operational design - our strategy -
should flow from it. It is at this fundamental level that the
Board's deliberations should begin, difficult as the dialogue may
be. </p>

<p>A key to achieving the Board's essential singularity of
purpose is the commitment of each Board member, on behalf of his
entire Department, to the goal of reducing drug consumption,
accompanied by a resolve that no opportunity for action,
particularly coordinated, multi-agency approaches, will be
ignored on the basis of parochial concerns. However, the use of a
committee in place of a single figure of authority runs the
inherent risk of preserving interagency competition. It is
encouraging to note that the Board has included as
&quot;potential items&quot; for review total budgetary planning
and administrative operations. This Commission submits that
vigorous review of the latter is urgently needed, with special
attention to what is not included in such memoranda and the
reasons for such omissions. </p>

<p>A combined and coordinated effort among the dozens of Federal
agencies and offices, measured by a single standard of success,
is certain to require program dislocations, reordering of
Departmental priorities, and subordination of Departmental plans
to Board direction. It will mean abandoning the &quot;Not
Invented Here&quot; veto, which has far too often blocked
inter-Departmental efforts. Cooperation is the heart of a truly
coordinated national attack on drug abuse. It will require not
just review, analysis and coordination, but initiative by the
Board to overcome unnecessary obstacles, outmoded concepts, and
self-protective agency narrowness. Success will also depend upon
careful attention to long-term coordination between Federal
agency operations and with State and local components, for if
experience has shown anything in the effort against drug
trafficking, it is the resourcefulness and adaptability of the
traffickers. Successful interdiction or enforcement in one area
is virtually certain to result in a relocation to a new area of
operations. Long range planning is critical if our resources are
to be used in a fashion which anticipates such movement, rather
than reacts to it. </p>

<p>It is neither possible nor desirable under our system of law
to invest a Board Chairman or any other &quot;Czar&quot; with
dictatorial power to command other Cabinet members to conduct the
affairs of their respective Departments in a particular fashion.
This fact is reflected in the tone of the Act, which empowers the
Chairman only to &quot;advise, recommend, correlate and
evaluate&quot; and to direct action only with &quot;the
concurrence of the head of the agency&quot; involved. Such terms,
intended to recognize the independence of the various
Cabinet-level agencies, also spread among them a common
responsibility for the success or failure of this vital task. </p>

<p>Intelligence </p>

<p>Accurate, timely, and complete intelligence is vital to the
efficiency of United States anti-drug efforts. Strategies to
reduce the supply of drugs, such as eradication, interdiction,
investigations, and prosecutions are dependent on effective
intelligence gathering. Less commonly acknowledged is that
strategies to reduce demand are similarly dependent on such
intelligence. Adequate data is the foundation upon which focused,
purposeful programs to reduce demand must be built. There is
substantial evidence to suggest that such a foundation is often
lacking in our current approaches. </p>

<p>Intelligence concerning both drug abuse and drug trafficking
must be shared between strategists who are working to reduce
supply and demand. Evidence indicates that thorough strategic
planning, whether concerned with the reduction of demand or with
attacks on supply, must carefully consider the available data on
the other side of the equation. For example, to achieve the most
carefully reasoned deployment of resources, decisions concerning
priorities for disrupting the supply of a particular drug should
consider not only the geographical and political conditions in
source and transit locations, but also carefully evaluate the
geographic and demographic data concerning drug consumption. Such
coordination of data from both sides of the supply-demand dynamic
is crucial to long-range planning. An awareness of traffickers'
ultimate markets will facilitate anticipatory deployment of
resources. This unified theory of planning is the basis for the
&quot;all source&quot; intelligence center discussed below. </p>

<p>Domestic Data Collection </p>

<p>One principal category of drug-related intelligence is
consumption and law enforcement data formally collected within
the United States. Such data are essential to describe and
measure the problems of drug abuse and trafficking. They are also
vital to our efforts to evaluate the effects of various efforts
to reduce the supply of and demand for drugs. The reliability of
these estimates is critical for both policy makers and drug law
enforcement officials. However, because drug trafficking and use
are illicit activities, data concerning them are necessarily
estimates. Compounding this problem is the fragmentation of the
current system of drug data gathering. Much greater coordination
is imperative. </p>

<p>Two primary ongoing studies are used to measure the number of
drug users and frequency of drug abuse in the United States: the
bi-annual Household Survey of Drug Abuse and the annual High
School Senior Survey, both sponsored by the National Institute on
Drug Abuse (NIDA). The Household survey sample includes 5,000
people 12 years of age or older, living in households across the
country. The High School Senior survey questions approximately
17,000 high school seniors. These surveys have been criticized
because they do not include information from those populations
that are frequently involved with drugs, high school dropouts and
people without residences. To compensate for this deficiency, it
has been proposed that these surveys oversample groups thought to
be heavy users of drugs. </p>

<p>While these surveys provide estimates of the extent of drug
abuse, they do not gather important data, such as the price and
quantity of drugs purchased. Such information is crucial for
effective organized crime and drug enforcement policy planning,
because it would provide information concerning the effects of
certain enforcement actions on drug purchasing/using behavior.
NIDA should amend these surveys to include questions about drug
purchases. To the extent possible, they should also be designed
to determine the sources of the funds used to finance drug
purchases. Such data may be crucial to effective prevention
education planning. </p>

<p>NIDA provides two additional data bases of drug use in this
area. The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) collects data
concerning drug-related emergency room visits and deaths. These
statistics are based on reports gathered by NIDA from one-sixth
of the country's emergency rooms and two-thirds of the medical
examiners' offices. NIDA collects information about drug users in
treatment through the Client Oriented Data Acquisition Process
(CODAP). Formerly, all States were required to provide such data
as a condition of Federal assistance. However, since the
institution of block grants to partially fund State drug programs
in 1982, the Federal government has not been able to compel
participation in CODAP, and the number of participating States
has shrunk to approximately 15. Because of the importance of this
treatment data, the Federal government should again require
participation in CODAP. </p>

<p>Much data concerning drug trafficking is gathered by the
11-member National Narcotics Intelligence Consumer Committee
(NNICC) and reported annually in the Narcotics Intelligence
Estimates (NIE). This data includes estimates of the amount of
drugs produced and entering the United States, trafficking
patterns, and prices and purity of drugs. Although the NIE claims
to be &quot;the most comprehensive assessment prepared for the
Federal Government on the worldwide illicit drug situation in
1984,&quot; the report also states that, &quot;[b]ecause of gaps
in some of the data used to derive the estimates, there is a high
degree of uncertainty to the resulting estimates.&quot; </p>

<p>In 1983 NNICC prepared a report analyzing the methodologies
used in preparing drug estimates. The report concluded that NNICC
estimates are not timely, with estimates generally 18-30 months
out of date; there is insufficient data concerning the price and
potency of drugs, in part because of inadequate input from State
and local sources; and estimates of the total retail value of
drugs is an imprecise measure, which should be replaced by a
better measurement of final drug sales. In addition, NNICC's
methodology has been criticized as &quot;analysis by
negotiation,&quot; with final estimates resulting from a
bargaining process among the member agencies. Complaints about
the reliability of NIE data also result from the fact that NNICC
does not publish the background data used to develop the
estimates. </p>

<p>Another important set of data in the drug field is the
estimate of the results of drug law enforcement, including the
amount of drugs and property seized, and the numbers of arrests
and convictions and sentences imposed on drug violators. A
significant problem in generating reliable statistics in this
area is the lack of a centralized system for collection. Because
many agencies often are involved in the same case, the amount of
drugs seized and other information may be reported by each
agency. According to the National Drug enforcement Policy Board, </p>

<p>One of the principal problems encountered by the Federal
Government in its efforts to gauge the effectiveness of its
overall drug law enforcement program has been the lack of
centralized statistical information on Federal drug seizures . .
. Because of an undetermined amount of double and triple
counting, reliable statistics on total Federal drug seizures are
not available. </p>

<p>In apparent response to this problem the 1984 National
Strategy called on the Drug Enforcement Administration to develop
and maintain a centralized system for statistics concerning
Federal drug seizures. </p>

<p>As discussed throughout this report, asset forfeiture programs
are an extremely promising source of funding for anti-drug
efforts. Unfortunately, the availability and reliability of
information about non-drug assets seized by all levels of
government is hampered by the same double counting,
decentralization, and inconsistent data gathering methodologies
described above. Although the Department of Justice Asset
Forfeiture Office was created to maintain centralized information
on forfeited assets, the office is still in the process of
developing statistics for total Federal assets forfeited. A study
of State and local officials found that more than one-half of
those surveyed could not estimate the value of property and cash
obtained through forfeiture. State and local governments which
have not already done so should establish asset management
systems for the disposition of forfeited assets to provide
accurate estimates of their value. </p>

<p>Drug Supply Intelligence </p>

<p>With regard to intelligence concerning drug supplies, this
Commission is encouraged by what appears to be a growing
commitment to effective information-gathering. A number of
agencies have reported confidentially to this Commission that
both their funding and priority determinations are giving greater
weight to effective intelligence programs. </p>

<p>Intelligence efforts in this area take different forms,
depending on the topic to which they are directed. All are
subject to the two classic categories of information gathering:
human intelligence, referring to data gathered from human
informants, and technical collection, gathered by such means as
surveillance flights and satellites. In the area of crop
eradication, the lead agency is the State Department's Bureau of
International Narcotics Matters, supported by other members of
our country teams. Issues here include crop conditions, host
country political and military capabilities, and the role, if
any, of groups, including insurgents, opposing eradication
efforts. </p>

<p>Interdiction efforts require tactical intelligence concerning
specific drug movements, such as the identities of those
involved, shipment techniques, vessel and aircraft
identification, routes, and schedules. Also required is
&quot;strategic&quot; information, such as shifts in processing
and staging locations or in transshipment techniques. The current
exclusion of the Customs Service from foreign intelligence
gathering, mandated by the 1973 reorganization plan, particularly
needs to be re-examined. Strategic and tactical intelligence are
critical for border interdiction. Therefore the Commission
proposes that the Customs Service be integrated into the foreign
intelligence process of the Drug Enforcement Administration, to
the maximum extent permitted by the Reorganization Plan currently
in effect. </p>

<p>Because international drug trafficking organizations
frequently locate components of their operations within U.S.
borders, domestic investigations and prosecutions are often
dependent upon effective international intelligence gathering to
supplement such domestic techniques as legal electronic
surveillance and development of informants. </p>

<p>Effective international intelligence collection and
dissemination is not necessarily a highly sophisticated process.
On the contrary, it can consist of information as simple as
providing the names of suspected traffickers known to the Drug
Enforcement Administration to the State Department to ensure that
consular officers do not issue U.S. visas to such persons, or
that issuance be on a controlled basis to assist the
investigative work of DEA. It is encouraging that the National
Drug Enforcement Policy Board, pursuant to the Foreign Relations
Authorization Act for 1986 and 1987, has been directed to compile
a list of such traffickers and prepare guidelines for
inter-agency sharing of that information. </p>

<p>In the area of more sophisticated drug-related intelligence
work DEA and the intelligence community are currently playing
leading roles. The former has recently expanded its foreign
detail by ten percent, and additional expansion is prevented by
lack of funding. This matter deserves careful consideration by
both Congress and the Executive Branch. In addition, the
capabilities of DEA agents presently stationed in foreign
locations are unduly and unnecessarily hampered by the
&quot;Mansfield Amendment&quot; to the Foreign Assistance Act of
1961, which restricts their activities to a secondary role. As
part of a new expression of determination to combat international
drug trafficking, the amendment should be repealed. </p>

<p>The intelligence community is not burdened by any such
ill-conceived restriction. On the contrary, with regard to
international narcotics trafficking, its mandate, found in
Executive Order 12333, is clear, direct, and sweeping: </p>

<p>1.4 The Intelligence Community. The agencies within the
Intelligence Community shall, in accordance with applicable
United States law and with the other provisions of this Order,
conduct intelligence activities necessary for the conduct of
foreign relations and the protection of the national security of
the United States, including: </p>

<p>(c) Collection of information concerning, and the conduct of
activities to protect against, intelligence activities directed
against the United States, international terrorist and
international narcotics activities, and other hostile activities
directed against the United States by foreign powers,
organizations, persons, and their agents. </p>

<p>Although the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) has in the past
been criticized for failing to give sufficient priority to drug
trafficking, the Commission is satisfied that the agency is
currently placing suitable emphasis on the issue. This is due, in
part, to the necessary Executive direction now being given to the
intelligence community, and in part to the growing recognition
throughout the government that drug trafficking in many forms and
in many locations has grown to become a national security
concern, transcending the traditional drug-related health and law
enforcement concerns, as discussed in this report. To complement
this effort, additional options are available and should be
pursued. </p>

<p>First, consistent with the direction now being provided to the
intelligence community, the Department of State should vigorously
pursue a program of educating its own foreign-based personnel to
the importance being given to drug-related intelligence and to
the critical need for State Department support for such efforts.
This appears to have been less than entirely adequate in all
instances. Second, the CIA's operational capabilities should be
fully explored to determine how the infrastructure of drug
trafficking organizations can be disrupted, consistent with the
concerns expressed in Executive Order 12333 and elsewhere.
Finally, the CIA's considerable research and development
capabilities should be used to develop additional means for
furthering efforts directed at international drug traffickers. </p>

<p>In connection with these contributions by the intelligence
community, it is encouraging to note the rapid evolution of a
cooperative relationship between the intelligence and law
enforcement communities. This is evidenced by the pertinent
language of Executive Order 12333, which provides that: </p>

<p>1.7 Senior Officials of the Intelligence Community. The heads
of departments and agencies with organizations in the
Intelligence Community or the heads of such organizations, as
appropriate, shall: </p>

<p>(g) Participate in the development of procedures approved by
the Attorney General governing production and dissemination of
intelligence resulting from criminal narcotics intelligence
activities abroad, if their departments, agencies, or
organizations have intelligence responsibilities for foreign or
domestic narcotics production and trafficking. </p>

<p>This direction is complemented by the inclusion of a
representative of the CIA on the Coordinating Group of the
National Drug Enforcement Policy Board. </p>

<p>Defense Capabilities </p>

<p>The intelligence community is not the only available source of
drug-related intelligence. The Department of Defense has a wide
range of facilities, equipment, and operations, which lend
themselves to effective participation. Although such a role is
most frequently discussed in connection with interdiction
operations near the U.S. border, intelligence-gathering
opportunities for Defense Department components exist much
farther afield. Like their counterparts in the interdiction area,
such efforts may be subject to Defense Department directives and
priorities, which in turn rely on a changeable definition of
&quot;national security.&quot; Nevertheless, if as a matter of
national policy, the military view of national security draws
closer to that of the intelligence community, as expressed in
Executive Order 12333, the potential for military drug-related
intelligence-gathering is profound. Because of the connection
between some drug trafficking organizations and terrorist or
insurgent groups, whatever assets are currently in place or in
planning for intelligence-gathering regarding terrorism or
insurgency could just as well function in connection with drug
traffickers. </p>

<p>Intelligence-gathering in source and transshipment countries
would be particularly effective in the interdiction effort, in
the opinion of former SOUTHCOM Commanding General Paul F. Gorman:
</p>

<p>I can't stress enough that it seems to me that the easy way to
operate on the [drug smuggling] pilots is down at the other end.
He is at the other end of his communications tether where the
airfields are much more primitive, where he is dependent on these
cartels and it's easier to penetrate. </p>

<p>Because they occur outside of U.S. territory, such operations
would not violate the Posse Comitatus Act. In addition, with an
expanded definition of national security, such as that manifest
in Executive Order 12333, the Economy Act would not be an
obstacle. Such an expanded intelligence-gathering role is a
desirable course of action for the Department of Defense. The
Commanding Officers of Unified Commands should be given maximum
flexibility in deploying their forces. </p>

<p>Another change in our application of military assets to
drug-related intelligence is much less sweeping in concept, but
nevertheless appears very useful. That is the inclusion of Coast
Guard officers in our Defense Attache programs in drug source and
transit countries. This Commission has been advised that such a
program is in process and encourages the agencies involved to
pursue this program with all due speed. </p>

<p>Allied governments in affected areas could significantly
enhance the intelligence operations of our own military units.
Such activities already under way and worthy of note include a
regional radio communications network being set up among the drug
enforcement authorities of Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and
Venezuela. This network is designed to give these countries the
opportunity to coordinate drug enforcement strategies and work
closely together in confronting the drug trafficking threat
common to all. Agreements signed very recently by Brazil,
Venezuela, and Colombia allow these countries to initiate joint
investigations on their common borders, call for periodic
meetings between drug enforcement police, exchange intelligence,
and solve common problems. Although such efforts must contend
with the endemic problems of corruption and organizational and
national rivalries, they are a step in the right direction. To
the extent that United States assistance can contribute to the
elimination of corruption and other systemic problems, such
assistance should be provided to promote these programs. </p>

<p>All Source Intelligence and Operations Center </p>

<p>Data collection is but one phase of a complete intelligence
operation. To be effective collection should be followed by
thorough and timely analysis and dissemination. This Commission
therefore concludes that this Nation's anti-drug intelligence
efforts should be built upon an all-source intelligence and
operations center. Such a concept is described briefly above in
connection with interdiction efforts. EPIC and NNBIS together
provide an existing core upon which such a center could be built.
EPIC has demonstrated the feasibility of joint agency operations,
and NNBIS has shown that interagency operational coordination,
particularly involving military components, is well within
capabilities. </p>

<p>As a component of a comprehensive intelligence program, such a
center should be designed to collect drug-related intelligence
from the broadest base possible, including those sovereign
nations that will provide consistent, timely data on a
cooperative basis. In this regard, it is encouraging to note that
Latin American drug enforcement agencies are reported to be
planning to establish a regional intelligence center in a
strategic location, such as Panama, in the near future. Because
analysis should be as complete as possible, such a center should
include not only supply and transit-related intelligence, but
also counterpart demand data, including information on such
topics as drug-related deaths and emergency room admissions. This
will allow a complete picture of drug distribution from one end
of the chain to the other. This center would assume the
functions, including issuing annual reports, currently undertaken
by the National Narcotics Intelligence Consumer Committee
(NNICC). In addition, it should integrate all financial data
currently available to agencies of the Federal government, to
enable analysts to complete their knowledge about the drug-money
cycle whenever possible. </p>

<p>To be consistent with the rest of our national effort, such a
center should be under the general direction of the Policy Board
or its delegate, with the Vice President retaining primary
responsibility for management and coordination of the information
related specifically to interdiction. Such a facility would thus
coordinate the collection, analysis, and dissemination of
intelligence, covering every topic from production and
cultivation (including related political issues) to domestic
enforcement and detailed patterns of domestic consumption. It
would also provide the necessary centralized data base for
thorough inter-agency coordination of operations. Given the
sensitivity of many of its sources and the data received
therefrom, the functions and output of such a center would, of
course, require physical and communications security. The
resources and expertise of the National Security Agency with
regard to operational and communications security is an extremely
valuable national asset, which should be exploited to the fullest
extent possible in this connection. As this Commission has sought
to demonstrate repeatedly, drug traffickers have regularly and
successfully sought to penetrate law enforcement communications.
The equipment available for such purposes is readily available.
Communications security thus requires very careful attention in
the planning and design of all anti-drug operations and
facilities.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>