
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-40</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B034-89</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/asap/sa1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070126 text/html 41083
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:01:19 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:34:10 GMT
Content-length: 40865
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Tragedy of Needless Pain</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_asap_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="asapmain.htm"><font size="3">ASAP - American Society for
Action on Pain</font></a><font size="2"> </font></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43622" -->

<p><font size="6">SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN </font></p>

<p><b>February 1990 Volume 262 Number 2</b></p>

<p align="center"><font size="7">The Tragedy of Needless Pain</font></p>

<p>Contrary to popular belief, the author says, morphine taken
solely to control pain is not addictive. Yet patients worldwide
continue to be undertreated and to suffer unnecessary agony </p>

<p><b>by Ronald Melzack</b></p>

<hr>

<p>RONALD MELZACK, who has been studying the neurophysiology of
pain for 35 years, is E. P. Taylor Professor of Psychology at
McGill University and research director of the Pain Clinic at the
Montreal General Hospital. After earning a Ph.D. in psychology
from McGill in 19S4 and accepting fellowships in the U.S. and
abroad, he joined the faculty of the Massachusetts institute of
Technology in 19S9. There, he and Patrick D. Wall began
discussions that led to the 196S publication of their now famous
,gate control&quot; theory of pain. He returned to McGill in
1963. This is his <u>third article for </u><i>Scientific
American. </i></p>

<hr>

<p>&quot;Pain&quot; as Albert Schweitzer once said, &quot;is a
more terrible lord of mankind than even death itself.&quot;
Prolonged pain destroys the quality of life. It can erode the
will to live, at times driving people to suicide. The physical
effects are equally profound. Severe, persistent pain can impair
sleep and appetite, thereby producing fatigue and reducing the
availability of nutrients to organs. It may thus impede recovery
from illness or injury and, in weakened or elderly patients, may
make the difference between life and death. </p>

<p>Sadly, there are some kinds of pain that existing treatments
cannot ease. That care givers can do little in these cases is
terribly distressing for everyone involved but is certainly
understandable. What seems less understandable is that many
people suffer not because their discomfort is untreatable but
because physicians are often reluctant to prescribe morphine.
Morphine is the safest, most effective analgesic (painkiller)
known for constant, severe pain, but it is also addictive for
some people. Consequently, it is typically meted out sparingly,
if it is given at all. </p>

<p>Indeed, concern over addiction has led many nations in Europe
and elsewhere to outlaw virtually any uses Of morphine and
related substances, including their medical applications. Ever
where morphine is a legal medical therapy, as it is in Great
Britain and the U.S., many care givers, afraid of turning
patients into addicts, deliver amounts that are too small or
spaced too widely to control pain. </p>

<p>'Yet the fact is that when patients take morphine to combat
pain, it is rare to see addiction-which is characterized by a
psychological craving for a substance and, when the substance is
suddenly removed, by the development of withdrawal symptoms (for
example, sweating, aches and nausea). Addiction seems to arise
only in some fraction of morphine users who take the drug for its
psychological effects, such as its ability to produce euphoria
and relieve tension. </p>

<p>Furthermore, patients who take morphine for pain do not
develop the rapid physical tolerance to the drug that is often a
sign of addiction. Many people who are prone to addiction quickly
require markedly escalating doses to achieve a desired change of
mood, but patients who take the drug to control pain do not need
sharply rising doses for relief. They may develop some tolerance
initially, but their required dose usually rises gradually and
then stabilizes. </p>

<p>I do not suggest that morphine be prescribed indiscriminately.
I do urge lawmakers, law-enforcement agencies and health-care
workers to distinguish between the addict who craves morphine for
its mood-altering properties and the psychologically healthy
patient who takes the drug only to relieve pain. </p>

<p>Morphine is a constituent of opium, which has been a medical
therapy for longer than 2,000 years, since at least ancient Roman
times. Opium is made by extracting a milky juice from the unripe
capsule, or seedpod, of the poppy <i>Papaver somniferum </i>(grown
abundantly in many Middle Eastern countries) and then drying the
exudate to form a gum. This gum-the opium-can be eaten as is or
added to a beverage. </p>

<p>By the 16th century opium was being carried by traders to
Europe and the Orient. At about that time an opium-containing
mixture called laudanum became a popular remedy in Europe for
virtually all ailments. Later, smoking opium and tobacco together
became yet another popular way to obtain the drug's benefits. </p>

<p>Soon after the turn of the 19th century, a young German
pharmacist named Friedrich W. A. Serttimer isolated morphine from
opium and identified it as opium's major active ingredient.
Morphine's production was followed in 1832 by the isolation of
yet another opiate, or opium derivative: codeine. </p>

<p>In the mid-19th century the introduction of the hypodermic
needle made it possible to administer large amounts of drugs by
injection. The standard approach to morphine therapy for ongoing
pain (left) calls for injections pro re nata (PRN), or &quot;as
needed.' In practice this means injections are given only in
response to pain; also, if the pain returns before four to six
hours have passed the patient often has to wait for help. By the
time the next injection is delivered, the pain may be so severe
that quite a large dose is needed, leading to mental clouding and
other side effects, such as nausea. A more enlightened approach
(right) seeks the actual prevention of pain and thus helps ease
the fear of recurring agony. The morphine is given orally (in a
dose tailored to the patient's needs) every four hours or even
more frequently if a shorter schedule prevents pain more
effectively. Because the doses are frequent, they typically can
be relatively low, which reduces the incidence of side effects. </p>

<p>Improved technology, which enabled a drug's effects to be felt
quickly, led in many regions of the world to the ready
prescription of injected morphine for severe pain. At the same
time, more and more people began taking morphine for its
emotional<b> </b>effects, and the number of addicts rose. </p>

<p>Eventually a search began for drugs that had morphine's
analgesic properties but were not habit-forming. This quest
resulted in the production of heroin, a synthetic compound
similar in activity to morphine but soon found, disappointingly,
to be quite as addictive. Various other opioids (chemicals with
activity similar to that of opium) were then introduced,
including methadone and meperidine (Demerol). Like the opiates,
many of the opioids relieve pain, induce changes in mood and,
unfortunately, are addictive to some extent. </p>

<p>Inevitably, the rising abuse of narcotics (by which I mean
opiates and opioids) and of other mood-altering drugs spurred
countries throughout the world to adopt antidrug regulations. At
the same time, the extremely cautious administration of narcotics
for pain became commonplace. </p>

<p>Today morphine therapy for pain is generally restricted to two
groups of patients. It is prescribed over relatively short
periods for hospitalized individuals who have discomfort caused
by surgical incisions, and it is given over potentially longer
periods to ameliorate the pain suffered by burn victims or people
who have incurable cancer. </p>

<p>In many hospitals the standard prescription order says
&quot;PRN&quot; (pro re nata, or &quot;as needed&quot;). This
order essentially means that the drug is given orLiy after pain
returns. Typically, it is delivered by injection into a muscle or
under the skirt. </p>

<p>The result of the PRN approach is often a confrontation
between the patient and the care giver, who expects morphine
analgesia to last for four to six hours. The patient, whose pain
has returned earlier than expected, is in agony and pleads to
have the next injection. The health-care worker, fearful of
causing addiction, refuses to comply. When the pain is finally
treated, it may be so severe that a large dose has to be given,
which increases the likelihood of side effects, such as mental
clouding and nausea. Particularly when a patient has a terminal
Illness, the issue of addiction is meaningless, and delaying
relief is cruel. </p>

<p>There is another, more humane way to treat pain, one that is
slowly gaining acceptance. In this approach doses are given
regularly, according to a schedule that has been actually
tailored to prevent recurrence of the individual's pain. Thus,
pain is controlled continuously; a patient does not wait for
discomfort to return before receiving the next dose. </p>

<p>This enlightened, preventive approach evolved from pioneering
work first undertaken some 20 years ago by Cicely M. Saunders, an
English physician who established the first modern center devoted
to caring for people who are dying of cancer or other dis. eases:
St. Christopher's Hospice in London. Saunders urged physicians
caring for terminally ill Patents to face reality and palliate-to
relieve Pain, nausea and other discomforts instead of making
futile attempts to cure disease. The final days or weeks of a
person's life, she believed, should be a time of peace and
comfort, spent as pleasurably as possible in the company of
family and friends. </p>

<p>To achieve this aim, Saunders prescribed the Brompton mixture,
a version of a liquid analgesic that had been used for advanced
cancer by several London hospitals, including the Brompton Chest
Hospital, since the late 19th century. The mixture (made of
morphine, cocaine, chloroform water, alcohol and flavoring syrup)
had been eclipsed by injectable morphine, but Saunders realized
that an orally delivered compound would allow many patients to
spend a number of their last days at home; a visiting nurse would
simply monitor them, making sure their pain was controlled.<br>
</p>

<p><img src="sa100001.gif" align="bottom" width="672"
height="248"> </p>

<p>Morphine has since been found to be the only important
ingredient in the Brompton mixture, and so today patients who are
treated with the preventive approach to pain take morphine alone,
either as a tablet or mixed into a beverage. An initial dose of
10 milligrams is typically given and repeated every four hours.
Then, over the course of perhaps several days or weeks, the dose
and timing are adjusted until a maintenance regimen is
established that controls pain around the clock without producing
mental clouding and other side effects. </p>

<p>For patients who have cancer, an approach emphasizing pain
prevention is particularly wise. Pain and the fear of pain are
perhaps their greatest source of suffering. In the early stages
of the disease, some 80 percent of people have pain resulting
from the cancer itself or from the procedures designed to arrest
its spread. By the time the cancer has reached its final stages,
about 70 percent of people report pain, which tends to be intense
and persistent. </p>

<p>About 80 to 90 percent of cancer patients treated with the
preventive approach obtain satisfactory relief, reporting that
their discomfort is consistently bearable or, more frequently,
gone. Roughly half of the remainder obtain relief with the
addition of other therapies. This success rate is remarkable in
view of the destructiveness of cancer and the severity of the
pain associated with it. </p>

<p>Treatments continue to improve. There are now special capsules
that release morphine slowly and so need to be taken only a few
times a day. Also available are electronically controlled,
portable pumps that deliver a steady infusion of medication under
the skin. </p>

<p>Enough evidence has now been collected to demonstrate that the
traditional, PRN approach, based as it is on the fear of
addiction makes little sense. Study after study of patients whose
pain is most often treated with narcotics-namely, cancer
patients, bum victims and those hospitalized for surgery-has
shown that the patients who develop rapid and marked tolerance
to, and dependence on, the narcotics are usually those who
already have a history of psychological disturbance or substance
abuse. </p>

<p>Let us first consider the problem of marked tolerance, which
not only is a sign of possible addiction but is also a medical
concern in its own right because the risk of side effects
increases as the dose increases. For instance, delivery of
extremely large amounts of morphine can induce coma and seriously
impair respiration. </p>

<p>Robert G. Twycross, now at the Churchill Hospital in Oxford,
England, has shown that relatively little tolerance develops in
patients with cancer lvh( take individually adjusted doses of
heroin several times a day over long Periods. The patients
developed some tolerance to the drug initially, so that the doses
had to be gradually raised over the first 12 weeks, but pain
relief was achieved without producing serious side effects. Then
the doses held fairly stable for months. </p>

<p>Balfour M. Mount, one of my colleagues at McGill University,
and I recently found similar results when we studied tolerance to
morphine in patients who spent more than a month in the
Palliative Care Unit at the Royal Victoria Hospital in Montreal.
(This unit, established by Mount, was the first service for
palliative care at a large general hospital.) The patients in our
study, who took the drug by mouth answered a pain-evaluating
questionnaire that I developed with Warren S. Torgerson of Johns
Hopkins University. The overall intensity of the pain was ranked
on a scale ranging from no pain (0) to pain that is mild <b>(1). </b>Discomfort
(2). distressing (3), horrible (4) or excruciating (5). </p>

<p>About 5 percent of the patients had persistently high pain
levels (3 or higher). The remaining 95 percent had excellent pain
control without requiring rapidly escalating amounts of morphine.
Increase in pain, usually a sign of disease progression after a
maintenance program has been established, was<b> </b>the most
common. reason for a rise in dose. Patients who found that their
discomfort had decreased either spontaneously or because of
treatment, such as reduction of a tumor by radiation-usually
required less medication </p>

<p>John F. Scott of the Elizabeth Bruyere Health Center in Ottawa
also uncovered little evidence of addiction when he analyzed many
studies examining withdrawal symptoms in patients at
cancer-treatment clinics. He reports that &quot;if a cancer
patient no longer requires a narcotic for pain control, a gradual
reduction in dose will prevent any withdrawal symptoms, although
these are usually mild or absent even after abrupt
discontinuance.&quot; Any physical dependence is generally
overcome without difficulty when doses are reduced over a period
of days. </p>

<hr>

<p>FORMALIN TEST measures the analgesic (painkilling) effects of
medications on so-called tonic, or persistent pain. A dilute
solution of formaldehyde and saline is injected under the skin of
a rat's paw, inducing pain that lasts for about 90 minutes. The
rat licks its paw repeatedly, which is a sign of moderate pain (a
pain rating of 3). Then. after a while, the animal holds the paw
in the air (a rating of 2), steps on it gingerly (a rating of 1)
and finally walks normally (a rating of 0). In this test, rats
treated with morphine develop little tolerance to the drug's
analgesic effect; that is, they do not require ever-increasing
doses to obtain relief. This finding is consistent with the
results of clinical studies showing that patients who take
morphine for persistent pain do not acquire marked tolerance and
do not become addicted.<br>
</p>

<p><img src="sa100002.gif" align="bottom" width="438"
height="370"> </p>

<hr>

<p>Studies of patients who received narcotics while they were
hospitalized have also uncovered little evidence of addiction. In
an extensive study Jane B. Porter and Hershel Jick of the Boston
University Medical Center followed up on 11,882 patients who were
given narcotics to relieve pain stemming from various medical
problems; none of the subjects had a history of drug dependence.
The team found that only four of the patients subsequently abused
drugs, and in only one case was the abuse considered major. </p>

<p>Equally persuasive are the results of a survey of more than
10,000 burn victims. These individuals, who were studied by
Samuel W. Perry of New York Hospital and George Heidrich of the
University of Wisconsin at Madisom underwent debridement, an
extremely painful procedure in which the dead tissue is removed
from burned skin. Most of the patients received injections of
narcotics for weeks or even months. Yet not a single case of
later addiction could be attributed to the narcotics given for
pain relief during the hospital stay. Although 22 patients abused
drugs after they were discharged, all of them had a history of
drug abuse. </p>

<p>Further evidence that narcotic drugs can be administered for
pain without causing addiction comes from studies of
&quot;patient-controlled analgesia&quot; in surgical patients and
those hospitalized for bums. in such studies patients push a
button on an electronically controlled pump at the bedside to
give themselves small doses of morphine (through an intravenous
tube). When these devices were introduced, there was considerable
fear that patients would abuse the drug. Instead it soon became
clear that patients maintain their doses at a reasonable level
and decrease them when their pain diminishes. </p>

<p>Studies that explore how morphine produces analgesia are
helping to explain why patients who take the drug solely to
relieve pain are unlikely to develop rapid tolerance and become
addicted. On the basis of such studies, my former student Frances
V. Abbott and I proposed in 1981 that morphine probably has an
effect on two distinct pain-signaling systems in the central
nervous system and that one of these-which gives rise to the kind
of pain typically treated with morphine-does not develop much
tolerance to the drug. </p>

<p>Our proposal grew out of my efforts to develop a test in
animals that would accurately determine the effectiveness of
analgesic drugs on the kind of pain most often requiring
narcotics in human patients: the prolonged, or &quot;tonic,&quot;
kind that persists long after an injury is suffered. This is the
sort of pain that chronically bedevils cancer patients. When an
injury first occurs, it gives rise to what is called phasic pain,
which is brief and rapidly rises and falls in intensity. (The
pain felt the instant a finger is cut would be called phasic.)
Such phasic pain is usually followed by the tonic kind. </p>

<p>For many years investigators interested in measuring the
analgesic effects of drugs subjected rats to what is called the
tail-flick test. After a rat is injected with a test drug, its
tail is immersed in hot water; the time between immersion and
when the rat flicks its tail out of the water is measured as an
index of pain. When morphine's effectiveness was examined with
this test, investigators repeatedly found evidence of marked
tolerance: the animals required ever-increasing doses in order to
keep the tail in the water for a given time. Such results were
interpreted to mean that human patients in pain would readily
become tolerant to morphine and so would become addicted to the
drug. </p>

<p>There is a major problem with the tail-flick test, however. It
gives rise to suddenly rising, phasic pain, which is not the kind
for which morphine is usually prescribed. To gain more
information about the effects of analgesics on persistent, tonic
pain in humans, John O'Keefe, David Dubuisson and Stephen G.
Dennis, who were then my students, developed what is called the
formalin test. A small amount of formalin-formaldehyde diluted in
saline-is injected under the s1cin of a rat's forepaw. When the
animal is not given an analgesic, the formalin produces moderate
pain that lasts for about 90 minutes, as evinced by the animal's
tendency to lick the paw and a reluctance to put weight on it. If
a drug soothes the hurt, the animal puts weight on the paw more
quickly. </p>

<p>With the formalin (tonic-pain) test, Abbott and I (later
joined at McGill by our colleague Keith B. J. Franklin)
discovered that rats developed relatively little tolerance to the
analgesia produced by successive injections of morphine. The most
logical explanation for the different degrees of tolerance found
in the tail-flick and formalin tests was that phasic and tonic
pain are invoked by two distinct neural systems that have
differing tolerance to morphine. </p>

<p>Other lines of evidence added support to this idea. For
instance, Dennis and I examined the effect on pain of several
drugs that interact with morphine (or that alter pain in their
own right) in both the tail-flick and the formalin tests. The
results were striking. Drug effects that we found in One test
were absent or even reversed in the other. For example, drugs
that reduced morphine analgesia in one test either had no effect
or enhanced the analgesic effect in the other test. if the neural
systems that respond to phasic and tonic pain were one and the
same, the effects of the drugs on morphine's activity should have
been identical in both tests. </p>

<p>My colleagues and I think we now know which of the many neural
pathways in the spinal cord and brain constitute the two
pain-signaling systems that are sensitive to morphine. We also
know something about their functioning and how they are affected
by morphine. In both systems, information about pain is delivered
to the dorsal horns (wingshaped regions) of the spinal cord by
peripheral neurons emanating from the skin and other body tissues
[see <i>illustration on opposite page]. </i>Ascending neurons
originating in the dorsal horns then relay the pain signals
upward through the spinal cord to various parts of the brain. </p>

<p>The pain-signaling system that my colleague and I think is
most associated with sudden, phasic pain is called the lateral
system. The name derives from the simple fact that the system's
tracts, which project to the sensory cortex, pass through the
brain stem at a position to the side of the brain stem's central
core. The system that is probably responsible for persistent,
tonic pain is called the medial system; its tracts pass through
the central core of the brain stem. </p>

<p>Among the more salient properties of the lateral system are
the rapid conduction of impulses and an organization that maps
the relative position of body sites. These properties would
enable the system to give rise to sudden, sharp pain in a readily
identified spot in the body. Kenneth L. Casey of the University
of Michigan at Ann Arbor and I have proposed that the lateral
tracts also account to a great extent for the sensory qualities
of pains, such as throbbing or burning. </p>

<p>The activity of the lateral system is apparently dampened
rather quickly, which would' explain why phasic pain often
subsides promptly. The inhibition is accomplished by a system of
neurons that originates in what is called the periaqueductal gray
matter in the part of the brain stem known as the midbrain. This
descending system sends signals downward to the dorsal horns,
where it inhibits the transmission of pain signals from the
peripheral nerves to ascending tracts. After an injury, it is
apparently activated by the body's own optoids (enclorphins and
enkephalins). if, as we suggest, the lateral system carries the
signals that give rise to sudden phasic pain, then it is not
surprising that the system is naturally subject to powerful
inhibition. Sudden pain from a newly acquired injury could well
overwhelm an animal, preventing it from fighting, running for
cover or burrowing to escape a predator during an emergency. </p>

<p>The other pain-signaling system the medial system-differs from
the lateral system in many ways. For example, a number of its
tracts send impulses to the limbic system which comprises the
subcortical regions of the brain involved in motivation and
affect. Hence, we think the medial system controls the emotional
component of pain, producing qualities one might describe as
wretched, terrifying, vicious and the like. The system also
influences the actions one takes in response to such feelings. </p>

<p>Because the medial system conducts signals relatively slowly
through many small neurons, it is not well suited for providing
precise information during emergencies. Instead it is more suited
for producing diffuse, unpleasant feelings for some time after an
injury has occurred. Such feelings would help ensure that, having
survived an immediate threat, a wounded individual would feel
miserable and so remain inactive long enough to heal. </p>

<p>Where does morphine exert its effects? In both the lateral
(phasic-pain) and the medial (tonic-pain) systems,morphine
clearly has some direct effect at the dorsal horns. It is also
well known that morphine can activate the descending inhibitory
system originating in the periaqueductal gray matter. Abbott and
others in my laboratory have found that this descending system
has a greater impact on the lateral system than on the medial
system, which suggests that much of morphine's power over sudden,
phasic pain is mediated by the descending neural tracts. </p>

<hr>

<p>TWO SYSTEMS of neurons evoke pain: a medial system (pink),
which passes through the central core of the brain stem, and a
lateral system <i>(orange). </i>Both are bilateral, consist of
several tracts and relay to higher centers the pain signals that
come into the dorsal horns of the spinal cord. The medial system
Is thought to be most responsible for persistent (tonic) pain.
Because it sends signals to the limbic system of the brain, Which
influences emotions, it is also believed to give rise to the
affective component of pain (reflected by such descriptions as ft
frightful&quot; or &quot;cruel&quot;). The lateral system is
thought to be most active during phasic pain, which is sudden and
sharp. Because it sends signals to the sensory cortex, it
probably gives rise to such sensations as cramping or stinging.
Morphine can inhibit both systems, but the medial (tonic-pain)
system develops much less tolerance to the drug's analgesic
effects than does the lateral (phasic-pain) system-which may
explain why patients who take morphine for persistent (tonic)
pain do not develop great tolerance to it. Morphine produces
analgesia in part by inhibiting the flow of pain signals from the
peripheral nerves to the ascending pathways; it acts directly at
the dorsal horns and also activates a descending inhibitory
system (blue) that originates in the midbrain. Morphine also acts
at sites above the periaqueductal gray matter of the midbrain,
including the limbic system and the habenula. which has strong
links to both the medial and Umbic systems. Such activity
apparently contributes to the drug's analgesic effect on
persistent pain. <br>
</p>

<p><img src="sa100003.gif" align="bottom" width="438"
height="646"> </p>

<p><img src="sa100004.gif" align="bottom" width="229"
height="232"> </p>

<hr>

<p>Morphine's analgesic activity certainly is not confined to the
dorsal horns and the midbrain. For instance, strong evidence
indicates that morphine acts on the limbic system, which is known
to play a major role in both pain and pleasure. Such activity
could well dampen the pain sensations produced by the medial
(tonic-pain) system, which sends a great many impulses to the
limbic system. </p>

<p>A recent study by S. Robin Cohen, my student, and myself lends
additional support to the idea that morphine's influence over the
medial system derives in part from activity above the midbrain.
We injected morphine into the habenula, a small region of the
brain (just behind the thalamus) that has strong links with the
limbic system and a part of the medial system in the midbrain.
The injections produced analgesia in the formalin test but not in
the foot-flick test (similar to the tail-flick test), which
suggests that morphine acts at the habenula and that, when it
does, it inhibits the medial but not the lateral system. </p>

<p>This finding and others indicate that more research should be
devoted to areas above the midbrain if investigators are to gain
a fuller understanding of how morphine eases persistent, tonic
pain without inducing tolerance to repeated doses of the drug. </p>

<p>In view of the complexity of the neural mechanisms of pain, it
is not surprising that morphine's ability to produce analgesia
has been found to vary greatly from person to person. An
important message emerging from studies of such variation is that
the need for a high dose is not necessarily a sign of addiction. </p>

<p>In one such study involving cancer patients, Robert Kaiko, now
at the Purdue Frederick Company in Norwalk, Conn., and Ws
colleagues at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center found
that to achieve a given level of analgesia, less morphine was
needed by older patients than by younger patients, and less was
needed by blacks than by whites. Similarly, patients with dull
pain needed less morphine than did those with sharp pain, and
patients with stomach pain needed less morphine than did patients
with pain in the chest or arm. </p>

<p>Genetic factors might also influence an individual's response
to the analgesic power of narcotics, as Anthony L. Vaccarino (my
student), R. Andrew R. Tasker, now at the University of Prince
Edward Island, and I learned recently when we examined the
effects of morphine and its antagonist naloxone in a strain of
mice specially bred for studies of immunologic function we
unexpectedly found that the &quot;antagonist&quot; actually
enhanced morphine analgesia and produced analgesia on its own in
rats subjected to the formahn test. These surprising findings,
which so far have been documented only for this strain of mice,
are clearly the result of a genetic anomaly. </p>

<p>The discovery of a genetic influence on morphine's actions
raises the possibility that susceptibility to addiction might
also have a genetic component in some people. Evidence collected
by other groups is consistent with. that idea, although little
work addresses the problem directly. </p>

<p>There is no way to identify patients who might be genetically
predisposed to morphine addiction, but I must emphasize again
that a person's psychological history is indicative of risk. More
than 50 percent of narcotics abusers have had bouts of major
depression, and 87 percent have a history of psychiatric
disorder. </p>

<p>Society's failure to distinguish between the emotionally
impaired addict and the psychologically healthy pain sufferer has
affected every segment of the population. Perhaps the most
distressing example is unnecessary pain in children Many
health-care workers undertreat pain in youngsters, not only
because of fear of addiction but also because of the mistaken
belief that young children do not feel pain as intensely as
adults. In a classic study, Joann M. Eland and Jane E. Anderson
of the University of Iowa found in 1977 that more than half of
the children from four to eight years old who underwent major
surgery-including limb amputation, excision of a cancerous neck
mass and heart repair-were given no medication for relief of
their postoperative pain; the remainder received inadequate
doses. When 18 of the children were matched with adults who
underwent similar procedures, the children as a group were found
to have been given a total of 24 doses of analgesic drugs,
whereas the adults were given a total of 671 doses. </p>

<p>The elderly also pay the penalty of ignorance. In a study of
postsurgical pain my colleagues and I found that surgical wards
contain two basic populations: a young and middle-aged group that
recovers quickly and an older group whose pain remains severe and
lingers for many days beyond the normal three- to four-day
recovery period. Despite the persistent, high level of pain in
these older patients (presumably because of complications that
arise after surgery) and despite the longer recovery period, they
do not receive larger doses or a higher daily amount of
medication. About 30 Percent of the patients on a surgical ward
at any time fall into this older category; they thus represent a
substantial number of people who suffer needlessly high levels of
pain. </p>

<p>The pain suffered by bum victims is known to be agonizing, and
yet it too, tends to be poorly controlled. Manon Choiniare of the
Bum Center at the Hotel Dieu in Montreal and I found that even in
the best bum facilities-those with highly capable, compassionate
physicians, nurses, physiotherapists and others-pain levels are
high. Our study of 30 consecutive patients who underwent
debridement and physiotherapy (exercise to prevent loss of joint
flexibility) classified the severity of pain on the basis of the
Pain questionnaire I developed with Torgerson. We discovered that
during treatment in the first two weeks, 23 Percent had severe
(&quot;horrible&quot;) pain, and 30 percent had extremely severe
(&quot;excruciating&quot;) pain. Even when the Patients were at
rest, 13 percent of them reported having severe pain, and another
20 percent said they had extremely severe pain. These data, by
the way, were obtained from patients who were already medicated
according to standard textbook recommendations (that is, the drug
order said &quot;PRN&quot;). </p>

<p>For many patients who are hospitalized for surgery or bums or
who have terminal cancer, the prescription is clear: a preventive
approach to pain should be instituted to maximize the
effectiveness of narcotics therapy. What, though, should be done
for people who suffer from debilitating chronic pain but who do
not have a fatal illness? These people have traditionally been
excluded from longterm therapy with narcotics, again for fear
they would become addicts. </p>

<p>Consider the case of a 26-year-old athlete who sustained a
major spinal injury that caused him to suffer from excruciating
pain in the back and legs. The pain rendered him unable to work,
and he became a burden to himself, his family and society, which
pays his medical bills. His physician discovered that small doses
of morphine taken orally each day (the way cancer patients
receive them) obliterated the pain. With the help of the
medication, the young man resumed working and made plans to marry
his childhood sweetheart, who was accepting of his injury. </p>

<p>One day, however, the physician was accused by his regional
medical association of prescribing narcotics for a purpose
unapproved by the association and of turning the patient into an
addict. Fearful of losing his medical license, the physician
stopped prescribing the drug. (Where morphine administration is
allowed by law, physicians can technically prescribe it at will,
but they are in fact restricted by the regulations of medical
societies, which control licensing.) </p>

<p>Of course, the young man's pain returned. In desperation, he
turned to other physicians and was rebuffed. He then sank rapidly
into depression and again became mired in helplessness and
hopelessness. </p>

<p>It was once unthinkable to give narcotics indefinitely to
patients who were not terminally ill. Yet studies designed to
examine addiction specifically in such patients are beginning to
show that for them, as for the standard candidates for narcotics
therapy, these drugs can be helpful without producing addiction. </p>

<p>In one recent study Russell K. Portenoy and Kathleen M. Foley
of SloanKettering maintained 38 patients on narcotics for severe,
chronic noncancer pain; half of the patients received opioids for
four or more years, and six<b> </b>of these were treated for more
than seven years. About 60 percent of the 38 patients reported
that their pain was eliminated or at least reduced to a tolerable
level. The therapy became problematic in only two patients, both
of whom had a history of drug abuse. </p>

<p>With cautious optimism, Portenoy and Foley suggest that
morphine might be a reasonable treatment for chronic pain in many
patients who are not terminally ill. They point out the problems
that may accompany narcotics maintenance therapy, and they
provide careful guidelines for monitoring patients. Studies such
as theirs are doing something in medicine that is akin in
aeronautics to breaking the sound barrier. They represent a
breakthrough to a reasoned, unbiased examination of the
effectiveness of narcotics in patients who have rarely been
considered for such therapy. </p>

<p>Among the critics of long-term narcotics therapy for such
patients are physicians and others who fear that people will
simply be given a prescription for a drug and will never receive
the advantages of a multidisciplinary approach to the care of
pain. Yet both approaches are compatible; in fact, they
complement each other. </p>

<p>For the future, many more well-controlled studies are needed
to provide data on the long-term effects of narcotics on chronic
noncancer pain. At the same time, medical and government agencies
must provide the authorization and funds for such studies to take
place. The goal is nothing short of rescuing people whose lives
are now being ruined by pain. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>FURTHER READING</b> </p>

<p><b>NARCOTIC</b> <b>ANALGESICS IN CLINTCAL PRACTICE. </b>R. G.
Twycross in <i>Advances in Pain Research and </i><b>Therapy, </b>Vol.
S. Edit<b>ed </b>by John 1. Bonica et al. Raven Press, 1983. </p>

<p><b>CHRONIC USE OF OPIOID ANALGESICS </b>IN <b>NON-MALIGNANT
PAIN: </b>REPORT OF 38 <b>CASES. R. </b>K. Portenoy and K. M.
Foley in <b><i>Pain, </i></b>Vol. 25, <b>pages </b>171-186; 1986.
</p>

<p><b>THE CHALLENGE OF PAIN. </b>Revised edi<b>tion. </b>Ronald
Melzack and Patrick Wall. Penguin USA, 1989. </p>

<p><b>TEXTBOOK OF PAIN. </b>Second edition. Edited by Patrick D.
Wall and Ronald Melzack. Churchill Livingstone, Inc., 1989. </p>

<p><b>INFLUENCE OF THE PAIN AND SYMPTOM CONTROL TEAM (PSCT) ON
THE PATTERNS OF TREATMENT OF PAIN AND OTHER SYMPTOMS IN A CANCER
CENTER. </b>Eduardo Bruera, Carleen Brenneis, Mary <b>Michaud </b>and
R. Neil MacDonald in <b><i>Journal </i></b>of Pain <b><i>and
Symptom Management, </i></b>Vol. 4, No. 3, <b>pages </b>112-116; <b>September,
</b>1989. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_asap_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="asapmain.htm"><font size="3">ASAP - American Society for
Action on Pain</font></a><font size="2"> </font></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43622" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>