
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B013-33</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/uromancy.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101320 text/html 48669
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:13:05 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:16 GMT
Content-length: 48451
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Urinalysis or Uromancy? The Untold Costs of Drug Testing
Abuse</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<p><font size="4">URINALYSIS OR UROMANCY? THE UNTOLD COSTS OF
DRUG TESTING ABUSE</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dale Gieringer, Ph.D.,</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A paper for the Drug Policy Foundation
Published in &quot;Strategies for Change: New Directions in Drug
Policy (1992)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Among the impositions on personal privacy
introduced in the Reagan-Bush era, few are more intrusive but
less questioned than drug urinalysis. Relatively unknown at the
start of the eighties, urinalysis has now become a condition for
employment in over half of America's major companies, as well as
for insurance, child custody, security clearance, and freedom
from jail on probation or parole. While urinalysis has been
challenged by civil libertarians, courts have generally upheld it
in the face of strong public support. Opponents have objected
that drug testing is an unwarranted violation of privacy and a
search without probable cause, bu supporters have successfully
countered that the supposed hazards of drug abuse necessitate
urine testing. What is all too rarely challenged in this debate
is the scientific rationale of urinalysis as a means of detecting
drug abuse in the first place. The facts that urinalysis does not
detect whether someone is impaired or under the influence of
drugs; rather it detects the presence of non-psychoactive drug
metabolites that may linger in the system days or weeks after
use. In this respect urinalysis differs from the familiar alcohol
breathalyzer and blood tests, which detect whether one is
actually under the influence (as it turns out, alcohol is unique
in this regard: for other drugs, there is no simple relation
between impairment and concentration in bodily fluids). Thus it
is not only possible, but entirely likely that someone whose
urine tests positive for drugs is altogether competent and
unimpaired. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">As it happens, urinalysis is particularly
sensitive to marijuana, a single use of which can register
positive for as long as a week, long after any effects have
vanished; heavy users may register positive for as long as 4-6
weeks. Thus, urinalysis precludes even the most innocent, weekend
smoking of marijuana as &quot;drug abuse.&quot; Ironically,
urinalysis is considerably more tolerant of harder drugs such as
cocaine and heroin, which generally wash out in 2-3 days at most.
Other commonly used psychoactive drugs, including nicotine,
tranquilizers, and psychedelic drugs such as LSD are generally
not tested for.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Above all, urinalysis doesn't detect America's
number one drug of abuse, alcohol. Thus urinalysis in no way
assures a drug-free workplace. Instead, it encourages
substitution of alcohol and other non-tested drugs for marijuana,
cocaine, opiates and amphetamine.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Drug urinalysis is therefore an inherently
flawed technology. On one hand, it arbitrarily treats even the
most occasional marijuana users as &quot;drug abuse,&quot;
despite the substantial evidence that moderate marijuana use is
harmless. On the other hand, it ignores flagrant alcoholism. The
upshot is that urinalysis disqualifies many productive, competent
workers who enjoy non-traditional drugs in their free time, while
completely ignoring the majority of drug abusers, who are
alcoholics. All of this raises obvious questions about the value
of drug urinalylsis.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Morally, urinalysis can be compared to randomly
searching workers' homes and garbage cans and branding them
alcohol abusers if empty liquor bottles are found. Though it
might seem that Americans would strenuously object to such
warrantless searches of their homes, polls have shown strong
public support for searching their bladder contents, especially
in jobs deemed safety-critical.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">URINALYSIS: AN UNPROVEN TECHNOLOGY</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Despite the public support for drug testing,
urinalysis is a remarkably unproven technology. Were urinalysis a
life-saving new drug, it would have had to undergo years of
painstaking premarket testing in order to meet FDA regulations,
requiring it to be proven fully &quot;safe and effective&quot; in
rigorous, double-blind studies. Yet the fact is that urinalysis
has been imposed on millions of American workers involuntarily
without so much as a single scientifically controlled study to
show that it is a safe or effective means of promoting workplace
safety. Moreover, unlike drug consumers, urinalysis subjects
receive no warning labels informing them of what they are being
tested for, nor of the risks, accepted usage or implications of
the tests.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A close inspection of the evidence for drug
testing shows that it rests largely on exaggerated, distorted and
unfounded claims, as shown in critical reviews in Scientific
American and elsewhere. (1) For instance, testing advocates have
cited a Research Triangle Institute survey purporting to show
that the income loss due to marijuana use was some $26 billion;
yet the same data showed no difference at all in income between
non-users and current users of marijuana or other drugs. Other,
non-peer-reviewed studies by employers have likewise been
misinterpreted to support urinalysis: for instance, a pair of
studies at Utah Power and Light Co. and Georgia Power Co.
purporting to show that drug users pose a high risk of accidents
and absenteeism only looked at users who had exhibited problem
behavior on lthe job. Not surprisingly, this population had worse
than average work records. Nonetheless, Utah Power found thalt
drug users cost $215 less in health insurance benefits, while
Georgia Power found lower rates of absenteeism in workers who
tested positive only for marijuana!</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Only a handful of published studies have
compared the performance of drug-positive workers with others,
with similar, mixed results. A one-year follow-up study of 180
new employeees at a Georgia hospital found no relationship
between drug screen results and subsequent job performance. It
concluded, &quot;The data presently available do not support the
thesis that positive drug screening predicts poor job
performance.&quot; (2) Nonetheless, the U.S. government has
recently ordered random testing of its VA hospital employees. The
most extensive and widely cited research on workplace drug
testing comes from the U.S. Postal Service, which tracked the job
performance of new employees according to prior drug screen
results. Test results were not used in hiring decisions, but were
evaluated to determine their relation to job performance one year
later. The first study, which tracked the performance of 2533
postal workers in Boston, reported that drug-positive workers had
a statistically 50% higher rate of dismissals, reprimands,
injuries, accidents and absenteeism. (3) However, the authors
noted that this difference was &quot;much less than previously
estimated.&quot; Looked at another way, the Boston data actually
showed that the great majority of drug-positive users were
reliable: fully 86% of marijuana-positive workers were
discipline-free after one year, versus 91% for non-users; 74%
were accident-free, versus 81% for non-users; and 71% were still
on the job, versus 81% for non-users. Thus, on the average,
marijuana-positive workers were 90% as reliable as clean-urine
ones. Surprisingly, cocaine-positive workers fared even better,
being over 95% as reliable in most categories. The Boston
findings regarding accidents and injuries were subsequently
contradicted by a second, larger, study of 4,396 postal workers
nationwide, which found no relation at all between drug test
results and injuries or accidents. (4) The Boston accident
findings had previously been criticized on methodological
grounds. The second Postal Service study did find that those who
tested positive for illicit drugs had a 50% higher rate of
absenteeism and dismissals. Yet once again, they showed that
drug-using workers were largely reliable: drug users had a 93.4%
attendance record, versus 95.8% for others, and 85% of users kept
their jobs, versus 89.5% of non-users.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The Boston data were later analyzed in a
cost-benefit study, which found that drug screening would be
marginally economical, to the tune of about $162 per
drug-positive worker rejected. (5) However, the authors cautioned
that these results were highly sensitive to variations in the
extent of drug use and cost of urine testing, and that there were
likely to be many situations where drug testing was not
cost-effective. They concluded that companies &quot;should
carefully weigh the costs and benefits&quot; in their particular
industry. Had the authors examined the second Post Service study,
they would presumably have found even slimmer benefits from urine
testing, since there would have been no savings from accidents or
injuries. Furthermore, their analysis undoubtedly overstated the
potential value of drug urine testing, since they assumed that
all drug-positive workers would be screened out. In practice,
however, drug-using workers are apt to avoid detection, either by
discontinuing use temporarily beforehand or by other evasion
techniques described below. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">VICTIMS OF URINALYSIS</font></p>

<p><font size="3">While the benefits of drug testing to employers
appear dubious and unproven, the costs to the workforce have
scarcely been examined at all. Nonetheless, it is clear that
urinalysis imposes significant costs on workers. To begin with,
it forces millions of innocent employees to submit to scrutiny of
intimate bodily fluids in a way that many regard as degrading and
obnoxious. This is especially trying for the unfortunate minority
sufering &quot;blushing kidneys,&quot; who are unable to produce
urine on demand. At least one urinalysis victim has even been
hospitalized for water poisoning after being required to drink
three liters of water in order to make her give urine. (6)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Urinalysis is especially burdensome and
offensive to those otherwise responsible, productive workers who
do not abuse drugs on the job but enjoy indulging them in their
free time at home. Principal among these are the nation's 20 or
30 million marijuana users, the great majority of whom are
occasional users. (7) Due to the oversensitivity of urine tests
to marijuana, pot smokers constitute the great majority of
urinalysis victims: up to 90% of drug-positive test results are
for marijuana. (8) Urinalysis forces these workers either to give
up a valued pleasure, or to risk losing employment, insurance, or
other benefits and rights.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">California NORML (National Organization for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws) is one of several organizations
offering drug testing advice via a telephone hotline, over which
we have received scores of complaints from victims of drug
testing abuse. Included are truck drivers, airline attendants,
office workers, mechanics, nurses and other employees with
impeccable work records, who have lost long-held jobs on account
of their urine chemistry, often against the wishes of their own
supervisors and co-workers.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">One urinalysis victim, Mike Beatty, says he
lost $500,000 in Air Force retirement benefits after discharged
for using marijuana solely on the evidence of one bad urine test.
Beatty says that he used to smoke pot regularly, but like most
fellow servicemen gave it up when urine testing was instituted.
Nonetheless, he relates, he continued to socialize with pot
smokers, and had the misfortune of accidentally consuming a
marijuana brownie at a party shortly before a drug test. Beatty
says that before his discharge he was &quot;humiliated&quot; by
Air Force personnel with sexual aspersions and investigations
into his wife's private sex life.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Another urinalysis victim named Don was fired
from an ARCO truck driving job after 19 years on the job.
&quot;It didn't even occur to me that I had a problem.&quot; he
said. &quot;I thought they were looking for coke.&quot; Don, who
had an excellent work record and seniority, complains that ARCO
never explained the implications of its drug testing policy.
After losing his job and pension benefits, he was forced to sell
his house and settlle for a much lower-paying job. &quot;You can
count me as a victim of drug testing,&quot; he says.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;Jim is outstanding at what he does,&quot;
reads the employee evaluation file of another urinalysis victim,
a tractor trailer driver who was fired under Department of
Transportation drug testing regulations. &quot;Excellent safe
driving awareness,&quot; &quot;great initiative,&quot;
&quot;demonstrated dedication and consistency,&quot; read other
testimonials in Jim's file. Jim, who admits t being a weekend
marijuana smoker, was fired after five lyears on the job despite
having the highest possible job safety rating with his company.
&quot;My employer couldn't believe it,&quot; says another woman
who was fired from a job with a major retail store after failing
a surprise drug test. Like many other drug testing victims, the
woman was tested after being &quot;promoted&quot; to a higher
position.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;Drug testing has destroyed my attitude
towards my job and my government,&quot; says another utility
worker, who was forced into an &quot;employee assistance
program&quot; for a positive urine test. &quot;They treat me like
a drug addict,&quot; he says, echoing the complaint of many pot
smokers, &quot;and they go home and get drunk every night.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">DEALING WITH DRUG TESTS</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The most common question received on the
California NORML hotline is how to deal with a urine test for
marijuana. The most obvious advice is to abstain from suspect
substances before the test. Many callers are surprised to learn
that occasional, weekend use typically washes out in as few as
2-5 days. Most regular smokers commonly pass within a couple of
weeks, though very heavy use can be detected for as long as six
weeks. However, exceptions can occur. NORML has heard from
callers who have reported flunking as long as 10 days after a
single, isolated use, while other, regular smokers have been
known to pass within hours of last use. Such reports only
emphasize the essential capriciousness and unreliability of drug
urinalysis.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">For pot smokers facing drug tests on short
notice, the simplest and most effective advice is to drink large
volumes of liquids immediately before the test. The purpose of
this is to dilute the concentration of drug metabolites in the
urine below the threshold of detection (usually 100 nanograms per
milliliter for the commonly used EMIT test). Test subjects are
also advised to avoid giving urine that has accumulated in the
bladder overnight, since this tends to be high in metabolites.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Although reliable information on urinalysis
evasion is hard to come by, reports from underground
investigators agree that urine dilution can be quite effective.
Most regular smokers are able to pass within a week or two, and
sometimes much sooner, though exceptions occur. (9) Dilution can
be boosted by taking diuretics, which stimulate urination;
however, the most effective of these are available only on
prescription. A number of diets and wash-out regimes have been
proposed for persons who have several days to prepare; however,
none of these have been scientifically validated. It is possible
for laboratories to detect dilute urine by special tests for
specific gravity, creatanin content, etc.; however, such tests
are expensive and rarely used. On rare occasion, subjects are
asked to take a second test after submitting a sample that has
been found to be too watery. Of course, this gives them more time
to clear up.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Becuase urine dilution is far from 100%
reliable, especially for regular users caught unawares, there is
a natural demand for surer methods. Many users experiment with
oral &quot;drug screens&quot; that are rumored to avert positive
urine tests. Included are certain vitamins, vinegar, zinc
sulfate, and goldenseal root, as well as some overpriced special
formulas and herb teas sold on the underground market. Despite
glowing testimonials from some lucky users, these nostrums have
no good scientific foundation and have been found to be
unreliable in underground investigations.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A more reliable, if ethically dubious, way to
foil urine tests is to furtively tamper with the sample. One
popular trick is to adulterate the sample with one of a number of
household products that are known to interfere with the common
EMIT test so as to produce a false negative for marijuana. (10)
Popular adulterants include detergent, salt, bleach and Drano
crystals, which can be concealed under the fingernails. However,
such substances may be detectable by sight or smell by diligent
lab technicians. A more sophisticated, less easily detected
adulterant is currently sold on lthe underground market. (11) and
has been proven to be quite reliable at producing false negatives
for marijuana (the manufacturer was compelled to move operations
when the Texas legislature passed a bill outlawing sale of urine
adulterants) (12)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Another, more cumbersome trick is to substitute
clean urine for one's own when delivering the sample. A
surprising number of American workers appear to have rigged
themselves up with substitute urine samples by methods elaborated
in Abby Hoffman's book, &quot;Steal This Urine Test.&quot; (13)
In order to discourage such cheating, many labs now measure the
temperature of each sample.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Another, surer safeguard against tampering is
to require that subjects be carefully observed during urination.
However, aside from the armed forces and criminal justice system,
few testers resort to such extreme measures. Most tests
accordingly provide leeway for evasive sleights of hand. One
regrettable side-effect of drug testing is thus to favor those
more unscrupulous drug users who are willing to resort to
tampering and similar evasion techniques, whereas honest users
must either give up or face the risk of being fired. In a similar
way, dishonesty is favored on questionnaires asking about illicit
drug use: those drug users who are honest about their use are
routinely turned down, with the result that only dishonest users
are hired.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">PRE-EMPLOYMENT TESTS</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In general, the common pre-employment urine
screen is by far the easiest kind of test to deal with, insofar
as prospective employees need only avoid incriminating substances
for the time they are on the job market. However, a surprising
number of ignorant job applicants are unaware that they should be
prepared for urine tests in the first place. Most pot smokers
appear to have little problem abstaining for job tests, given the
low addictiveness of marijuana. Only rarely has California NORML
encountered long-term heavy users who complain of difficulty in
giving up pot for a while.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Nonetheless, pre-employment tests can still be
a problem even for moderate users if they happen to encounter a
surprise job opportunity. In addition, many companies require
drug screens of employees when they are promoted. As a result,
many workers whose efforts have won them a promotion end up being
fired instead on account of bad urine chemistry. Employees may
also face urine tests unexpectedly when their company is sold to
new management. In such cases, the new owners may demand a sudden
spot urine check of the entire workforce, effectively purging it
of anyone who has had the bad luck to indulge a suspect substance
too recently. Victims of such abuses generally have no legal
recourse against dismissal, and can also expect to lose
unemployment benefits.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">NORML has heard from many otherwise blameless
pot smokers who have lost jobs thanks to drug testing. Few cases
better illustrate the absurd lengths to which urinalysis is
carried than that of a newly &quot;promoted&quot; radio
programmer who found himself fired for a positive marijuana test.
The employee, who admitted to being a weekend pot smoker, had
been working for a San Francisco &quot;60's golden oldies&quot;
FM station!</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Many NORML callers complain of having been
coerced into drug testing programs they don't understand or
approve of, with little explanation of how the policy will be
administered. &quot;It was very manipulative,&quot; recounts one
woman concerning her employer's efforts to make her sign a form
consenting to urinalysis. &quot;They told us of course we
wouldn't be randomly tested; we would only be tested on
cause,&quot; she relates, &quot;But the form specifically stated
we would agree to random testing.&quot; Many employees receive no
disclosure statements at all, leaving them vulnerable to
arbitrary decisions. Some workers complain of being fired for a
single bad test, after being given the impression that they would
be eligible for a rehabilitation program instead. Many employees
complain about being &quot;singled out&quot; for drug tests
because they are unpopular with their supervisor or manager.
Others report being told by their managers that they will be
protected from urine tests because they are valued employees.
Some employees receive advance warning about impending tests,
giving them time to prepare; others are taken by surprise.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Because blood and urine samples are used for
many other medical tests, subjects do not necessarily know when
they are being drug tested. A Nevada mother told the NORML
hotline that she had been unwittingly blood-tested for marijuana
in a maternity ward, in what she had been told was a blood test
for AIDS. She said her family was subsequently visited by
plainclothes police demanding that they refer their newborn to a
hospital ward for drug-addicted babies, or else give up custody.
Another woman relates giving a urine specimen for what she was
told was a pre-employment drug test, and losing the job when the
employer inspected it to find out that whe was pregnant instead!</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(Continued)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">URINALYSIS OR UROMANCY PART II</font></p>

<p><font size="3">RANDOM URINALYSIS</font></p>

<p><font size="3">By far the most dreaded and intrusive form of
drug testing is the random test, which is specifically designed
to take workers by surprise. Under random testing, workers may be
called on to provide a urine sample at any time, typically on no
more than an hour or two's notice (however, in some shops,
workers have been known to receive as much as a weeks' advance
alert). A corollary of random urinalysis is to prevent workers
from using any marijuana, even at home on weekends, at the risk
of losing their jobs.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">While private employers have tended to shy wawy
from random testing on grounds of expense, government drug
warriors have successfully campaigned to impose random testing
through federal regulations. Random urinalysis is now required
for the military, many public employees and contractors, and the
nation's entire interstate transportation workforce -- including
not only airline pilots, train engineers and truck drivers, but
also flight attendants, mechanics, and gas pipeline workers.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The NORML hotline receives many complaints
about random testing from transportation workers. Most not only
resent the intrusion on their private lives, but also insist that
illicit drug abuse is not a safety problem. &quot;Alcohol is the
worst abused drug, especially pilots,&quot; says one angry flight
attendant, a view repeatedly expressed by others in the industry.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">According to air industry spokesmen, not a
single passenger airline crash had been attributed to alcohol or
drug abuse. (14) Administration officials lamely pointed to a
1988 plane crash in Durango, Colorado, in which the pilot's blood
showed evidence of cocaine use. Yet investigators determined that
the pilot was not high at the time of the crash, and it was the
co-pilot who was controlling the plane at the time of the crash!
(15) The fact that drug testing is widely opposed by the very
airline workers whose lives are most at stake would seem to raise
obvious questions about the supposed dangers of drug abuse in the
air industry.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Drug testing of transportation workers was
mandated by Congress in response to a highly publicized 1987
train collision in which 16 passengers were killed. (16) The
accident was blamed on the negligence of an engineer and
brakeman, who were determined to have been smoking marijuana
shortly before the crash. A subsequent investigation revealed
that both men had an extensive record of drunken driving offenses
and were known to be problem drinkers. Furthermore, some of the
train's safety equipment had been disabled. The engineer admitted
to culpability for ignoring warning signals, but denied that
marijuana had anything to do with the accident. An investigation
by the National Transportation Safety Board concluded that the
railroad should undertake management reforms and equipment
improvements, but did not recommend drug testing. Nonetheless,
Transportation Secretary James Burnley argued for drug testing,
pointing to evidence that a significant percentage of
accident-involved rail personnel tested positive for drugs. (17)
In fact, however, Federal Railroad Administration statistics
showed that only 4-6% of &quot;reasonable cause&quot; urine tests
were positive for drugs or alcohol, (18) half of what might have
been expected for a normal cross-section of the workforce! (19)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The ultimate impact of random testing
regulations remains to be seen, as testing is still being phased
in within the transportation industry. Many workers have
responded by adjusting their drug use, however grudgingly. Others
persist in risking a urine positive, relying on one or another
evasion techniques to minimize their risks. Relatively few are
actually caught: airlines report fewer than 1% of employees test
urine positive. (20) Included are an unfortunate number of very
occasional users: NORML has heard from more than one flight
attendant dismissed for indulging a rare joint with an old
friend.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Many workers report turning to alcohol as a
substitute for marijuana. &quot;I'm drinking a lot more
now,&quot; says one trucker, echoing a common complaint of many
drug-tested workers who say they use pot to control alcoholism.
Other drug-tested workers report widespread alcohol abuse among
their fellows: &quot;You see guys stumbling in here drunk from
the management on down,&quot; says a Customs employee,
&quot;There are guys drinking alcohol first thing in the
morning.&quot; Another employee told NORML that workers at his
job had started smoking heroin instead of pot. Meanwhile, in the
military, LSD is said to have become the illicit drug of choice
due to its relative undetectability. (21) It is tempting to
speculated that recent reports of a parallel upsurge in alcohol
and LSD use among young persons reflect a broader social trend
created by the incentives of drug urinalysis. (22)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">URINALYSIS: &quot;ON-CAUSE&quot; OR NO CAUSE?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In many workplaces, employees are subject to
&quot;on-cause&quot; testing whenever they have an accident.
While such testing might seem unobjectionable, it is often abused
so as to inculpate innocent workers. For instance, a diesel
mechanic told NORML that he had been ordered to take a urine test
following a minor workplace accident on a Friday, and that his
drug test was scheduled for Monday, three days after the
accident. The worker was rightly concerned that he might be fired
because he had recently smoked marijuana at home. Ironically,
however, three days would have been ample time to pass the test
had he actually been under the influence of any other
drug--cocaine, heroin, alcohol or speed--at the time of the
accident!</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In another case, a woman reported that her
husband, a print shop worker with eight years' seniority, had
flunked a drug test for marijuana after receiving a minor finger
cut in an accident caused by another worker. Not only was her
husband fired for an accident that wasn't his fault, but the
family also lost health insurance coverage for their son, who had
serious medical problems costing $1200 per month. Like other
urine testing victims, the woman charged that the company had
financial motivations to fire her husband, namely the family's
insurance costs. Urinalysis abuse is a phenomenon that extends
beyond the job market. For instance, some insurance companies
require drug urinalysis as part of their physical exams.
Applicants are routinely denied insurance if they are found to
use marijuana, despite the fact that there is not an iota of
actuarial evidence showing marijuana adversely affects life
expectancy.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Urinalysis has also come to figure in custody
battles between estranged couples. One husband told California
NORML that he had been directed by a court to submit to
urinalysis after his wife had accused him of being a marijuana
smoker, a condition widely presumed to compromise parental
fitness. He complained that he was given no time to prepare for
the test, despite the fact that his wife, who had demanded the
test, had three weeks to prepare a clean sample of her own.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Another arena where urinalysis is widely abused
is the prison system, where it is often imposed indiscriminately
as a condition of probation or parole. As a result, many
non-violent offenders face substantial prison time for simply
smoking a joint. For instance, a California woman with a long
history of medical marijuana use for migraines was sentenced to 8
months in jail on charges of marijuana transportation. The judge
explained that he could not give her a suspended sentence because
in that case she would be subject to drug testing, which she
would almost certainly fail, thereby ending up with a substantial
sentence. Drug use violations have been reported to constitute
45% of all parole violations in California, which in turn account
for nearly half of all prison admissions. (23) The use of
marijuana screening appears especially dubious in light of the
fact that marijuana tends to suppress violence, whereas the
nearest substitute, alcohol, tends to aggravate it.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">California NORML has heard from several medical
marijuana patients with drug testing problems. &quot;Pot makes me
feel better,&quot; complains a government worker with psoriatic
arthritis, &quot;I can't take alcohol.&quot; Other patients are
threatened with drug testing programs following convictions for
marijuana offenses. Although marijuana is not an approved
medication, patients may be able to pass urinalysis by obtaining
a prescription for Marinol, the government-approved synthetic
marijuana substitute. Since Marinol reacts exactly like
marijuana, patients could presumably obtain a medical exemption
for a positive urine test. Unfortunately, however, prescriptions
for Marinol are not easy to come by and federal regulations
forbid its use outside of cancer chemotherapy.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">One common concern about drug testing is the
danger of &quot;false positives,&quot; in which subjects are
erroneously accused of drug use. Contrary to rumor, neither
passive smoking nor drug interactions are likely to cause false
marijuana positives. Only in the most unlikely conditions, such
as sitting for hours on end in a closet full of heavy pot
smokers, has passive smoking been shown to produce a level of
urine metabolites high enough to be detected on the standart EMIT
test. (24) Likewise, no drug is known to cause a false positive
for marijuana, but certain over-the-counter medicines can trigger
the test for amphetamines and poppy seeds can be confused with
opiates (it used to be that ibuprofen interfered somewhat with
marijuana tests, but this problem has been fixed). (25) Such
problems are supposed to be sorted out by medical review
officers, the reliability of whom can only be speculated on.
However, NORML has not heard any complaints about false positives
from drug interactions.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The important question remains whether false
positives may be caused by lab error. Early surveys of drug
testing labs reported remarkably high error rates. However,
industry and government have taken steps to insure against false
positives for the sake of public credibility and liability. By
requiring accurate gas chromatograph confirmation tests of
positive samples and regulating the chain of custody, selected
labs have demonstrated false positive rates as low as zero in
10,000 -- 48,000 samples in proficiency tests (false negatives,
in which drug use is not detected, run around 3%) (26)
Nonetheless, given the profusion of unregulated labs, higher
error rates may well be common. It should be noted that even if
false positives occur in as few as one in 100,000 tests, hundreds
of Americans per year can expect to be falsely branded as illicit
drug users.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">California NORML has heard from three or four
persons claiming to be victims of &quot;false positives&quot; for
marijuana. Claims of this kind are by nature suspicious and
difficult to verify. On one occasion, however, I personally
observed what appeared to be a serious lapse of security in a
local clinic that administers drug tests to probationers for
local corrections authorities. I had come there to have some
experimental specimens tested, and was told to place them on a
shelf. While I waited for an attendant to record and label the
samples, a nurse came in and deposited another unlabeled specimen
jar on the shelf next to mine. Had I not brought the situation to
the attendant's attention, it would have been child's play to
switch and mislabel the samples by error or mischief.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">UROMANCY: AN OBSOLESCENT TECHNOLOGY?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The full toll of drug urine victims has yet to
be scientifically investigated. Nothing is known about the number
of false positives, nor the number of responsible workers
disqualified for urine positives, nor the costs to their
families, the economy, and welfare roles, nor the extent to which
drug urinalysis has aggravated abuse of alcohol, tobacco and
other untested drugs. As for the purported benefits of testing,
these too are unclear. Given the potential for drug substitution,
however, it may be doubted whether they will prove significant.
Indeed, a pair of recent studies suggest that the recent decline
in marijuana use has led to an increase in drug-abuse emergencies
and auto fatalities due to alcohol and other drugs. (27)
Meanwhile, the Bureau of Labor Statistics lhas reported a jump in
job-related sickness and injuries to a record 6.8 million in
1990, or 8.8 out of 100 workers, the highest rate since 1979,
before drug testing began! All of this raises obvious questions
about the purported benefits of drug urinalysis. Insofar as the
evidence for drug testing rests more on faith than science, it
might aptly be called &quot;uromancy.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The case for drug urinalysis is further
undermined by the fact that there exist alternative means for
detecting impairment. Most promising of these are performance
tests, which measure reaction time, alertness, and agility at
various tasks. Computer-based performance tests are now on the
market and have started to be used in some workplaces. (28)
Performance tests have the obvious advantage of measuring actual
impairment, regardless of the cause. Unlike urinalysis, they can
detect problems caused by alcohol and other, untested drugs, as
well as stress, fatigue, and emotional distress. In addition,
they have the important advantage of disregarding private
behavior that is irrelevant to job performance.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Another, often ignored alternative to
urinalysis is blood testing. Although blood tests are even more
physically invasive than urine tests, they provide a much better
indication of current impairment, since they detect the active
presence of psychoactive drugs in the system rather than inactive
urinemetabolites. Because blood tests are less sensitive to
behaviorally irrelevant, past drug use than urine tests, they are
commonly used in forensic studies of accident victimes to
determine whether the subject was under the influence of drugs.
Unfortunately, blood tests are at best an imperfect indicator of
intoxication for drugs other than alcohol, and it is impossible
to determine fixed thresholds for impairment. In the case of
marijuana, THC blood levels decline quite rapidly to negligible
levels in as little as two hours for occasional lusers, although
chronic users can manifest detectable levels for a couple of
days. Blood tests may therefore offer a useful way for occasional
drug users to establish their innocence of being under the
influence. The case can be made that any worker accused of
on-the-job drug abuse should have the option of taking a blood or
impairment test to prove his or her competence (in California,
motorists accused of driving under the influence of drugs have
the option of blood or urine tests; unfortunately, few if any
drivers understand the dramatic differences in sensitivit;y
between the two).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Another, more sinister alternative to
urinalysis is hair testing, which is even more sensitive to past
drug use than urinalysis. Promoters claim to detect drug use for
months and even years, far longer than any pharmacological impact
on health. Despite the fact that hair testing has unresolved
technical problems and is considered to be an unproven technology
by the scientific community, (29) it is already being marketed
and used by some private employers and has been boosted by
federal officials like Drug Czars William Bennett and Bob
Martinez. The one advantage of hair testing is that is is less
invasive of bodily privacy than blood or urine testing, although
some persons, such as those of the Sikh religion, object to
having their hair disturbed. However, because hair testing is
also much more indiscriminate than other technologies in
distinguishing harmless drug use from abuse, it poses enen
greater potential costs to society, the economy, and civil
liberties.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The choice betwee hair testing and performance
testing marks a crucial crossroads for the nation's drug policy.
While the outcome remains to be seen, there are good reasons to
think that urine and hair testing will eventually be rejected for
all but forensic purposes, given their basic inability to measure
competence. Drug urine testing is perhaps best understood as a
tool for imposing social conformity that has aptly been described
as &quot;chemical McCarthyism.&quot; (30) Like the loyalty oath
of the fifties, urinalysis seeks to impose &quot;politically
correct&quot; attitudes in the workforce. As drugs have replaced
Communism as domestic enemy number one, so the question,
&quot;Are you now or have you ever been a member of the Communist
party?&quot; has been replaced by, &quot;Are you now or have you
been the user of a controlled substance?&quot; When the current
anti-drug hysteria subsides, the absurdity of this question will
become apparent.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Technologically, drug urine testing can best be
compared to that other tool of McCarthyism, the polygraph. Like
the polygraph, drug testing rests on the spurious premise that
the human mind can be read via crude physiological measures. Like
the polygraph, drug testing is inherently misleading and
endangers innocent parties. Time has revealed the polygraph to be
an essentially flawed technology, and it has now been outlawed
for most purposes (ironically, by the very same Congress that
eagerly embraced random urinalysis). In the fullness of time, it
can be expected that the same will happen to drug urinalysis. As
the costs of drug testing are examined more closely, it is apt to
be seen that human beings are best judged by their perormance,
not the chemicals in their urine.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">FOOTNOTES</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1 John Horgan, &quot;Test Negative: A look at
the 'evidence'justifying illicit-drug tests,&quot; Scientific
American, March 1990, pp. 18-22; John Horgan, &quot;Postal
Mortem,&quot; Scientific American, February 1991, pp. 22-3; Dr.
John Morgan, &quot;Impaired Statistics and the Unimpaired
Worker,&quot; The Drug Policy Letter 1 (2): May/June 1989.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2 Dr. David Charles Parish, &quot;Relation of
the Pre-employment Drug Testing Result to Employment Status: A
One-year Follow-up,&quot; Journal of General Internal Medicine 4:
44-7 (1989).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3. Zwerling, Ryan and Orav, &quot;The Efficacy
of Preemployment Drug Screening for Marijuana and Cocaine in
Predicting Employment Outcome,&quot; JAMA 264 (20): 2639-43
(1990).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">4. Normand, Salyards and Mahoney,, &quot;An
Evaluation of Preemployment Drug Testing,&quot; Journal of
Applied Psychology, 75 (6): 629-39 (1990).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">5. Zwerling, Ryan and Orav, &quot;Costs and
Benefits of Preemployment Drug Screening,&quot; JAMA 267 (1):
91-3 (1992).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">6. Klonoff, &quot;Acute Water Intoxication as a
complication of urine drug testing,&quot; JAMA 265: 84-5 (1991).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">7. One in four current marijuana users say they
are daily users, while one in seven report smoking at least two
joints a day, according to NIDA's 1982 National Survey of Drug
Abuse.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">8. Dr. John Morgan, cited in Horgan, &quot;Test
Negative,&quot; loc. cit.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">9. &quot;Lab Experiments: How to Piss and
Pass,&quot; The Urine Nation News #7, Jan. 1992 (available from
Digit Press, PO Box 920066, Norcross GA 30092); Robert Freeman,
&quot;How to Beat A Urine Test,&quot; High Times, August 1988.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10 John Morgan, &quot;Marijuana Metabolism in
the Context of Urine Testing for Cannabinoid Metabolite,&quot;
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 20 (1): 107-15 (Jan-Mar 1988).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">11 UrinAid, available from Byrd Labs: PO Box
1441, Topanga CA 90290.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">12 Urine Nation News, loc. cit.; &quot;Urine
Trouble,&quot; Austin Chronicle, June 21, 1991.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">13 A. Hoffman, Steal This Urine Test, Penguin
Books, 1987.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">14 Washington Post, &quot;Signs of Drug Use in
Fatal Air Crash,&quot; printed in San Francisco Chronicle, March
12 1988.; R.B. Stone, testimony in Hearings on lthe Airline and
Rail Service Protection Act of 1987, Senate Committee on
Commerce, Science and Transportation, 100th Congress, Feb. 20
1987.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">15. Associated Press, &quot;Cocaine Called a
Factor in Colorado Air Crash,&quot; San Francisco Chronicle, Feb.
2, 1989.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">16. D. Gieringer, &quot;Marijuana, Driving, and
Accident Safety,&quot; Jopurnal of Psychoactive Drugs 20 (1):
93-101 (Jan-Mar, 1988).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">17 &quot;Drug-Test Rules for Rail Workers
Proposed by U.S.,&quot; Wall Street Journal, May 6, 1988.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">18 Federal Register Vol. 53 #224, Nov. 21,
1988, p. 47104.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">19 A roadside survey of truckers found 14%
urine positive on the job; A.K. Lund et al, &quot;Drug use by
tractor-trailer drivers,&quot; Washington DC, Insurance Institute
for Highway Safety, 1987.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">20 &quot;Airlines Seek Cutback in Drug
Testing,&quot; Wall Street Journal, May 12, 1992.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">21 &quot;By the Way,&quot; Reason, August/Sept.
1989, p. 14.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">22 &quot;The New Age Of Aquarius,&quot;
Newsweek, Feb. 3, 1992&quot;; &quot;Binge Drinking More Common On
Campus,&quot; San Francisco Chronicle, June 5, 1992.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">23 &quot;California Prisoners and
Parolees,&quot; California Department of Corrections, 1989.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">24 E. Cone and R. Johnson, &quot;Contact highs
and urinary cannabinoid excretion after passive exposure to
marijuana smoke,&quot; Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 40
(3): 247-56 (Sept. 1986).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">25 David W. Fretthold, &quot;Drug Testing
Methods and Reliability,&quot; Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 22:
419-28 (Oct-Dec 1990).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">26 ibid.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">27 Peter Passell, &quot;Less Marijuana, More
Alcohol?&quot; New York Times, June 17, 1992</font></p>

<p><font size="3">28 Manufactured by Performance Factors, 980
Atlantic Ave #104, Alameda, CA 94501.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">29 &quot;Hairy Problems for New Drug Testing
Method,&quot; Science, Sept. 7, 1990 p. 1099f.; The Forensic Drug
Abuse Advisor, Vol. 2 # 10, Nov/Dec 1990</font></p>

<p><font size="3">30 Dr. George Lundberg, &quot;The Rush to Test
Urine,&quot; Washington Post Health, Dec 9, 1986; see also JAMA
Dec. 5, 1986 p. 3003.</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>