
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B23-44</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B027-67</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/om/om13.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122141147 text/html 6493
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:11:39 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:30 GMT
Content-length: 6276
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Opium Monopoly - British North Borneo</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM MONOPOLY </h1>

<p><b>BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE</b> </p>

<h2>XIII - BRITISH NORTH BORNEO</h2>

<hr>

<p>BRITISH North Borneo occupies the northern part of the island
of Borneo. Area, about 31,000 square miles, with a coast line of
over 800 miles. Population (1911 census), 208,000, consisting
mainly of Mohammedan settlers on the coast and aboriginal tribes
inland. The Europeans numbered 355; Chinese 26,000; Malays,
1,612; East Indians about 5,000 and Filipinos 5,700. The number
of natives cannot be more than approximately estimated, but is
placed at about 170,000. The territory is under the jurisdiction
of the British North Borneo Company, being held under grants from
the Sultans of Brunei and Sulu (Royal Charter in 1881). </p>

<p>Like many other British colonies, opium is depended upon for
part of the revenue. The Statesman's Year Book for 1916 observes
on page 107: &quot;Sources of revenue: Opium, birds' nests, court
fees, stamp duty, licenses, import and export duties, royalties,
land sales, etc. No public debt.&quot; </p>

<p>In this frank manner, our attention is called to opium, which
appears first on the list of sources o revenue. </p>

<p>Going over the files of the Government reports, we will begin
with the &quot;Supplement to the Official Gazette for British
North Borneo. Administration Report for the Year 1910.&quot;
Published June 1, 1911. On page 3 we read: Customs and Trade: The
import and export trade of the state shows a healthy expansion. .
. . It is interesting to note that imports show an increase at
every station. Out of the 47 headings of Tariff, there are only 7
which show decreases. . . . The largest increases appear under
cloth, $147,106; opium, $132,692, and iron ware, $218,620. . . .
The general all round increases . . . are of course due to the
demand for supplies of all kinds in connection with the opening
of rubber estates.&quot; </p>

<p>The Supplement to the Official Gazette, Report for 1912
(published in December, 1913) is also a report of general
prosperity. Page 4: &quot;Trade: The volume of trade for the year
1912 was $11,139,122, giving an increase over 1911 of 18 per
cent. . . . Imports: As in 1911, all stations show an increase of
imports. Out Of 47 headings, 33 show increases, 12 show
decreases, and 2 remain stationary. Increases: There was an
increase under rice, flour and grain . . . the increase under
other headings include sundries, opium, machinery, etc.&quot; </p>

<p>The next Government Report is not so happy. Opium imports show
no &quot;healthy expansion.&quot; Thus, the Supplement to the
Official Gazette, Report for 1913 (published 1 February, 1915)
says on page 4: &quot;Other decreases in imports were opium,
$108,18o. The decrease in opium was due to the abolition of the
Opium Farm, which also held the Labuan Farm, and opium was
therefore no longer imported from Labuan for use in the West
Coast and the Interior.&quot; </p>

<p>Still more bad news as to opium, in the report for 1914,
(published 1 February, 1916). All imports drop. Page 4 records
&quot;Decrease in imports. . . . Railway and telegraph material,
rice, flour, grain and opium.&quot; In this year the opium
imports only amount to $58,464. This general falling off in all
imports may have been due to the war. But the opium situation was
apparently growing serious. On page 17 of this same report we
read that &quot;Thirty-two ordinances were passed by the Council
and became laws during the year. Among them the Opium and
Chandu.&quot; </p>

<p>The brevity and meagerness of these official reports often
leave one puzzled as to their meaning. The Supplement to the
Official Gazette for 1915 (published October, 1916), shows still
more discouraging news as to opium. Imports that year amounted to
only $31,299. But, in spite of this discouragement, hope still
remains. The same report shows optimism under the head of Excise.
&quot;Excise: $627,225, against $467,078, an increase in the net
revenue of $160,147, due to Government taking over the sole
control of the sale of chandu (smoking opium) and the collection
of other Excise duties, formerly farmed.&quot; </p>

<p>This explains the Ordinance passed by the Council the
preceding year, regarding Opium and Chandu. Since the Government
has taken over 44 sole control of the sale of chandu &quot; and
will collect the excise duties systematically and thoroughly, we
may still hope for some future report which will show once more a
&quot;healthy expansion&quot; in the opium revenue. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>