
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B014-196</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/dojpr1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122120857 text/html 6055
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:08:51 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:34 GMT
Content-length: 5838
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>THE NATION'S PRISON POPULATION GREW ALMOST 9 PERCENT LAST
YEAR </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p>THE NATION'S PRISON POPULATION GREW ALMOST 9 PERCENT LAST YEAR
</p>

<p> U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE </p>

<p> ADVANCE FOR RELEASE AT 5 P.M. EDT BJS </p>

<p> WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 9, 1995 202/307-0784 </p>

<p> WASHINGTON, D.C. -- The nation's state and federal prisons
had to find room for 83,294 more inmates last year--the second
largest annual increase in history and just 1,470 fewer than the
84,764 increase recorded in 1989. The total number of men and
women in prison last December 31 was 1,053,738--a new record.
Overall, almost 1.5 million people were incarcerated in the
United States in 1994. State and federal prisons, which primarily
hold convicted felons serving longer sentences, contained about
two-thirds of the total. Locally operated jails, which primarily
hold people awaiting trial or serving sentences of a year or
less, held the other third. </p>

<p> At the end of 1994 state prisons held 958,704 men and women
and federal prisons held 95,034 inmates. California (125,605) and
Texas (118,195) together held more than one in every five inmates
in the nation. Seventeen states, each holding fewer than 5,000
inmates, accounted for 4 percent of all prisoners. </p>

<p> Prison populations increased by at least 10 percent in 16
states last year. Texas reported the largest growth (28 percent),
followed by Georgia (20 percent). Alaska and </p>

<p> Connecticut reported fewer prisoners who had been sentenced
to more than a year. </p>

<p> The average sentence length and time served for state
prisoners has remained stable in recent years. Between 1985 and
1992, the years for which comparable data are available, half of
the state prisoners served at least 48 months. </p>

<p> In the federal system, however, the &quot;truth in
sentencing&quot; provisions of the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984
have contributed to increasing the median time served in prison
from 15 months in 1986 to 24 months in 1992. </p>

<p> The incarceration rate for prisoners sentenced to more than a
year reached a record 387 per 100,000 U.S. residents last
December 31. States with the highest incarceration rates were
Texas (636 inmates per 100,000 residents), Louisiana (530) and
Oklahoma (508). North Dakota (78) had the lowest, followed by
Minnesota (100) and West Virginia (106). </p>

<p> Since 1980 per capita incarceration rates rose the most in
the South (from 188 to 451) and West (from 105 to 333). The rate
in the Northeast rose from 87 to 285, and the rate in the Midwest
from 109 to 297. </p>

<p> In absolute numbers, violent offenders were the greatest
contributors to state prison inmate growth. Between 1980 and
1993, the number of violent offenders grew by an estimated
221,300, the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) estimated using
1993 data. </p>

<p> More than a quarter of the state and federal inmates were in
prison for drug offenses (234,600 prisoners) in 1993. Prisoners
serving a drug sentence increased from 8 percent of the state and
federal prison population in 1980 to 26 percent in 1993. In
federal prisons, inmates sentenced for drug law violations were
the single largest group--60 percent in 1993, up from 25 percent
in 1980. </p>

<p> At the end of the year, states reported they were operating
between 17 percent and 29 percent over capacity, while the
federal system was operating at 25 percent over capacity. </p>

<p> Because of prison construction and the creation of new prison
beds, the ratio of the inmate population to the capacity of state
prisons has remained almost the same since 1990. </p>

<p> The average growth in the number of state and federal
prisoners sentenced to at least a year's incarceration was equal
to the need for 1,542 more beds per week in 1994. </p>

<p> During 1994 almost 5 percent of all state prisoners--48,949
inmates in 21 jurisdictions--were held in local jails or other
facilities because of prison crowding. </p>

<p> The number of female inmates grew 10.6 percent last year,
compared to an 8.5 percent increase among male inmates. On
December 31, 1994, there were 64,403 women in state and federal
prisons--6.1 percent of all prisoners. The rate of incarceration
for inmates serving a sentence of more than a year is 746 males
per 100,000 U.S. male residents, vs. 45 females per 100,000
female population. </p>

<p> Between 1980 and 1993, the number of white and black female
inmates grew at a faster pace than the number of male inmates in
either racial group. During this period the number of white males
grew 163 percent, the number of black males grew 217 percent, the
number of white females 327 percent, and the number of black
females 343 percent. An estimated 1,471 blacks per 100,000 black
residents and 207 whites per 100,000 white residents were
incarcerated in the nation's prisons on December 31, 1993. </p>

<p> The report, &quot;Prisoners in 1994&quot; (NCJ-151654), was
written by BJS statisticians Allen J. Beck and Darrell K.
Gilliard. Single copies may be obtained from the BJS
Clearinghouse, Box 179, Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701-0179.
The telephone number is 1-800/732-3277. Fax orders to
410/792-4358. </p>

<p> Data from tables and graphs used in many BJS reports can be
obtained in spreadsheet files on 5.25 and 3.5 inch diskettes by
calling 202/616-3283. </p>

<p> After hours contact: Stu Smith at 301-983-9354 <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>