
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B044-69</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/prsn90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114432 text/html 24275
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:44:20 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:12:42 GMT
Content-length: 24057
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Prisoners in 1990</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p>Prisoners in 1990 </p>

<p> U.S. Department of Justice </p>

<p> Office of Justice Programs </p>

<p> Bureau of Justice Statistics </p>

<p> Bureau of Justice Statistics </p>

<p> Special Report </p>

<p> Prisoners in 1990 </p>

<p> May 1991 </p>

<p> NCJ-129198 </p>

<p> Full text with tables available from: </p>

<p> BJS Justice Statistics Clearinghouse </p>

<p> 1-800-732-3277 </p>

<p> Box 6000 </p>

<p> Rockville, MD 10850 </p>

<p>
-----------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p> This Bulletin presents counts of the Nation's prisoners at
the end of 1990. The 1990 increase of nearly 59,000 prisoners
equals a demand for approximately 1,100 new prison beds per week
nationwide. Prisons were estimated to be operating from 18% to
29% above their capacities at yearend. </p>

<p> Strong evidence exists that during the 1980's there was an
increasing probability that a convicted offender would go to
prison. The ratio of prison admissions to reported serious crimes
and arrests for serious crimes increased to levels unequalled in
almost 30 years of reporting. </p>

<p> The Bureau of Justice Statistics expresses its appreciation
to the departments of corrections in the 50 States, the District
of Columbia, and the Federal Prison System, that make it possible
for us to gather and report data on the Nation's prisoners. </p>

<p> Steven D. Dillingham, Ph.D. Director </p>

<p>
-----------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p> PRISONERS IN 1990 </p>

<p> By Robyn L. Cohen </p>

<p> BJS Statistician </p>

<p> The number of prisoners under the jurisdiction of Federal or
State correctional authorities at yearend 1990 reached a record
high of 771,243. The States and the District of Columbia added
52,331 prisoners; the Federal system, 6,355. The increase for
1990 brings total growth in the prison population since 1980 to
441,422 - an increase of about 134% in the 10-year period. </p>

<p> The 1990 growth rate (8.2%) was less than the percentage
increase recorded during 1989 (13.5%), and the number of new
prisoners added during 1990 was 26,271 less than the number added
during the preceding year (84,957). The 1990 increase translates
into a nationwide need for approximately 1,100 prison bedspaces
per week, compared to 1,600 prison bedspaces per week needed in
1989. </p>

<p> Prisoners with sentences of more than 1 year (referred to as
&quot;sentenced prisoners&quot;) accounted for 96% of the total
prison population at the end of 1990, growing by 8.6% during the
year. The remaining prisoners had sentences of a year or less or
were unsentenced (like those, for example, awaiting trial in
States with combined prison-jail systems). </p>

<p> The number of sentenced Federal prisoners increased at a
faster rate than sentenced prisoners in the States during the
year (10.7% versus 8.5%). For States, the rate of increase in the
number of sentenced prisoners was lower than in 1989 (13%). </p>

<p> Among the 13,318 Federal prisoners with no sentences or
sentences of a year or less were 1,910 under the jurisdiction of
the Immigration and Naturalization Service, a decrease of 45 from
the number held at the end of 1989 (1,955). The number of Federal
prisoners with no sentences or sentences of less than a year
increased by 1,315 during 1990 (from 12,003 to 13,318), while the
number of sentenced prisoners increased by 5,040. </p>

<p> Total prison populations in Alaska, the District of Columbia,
Oregon, Rhode Island, and Tennessee altogether decreased by 1,675
inmates during 1990. The District of Columbia accounted for more
than half of this decline. The percentage of growth was the
highest during 1990 in Vermont (15.9%), Washington (15.4%), and
New Hampshire (15.1%). Thirteen States reported total prisoner
increases of 10% or more since yearend 1989. California's
increase of more than 10,000 prisoners during the year was the
largest gain in the number of prisoners for any single
jurisdiction. At the end of 1990, about 1 in 8 prisoners
nationwide were confined in a California institution. California
accounted for more than 17% of the increase nationwide during the
year. </p>

<p> Rates of Incarceration Increase </p>

<p> On December 31, 1990, the number of sentenced prisoners per
100,000 residents was 293, also setting a new record. Ten of the
16 jurisdictions with rates equal to or greater than the rate for
the Nation were located in the South, 4 were in the West, 1 was
in the Midwest, and 1 was in the Northeast. </p>

<p> Since 1980 the number of sentenced inmates per 100,000
residents has risen nearly 111%, from 139 to 293. During this
period, per capita incarceration rates have grown most rapidly in
the Northeast, increasing by 167% (from 87 to 232) and the West,
up by nearly 163% (from 105 to 276). The per capita number of
sentenced prisoners in the Midwest climbed 119% (from 109 to
239), and the rate rose 68% in the South (from 188 to 315). The
number of sentenced Federal prisoners per 100,000 U.S. residents
has increased 133% (from 9 to 21) over the same period. </p>

<p> Prison Populations in Western States Grow the Fastest </p>

<p> Regionally, during 1990 the percentage increase in the number
of sentenced prisoners was highest in the Western States, with a
gain of 9.2%. The number of sentenced prisoners grew by 8.8% in
the Northeast, 8.8% in the South, and 6.9% in the Midwestern
States. The sentenced Federal prison population grew by 10.7%. </p>

<p> In 13 States the percentage change in the number of sentenced
prisoners during 1990 was equal to or higher than that of 1989.
Among these jurisdictions, four had increases of at least 10%,
led by New Hampshire (15.1%), Texas (13.7%), Alabama (13.2%), and
Georgia (10.1%). </p>

<p> From the end of 1985 to December 31, 1990, net gains in the
number of sentenced prisoners have averaged about 1,000 prisoners
per week - a weekly gain of about 922 State prisoners and 75
Federal prisoners per week over the period. The largest net gains
have occurred in the South (306 inmates per week) followed by the
West (243), the Midwest (194), and the Northeast (179). During
1990 average growth in the number of sentenced State and Federal
prisoners was equal to a demand for 1,131 additional bed- spaces
per week, about 354 fewer than the average weekly growth in 1989.
</p>

<p> The sentenced prisoner population had increased in four
States by 90% or more since 1985: California (94%), Colorado
(107%), Michigan (93%), and New Hampshire (97%). California's
increase of 45,796 sentenced prisoners since 1985 accounts for
72% of the increase for the West and 19% of the increase among
all States over the period. In 1985, 10.8% of the Nation's
sentenced State prisoners were in California; in 1990, 13.7%. </p>

<p> Male Prisoner Population Growth Outpaces that of Females </p>

<p> The number of male inmates (727,398) increased at a faster
rate during 1990 (8.3%) than the number of female inmates (7.9%).
This is the first year since 1981 that the number of male inmates
has increased at a faster rate than the number of female inmates.
The rate of incarceration for sentenced males (566 per 100,000
males in the resident population) was about 18 times higher than
for sentenced females (31 per 100,000 females in the resident
population). At the end of 1990, women accounted for 5.7% of
prisoners nationwide. </p>

<p> The 1990 growth rate (7.9%) for female inmates was less than
the percentage increase recorded during 1989 (24.4%). As shown
below, the percentage change was lower in 1990 across all the
regions and at the Federal level. </p>

<p> Percent Increase in Female Inmate Population </p>

<p> 1989-90 1988-89 </p>

<p> Total 7.9% 24.4% </p>

<p> Federal 13.0 36.8 </p>

<p> State 7.2 23.1 Northeast 9.2 29.8 </p>

<p> Midwest 7.1 19.5 </p>

<p> South 7.2 23.6 </p>

<p> West 6.3 22.3 </p>

<p> In 1990, 22 States, the District of Columbia, and the Federal
system had more than 500 female inmates. Among these
jurisdictions, 10 had increases of at least 10%, led by New
Jersey's increase of 17.5% (from 886 in 1989 to 1,041 in 1990).
California's increase during 1990, 502 inmates, accounted for
15.7% of the nationwide increase of 3,199. </p>

<p> Local Jails Held More than 18,000 Because of State Prison
Crowding </p>

<p> At the end of 1990, 21 jurisdictions reported a total of
18,380 State prisoners held in local jails or other facilities
because of crowding in State facilities. The number of State
prisoners held locally decreased by 3.6% over that of yearend
1989. Three States - Louisiana, New Jersey, and Virginia -
accounted for more than half of the prisoners sentenced to prison
but incarcerated locally. Five States - Arkansas, Louisiana, New
Jersey, Tennessee, and Virginia - held more than 10% of their
State- sentenced prisoners in local jails because of State
facility crowding. Overall, 2.4% of the State prison population
was confined in local jails on December 31, 1990, because of
prison crowding. </p>

<p> Prison Capacity Estimates are Difficult to Compare </p>

<p> The extent of crowding in the Nation's prisons is difficult
to determine precisely because of the absence of uniform measures
for defining capacity. A wide variety of capacity measures is in
use among the 52 reporting jurisdictions because capacity may
reflect both available space to house inmates and the ability to
staff and operate an institution. To estimate the capacity of the
Nation's prisons, jurisdictions were asked to supply up to three
measures for yearend 1990 - rated, operational, and design
capacities. These measures were defined as follows: </p>

<p> - Rated capacity is the number of beds or inmates assigned by
a rating official to institutions within the jurisdiction. </p>

<p> - Operational capacity is the number of inmates that can be
accommodated based on a facility's staff, existing programs, and
services. </p>

<p> - Design capacity is the number of inmates that planners or
architects intended for the facility. </p>

<p> Of the 52 reporting jurisdictions, 32 supplied rated
capacities, 42 provided operational capacities, and 38 submitted
design capacities. As a result, estimates of total capacity and
measures of the relationship to population are based on the
highest and lowest capacity figures provided. (Twenty-six
jurisdictions reported 1 capacity measure or gave the same figure
for each capacity measure they reported.) </p>

<p> Most Jurisdictions are Operating Above Capacity </p>

<p> Prisons generally require reserve capacity to operate
efficiently. Prison dormitories and cells need to be maintained
and repaired periodically, special housing is needed for
protective custody and disciplinary cases, and space may be
needed to cope with emergencies. At the end of 1990, nine States
reported they were operating below 95% of their highest capacity.
</p>

<p> Forty-two jurisdictions and the Federal prison system
reported operating at 100% or more of their lowest capacity; 34
of these held populations that met or exceeded their highest
reported capacities. </p>

<p> Overall, at the end of 1990 State prisons were estimated to
be operating at 115% of their highest capacities and 127% of
their lowest capacities. Prisons in Southern States were found to
be operating closest to their reported capacity on each measure. </p>

<p> The Federal system was estimated to be operating at 51% over
capacity. Between 1989 and 1990, State and Federal prison
capacities were estimated to have increased by approximately
20,000-50,000 beds. At the end of 1990, prisons nationwide were
estimated to be from 18% to 29% over their capacities. </p>

<p> Prison Population Growth may Reflect Increasing Certainty of
Punishment </p>

<p> There is some evidence that during the period 1980-89 changes
in criminal justice policies have increased a criminal's
probability of being incarcerated from levels existing in prior
years. </p>

<p> Murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, rape, robbery, aggravated
assault, and burglary are among the most serious crimes and
account for approximately half of prison commitments from courts.
In 1960 there were 62 prison commitments for every 1,000 of these
crimes reported to law enforcement agencies. During the rest of
the decade this ratio steadily declined reaching 23 in 1970 and
was relatively stable during the 1970's. Between 1980 and 1989
the ratio increased from 25 commitments per 1,000 reported crimes
to 62. </p>

<p> Similarly, between 1960 and 1970 the ratio of prison
commitments to adult arrests for the selected crimes declined
from 299 per 1,000 to 170. This ratio was relatively stable
during the 1970's, but it increased between 1980 and 1989, from
196 commitments per 1,000 adult arrests to 332. (See
Methodological note for more detail on these data.) </p>

<p> Prison-admissions-to-crime ratios for individual States
provide an alternative measure of prison use to population-based
rates. Population-based incarceration rates take into account the
number of sentenced prisoners and the size of the resident
population in a jurisdiction. The crime-based rate measures entry
into prison relative to the number of crimes reported to law
enforcement agencies during a year. </p>

<p> Between 1980 and 1989 the ratio of court commitments to
prison and reported crimes increased 148%, from 25 commitments
per 1,000 crimes to 62. Over the same period the number of prison
commitments per 100,000 adult residents went up 115%, from 80 to
172. The Northeast had the largest percentage increase in the
number of commitments relative to reported crime and experienced
the largest gain in prison commitments relative to population.
However, in both 1980 and 1989 the South had the largest number
of court commitments to prison relative to reported crime and to
population. </p>

<p> Besides the increased use of prison relative to reported
crime, arrests, and resident population, prison population has
also been affected by changes in the extent of the illegal drug
problem. </p>

<p> An estimated two-thirds of those in State prisons for a drug
offense were convicted of trafficking or manufacturing illegal
drugs. (For additional information on drug offenders in State
prisons, see Profile of State Prison Inmates, 1986, BJS Special
Report, NCJ-109926, January 1988 and Drug Use and Crime, BJS
Special Report, NCJ-111940, July 1988.) Since 1985 the number of
adult arrests for drug violations has increased by 74%, and the
number of arrests for sales or manufacturing of illegal drugs has
grown by 137%. </p>

<p> Methodological Note </p>

<p> This bulletin is based upon an advance count of prisoners
conducted for the National Prisoner Statistics (NPS) program
immediately after a calendar year ends. A detailed, final count
containing any revisions to the jurisdictions' advance count will
be published later. </p>

<p> Explanatory Notes </p>

<p> Alabama. Capacity in community programs is not included in
the reported capacity figures. </p>

<p> Alaska. In this State, prisons and jails form one integrated
system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prison
populations. </p>

<p> Arizona. Population counts are based on custody data.
Population counts exclude inmates housed in local jails because
of crowding. </p>

<p> California. Population counts are based on custody data. </p>

<p> Colorado. Population counts for &quot;Inmates with over 1
year maximum sentence&quot; include an undetermined number of
&quot;Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less.&quot; Population
counts exclude 652 male inmates and 1 female inmate housed in
local jails awaiting pickup. </p>

<p> Connecticut. In this State, prisons and jails form one
integrated system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and
prison populations. </p>

<p> Delaware. Population counts are based on custody data. In
this State, prisons and jails form one integrated system. All NPS
data include, therefore, both jail and prison populations. </p>

<p> District of Columbia. Population counts are based on custody
data. In the District of Columbia, prisons and jails form one
integrated system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and
prison populations. Population counts exclude those inmates
housed in Federal Bureau of Prisons facilities. Population counts
exclude 826 male inmates housed in other States as a result of
crowding. Female capacities are included in the male capacities
reported. </p>

<p> Federal. Population counts for &quot;Unsentenced
inmates&quot; include 1,886 males and 24 females who come under
the jurisdiction of the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization
Service. Capacity figures apply to Bureau of Prisons institutions
only and do not include capacity provided by contract facilities.
Female capacities are included in the male capacities reported. </p>

<p> Florida. Population counts are based on custody data. </p>

<p> Georgia. Population counts are based on custody data. </p>

<p> Hawaii. In this State, prisons and jails form one integrated
system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and prison
populations. </p>

<p> Illinois. Population counts are based on custody data.
Population counts for &quot;Inmates with over 1 year maximum
sentence&quot; include an undetermined number of inmates with a
maximum sentence of 1 year. </p>

<p> Indiana. Population counts are based on custody data and
exclude inmates housed in local jails because of crowding. </p>

<p> Iowa. Population counts are based on custody data. </p>

<p> Kansas. Female capacities are included in the male capacities
reported. </p>

<p> Maine. Population counts are as of January 1, 1991. Female
capacities are in the male capacity figures reported. </p>

<p> Maryland. While population totals are actual manual counts,
the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates based on the
actual sentence length breakdowns of Maryland's automated data
system. </p>

<p> Massachusetts. Starting with December 31, 1990, Massachusetts
is reporting &quot;unsentenced Inmates.&quot; Population counts
are based on custody data. Population counts exclude 418 male and
12 female inmates housed in local jails because of crowding.
Population counts for &quot;Inmates with over 1 year maximum
sentence&quot; include an undetermined number of &quot;Inmates
with a sentence of 1 year or less.&quot; Population totals are
actual counts; however, the male/female breakdown is an estimate
believed to be within 0.1% of the actual counts. By law,
offenders in Massachusetts may be sentenced to terms of up to 2
1/2 years in locally operated jails and correctional
institutions. Such populations are excluded from the State count
but are included in published population counts and rates for
local jails and correctional institutions. </p>

<p> Michigan. Population counts are based on custody data.
Capacity figures exclude the capacities of the Community
Residential Program. </p>

<p> Mississippi. Female capacities are included in the male
capacities reported. Montana. Starting with the December 31,
1990, data, Montana now reports &quot;Inmates with a sentence of
1 year or less.&quot; Montana is currently operating under
emergency capacity; therefore, they are reporting emergency
rather than operational capacity. </p>

<p> Nevada. Female capacities include the Nevada Women's Facility
and the Reno Correctional Facility but exclude space at Nevada's
Restitution Centers. Capacity for women at Nevada's Restitution
Centersis included with the male capacity. </p>

<p> New Jersey. Rated, operational, and design capacities include
568 bedspaces in county facilities. </p>

<p> North Carolina. While population totals are actual counts,
the breakdowns for sentence length are estimates believed to be
accurate within 1% of the actual counts. </p>

<p> Ohio. Population counts for &quot;Inmates with over 1 year
maximum sentence&quot; include an undetermined number of
&quot;Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or less.&quot; </p>

<p> Oklahoma. Population counts for &quot;Inmates with over 1
year maximum sentence&quot; may include a small undetermined
number of inmates with a sentence of 1 year. </p>

<p> Rhode Island. In this State, prisons and jails form one
integrated system. All NPS data include, therefore, both jail and
prison populations. Tennessee. Population counts for
&quot;Inmates with over 1 year maximum sentence&quot; include an
undetermined number of &quot;Inmates with a sentence of 1 year or
less.&quot; Population counts include 1,854 males and 15 females
housed in local jails because of overcrowding of State prison
facilities and exclude 2,593 felons sentenced to serve their time
in local jails. (The State pays to house these 2,593 felons, but
the local court maintains jurisdiction.) Texas. Population counts
are based on custody data. The courts have ordered that the Texas
Department of Criminal Justice Institutional Division (TDCJ-ID)
cannot house more inmates than 95% of capacity. Approximately
2,928 beds are exempt from this rule, and the inmates in these
beds do not count toward the calculation of 95% capacity. The
population counts include all inmates within TDCJ-ID; however,
the capacity figures exclude the 2,928 exempt beds. </p>

<p> Vermont. Population counts are as of December 6, 1990. In
this State, prisons and jails form an almost completely
integrated system. However, some county and municipal authorities
do operate local lockups. NPS data include both jail and prison
populations. The counts for jail crowding include 34 male inmates
housed in local lockups. The capacity figures exclude the 34 male
inmates housed in local lockups. </p>

<p> Washington. Capacity figures exclude space in State
work-release facilities that housed 609 male and 69 female
inmates on December 31, 1990. </p>

<p> West Virginia. The female population counts are based on
custody data. Population counts exclude 87 male and 15 female
inmates housed in local jails because of overcrowding. </p>

<p> Wyoming. The operational capacity figure is the absolute
total bedspace available to Wyoming's Department of Corrections,
and it includes 60 bedspaces in community centers. </p>

<p>
-----------------------------------------------------------------Bureau
of Justice Statistics Bulletins are prepared principally by BJS
staff. Robyn L. Cohen, statistician, under the supervision of
Lawrence A. Greenfeld, corrections unit chief, wrote this report.
Thomas Hester edited it. Darrell Gilliard provided statistical
assistance. Marilyn Marbrook, publications unit chief,
administered production, assisted by Betty Sherman, Yvonne
Boston, and Jayne R. Pugh. Collection and processing of National
Prisoner Statistics data were conducted under the general
supervision of Lawrence S. McGinn and Gertrude B. Odom, assisted
by Carol Spivey, U.S. Bureau of the Census. </p>

<p> May 1991, NCJ-129198 </p>

<p> The Assistant Attorney General, Office of Justice Programs,
coordinates the activities of the following program offices and
bureaus: Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Institute of
Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, Office of Juvenile Justice
and Delinquency Prevention, and Office for Victims of Crime <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>