
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-52</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B019-69</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/therappos.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052756 text/html 10720
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:27:50 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:56 GMT
Content-length: 10502
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Therapeutic Possibilities in Cannabinoids</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="5">THERAPEUTIC POSSIBILITIES IN CANNABINOIDS
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">THE LANCET, MARCH 22, 1975 P. 667-69 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">EDITORIAL &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">To early man, Cannabis sativa L. was a source
of food ( hemp seed and oil) and of fibre (ropes), though,
according to mythology, the Emperor Shen Nung (4000 B.C.) knew
that it contained a potent drug. Hindus (20) and Arabs (21) used
it in a medley of diseases, and in Victorian times it had a
therapeutic vogue in Europe. Tincture of cannabis, taken orally,
was occasionally effective as a sedative in psychosomatic
disorders and even for the control of fits, asthma, migraine,
choreiform conditions, and &quot;psychosis.&quot; After a review
by REYNOLDS (22) in 1890, British medicine heard little of the
drug---because of unreliability of available material, the onrush
of chemotherapy by synthetic drugs, and not least the
classification of Cannabis, with opium, as a narcotic in need of
legal restriction.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Herbal cannabis (marihuana or &quot;pot&quot;),
or the resin collected from the flowering tops (hashish), varies
greatly (23) in its content of each active principle or
cannabinoid, but the important ones are tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC, numbered as delta-1 or delta-9, according to the school of
chemistry) and some analogues; cannabinol (CBN); cannabidiol
(CBD)); and cannabigerol (CBG). Synthetic compounds are now being
assessed: an early attempt, demethylheptylpyran (DMHP), is an
anticonvulsant of some potency in man. (24) THC is highly
lipophilic, absorbed rapidly when inhaled and more slowly when
ingested, and is quickly oxidised in stages through an active
metabolite to more polar but inactive products. These are cleared
very slowly from the body in urine and feces. At present cannabis
and the cannbinoids are controlled drugs in the UK, scheduled in
the Misuse of Drugs Act of 1971; a personal licence (which can be
obtained readily enough from the Home Office for legitimate
purposes) is required in order to gain exemption from the
provisions of this Act.* </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Among established pharmacological properties of
cannabinoids which may be capable of therapeutic application are
the sedative or tranquillising effect; analgesia; anticonvulsant,
hypothermic, and hypotensive effects; stimulation of appetite;
lowering of intraocular tension; relaxation of smooth muuscle;
and cytotoxic or immunosuppresive actions. There has been
particular interest in the effects on airways. A prolonged and
significant reduction in airways resistance was noted by VACHON
et al. (25) in experienced young males who inhaled 9 litres of
smoke in air from herbal cannabis which contained 1% or 2.6% THC.
Tachycardia and a rise in specific airways conductance followed
at once, the airways effect peaking at 20 minutes and persisting
for some hours. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">TASHKIN et al. (24) confirmed this observation
and estimated that the smoke from cannabis of 2% THC content was
more effective than 1.25 mg of isoprenaline. The next step was to
show that THC in sesame oil was active taken orally in doses of
10-20 mg. The effect took about 1 hour to peak and persisted for
6 hours. TASHKIN et al (27) examined 10 subjects with reversible
airways obstruction of varying severity but whose disability was
quiescent. They were asked to smoke placebo herb, or 7 mg per kg
cannabis of 2% THC content, or to ingest 15 mg of THC. Airways
conductance rose immediately and the effect persisted much longer
than that of isoprenaline. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The two teams have confirmed these results,
(28,29) but there are two minor reservations which may be made
about their work. Firstly, all the subjects tested had previously
smoked marihuana and therefore expected some effect from it,
which may have induced adrenal medullary activity; cannabis-naive
individuals may not respond in this way. Secondly, a highly
sensitive whole-body plethysmograph was used which detects modest
changes in dynamic lung values. With these reservations in mind,
DAVIES et al (30) gave a crude extract of cannabis orally in
ethanol, added to fruit juice immediately before swallowing, to
16 drug-naive patients with reversible airways obstruction. The
extract was analysed by gas / liquid chromatography so that the
dose of THC was known---nil, 2.5 mg, and 10 mg, with 4 mg
salbutamol for comparison. FVC, FEV, PEFR, and MEFR were measured
in addition to self-rating mood scales, blood-pressure,
pulse-rate, and so on. With THC there was a dose-related trend
towards bronchodilation, less than that after salbutamol and not
significantly different from placebo. Further work with higher
dosage is called for. A brief trial of the effect of inhalingl
aerosol-THC failed because the drug is insoluble in water and
poorly soluble in 40% ethanol (which is just tolerable for
inhalation); oil, in which it is soluble, harms the lung. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The best medium may be some non-irritant
smokable carrier. Herbal cannabis is unsuitable because of the
irritant (31) and cytotoxic (32) properties of the smoke. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Cannabinoids inhibit the incorporation of
amino-acids into nucleotides. They are, therefore,
immuno-suppressive and antimitotic; and they inhibit the growth
of Lewis lung cancer in mice. In a pilot trial DAVIES et al. (33)
gave 10 mg oral THC (in alcohol / fruit juice) once daily for
periods of a week to patients with inoperable bronchogenic
carcinoma treated by radiation and who were distressed. A
single-blind crossover pattern was applied, with a week on drug
or placebo followed by a week of rest. There were no very
dramatic changes; the principal effects were drowsiness, improved
sleep, a more relaxed state of mind, reduced demand for
analgesics and hypnotics, and fewer problems of management. The
second was reported by REGELSON and his colleagues (34) at a
symposium at Savannah, Georgia. They gave 0.1 mg per kg THC three
times a day orally in oil to outpatients with inoperable cancer
of several types. Dizziness and drowsiness were troublesome but,
with improved appetite, weight-loss was checked or reversed, and
stress was relieved. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">One of the drawbacks to treatment with THC is
the readiness with which tolerance develops. This may reduce its
efficacy, but THC, or more probably some derivative, may well
find a place as an adjuvant to isoprenaline, since the action on
bronchial smooth muscle differs from that of isoprenaline, or as
an anodyne in the management of terminal carcinoma. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5">REFERENCES</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">20. Chopra, G.S. Int.J. Addict. 1969, 4, 215.
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">21. Souief, M.I. Bull. Narcotics, 1971, 33,
17&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">22. Reynolds, J.R. Lancet, 1890, i, 637.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">23. Fairbarn, J.W., Hindmarsh, I., Simic, S.,
Tylden, E. Nature, 1974, 249, 276. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">24. Davis, J.P., Ramsay, H.H. Fedn Proc. 1949,
8, 284.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">25. Vachon, L., Fitzgerald, M.X., Solliday,
N.H., Gould, I.A., Gaensler, E.A. New Engl J. Med. 1973, 288,
985.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">26. Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J., Frank, I.M.
ibid. 1973 , 289, 336. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">27. Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J., Frank, I.M.
Am Rev. resp. Dis. 1974, 109, 420.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">28. Tashkin, D.P., Shapiro, B.J., Frank, I.M.
Pharmacology of Marihuana. Baltimore (in the press).&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">29. Vachon, L., Mikus, P., Morrissey, W.,
Fitzgerald, M., Gaensler, E.ibid. (in the press).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;30. Davies, B.H., Radcliffe, S., Seaton,
A., Graham, J.D.P. Thorax (in the press). </font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;31. Henderson, R.L., Tennant, F.S.,
Quarry, R. Arch Otolar. 1972, 95, 248.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;32. Leuchtenberger, C., Leuchtenberger,
R., Ritter, N. Nature, 1973, 242,403.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;33. Davies, B.H., Weatherstone, R.M.,
Graham, J.D.P., Griffiths, R.D. Br. J. clin. Pharmac. 1974, 1,
301. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">34. Regelson, W., Butler, J.R., Schulz, J.,
Kirk, T., Peek, L., Green M.L. Pharmacology of Marihuana.
Baltimore (in the press).</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>