
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-8</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B012-214</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/sciurin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101157 text/html 24270
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:11:44 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:57 GMT
Content-length: 24052
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Scientific Justification for Urine Testing</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h2><font size="3">THE &quot;SCIENTIFIC&quot; JUSTIFICATION FOR
URINE DRUG TESTING</font></h2>

<p><font size="3">John Morgan, Medical professor and acting
Chairman of Pharmacology, City University of New York Medical
School</font></p>

<p><font size="3">KANSAS LAW REVIEW, 1988, Vol. 36, pp. 683-697</font></p>

<hr>

<h3><font size="3">INTRODUCTION</font></h3>

<p><font size="3">Just as drug use is often ceremonial and
ritualistic, discussions about those problems have a communal,
worshipful character. Individuals have to speak out of strong
conviction, and congregational beliefs are strengthened in a
confirmation of faith and shared attitudes. In recent years, the
experiences described above have been characterized by an
important cohesive element, a shared litany.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Since 1984, when urine testing of unimpaired
civilian workers began to expand rapidly, its public supporters
have used a common set of statements, ideas, and statistics to
justify the imposition of the forced detection and testing of
urine for illegal drugs. The use of this religious language is
not without a purpose. Litany is seldom questioned, nor is the
speaker of litany often called upon to prove the truth of his
statements, even when they involve things material and not
spiritual. I believe this common set of statements used by those
justifying and selling urine tests is repeated, polished, and
accepted with a minimal offering of proof. In this article, I
will identify these statements, search for their sources, and
examine their accuracy.</font></p>

<h3><font size="3">II. THE FIRESTONE &quot;STUDY&quot;</font></h3>

<p><font size="3">Obviously, statements concerning the job
performance of drug users have an impact on their employers. From
the earliest days of the debate, a series of statistics about
drug-using workers, their poor productivity, and high cost to
ther company have been presented. In one of the first proceedings
of a meeting directed to the issues of drug abuse in the
workplace, Robert Angarola and Judith Brunton stated:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A recent study....suggests that drug users were
almost four times as likely to be involved in a plant accident
and were two and one-half times as likely to be absent from work
for more than a week than employees who did not use drugs. Drug
users were five times as likely to file workers' compensation
claims and they received three times the average level of sick
benefits. (1) Further, the drug users were &quot;repeatedly
involved in grievance procedures.&quot; The Angarola-Brunton
document was published in 1984 but they and others had begun
making the remarks frequently by then</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In 1987 testimony before the U.S. House of
Representatives, by Mark de Bernardo of the United States Chamber
of Commerce:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">'recreational' drug users are</font></p>

<p><font size="3">-----2.2 times more likely to request early
dismissal or time off... </font></p>

<p><font size="3">--3.6 times more likely to injure themselves or
another person in a workplace accident</font></p>

<p><font size="3">--5.0 times more likely to file a worker's
compensation claim. (3)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">For at least five years, these statistics and
others like them have been voiced and published by testing
advocates, although seldom with de Bernardo's decimal-point
precision. Those whom I have quoted seem to be referring to any
user of illegal drugs and de Bernardo specifically speaks of
recreational drug user. Yet, one might wonder how these data were
gathered, particularly since drug testing in the workplace is
proposed to uncover the secret user. How were these users
described by Angarola and de Bernardo (and many others) found and
analyzed? The answer, as is often the case is simple. They were
not.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The most important source for dissemination of
these statistics seems to be the Drug Abuse and Alcoholism
Newsletter of Dr. Sidney Cohen. (4) This monthly newsletter is
widely distributed and has been collected and published. In the
August 1983 newsletter, Cohen discussed a study by the Firestone
Tire and Rubber Company and constructed the quotable statements
which have appeared and reappeared: &quot;Drug users were five
times as likely to file a Workers' Compensation claim, and they
received three times the average level of sick benefits.&quot;
(5)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The Firestone &quot;Study&quot; has never been
published. Thus, Cohen's newsletter seems to be the source of all
such statements. Yet, Cohen gave no attribution nor sources, and
when I wrote to him in 1985 he answered that he did not have a
copy of the study and suggested I write Firestone. After a number
of calls and queries I received a two page document from
Firestone's Medical Director, E. Gates Morgan. The report apears
to be an in-house newsletter. (6) In it, a Mr. Ed Johnson is
interviewed about the Employer Assistance Program
(&quot;EAP&quot;) at Firestone. There are some statements
pertaining to absenteeism, but these are not documented, and more
importantly, refer only to a few alcoholics who have been served
by the Firestone EAP. The statistics generated (if these
calculations based on alcoholics were actually made) have nothing
to do with drug users, recreational or otherwise.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The statistics cited about absenteeism and
workers' compensation claims may have been derived from
interviews with alcoholic workers enrolled in the EAP at
Firestone. These people were not identified by urine testing for
alcohol, but were referred because they or others perceived that
their lives were falling apart. They, unlike workers randomly
tested for drug use, were dysfunctional. To use them as a
justification for testing unimpaired workers is like demanding
that all workers have mandatory periodic rectal temperatures
taken because a case of tuberculosis was found in the workplace.</font></p>

<h3><font size="3">III. THE RTI STUDY FOR DIMINISHED PRODUCTIVITY</font></h3>

<p><font size="3">The Research Triangle Institute
(&quot;RTI&quot;) of North Carolina issued a report in 1984 that
attempted to calculate the economic cost to society of alcohol
and drug abuse and mental illness. (7) It appears to be the
source of the claim that drug abuse costs the United States
thirty-four billion dollars a year in lost productivity. (8)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This claim seems to indicate that somehow
individual worker productivity was assessed by some quantitative
measure and was noted to be seriously diminished. I often ask my
students how they would design a study which might quantify the
effect of drug use or abuse on productivity and they generate
interesting ideas and designs. None, however, have ever come up
with anything as creative as the RTI report.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The National Institute on Drug Abuse
(&quot;NIDA&quot;) Household Survey is the actual source of the
RTI statistics. (9) The RTI analysis itself does not include any
studies about productivity, dor does it document that drug use
was associated with any diminished productivity. The RTI report
relied on the 1982 version of the Household Survey, which
included a question to the adult (older than eighteen years of
age) respondents about daily marijuana use. If the respondent
stated that he or she had ever used marijuana daily for twenty or
thirty days in one month, this respondent's household income was
compared to another household without a daily user. The user
households were estimated to have a household income
approximately twenty-eight percent less than those households
that did not have such an interviewee. According to the RTI
report: &quot;These result have been used to calculate the
reduced productivity due to daily marijuana use. Once again, the
prevalence rates of ever using marijuana daily in the labor force
by age and sex groups....were applied to the number of persons in
the labor force from those groups that experienced
reducedproductivity. This number was multiplied by the expected
productivity in the workplace and in the household and then by
the impairment rate (27.9 percent) to produce the final value:
The loss due to marijuana abuse was estimated at $34.2 billion
for 1980.&quot; (10)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This somewhat opaque quotation means that the
$34 billion &quot;lost&quot; to drug-induced diminished
productivity and the one-third reduction is productivity of the
drug user come from a very unusual calculation. The homes with
daily users had a reduced household income. Because the daily
users all were between eighteen and thirty-four years of age, the
proportion of the work force represented by them was multiplied
by total income expected and this was multiplied by the reduction
figure to generate the $34 billion guess. I have never seen a
published analysis of the RTI study. It is a complex and detailed
document of one hundred thirty-seven pages whose appendices
number nearly one hundred thirty more. Although many of its
assumptions regarding the cost of alcohol and drug abuse are
questionable, I have focused only on the loss of productivity
formulation.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The reduced income figure itself may be
incorrect. It relies upon reports from interviewees that they
used drugs and relies upon their estimates of household income.
The income data were grouped in seven broad categories with
intervals as broad as $10,000. (11) To generate the reduction
figure with categories like this amounts to measuring centimeters
using a device graduated in meters. The control households were
generated by selecting a household whose respondent resembled the
marijuana use respondent. This meant that the two respondents
resembled each other in regard to age, education, marital status,
and occupation. (12) The similarities did not include race,
location, or nonchildren resident(s) in the household. Therefore,
a twenty-four year-old single black, high school graduate
brick-layer who smokes marijuana and lives with his grandmother
and uncle in Harlem, could have his family income compared to a
twenty-four year-old single white, high school graduate,
brick-layer living with his parents in an affluent New Jersey
suburb. If the household in Harlem had a lower income, it would
be attributed to diminished productivity caused by marijuana use.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">As the RTI authors noted, however, the
association between marijuana use and reduced income is not
necessarily causal. (13) Although age and occupation were
similar, the user may not have concerned himself with income and
may have made other job choices. (14) Moreover, the heavy use of
marijuana could have been secondary to job loss in a poor
economy.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This manipulation, which assigned lost
productivity to sometime past heavy use of marijuana, did not
show any association with current use of marijuana (or any other
drug), nor could it show any productivity decrease due to past
use of any other drug. It also could not show any effect of any
drug use in any person greater than age thirty-five. (15) Thus,
according to the study, regular use of marijuana in the past on
the part of females aged twenty-five to thirty-four cost the
nation $2,396,000,000. (16) However, marijuana use by females
greater than thirty-four, cost the nation nothing. (17) In males
aged twenty to twenty-four, regular marijuana use in the past
would have cost the economy $6,723,000,000. (18) On this basis,
however, any use of cocaine, prescription drugs, or phencyclidine
(PCP) by this group cost the nation nothing. Of course, the study
really does not indicate this because its inadequacy prevented
any such calculations. Its inadequacy regarding the marijuana
calculations should be viewed in the same fashion. To stand in
front of an audience and say that drug use cost the nation $34
billion dollars in decreased productivity is foolish and
improper. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Readers may have noted that the past paragraphs
followed the mode of the RTI report and used income and
productivity as equivalents. I do not believe they are
equivalents. Are those who choose to work in positions where they
earn less than the maximum possible less productive? If so, a
judge is less productive than a practicing lawyer, a medical
school professor is less productive than a practicing physician,
a farmer is less productive than a florist, and an elementary
school teacher is less productive than an owner of a day-care
center.</font></p>

<h3><font size="3">IV ILLEGAL DRUG USE IS DECLINING</font></h3>

<p><font size="3">In an affidavit filed in support of the federal
government's attempt to promote urine testing of certain federal
employees under the President's executive order, J. Michael Walsh
characterized the drug problems in America as pervasive:
&quot;Overall, 70.4 million Americans age 12 and over 37% of the
population have used marijuana, cocaine or other illicit drugs at
least once in their lifetime. Nineteen percent of the population
age 12 and over 36.8 million have used illicit drugs at least
once in the past year, and 12 % at least once during the month
prior to being surveyed.&quot; (19)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Walsh himself later notes that of the 70.4
million Americans who have tried an illicit drug at least once in
their lives, for most (sixty two million) that drug was
marijuana. (20) Many of the proponents of testing use such data.
Proponents, however, do not often seem to notice that this same
data reveals that almost fifty percent of those who have ever
used an illegal drug at least once have not used an illegal drug
in the past year and perhaps never will again. (21)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The sources of these data are important and
interesting and merit careful attention. There are two important
surveys funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse from which
most of our knowledge about the use of illegal drugs in the
United States is derived. These surveys are the National
Household Survey and the annual High School Senior Survey. (22)
Both surveys, however, were not constructed to signal serious
heavy drug use: &quot;The unique contribution of serveys of the
general population lies in their ability to furnish prevalence
estimates that include many forms of drug use that never come to
the attention of medical and legal authorities.....Survey
responses permit classification of drug-using behavior along a
continuum of involvement, substituting empirical for arbitrary
definitions of medically or socially pathologic conditions, and
emphasizing the typical nature of the phenomenon rather than its
most dramatic manifestations.&quot; (23)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">These words from the forward to the National
Household Survey published in 1983 seem particularly calm in the
light of the frequent repetition of its glaring numbers to induce
employers and others to join in the zealot's game. The National
Household Survey is a general population survey of household
members aged twelve and above and has been conducted every two to
three years since 1971. It excludes individuals in
institutionalized settings (colleges, prisons, military bases)
and, therefore, as conservative. Because each respondent gives
general data, it can monitor trends by age and sex and other
demographic variables.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The annual High School Senior Survey obtains
self-reported information from approximately 130 high schools in
the continental United States. Between 16,000 and 18,000 seniors
are surveyed. In addition, the investigators construct a sub
sample of individuals from each class who are followed, yielding
a longitudinal study. These two surveys do not yield a horrible
story of an American decline into profligate drug use, but
exactly the opposite. Table I depicts data from the Household
Survy regarding marijuana use over time. (24) Since 1979, the
data indicate a significant decline in use among the two
important youth groups. In the eighteen to twenty-five group, the
percentage of the population that had ever used marijuana
declined from 68.2% to 60.5% Those who had used marijuana in the
year preceeding the survey declined from 46.9% to 37% and in the
last month preceeding the survey, from 35.4% to 21.9%.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(Unable to duplicate Tables, charts, and graphs
which follow in original text)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">These national trends also are reflected in the
High School Senior Survey (Table II). (25) The apex of marijuana
use in this group also was noted in 1979 and has steadily
declined. Marijuana use in the month preceeding the survey fell
from 33.7% to 23.4%. Daily use has steadily declined from 10.3%
to 4.0%</font></p>

<p><font size="3">During the growing clamor to test working
Americans, interest in marijuana, the most widely-accepted
illegal drug, has declined, and declined significantly. This fact
is not stressed by those frequently quoting the two survey
instruments. The use of cocaine shows a different but still
hopeful pattern. Between 1974 and 1985, the lifetime prevalence
of cocaine use increased from 5.4 million users to 22.2 million
users. (26) However, the trend in the High School Senior Survy
showed a distinct leveling off between 1982 and 1985 with a
slight decrease. (27) In 1987, cocaine use by high school
students and young adults dropped twenty percent. (28) Again, a
quarter of those reporting cocaine use had not used the drug in
the last year. The decline noted for marijuana has occurred in
most drug categories in the High School Survey including a
decline in current and daily use of alcohol. (29)</font></p>

<hr>

<h3><font size="3">FOOTNOTES</font></h3>

<p><font size="3">1 Angarola &amp; Brunton, &quot;Substance Abuse
in the Workplace: Legal Implications for Corporate Actions,&quot;
in SUBSTANCE ABUSE IN THE WORKPLACE 35-36 (1984) (hereinafter
Angarola &amp; Brunton).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2 id. at 36.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3 &quot;Proficiency Standards for Drug Testing
Laboratories: Hearings Before a Subcomm. of the House Comm. on
Government Operations, 100th Cong., 1stt Sess. 91-92 (1987)
(statement of Mark de Bernardo, Special Counsel for Domestic
Policy and Manager of Labor Law. U.S. Chamber of Commerce)
[hereinafter Statement of de Bernardo].</font></p>

<p><font size="3">4 See Angarola &amp; Brunton, supra note 1, at
35.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">5 Cohen, &quot;Drugs in the Workplace,&quot; 12
DRUG ABUSE &amp; ALCOHOLISM NEWSL. I. I (Aug. 1983).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">6 Photocopy sent from E. Gates Morgan to Dr.
John Morgan (Nov. 1986) (discussing Firestone &quot;Study&quot;)
(copy on file at the Kansas Law Review).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">7. RESEARCH TRIANGLE INSTITUTE, ECONOMIC COSTS
TO SOCIETY OF ALCOHOL AND DRUG ABUSE AND MENTAL ILLNESS: 1980
(1984) [hereinafter RTI STUDY].</font></p>

<p><font size="3">8. See Statement of de Bernardo, supra note 3,
at 89. &quot;$60 billion is the annual cost to the business
community for drug abuse, a 30 percent increase in only three
years. One half of that cost is in lost productivity.&quot; Id.
(emphasis in original). de Bernardo did not cite any source for
this statement. See also Church, &quot;Thinking the
Unthinkable,&quot; TIMEm May 3, 1988, at 14 (chart).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">9. See RTI STUDY, supra note 7, at 67-68
(citing NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE HIGHLIGHTS OF THE 1982
HOUSEHOLD SURVEY ON DRUG ABUSE (1983) [hereinafter 1982 NATIONAL
HOUSEHOLD SURVEY].</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10. RTI STUDY, supra note 7, at A-22.
Interestingly, the data relied upon showed that adults
thirty-five and older effectively had a zero prevalence rate of
ever using marijuana on a daily basis. Id. at A-20.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">11. Id. at A-20.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">12. Id. at A-9.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">13. See id. at A-24.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">14. Id.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">15. See supra note 10.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">16. See RTI STUDY, supra note 7, at 68.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">17. Id.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">18. Id.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">19. Declaration of J. Michael Walsh, Ph.D.,
Director of Workplace Initiatives, National Institute on Drug
Abuse, at 2, submitted with Department of Justice Memorandum of
Support for Summary Judgment, American Fed'n of Gov't Employees,
Civ.No. 87-1797, 87-2350 (D.D.C. March 1, 1988) [hereinafter
Declaration of J. Michael Walsh, Ph.D.].</font></p>

<p><font size="3">21. id.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">22. NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY, supra note 9;
NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON DRUG ABUSE US DEPT OF HEALTHE AND HUMAN
SERVICES, NATIONAL TRENDS IN DRUG USE AND RELATED FACTORS AMONG
AMERICAN HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS AND YOUNG ADULTS, 1975-1986
[hereinafter HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR SURVEY].</font></p>

<p><font size="3">23. 1982 NATIONAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY, supra note
9, at 1.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">24. Kozel &amp; Adams, &quot;Epidemiology of
Drug Abuse: An Overview,&quot; 234 SCIENCE 970, (1986)
[hereinafter Kozel &amp; Adams] (citing NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON
DRUG ABUSE, HIGHLIGHT OF THE 1985 HOUSEHOLD SURVEY ON DRUG ABUSE
(Nov. 1986).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">25. HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR SURVEY, supra note 22,
at 47-50.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">26. Kozel &amp; Adams, supra note 24, at 973.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">27. HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR SURVEY, supra note 22,
at 47-50</font></p>

<p><font size="3">28. Statement by Dr. Lloyd D. Johnstone, U.S.
Dept. of Health and Human Services News Conference (Jan. 13,
1988) (copy on file at the KANSAS LAW REVIEW). Dr. Johnston is
one of the principal authors of the High School Senior Survey.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">29. Id. </font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>