
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B022-100</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1l.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123525 text/html 91560
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:35:14 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:07 GMT
Content-length: 91342
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Marihuana and (Non-Violent) Crime</h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Much that has been said with respect to aggressive behavior
and violent crime also applies to the more general proposition
that marihuana causes or leads to (non-violent) crime and
delinquency. The popular and professional literature abounds with
claims and counter-claims. Public and professional opinion
surveys demonstrate a widespread belief in the existence of a
marihuana-crime relationship but also reveal considerable
uncertainty about the existence of such a relationship. </p>

<p>The empirical evidence is somewhat more consistent. Laboratory
studies provide no evidence that marihuana produces effects which
can be interpreted as criminogenic. Although some studies of
offender populations purport to demonstrate a causal relationship
between marihuana and crime, they reveal, at the most, a
significant statistical association. Closer examination of these
data or more sophisticated analysis, however, generally shows the
purported relationship to be spurious. The original relationship
is usually found to derive not from the chemical effects of the
drug but from the operation of social and cultural variables
unrelated to either the drug or its use. </p>

<p>In the following pages the available evidence bearing on the
relationship between marihuana. and crime will be reviewed in an
effort to determine whether marihuana itself or the use of the
drug plays a significant precipitating or contributory role in
the commission of criminal or delinquent acts. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>PUBLIC AND PROFESSIONAL OPINION</b> </p>

<p>The formulation and expression of strong opinions about the
relationship of marihuana to criminal and delinquent behavior
have persisted despite the inherent complexities of the issue,
the relative absence of conclusive empirical evidence and the
general lack of knowledge and understanding about the effects of
the drug. For the most part, however, neither public nor
professional opinion about marihuana and its impact on public
safety has been explored in any systematic fashion. As a
consequence, public policy with respect to the drug has been
shaped by the most vociferous advocates of one position or
another at any given time. </p>

<p>Probably the first official body to explore prevailing opinion
about the relationship between marihuana use and crime was the
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission of 1893-1894. The Commission spent
over a year in making field trips to 30 cities, in receiving
evidence from almost 1,200 expert witnesses (335 of whom were
medical practitioners) and in reviewing judicial proceedings and
the case files from India's mental hospitals. The Commission's
Report, reprinted in 1969, contains the following information
gathered with respect to the relationship of marihuana use to
crime. </p>

<p>First, the Commission found that the majority of hemp drug
consumers were moderate rather than excessive users, and that the
drug users were rarely regarded as offensive or potentially
dangerous by their neighbors (a few objected to the smell of the
smoke or the example set by the users for the neighborhood
children). </p>

<p>With respect to the drug's possible long-term or chronic
criminogenic effects (producing &quot;bad characters&quot;), the
Commission reported that two thirds of the witnesses did not
believe that marihuana would produce, over time, a large
proportion of &quot;bad characters&quot; among the moderate
users. A majority felt that even excessive use was unrelated to
the production of &quot;bad characters.&quot; When the possible
relationship was framed more precisely in terms of cause-effect
rather than statistical association, a ratio of 8 to 1 of the
witnesses held that moderate consumption of these drugs had no
connection with crime and a ratio of 4 to 1 denied a causal
connection between excessive consumption and being a &quot;bad
character.&quot; </p>

<p>With respect to the more acute effects of hemp drugs, the
Commission set out to determine whether criminals use the drug to
fortify their courage prior to the commission of their crimes,
whether the drugs were used by criminals &quot;to stupefy their
victims,&quot; and whether the drugs incited the user to commit
unpremeditated crimes. The Commission's conclusion regarding the
first question was that &quot;criminals like any other consumers
of these drugs go to them for that assistance when they feel they
require it&quot; (p. 256). </p>

<p>To the second question, the Commission responded that although
some persons had alleged the commission of &quot;thefts of
ornaments from children stupefied by sweet meats&quot; containing
marihuana, the fact of other readily available, more effective
and more disabling drugs, considerably more conducive to
surreptitious administration, cast doubt on the use of hemp drugs
by criminals for this purpose. </p>

<p>To the third question, the Commission said that the majority
of witnesses saw no connection between either the moderate or
excessive use of hemp drugs and the commission of unpremeditated
crimes, including crimes of violence. The Commission therefore
concluded that &quot;for all practical purposes it may be laid
down that there is little or no connection between the use of
hemp drugs and crime,&quot; (p. 264). </p>

<p>The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) also interviewed law
enforcement officers (federal, state and local police) about the
purported link between marihuana and crime. The Committee
reported that: </p>

<p><i>In most instances [the police officers] unhesitatingly
stated that there is no proof that major crimes are associated
with the practice of smoking marihuana. They did state that many
marihuana smokers are guilty of petty crimes, but that the
criminal career usually existed prior to the time the individual
smoked his first marihuana cigarette</i> (Schoenfeld, 1944:
14-15). </p>

<p>Reference has already been made to the results of a small,
unpublished survey of the opinions of police officers about the
relationship of marihuana to aggression (Schofield, 1968), All of
the respondents reported observing a variety of conduct exhibited
by users under the influence of marihuana and emphasized that an
individual's reaction to the drug depends on his particular
personality and, in some instances, the strength of the dose.
Some, respondents observed a recent shift in the type of
individual or personality prone to using marihuana. </p>

<p>In response to a question regarding the use of marihuana prior
to engaging in property crimes, 10 out of the 16 officers
interviewed believed that this often occurred. Seven cited
specific examples of offenders who reported using marihuana
before committing their offenses to bolster their courage and
sharpen their senses; the views of three rested on hearsay
evidence; and the remaining six officers responded that they did
not believe this was a common practice and that they had never
personally observed such examples. </p>

<p>In the Commission-sponsored National Survey of a
representative sample of more than 3,000 American youth and
adults (Abelson, et al., 1972), respondents were asked to
indicate their agreement or disagreement with the statement that
&quot;many crimes are committed by persons who show that 56% of
the adults and 41% of the youth agree with the statement. The
extent of agreement, however, varies significantly according to
age, education, geographic location and the marihuana-using
experience of the respondent. Those who are early adolescents
(12-13 years), over 25 years of age, have not completed high
school, live in the South or North Central regions of the country
and have no experience with marihuana are, significantly more
likely to agree with the statement than are those who are between
14 and 25 years of age, are at least high school graduates, live
in the Northeast or West and have had experience with marihuana.
Table 5 below, shows the percentage of respondents agreeing to
the statement according to age, education, geographic location
and experience with marihuana. </p>

<p>The survey also showed the existence of considerable
uncertainty with respect to the proposition that many crimes are
committed by persons under the influence of marihuana; 25%, of
the youth and 17% of the adults were either unsure of its
relative truth or failed to respond to the question (p. 69).
Adults were considerably more certain, however, about the
relationship between alcohol and crime (youth were not asked the
question) ; 7% were either unsure or did not respond and 69%
agreed with the statement that many crimes are committed by
persons who were under the influence of liquor (pp. 28, 31). </p>

<p><b>Table 5.-PERCENTAGE OF RESPONDENTS WHO AGREE THAT
&quot;MANY CRIMES ARE COMMITTED BY PERSONS WHO ARE UNDER THE
INFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA&quot;<br>
</b></p>

<p>Percent agreeing<br>
</p>

<p>Youth Adults<br>
</p>

<p>Total respondents agreeing 40.7 56.0 </p>

<p>Age (years): </p>

<p>12-13 54.5 </p>

<p>14-15 35.2 </p>

<p>16-17 31.8 </p>

<p>18-25 35.1 </p>

<p>26-34 48.5 </p>

<p>35-49 59.0 </p>

<p>50 and over 68.8 </p>

<p>Education: </p>

<p>Less than high school graduate 70.9 </p>

<p>Eighth grade or less 49.5 </p>

<p>Ninth-twelfth grades 31.8 </p>

<p>High school graduate 56.8 </p>

<p>College or more 39.2 </p>

<p>Geographic location: </p>

<p>Northeast 34.1 46.9 </p>

<p>North-Central 42.1 54.9 </p>

<p>South 48.5 66.8 </p>

<p>West 34.0 52.3 </p>

<p>Marihuana experience (ever used): </p>

<p>Yes 8.9 24.1 </p>

<p>No 46.1 62.0 </p>

<p>The surveys of prosecuting attorneys, judges, probation
officers and court clinicians also revealed considerable doubt
about the existence of a causal connection between marihuana and
crime. Although the survey of prosecuting attorneys conducted by
the Commission staff asked only about aggressive behavior and
violent crime, the data showed that 52% of the respondents either
denied or were uncertain that marihuana causes such behavior. </p>

<p>The Commission-sponsored survey of nationally representative
samples of judges, probation officers and court clinicians,
however, posed several questions bearing on the more general
proposition that marihuana is related to crime and delinquency
(InTech, 1971). Respondents were first asked whether or not they
had witnessed an increase in the incidence of drug or
drug-related offenses in their caseloads during the past five
years. The large majority of all three groups (86%) responded
affirmatively and reported that marihuana was the type of drug
most often seen in this connection (83%). However, about two
thirds of the respondents reported that marihuana offenders
(those arrested for using or selling marihuana) constituted less
than 20% of their caseloads; 56% of the respondents reported that
those arrested for non-drug offenses but incidentally found to
possess marihuana comprised less than 10% of their caseloads; and
73% of the respondents reported that less than 10% of their
caseloads attributed their offenses to marihuana (pp. 31, 34). </p>

<p>To determine better the nature and direction of a possible
relationship between marihuana use and crime, respondents were
asked to indicate which -of four statements most reflected their
own professional experience. On the whole, the respondents were
more likely to postulate a statistical association (36.6%) rather
than a direct cause-effect relationship (26.9%) ; 18% of the
respondents thought that involvement in a criminal or delinquent
subculture caused or led to the use of marihuana (in contrast to
the. more prevalent belief that marihuana use, leads to crime)
and 9.1% believed there was absolutely no relationship between
marihuana use and other criminal or delinquent behavior. The
extent to which uncertainty prevails even among these practicing
professionals is reflected in the 9.3% no response category (p.
39). </p>

<p>Table 6 shows the responses of the judges, probation officers
and clinicians to each of the four propositions (InTech, 1971:
Appendix 1, Section II, Question 3). The data show that judges
are significantly more, likely to believe that marihuana causes
or leads to criminal and delinquent behavior and significantly
less likely to believe in either a statistical relationship or in
no relationship whatsoever than either the probation officers or
the clinicians. </p>

<p>The researchers also attempted to determine these,
professionals' opinions about crimes actually committed by
marihuana users. More specifically, did the respondents think
that most non-drug crimes committed by persons who were known
users of marihuana occurred when the individuals were, actually
under the influence of the drug or when they attempted to obtain
it? Again, the responses indicated considerable uncertainty in
all three, groups. One-third of the, respondents were either
unsure or did not respond to either proposition. About twice the
number of respondents thought that the crimes occurred while in
the attempt to obtain marihuana (31.0%) rather than while tinder
the influence of marihuana (16.8%). </p>

<p>Table 7 shows the percentage of respondents indicating the
probable truth and probable nontruth of the two propositions
(Appendix 1, Section 11, Questions 2a, 2b). </p>

<p>The data show that half of the respondents denied the
commission of non-drug crimes while under the influence of the
drug, suggesting that marihuana itself does not have the capacity
to produce criminogenic effects. About one-third of the
respondents, however, believed that these crimes occur when the
user is attempting to obtain the drug, suggesting an addiction
model; that is, that users commit crimes to support a
&quot;habit.&quot;` </p>

<p>This interpretation is corroborated by the significant
findings that 65% of the respondents either did not know (23%) or
thought that a few (21%), some (17%) or most (4.4%) of the
regular users were physically addicted to marihuana<br>
</p>

<p>Table 7.-RESPONSES OF JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURT
CLINICIANS TO STATEMENTS ABOUT NON-DRUG CRIMES COMMITTED BY
MARIHUANA USERS </p>

<p>(Figures in Percentages) </p>

<p>Most non-drug crimes committed by persons who use marihuana
occur when the offender is- </p>

<p>Under the in- Attempting to </p>

<p>fluence of mari- obtain marihuana </p>

<p>huana<br>
</p>

<p>Prob- Prob- Prob- Prob- </p>

<p>ably ably ably ably </p>

<p>true not true true not true </p>

<p>Judges 17.1 % 46.8 % 34.2 %, 30.4 %, </p>

<p>Probation officers 21.8 47.3 30.0 37.3 </p>

<p>Court clinicians.. .. . 10.4 65.2 16.5 60.0 </p>

<p>Total 16.8 49.6 31.0 35.7<br>
</p>

<p>The National Survey of the general public (Abelson, et al.,
1972) likewise showed that large segments of the population (65%
of all adults and 48% of all youth) regard marihuana as
addictive. Even among the users, 40% of adults and 21% of the
youth believed marihuana to be addicting (p. 22) </p>

<p>These findings, taken together, suggest that much of the
confusion regarding the relationship between marihuana and crime
may be predicated on public and professional misconceptions about
the drug's addiction potential. The Commission's National Survey
showed that, among those persons who believed marihuana to be
addicting, 67.5% of the adults and 52.3% of the youth believed
that many crimes are committed by persons under the influence of
marihuana. Among those who said that marihuana was not addicting,
34.6% of the adults and 30.2% of the youth agreed that many
crimes are committed by marihuana users. Table 8 below shows this
relationship (unpublished data, Abelson, et al., 1972). </p>

<p>Table 8.-RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PERSONS WHO THINK MARIHUANA IS
ADDICTIVE AND THOSE WHO THINK THAT MANY CRIMES ARE COMMITTED BY
PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA </p>

<p>(Figures in Percentages) </p>

<p>Persons who think marihuana is </p>

<p>Addictive Not addictive </p>

<p>Youth Adults Youth Adults </p>

<p>Many crimes are committed under the influence of </p>

<p>marihuana:<br>
</p>

<p>Mostly agree.. . . 52.3 67.5 30.2 34.6 </p>

<p>Mostly disagree 20.8 14.5 39.9 41.1 </p>

<p>Other 2.3 3.1 4.4 2.0 </p>

<p>Not sure/no answer 24.6 14.9 25.6 27.3<br>
</p>

<p>Table 6.-THE OPINIONS OF JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURT
CLINICIANS REGARDING THE NATURE OF THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
MARIHUANA USE AND OTHER CRIMINAL OR DELINQUENT BEHAVIOR </p>

<p>(Figures in Percentages) </p>

<p>Judges Probation Court Total </p>

<p>(N=556) officers clinicians (N=781) </p>

<p>(N=110) (N 1.15) </p>

<p>Use of marihuana causes or leads to antisocial behavior in the
sense </p>

<p>that it leads one to commit other criminal or delinquent acts
33.8 18.2 1.7 26.9 </p>

<p>Involvement in a criminal or delinquent subculture causes or
leads </p>

<p>to the use of marihuana 18.3 20.0 14.8 18.1 </p>

<p>There is a statistical relationship or association between
marihuana </p>

<p>use and other criminal or delinquent behavior, but it is not a
</p>

<p>cause-effect relationship 31.1 40.0 60.0 36.6 </p>

<p>There is absolutely no relationship between marihuana use and </p>

<p>other criminal or delinquent behavior 6.7 14.5 15.7 9.1<br>
</p>

<p>(X2=76.895, p&lt;.001).<br>
</p>

<p>To summarize, these opinion surveys demonstrate that there is
considerable uncertainty about the existence and the nature of a
relationship between marihuana use and crime and that this
uncertainty exists among youth and adults, practicing
professionals in the criminal justice community and the lay
public, marihuana users and non-users alike. The data suggest,
however, that the persistent and fairly widespread belief in a
cause-effect relationship between marihuana and crime may, at
least in part, be predicated on the erroneous but equally
prevalent belief that marihuana is physically addicting. To the
extent that the general public operates under this misconception,
they may be more likely to believe that, like the heroin user,
the marihuana &quot;addict&quot; commits crime in order to
support his &quot;habit&quot; and obtain the drug. </p>

<p>The logical extension of this belief is that marihuana users,
like heroin user-,, will be considered more likely to commit
their crimes in the attempt to obtain the drug than while under
the influence of the drug. Stated another way, persons who
believe that marihuana is physically addicting would be more
likely to base the purported causal relationship between
marihuana and crime not on the chemical effects of the drug per
se but on the user's physical need for the drug. As such, they
would be more likely to postulate that most crimes committed by
users occur not when the offender is under the influence of the
drug (which, like heroin, makes one passive, lethargic and
stuporous) but when the, &quot;addict&quot; needs a
&quot;fix&quot; and is desperately trying to obtain the drug or
the money to buy it. This interpretation is, indeed, supported by
the findings of the Commission-sponsored survey of judges,
probation officers and court clinicians and is suggested from the
findings of the National Survey. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>STUDIES OF OFFENDER POPULATIONS</b> </p>

<p>Over the years, numerous studies have relied on offender
populations and zero-order statistical correlations to
&quot;demonstrate&quot; a cause-effect relationship between
marihuana and crime. This method of &quot; proof by
enumeration&quot; has become probably the most common approach to
&quot;demonstrating&quot; the purported causal relationship. </p>

<p>As Goode (1970) has noted, however: </p>

<p><i>Not even marihuana's staunchest supporter would argue that
a crime has never been committed by a user while high. Yet,
incredible as it seems, the burden of many proofs of marihuana's
criminal effects has been precisely the simple fact that it is
possible to locate crimes committed in conjunction with smoking
marihuana. &quot;Proof&quot; by enumeration is no proof at all.
By examining an enumeration of crimes which were committed under
the influence of marihuana (even were this definitely known), it
is impossible to determine the &quot; cause&quot; of the event
taking place, in this ease the crime-or, indeed, that marihuana
has anything whatsoever to do with its commission</i> (pp.
215-216). </p>

<p>Even if these studies are taken at face value, their findings
do not generally support the thesis of a positive and significant
statistical association. In most instances, marihuana has not
been found to predispose one to commit crime or to serve as an
initiator of criminal careers; nor does the use of the drug
appear to alter the progression to other non-drug offenses among
those without prior criminal records or histories of
psychological maladjustment. Predictably, however </p>

<p>the data do indicate a greater rate, of progression among
marihuana-using offenders (both those arrested specifically for
their marihuana offenses and those charged with non-drug crimes)
than that which might be expected from similar, non-using
offenders or from the general population. </p>

<p>Because these studies do provide at least interesting insights
into the possible nature and direction of a relationship between
marihuana and crime or, conversely, a non-existent relationship,
several of these studies are summarized below. </p>

<p>Bromberg, 1939. Between 1932 and 1937, Bromberg and his team
of researchers reviewed all cases eventuating in conviction by
New York's Courts of General and Special Sessions; conducted
interviews with about 17,000 drug and non-drug-using offenders;
and analyzed the statistics from both courts. The report of this
work, published in 1939, yielded the following information. </p>

<p>Among the 16,854 offenders convicted of felonies in the court
of General Sessions, 67 (.005%) were identified as marihuana
users. Of these 67, 46 (697c) had been convicted on charges of
possession with intent to sell; 16 (24%) were charged with
burglary, robbery and grand larceny; two persons were charged
with assault and one each was charged with petty larceny, forgery
and murder. </p>

<p>The researcher points out that in only nine cases did the,
offenders' criminal records commence with a drug charge,
&quot;indicating that there was not in those cases a close
relationship between drugs and the beginning of a career in
crime&quot; (p. 10). </p>

<p>In a 25% random sample of offenders convicted in the Court of
Special Sessions (misdemeanors), 135 or 9% were charged with
possession of marihuana. Of these 135, 93 or 69% had no previous
record, 8 had been charged previously with drug violations only,
5 had mixed drug and non-drug charges and 29 (21%) had only
non-drug arrests. In summary, the researcher stated that: </p>

<p>As measured by the succession of arrests and convictions in
the Court of General Sessions (felonies) . . . , </p>

<p><i>it can be said that drugs generally do not initiate
criminal careers. Similarly, in the Court of Special Sessions
(misdemeanors), only 8% of the offenders had previous charges of
using drugs and 3.7% had previous charges of drugs and other
petty crimes. In the vast majority of cases . . . then, the
earlier use of marihuana apparently did not predispose to crime,
even that of using other drugs. . . . The expectancy of major
crimes following the use of cannabis in New York County is small,
according to these experiences </i>(p. 10). </p>

<p>Bromberg and Rodgers, 1946. A study of 8,280 naval and marine
prisoners at the U.S. Naval Prison in Portsmouth, New Hampshire
(1946) revealed that 40 or .0048% of the offenders were marihuana
users. The offenses they committed while in the service were:
AWOL or AOL (32, or 80%), assault or striking an officer (3),
theft (3), and narcotics violations (2). Their previous civilian
offenses included three each of assault, theft and traffic
violations and one each of gambling and narcotics violations,
drunkenness, draft dodging, and violation of the Mann Act.
Twenty-eight or 70% of the marihuana users had no previous
civilian criminal records (p. 825). </p>

<p>The preponderance of psychiatric disorders in the user group
over the non-users (40 randomly selected non-using naval
prisoners) led the researchers to conclude that &quot;marihuana
usage is but an aspect of some type of mental disorder or
personality abnormality&quot; (p. 826), a conclusion also reached
by Charen. and Perchan 1946), Ausubel (1958), Andrade (1964),
Lambo (1965), Bloomquist (1968), Simmons (1969) and Grinspoon
(1971). </p>

<p>Gardikas, 1950. The researcher reviewed the criminal records
of &quot;379 individuals either sentenced or arrested flagrante
delicto for using hashish publically&quot; between 1919 and 1950.
More than half (55%) of these individuals were already known to
law enforcement authorities prior to their use of hashish and an
additional 14% had no subsequent difficulties with the law except
for hashish and vagrancy offenses. The researcher notes, however,
that the remaining 117 offenders (31% of the original sample)
went on to become &quot; confirmed criminals after their first
hashish arrest.&quot; </p>

<p>Dividing this last subgroup of 117 into three approximately
equal parts, Gardikas. then described the subsequent criminality
of each group. The first group was given 332 more sentences
following their first sentence for using hashish; 142 (43%) were
additional hashish offenses, a similar number were for violent
crimes or crimes involving weapons, 18 were for
&quot;insults&quot; and two were for &quot;high treason.&quot; </p>

<p>In a critique of the Gardikas study, Kaplan were accumulated;
mostly for hashish offenses (42%) and thefts (20%). Although
there were a small number of violent crimes subsequently
committed by this group of offenders, most sentences subsequent
to their initial hashish sentence were for such relatively minor
offenses as illegal gambling, living on immoral earnings,
&quot;false statements of identity,&quot; and &quot;fishing with
dynamite,.&quot; </p>

<p>The, third group discussed by Gardikas, comprised of those
&quot;who after having, made use of hashish became
criminals,&quot; accumulated 332 additional sentences. Hashish
offenses were again responsible for 30% of these offenses and
most of the rest were for theft. Gardikas notes with respect to
this group that although not all of these individuals were
criminal before they used hashish, their use of hashish
&quot;turned [them] into habitual hashish smokers and habitual
criminals with a, strong propensity leading toward crime of
dishonesty and particularly theft and f rand. At least one-half
of them surely and undoubtedly are even to be characterized as
dangerous idle, vagrants&quot; (p. 203). </p>

<p>In a critique of the Gardikas study, Kaplan (1971) has stated
that: </p>

<p><i>The basic problem underlying Gardikas' paper is his
conclusion that hashish use caused his subsample of 117 arrests
to become criminals. This assumes, first. that they had not
engaged in crime before beginning to use hashish and, second,
that it was the hashish use and not something else that turned
-them toward crime. Neither of these assumptions is justified by
the data. . . . As for the first assumption . . . all we know is
that they had not been arrested or convicted for other crimes
first. . . . The second assumption . . . is also impossible to
justify. Even if the members of the subsample had not previously
been criminals, it may very well be difficult to distinguish the
criminogenic effects of hashish from those of conviction and
sentence to Greek jails.</i> </p>

<p><i>Even aside from any criminogenic effect of the Greek penal
system, the figures may indicate only that once somebody has been
arrested for hashish-and probably served a term in jail as
well-lie is more likely to be picked up by the police when
further crimes are committed. Finally, the years from 1919
through 1950 . . . were a period of enormous social dislocation
[in Greece] . . . . It is obviously an almost impossible task to
sort out how much of the subsequent criminality in the subsample
was due to hashish use and how much to the social chaos that
prevailed in Greece </i>(pp. 103-104).<br>
</p>

<p>Andrade, 1964. The researcher retrospectively reviewed the
examinations of 120 patients sentenced between 1951 and 1960 by a
Brazilian Court to Heitor Carrilho insane asylum. Sentencing in
all cases was based on the allegation that cannabis was directly
responsible for their crimes. The researcher concluded that: </p>

<p><i>In the 120 patients examined, we did; not find any
criminogenic action that could be attributed to cannabis; ... In
the majority of cases examined (83), we found patients with
psychotic disturbances. . . . In the cases in which we did not
find mental disturbances, a total of 37, the crime attributed to
them was that of carrying or selling marihuana.... In the study
of the dynamics of the crimes of all the others, we saw that
there was a link between the crime and the illness, independent
of the use of cannabis</i> (Tinklenberg, 1971: 12). </p>

<p>Lambo, 1965. The researcher compiled lists of crimes occurring
over a, two year period in three West African nations and
recorded the number of offenders perpetrating these crimes. He
found that approximately one-fourth of the offenders had previous
convictions. Forty-seven percent of the 863 offenders convicted
for false pretenses, 61% of the 2,880 convicted burglars and 54%
of those convicted on charges of &quot;culpable driving&quot;
were said to have histories of cannabis use. Many of these users,
however, were also shown to have long histories of psychological
maladjustment (p. 10). The researcher suggests that &quot;the use
of cannabis enhances suggestibility in certain individuals, and
this may be a factor in the commission of crime, by these chronic
abusers&quot; (p. 11). </p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MARIHUANA AND CRIME:</b> </p>

<p><b>AN EXPLANATION</b> </p>

<p>As indicated at the outset, enumerative studies of the crimes
committed by apprehended marihuana, law violators and non-drug
offenders identified as marihuana users cannot, by their very
nature, either prove or disprove a causal connection between the
use of cannabis and the commission of crimes; nor can their rates
of crime be projected onto the larger universe of marihuana
users. </p>

<p>As several researchers have pointed out, those individuals
apprehended for marihuana offenses represent only a. tiny
fraction of all marihuana users (Kaplan, 1971; Weitzner, et al.,
1971) ; likewise, those in other offender samples who are
identified as marihuana users represent only a small proportion
of the offender populations of which they are a part (Bromberg,
1939; Bromberg and Rodgers, 1946; Kaplan, 1971). </p>

<p>Although the data do indicate that some individuals identified
as marihuana users are subsequently involved in crime, both
drug-specific and non-drug offenses, they do not provide support
for the thesis that cannabis was the determining factor in their
criminal careers. Likewise, they fail to indicate that the rate
of progression to other crimes manifested by these offenders was
significantly greater than that which might be expected in either
a non-using criminal subgroup or the general population. </p>

<p>As Tinklenberg (1971) has stated: </p>

<p><i>The important issue is that unless one has systematic data
on the proclivities toward crime of the various subgroups of
marihuana users, one cannot answer the crucial question of
whether the use of marihuana alters the actual rate of crime
among these various subgroups over the criminality which would be
expected. At this time, it is unknown whether individuals with
these characteristics seek the use of marihuana or whether the
use of marihuana in any way contributes to the development of
these traits</i> (P. 24). </p>

<p>By reading between the lines of these enumerative studies,
however, one would be tempted to postulate that individuals with
certain psychological, social and cultural characteristics are
more likely to seek the use of marihuana, than is marihuana
likely to contribute to the development of delinquent or criminal
behavior patterns. </p>

<p>The number of researchers pointing to individuals with long
histories of psychological maladjustment or disturbances has
already been noted. Others have alluded to persons involved,
prior to cannabis use, in criminal or delinquent subcultures
(Blumer, 1967; Robins, et al., 1970; Kaplan, 1971; Weitzner, et
al., 1971). Still others suggest that marihuana use is more
likely to develop among persons living in underprivileged
communities or within a social structure that limits achievement
and advancement (Asuni, 1964; Blumer, 1967; Goode, 1972). </p>

<p>In recent years, considerable evidence has been gathered to
suggest that the use of other drugs and association with
drug-using friends are also likely to enhance the probability of
marihuana use (Hochman and Brill, 1971; Goode, 1972; Abelson, et
al., 1972). </p>

<p>Because many of these characteristics are likely' to be
associated with both criminal or delinquent behavior and
marihuana, use, some individuals have mistakenly concluded a.
cause-effect relationship rather than a statistical correlation. </p>

<p>The studies reviewed in the following pages axe probably the
most methodologically adequate assessments of the. purported
relationship between marihuana and crime undertaken to date. The
data show that the seemingly significant statistical correlation
often observed between marihuana, use and crime is spurious; it
is dependent not on the chemical effects of the drug but upon the
operation of several extra-pharmacological variables which have
little or nothing to do with the use of marihuana. per se. </p>

<p>The first of these studies (Goode, 1970) is based on a sample
of marihuana users. Because it, like the study by Robins and his
colleagues (1967, 1970) referred to earlier, involves a selected
population, the extent to which its findings can be applied to
the general population remains speculative. </p>

<p>The second study presented, a Commission sponsored survey of
young male urban dwellers, is probably the most adequate
assessment to date of the relationship between marihuana use and
crime. The results are based on a representative sample of the
general population of males, 15 to 34 years of age, the self
reports of criminal behavior have been cross-checked with
Philadelphia Police Department files; and numerous statistical
controls have been applied to the data. The study therefore
provides at least tentative answers to the following questions: </p>

<p>-Do young, male marihuana users and nonusers in the general
population differ significantly in the nature and extent of their
criminal activities? </p>

<p>-Is marihuana use, in and of itself, the principal determinant
of any observed differences? -If not, what are the variables
which explain a statistical correlation between marihuana use and
crime? </p>

<p>Goode, 1970. Between February and September of 1967,
face-to-face interviews were held with 204 marihuana users
residing in the New York City Metropolitan Area. The sample,
admittedly nonrepresentative, was drawn front membership lists of
drug-related organizations and also included friends and
acquaintances of the researcher. </p>

<p>The sample, suspected of differing to some unknown extent from
a random sample of marihuana users, can be characterized -as
primarily male (53%), young (median age 22 years), white (89.5%),
single (78%), middle class urban dwellers, including students,
dropouts, business people, housewives and the unemployed (p.
316). </p>

<p>All of the respondents, by virtue of their marihuana use,
possession or sale, had engaged in law violative behavior, but,
only nine marihuana arrests were reported. This finding indicates
that persons who are arrested for marihuana related activities
constitute only a small fraction of total marihuana users. </p>

<p>Because of their marihuana-related criminal activity, one
would expect that persons in this sample would have a higher
probability of being arrested than would the &quot;average&quot;
person from the general population. To determine if, in fact,
this might be the case, the researcher computed the rate of
arrest for his sample and compared it with the national rate of
arrest provided by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the
year 1965. Despite the fact that the rates are not strictly
comparable (the sample rate is based on arrests ever experienced;
the national rate is based on the number of arrests recorded for
one year), the similarity is striking. The national rate was
given as 3.7 per 100; the sample rate was computed to be 3.9 per
100 per year, 4.5 if one adds the marihuana arrests (p. 236). </p>

<p>Although the arrest, rates of the users and the general
population were found to be roughly similar, the types of crimes
committed by the users differed significantly from those crimes
recorded for the population as a whole. In contrast to the
majority of drunkenness and disorderly conduct charges noted for
the general population, the offenses of the users most often
resulting in arrest involved participation in political
demonstrations (19 out of the 55 arrests). No other single
offense attracted more, than a few arrests (p. 2335). </p>

<p>In addition to examining arrest rates and the types of
offenses committed, the researcher also investigated the
relationship between the amount of marihuana smoked and the
criminal behavior of the user. If it were true that marihuana did
produce a dangerous and criminogenic state in the user, the
greater would be his likelihood of committing crimes and of being
arrested. </p>

<p>The data, however, show no relationship; excluding the
&quot;political crimes&quot; (which were most common among the
least frequent smokers and least common among the most frequent
smokers), the &quot;serious&quot; crimes committed by 15
respondents (non-marihuana narcotics possession, disorderly
conduct, drunkenness, burglary, theft, assault, auto theft,
serving liquor to a minor and larceny) resulted in a total of 21
arrests. The heavy smokers did not commit these crimes
significantly more frequently than did the light smokers. </p>

<p>Similarly, there was no relationship found between the
frequency of use and the likelihood of arrest; three of the daily
smokers, three of those who smoked three to six times per week,
three who smoked one or two times weekly, one who smoked four
times monthly and three who were less than monthly smokers were
arrested for committing these &quot;serious&quot; crimes (pp.
237-38). </p>

<p>The researcher concludes that: </p>

<p><i>Although these numbers are extremely small, the fact of
their perfect dispersal is perhaps indicative of the lack of a
crime-inducing effect of the drug. It is, at any rate, a
proposition which ought to be tested more systematically in the
future with more complete data. For the moment, there are
indications that point to the fact that the marijuana smoker is
no more criminal than the rest of the population </i>(p. 238). </p>

<p>Goode, 1972. The Commission-sponsored Philadelphia survey set
out to resolve these issues. Goode (1972) analyzed the data
collected during August of 1971 from an interview survey of 559
15-to-34-year-old residents of West Philadelphia. </p>

<p>That part of the report devoted specifically to the analysis
of the data is presented in its entirety below. The only
deletions made were the author' references to previous studies
bearing on the issues addressed, the findings of which have been
presented earlier in this chapter. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Excerpts From </b></p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA USE AND CRIME* </b></p>

<p><b>PREFACE</b> </p>

<p>*Prepared by Professor Erich Goode for the National Commission
on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, January 15, 1972. The data on which
this report is based were obtained from a survey conducted by the
Institute of Survey Research of Temple University. All tables
referred to in Professor Goode's text are found at the end of
these excerpts. 'The interview schedule was developed and
executed and the data processed for the Commission by Temple
University's Institute for Survey Research, in Philadelphia.<br>
</p>

<p>The data analyzed in this report were gathered in August 1971
by the Institute for Survey Research of Temple University In
Philadelphia; the author of this report did not have a hand in
any phase of the data gathering, including constructing the
interview schedule, although he is solely responsible for the
data analysis. The sample consists in toto of males age 15
through 34 living in households located in a section of West
Philadelphia. Each respondent was interviewed; a total sample
size of 559 was collected. (The refusal rate was 10%, which is
typical for house-to-house surveys of this type.) The area in
which the sample was drawn is composed mainly of two
heterogeneous populations: lower-middle and working-class, high
school educated blacks, and college-associated whites-students
and professionals associated with [Drexel University and] the
University of Pennsylvania. About four respondents in ten in this
survey are black, and just over half are white. (The number of
Orientals and Puerto Ricans or Mexicans is too small to permit a
meaningful statistical analysis, so that when race is discussed
in this report, only the black-white comparison will be made.)
The racial composition is roughly equivalent to the census
figures for the sample area although no attempt was made, through
a weighting of cases, to &quot;correct&quot; any discrepancies
which might have prevailed in population composition. More
detailed information is available from the Institute for Survey
Research. </p>

<p>A quarter of the sample (23%) had never smoked marijuana; in
17 cases (3%), no information on marijuana use was given by the
respondent. Of the marijuana users the question asked about
frequency of use during the respondent's most recent year of
use-about 1 in 10 smoked marijuana daily or more, about 1 in 5
smoked approximately once or twice a week, 1 in 4 smoked once or
twice per month, on the average, and about 4 in 10 smoked
marijuana several times a year. (The study also asked how often
the respondent smoked marijuana in his first year of use a
variable which I have not made use of in this report.) Questions
were also asked concerning the respondent's use of other
drugs-&quot;stimulants or uppers, such as bennies, speed, or
dex,&quot; &quot;sedatives or downers, such as sleeping pills,
amytal or blues, or nembutal, or yellow jackets,&quot;
&quot;hallucinatory drugs, such as LSD, mescaline, or STP,&quot;
and &quot;hard drugs, such as heroin, morphine, demerol, cocaine,
or codeine.&quot; In addition, questions on one's friends' drug
use-both marijuana and these other drugs--were asked. </p>

<p>The commission of various offenses formed another segnient of
the questionnaire. There were 16 of them, and ranged from those
which would not be considered crimes in most instances-such as
&quot;disturbing people&quot;-to those which would be considered
felonies, drawing long prison sentences such :as rape, armed
robbery, and assault. As would be expected], the serious offenses
were committed (or admitted to) by very, very few respondents-and
thus, any comparison between users and non-users has to be made
mainly on the basis of committing trivial offenses.... </p>

<hr>

<p><b>III. THE EFFECTS OF MARIJUANA</b> </p>

<p>At this point, I will introduce the data from the Philadelphia
marijuana use and crime study, specifically mandated by the
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. This survey's
data will form the bulk of the factual evidence on the
marijuana-crime connection in the report which follows. </p>

<p>The question of marijuana's relationship to crime and
aggressive behavior is obviously closely related to the drug's
effects. One of the most fundamental generalizations in
psychopharmacology to be obtained from thousands of recent
research efforts is that the same drug does not have standard and
invariant &quot;effects,&quot; but that effects are sensitive to
a number of extra-pharmacological variables, including the
personality of the user, the social setting in which drug, use
takes place, the user's past experience with the drug, his
expectations, and so on. Thus, it is elliptical and somewhat
artificial, and incomplete, to speak of any drug's
&quot;effects,&quot; as if they occurred under any and all
conditions, in all users. We should bear this qualification in
mind when looking at the relationship between the ingestion of a
drug and any subsequent behavior-with the latter supposedly
&quot;,Caused&quot; by the effects of the drug. Drug effects
vary, and, in addition, even standard effects do not
automatically translate into specific forms of human behavior.
Even opposite forms of behavior could follow the same effects,
given different individuals taking the drug, different settings
in which the drug is used, different definitions of the drug and
its use and so on.... </p>

<p>The data collected by the Philadelphia survey on the
subjective effects of marijuana dovetail precisely with those of
earlier studies. The effects agreed to by the users in the sample
are clearly inconsistent with aggressive behavior. This does not
mean that marijuana cannot be related to the commission of
criminal or aggressive acts-but it does suggest that the effects
of marijuana, per se, may have nothing to do with the commission
of crimes, especially violent crimes. Table 1 summarizes the
results from this survey's question on marijuana's effects, which
was: &quot;I am going to read to you some of the ways using
marijuana may affect people. For each could you tell me whether
marijuana had this effect on you almost every time, more than
half the time, less than half the time, or never or almost never,
when using marijuana.&quot; The effects asked about were related
to feelings generally thought of as criminogenic either in a
positive or a negative direction. Those that are generally
considered to be related to crimes deal with anger and
frustration, or with derangement, or with suggestibility. Those
inversely related to the commission of crimes and aggressive acts
dealt with relaxation and sleepiness. </p>

<p>As can be readily seen from Table 1, users overwhelmingly deny
that marijuana has effects on them which could be interpreted as
criminogenic or violent in nature. Nearly all respondents
specifically denied that aggressive feelings came over them
during the marijuana intoxication. When asked whether, under the
influence of marijuana, they had a feeling of wanting to hurt
someone, 96% said that this occurred never or almost never. When
asked whether they had feelings of wanting to do something
violent, 95% said never or almost never. Almost nine in 10 (88%)
said that they never or almost never felt more angry when high.
And almost eight in 10 (78%) said that they never or almost never
felt frustrated when tinder the influence. Thus, the
frustration-anger-aggressive impulse syndrome seems to be an
extremely rare phenomenon associated with the marijuana
intoxication. Likewise, the suggestibility syndrome does not
appear to be characteristic, although it seems to be somewhat
more common than aggressive feelings. About six in 10 (or 59%) of
the respondents said that they had a feeling of &quot;being more
willing to follow other people's suggestions,&quot; never or
almost never. And about three-quarters (77%) said that they had a
&quot;feeling of being able to do anything,&quot; never or almost
never. Those sensations, however, which would be seen as
inhibiting criminal and aggressive im pulses and acts were
decidedly more common, Exactly half of the respondents said that
they felt &quot;a feeling of relaxation&quot; almost all the
time. About a third (31%) said that they felt less angry than
usual almost all the time. About a fifth (22%) felt drowsy and
sleepy almost all the time-and another quarter (25%) felt this
more than half the time. </p>

<p>These data suggest-but do not demonstrate-that the effects of
marijuana per se are probably not related in any meaningful or
causal manner to aggressive or criminal acts. They give us a
clue, but do not prove, that in and of itself, marijuana use does
not &quot;cause&quot; the commission of criminal acts. In fact,
if we were to look at the subjective effects of marijuana
themselves, they appear to point in exactly the opposite
direction-they would seem to inhibit crime, indeed, activity of
all kinds. The effect of marijuana would be more in the direction
of reducing than stimulating aggressive, criminal or violent
activity. </p>

<p>Two final qualifications would appear to be in order before I
explore the marijuana-crime link more systematically and fully.
One has to do with the length of time that the marijuana
Intoxication lasts. Two facts bear on this issue. First, each
episode of use generally produces an intoxication which lasts
roughly three or four hours, at the most. Marijuana's effects
wear off about three hours or so after the user smokes the drug.
Secondly, from previous studies ... as well as the survey whose
data I am analyzing In this report, it is clear that the average,
or median, level of marijuana use Is roughly once a week. This
means that the typical marijuana user is under the influence
about three or four hours per week, or roughly 3% or so of his
waking hours, and under a &quot;normal&quot; state of mind the
remaining 97%. Now, it is possible that this tiny segment of time
would influence some users in some significant way, but the fact
of its briefness of duration ought to be kept in mind when
reasoning about the impact of the drug on the lives of users. The
daily user comprises roughly one marijuana user out of 10, and
the individual who is high all, or nearly all, of his waking
hours, probably constitutes about I or 2% of all marijuana
smokers. These facts cannot be ignored in our exploration of the
causal connection between the effects of marijuana and criminal
activities. </p>

<p>And the last issue I will raise in the marijuana effects topic
has to do with the truthfulness of the answers given by users. A
plausible objection to taking the word of users concerning the
effects of the drug on them would be that they are
untrustworthy-that they have a motive for lyIng, for portraying
the drug and their experiences in a positive light. Actually,
what nearly all researchers have found in an interview situation
with drug users is that they very rarely lie; in fact, their
honesty about themselves and their activities and experiences
appears to be the rule, overwhelmingly. . . . </p>

<p>The overall picture that we receive from . . . various studies
is that, like most interview subjects, marijuana users may
occasionally lie or hide the truth, but their answers will, in
general, be truthful. This does not mean that everything they say
must be taken at face value-as with any other group of
interviewees, anything which the researcher is capable of
checking independently, and which we have data on, we should
corroborate with what we learn in the interview situation. At the
same time, we would be as fallacious in assuming that everything
that marijuana smoker-, said to be true is suspect as if we
accepted everything they said to be true in all respects. What
all of this means is that we must reason with caution from
self-reported data, use them whenever we must, and check them
whenever we can. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>IV. CRIMES UNDER THE INFLUENCE<br>
</b></p>

<p>The Philadelphia survey on marijuana use and crime asked
several questions concerning 16 different offenses. The questions
began as follows: &quot;'Many people in every community commit
acts which others consider offenses, delinquent acts, and
violations. Here is a list of these acts.&quot; The specific
questions dealt with whether the respondent had ever committed
each one, how often, how old lie was when the offense occurred,
whether lie was caught by the police, and whether the respondent
had been drinking, or was under the influence of marijuana, 24
hours or less before committing the act-as well as whether the
respondent thought that using marijuana influenced him to commit
the act; these questions were asked about the first as well as
the most recent such of. fense, if they occurred. The offenses
were: hurting someone in a minor way, hurting someone badly,
carrying a knife. stealing a car, disturbing people, threatening
to hurt someone, taking money, stealing from a store, making an
obscene telephone call, forcing sexual intercourse with a woman,
breaking into a house or store, damaging property, buying stolen
property, setting off an alarm, carrying a gun, and using a
weapon to steal. From these facts, it might be interesting to
find out what proportion of acts involved some drug use occurring
within 24 hours-and whether that drug is alcohol or marijuana. I
will explain after the data are presented what these facts can
and cannot tell us. We must not be too hasty in reading too much
into any given set of data. </p>

<p>Table 2 presents summary information from this set of
questions. I have presented figures for only six offenses:
stealing from a store, damaging property, hurting someone in a
minor way, breaking into a house or store, stealing a ear, and
hurting someone badly. Some of the crimes asked about were
committed by so few respondents (such as forcing sexual
intercourse) that any statistical analysis would be completely
meaningless. Other offenses seem to be unrelated to the
aggressive syndrome associated with marijuana use-such as buying
stolen property. The six I have chosen are, in any case,
representative. Tile first three are relatively minor, and would
usually be classified by the law as misdemeanors; the second two
are considerably more serious, and would often be classified as
felonies. Table 2 presents the proportion who drank alcohol, and
smoked marijuana 24 hours or fewer before the crime was
committed; the figures in the first two columns are for the first
time the respondent committed the offense, and the second two
columns are for the most recent time, if it occurred more than
once. </p>

<p>What generalizations may we make front Table 2? </p>

<p>First of all, committing these crimes is atypical. Not one
these six offenses was committed by a majority of the sample.
Secondly the more serious the offense, the less likely it was to
be committed. Minor offenses were committed at least once by
between four and five out of every 10 respondents, but major
offenses had been committed at least once by something like one
respondent in 25. (And two of the offenses not in the table were
rarer still; forcing sexual intercourse was admitted to by six
respondents, or about one in 100, and using a weapon to steal was
reported by only three respondents, or one out of 200.) </p>

<p>What about drugs and crime? Compared with not being under the
influence, drugs tend to be atypical in the commission of crimes.
For none of these categories, whether first offense or most
recent, was being under the influence of either alcohol or
marijuana characteristic of over a quarter of all offenses, and
most are considerably below this. Most crimes here were committed
when the offender was not under the influence of any drug,
marijuana, or alcohol, when lie was in a &quot;normal&quot; state
of mind pharmacologically.* Secondly, in terms of absolute
incidence, alcohol is involved in the commission of crime
considerably more often than marijuana. Adding together all of
the offenses committed 24 hours before each drug was used,
alcohol had been used in conjunction with first offenses a total
of 47 times, and marijuana only five times-a ratio of not quite
ten to one. For the most recent offenses, alcohol was involved a
total of 66 times, and marihuana 19--a ratio of about three to
one. </p>

<p>In conjunction with this point, it should be stressed that the
classic, aggressive, violent crimes traditionally and
historically associated with the marijuana intoxication are very,
very rarely committed-by anyone, high or normal, user or non-user
alike. Six men in this survey admitted to forcing a woman to have
intercourse with him as a first offense, and three admitted to
rape more than the first time. In two out of the six first-time
cases, the offender said that he had been drinking 24 hours
before, and in one out of the three most recent-time cases,
drinking was involved as well. But in none of the six first time
cases, and in none of the three recent-time cases, had anyone
smoked marijuana 24 hours before. (None of the men had been
apprehended for this offense, incidentally.) Only three of the
men in the survey said that they had used a weapon to steal as a
first offense, and two admitted this offense more than the one
time-and none said that lie had either drunk or smoked 24 hours
before the offense. </p>

<p>*Several facts should he born in mind when considering this
generalization. First of all, the survey asked about the use of
each drug 24 hours before the offense was committed or less-and
hence, the respondent was not necessarily under the influence
when the offense was committed, although certainly many
respondents were under the influence at that time. Secondly,
anyone who uses marijuana is far more likely to become
intoxicated with each episode of use than is true of each episode
of alcohol use. </p>

<p>Considering the fact that the typical marijuana smoker in this
study had been intoxicated several hundred times for a total of
well over a thousand hours, and therefore in a state of mind
which, if the &quot;causal&quot; theory is correct, is aggressive
and criminogenic, then this almost total absence of violent and
aggressive crimes committed by users should be puzzling. This
fact indicates that the &quot;causal&quot; theory may be
inadequate and erroneous. </p>

<p>However, it is not possible to tell from Table 2 whether the
commission of crimes is more frequent for alcohol or marijuana on
a relative basis during the period of intoxication. That is, if
anyone wanted to know whether a thousand hours of a marijuana or
an alcohol intoxication was more like to result in the commission
of various crimes, this table would not convey this information.
Unfortunately, this survey did not ask a question on the
frequency with which the respondents drank alcohol or, indeed,
whether they drank at all so that an alcohol -marijuana
comparison cannot be more systematically made. It is entirely
possible that alcohol-related crimes are far more frequent than
marijuana-related crimes. simply because alcohol is still, even
in this sample, probably the drug of choice among young people,
and is more often used than marijuana (just as not being under
tile influence of any drug is more frequently involved with
crimes than being under the influence, simply because most
people, most of the time, are not intoxicated). As to which drug
is more &quot;criminogenic&quot; in the sense of what proportion
of the time under the influence of marijuana vs. alcohol one
commits various crimes cannot be determined from the data from
this study. However, in absolute terms, alcohol is considerably
more often used before crimes than marijuana. </p>

<p>Another generalization that may be made from Table 2 is that
the contribution of marijuana from first offense to most recent
offense grows somewhat relative to alcohol. That is, for the
first offense, alcohol is used before it about 10 times as
frequently as is marijuana, but for most recent offense, alcohol
is only three times as frequent. This probably is a reflection of
the following two trends: (1) Marijuana smoking is considerably
more frequent today (i.e., closest in time when the most recent
offense occurred) titan a few years ago (i.e., closest in time
when the first offense occurred), and hence, its frequency
relative to alcohol would be greater in conjunction with any
activity-criminal or non-criminal as well-simply because its use
is more common ; (2) Marijuana smoking is more common among young
adults (the age group most closely represented by the age when
last offense was committed) than among adolescents and
preadolescents (the age group most closely represented by the age
when first offense was committed) and, moreover, as age rises,
marijuana use rises faster than alcohol use rises, at least up,
until early adulthood. . . . </p>

<p>It is possible that, as marijuana usage increases, the number
of crimes committed under the influence of this drug may increase
as well. However, the question as to marijuana's direct
contribution to the commission of crimes, especially aggressive
crimes, is ail independent issue, and one in need of exploration.
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>V. WHO COMMITS CRIMES AND WHO DOESN'T?<br>
</b></p>

<p>In this section, it is our job to explore two basic issues: </p>

<ol>
    <li>Do marijuana users commit crimes and offenses any more
        frequently titan non-users do? </li>
    <li>Are any variables with which marijuana use is strongly
        related also correlated with criminality? </li>
</ol>

<p>In the next section I will deal with a third question, and one
which is probably the most crucial one in this report: Can the
marijuana-crime connection be explained mainly by the use of
marijuana in and of itself, or is use itself dependent on third
variables which themselves explain the commission of offenses? </p>

<p>As the principal measure of committing crimes, this study has
employed the number of different types of offenses admitted to in
the 16 categories asked about. Naturally, there are many other
crimes not asked about, and, in addition, some of these crimes
would not correspond to the image most people would have of
&quot;classic&quot; aggressive offenses-such as &quot;disturbing
people,&quot; or receiving stolen goods. However, as a general
index or overall measure of criminality of different groups or
categories of individuals, this one is as good as any others that
have been employed, and is probably adequate for our purposes.
(The survey, it must be noted, did not ask questions about any
white collar crimes, which must be reckoned into an adequate
measure of output of criminal behavior-but these crimes do not
correspond with the public's image of aggressive crimes committed
under the influence of marijuana, and so their absence is less
relevant than would appear at first glance.) Throughout the
remainder of this report, the number of crimes and offenses will
be employed as the dependent variable-the outcome to be
explained. And throughout, I will be examining the
marijuana-crime connection-as well as other relationships-insofar
as it bears on file basic issue. </p>

<p>Before the analysis proceeds, it should be pointed out that of
the 16 offenses, not one of the violent crimes correlated with
marijuana use in any meaningful way at all, and a very weak
relationship was evidenced with only five of the
offenses-stealing from a store, buying stolen property,
disturbing people, damaging property, and hurting someone in a
minor way (the last of which showing the weakest association of
all). The statistical differences in rates of offenses between
users and non-users rest on adding together a small number of
weakly correlated offenses. When offense differences are
discussed, the reader should not hold the mistaken impression
that they indicate massive differences, or differences indicating
a higher rate of classic, violent crimes among users. With that
warning in mind, we may now proceed to user/non-user differences
in offenses. </p>

<p>The first relationship to be presented, then, is whether
marijuana users as a whole commit offenses any more frequently
than non-users as a whole. The answer is yes. I have employed two
indicators of marijuana use; one is frequency of marijuana use
during the period of most recent use (which may have been in the
past, or may be at present), and whether or not the respondent
has ever, or has never, used marijuana. Both indicators of
marijuana use correlate very powerfully with committing offenses.
For both tables, the differences are significant beyond the .001
level, employing Chi-square as a test of significance, which
means that the differences observed could occur at random only
one chance in a thousand. This is considered extremely
significant. There is a regular and step-wise relationship
between frequency of use and committing offenses; the more that a
given respondent smokes marijuana, the greater is the likelihood
that lie will have committed four or more offenses, and the lower
is his likelihood of committing no offenses at all. Over a third
(38%) of those who have never smoked marijuana said that they
committed none of the 16 offenses asked about-but this was true
of only one respondent in eight (or 12%) of the regular smokers.
At the other end, there was a 17% difference between non-users
and regular users (24% vs. 41%) in admitting to four or more of
these offenses. Tables 3 and 4 present these data in detail. </p>

<p>We would be remiss in our duties as sensitive and acute social
analysts if we ended the analysis there. The simple correlation
between marijuana use and offenses may very well mask important
and even more basic relationships buried beneath it. Marijuana is
correlated in a simple manner with the commission of crimes,, but
does it remain correlated when controls are applied? In other
words, is it a spurious relationship, or one which will remain
when crucial variables are held constant' Which-factors are also
related to the commission of offenses-which might actually
themselves explain the simple marijuana-crime connection? There
are several such variables-race, age, education, the use of other
drugs, and the respondent's involvement in the drug subculture.
Blacks are significantly less likely to use marijuana (64% of the
blacks in the survey said that they had tried marijuana, but 86%
of the whites said that they had done so), but slightly more
likely to admit to the commission of offenses--41% of all blacks
said that they committed four or more offenses but this was true
of only 25 ) % of all whites (see Tables 23 and 25). Does the
marijuana-crime correlation hold up for blacks and whites
separately? Age was also related to both offenses and marijuana.
The oldest respondents (age 29-34) were least likely to have
tried marijuana (61%), the youngest (15-20) were next least
(73%), and the intermediate age groups (21-23 and 24-28) were
most likely to have tried marijuana (82% and 80%). There was a
linear relationship between age and offenses, however. The
youngest group was least likely to have committed no offenses
(20%), and most likely to have committed four or more (42%) ; the
oldest group was most likely to, have committed no offenses
(35%), and least likely to have committed four or more (22%) (see
Tables 29-31). Thus, we would want to know whether marijuana and
crime still correlate in each age group separately. The same
thing can be said for education (Tables 26-28), the use of drugs
other than marijuana (Tables 11-16), and having friends who use
drugs (Tables 17-22)-the relationship between marijuana use and
crime could be mitigated or even transformed altogether if these
third variables are considered. One possibility is that the
marijuana-crime relationship is wiped out altogether with the
application of these controls-that is, that the relationship is
completely spurious. A second possibility is that the
marijuana-crime connection may be specific to some groups or
categories, but not others. And the third possibility is that the
same original relationship remains basically unaltered, or even
is strengthened, by the application of these controls. </p>

<p>Special attention ought to be paid to the drug-related
variables. There is a powerful and significant association
between the use of marijuana and the use of other drugs. Although
recent studies have presented evidence that this basic
relationship is probably not due to the effects of marijuana per
se, but to friendships and associations made in conjunction with
marihuana use . . . , the simple relationship between marihuana
and other drugs is a statistical fact. There is, in addition, a
strong and marked association with using drugs other than
marijuana and the commission of crimes. Thus, a legitimate
question to be explored is whether &quot;marijuana only&quot;
users have a greater crime rate than non-users, whether the
higher rate of the commission of offenses cannot be attributed
largely or solely to using drugs other than marijuana. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>VI. MARIJUANA USE AND CRIME: CAUSAL OR SPURIOUS<br>
</b></p>

<p>Our first clue as to the nature of the underlying relationship
between marijuana use and crime is obtained by examining Table 5,
which documents the association between number of offenses and
marijuana use, taking into account the use of other drugs as
well. Table 5 shows that &quot;marijuana only&quot; marijuana
users are only very slightly more likely to commit crimes than
non-users. Tire original nine percentage point difference between
users and non-users in committing four or more offenses has
shrunk to only two percentage points (in fact, only one
percentage point--we are comparing 24.4% with 25.5%, and the
original 19 percentage point difference between users and
non-users in committing no offenses has been reduced to 13
percentage points. In fact, the &quot;marijuana only&quot; user
is far more similar to the non-user in number of offenses
committed than he is to the user of marijuana plus two or more
other drugs. The application of the control involving other drugs
clearly attenuates the marijuana-crime relationship, and much of
the user-non-user differences in offenses committed can be traced
to the fact that marijuana users are significantly more likely to
use other drugs, rather than the use of marijuana per se.* </p>

<p>*The exploration of the &quot;escalation&quot; hypothesis-the
question of whether or not marijuana &quot;leads to&quot; the use
of other more dangerous drugs-would take us far afield in this
report. The issue is dealt with in a separate report by the
author prepared for the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse, however. </p>

<p>Our confidence in the lack of basic association between
marijuana use itself and offenses--and our ability to attribute
the simple original relationship to the use of drugs other than
marijuana-is strengthened when we examine the relationship
between frequency of use and offenses, holding the use of other
drugs constant. Table 5A presents these data. Among
&quot;marijuana only&quot; users, there is no statistically
significant correlation between frequency of use and the
commission of crimes--the differences are small, insignificant,
and in no consistent direction. Among users of one other drug,
likewise, frequency of marijuana use is extremely loosely
associated with committing offenses-the differences which are
observed are small, statistically insignificant, and point in no
particular direction. And lastly, among users of two or more
other drugs aside from marijuana, the association between
frequency of marijuana use and the commission of the offenses
described earlier is loose and not at all significant. Table 5A
very strongly indicates the validity of the &quot;spurious&quot;
model. </p>

<p>Closely related to the use of other drugs is a control which
should be explored: the respondent's involvement with a
drug-using subculture-with others who also use drugs. Naturally,
as we saw in the last section, individuals who use marijuana tend
to have friends who also use marijuana. What we would like to
know is whether the social patterns they exhibit can be traced to
their use of the drug. or to the fact that they have friends who
use drugs. Thus, we should be very interested in looking at the
individual who uses marijuana, but who does riot have drug-using
friends, as well as the individual who does riot rise marijuana,
but has drug-using friends. If interesting changes take place in
the original marijuana-crime correlation, then we have
indications that it is the individual's social relations, and not
his rise of marijuana, per se, that determine marijuana use's
correlation with crime. Tables 6 and 7 deal with this issue; they
should be examined in conjunction with one another. </p>

<p>Among respondents with no marijuana-using friends (out of
their 10 closest friends). as well as those with no drug-using
friends at all. almost an identical relationship between
marijuana use and crime obtains as in the original Table 3.
Marijuana users are, significantly (but not strikingly) more
likely to commit four or more offenses, and significantly less
likely to commit none. The percentage differences in Tables 6 and
7 are almost the same (even slightly more) as those in Table.
3-about 25% at the &quot;none&quot; end vs. 19% for the original
table, and about 18% at the &quot;four or more&quot; end vs. 9%
for the original table (Table 3). If we were to rely only on
these segments of the table, we would be led to the, inference
that marijuana is meaningfully related to the commission of
crimes. </p>

<p>However, an extraordinary thing happens to the other segments
of the table: among those with drug-using friends, there is no
relationship at all between marijuana use and committing
offenses. The differences are so small as to be statistically
insignificant. (And they are actually in the opposite
direction-non-users are slightly more likely to commit four or
more offenses than users are.) In other words the marijuana-crime
relationship is completely wiped out by the application of
controls-in this case, integration into the drug-using
subculture. We are led overwhelmingly to the conclusion that
marijuana users tend to be somewhat more likely to commit crimes
solely because they are part of a drug-using subculture; the
actual properties of marijuana appear to be completely
unassociated with criminal behavior. Anyone (whether he uses
marijuana or not) who makes friends and becomes involved with
others who use drugs-especially others who use drugs in addition
to and aside from marijuana stands a higher likelihood of
committing offenses, simply because this segment of the
population tends to be more lax about obeying the law. It is
merely because marijuana users tend to associate with others who
are part of this subculture that their crime rate is somewhat
higher. In other words, the marijuana-crime relationship-in terms
of the causal or effects model is completely spurious. </p>

<p>What of the marijuana-using isolate? What of those who use
marijuana but who have no friends who use drugs-either marijuana
or other drugs? How can we explain the fact that the original
difference in offense rate between users and non-users were not
wiped out among those without drug-using friends-in contrast to
being wiped out among those who had drug-using friends? Looking
back at Tables 6 and 7, we are struck by the fact that the
offense rate of the marijuana-using group without drug-using
friends is as high as the groups with drug using friends. What
does this indicate? First of all, involvement with a drug-rising
subculture is clearly not the only determinant of a high rate of
committing offenses. Probably something else is at work. The fact
that the offense differences wash out among those involved with
the drug subculture indicates that rise by itself (i.e., being
high) cannot be a factor in the original marijuana-crime
relationships difference cannot explain two things that are
similar. The using isolate, however, is probably a (Qualitatively
different social being from those who either do not rise, or
those who use and have friends who also use. The isolate is
probably deviant in a variety of ways crime being one of them.
The fact that he uses in spite of having no friends who use
(although lie may have friends who do not use) means that he uses
most of the time alone. has not integrated his activities into a
social life or a subculture, and probably pursues some activities
which the dominant society would judge to be eccentric and
unusual. In other words, it is possible that his involvement with
crime is related to his social isolation from a group which
pursues drug activities similar to his own, rather than his use
of marijuana. However, these remarks must be regarded as
speculation, since more complete information is not available. </p>

<p>A related process occurs when race is employed as the control
variable. Among blacks, the original relationship remains intact;
marijuana users are significantly (although not markedly) more
likely to commit four or more offenses, and less likely to commit
none, than is true of non-users. (The relationship is significant
at the .004 level, using Chi-square.) However, among whites, the
original relationship is completely washed out; users are not at
all more likely to commit offenses. Table 8 presents these data.
The minor differences can be completely accounted for by random
fluctuations; the relationship is not significant at any level. </p>

<p>When education is treated as the control variable in this
relationship, the marijuana-crime connection follows a pattern
parallel to the two previous explorations-that is, it is
completely washed out for some groups, but remains for others. In
Table 9, we see that marijuana users who have at least attended
college, but not graduate school, are not any more likely to
commit offenses than college non-users. The percentages
committing four or more crimes, and those committing none, are
almost identical for users and non-users alike. (The differences
are insignificant, and due to random fluctuation.) However, among
respondents with only a high school education, the same basic
relationship produced in Table 3 is upheld: marijuana users are
significantly more likely to have committed offenses than
non-users. However, at least two variables are compounded here,
since most respondents with a college education are white. Thus,
the retainment of the original marijuana-crime correlation among
high school education respondents, and its wash-out among college
educated respondents, should not come as any surprise. However,
among respondents with at least some graduate school education,
the original relationship asserts itself; users are more likely
to commit offenses than non-users. (The differences observed are
significant at the .05 level; in other words, the differences
have a one in 20 chance of occurring purely at random.) Table 9
presents the marijuana-crime relationship, holding education
constant. </p>

<p>Using age as a control variable also produces mixed results.
Among the two youngest age groups (15--20 and 21-23), the
differences obtaining between users and nonusers are
statistically insignificant, and could have occurred by chance
alone; in the youngest of these two groups, the non-user is
slightly more likely to have committed four or more offenses, and
in the next to youngest of these groups, the user is slightly
more so--but in both, the differences are too small to be
meaningful. In the 24-to-28-year-old group, the differences
approach statistical significance, but they are not substantial
(.07 level of significance, using Chi-square). However, among the
oldest group (age 29 to 34), the same basic difference in
offenses as obtained in the original relationship holds up here;
users are about twice as likely to have committed four or more
offenses as non-users (28% vs. 13%), and less than half as likely
to have committed no offenses (21% vs. 58&amp;). These data
appear in Table 10. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>VII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS<br>
</b></p>

<p>The central effort in this report has been to determine
whether marijuana use, in and of itself, is meaningfully and
causally related to the commission of crime. Two models have been
used in the past to answer this issue: the causal model, which
holds that using marijuana, being under the influence of the
drug, actually does stimulate the will to commit antisocial acts,
and the spurious model, which holds that marijuana use is merely
a reflection of independent and more powerful forces, and that in
itself, marijuana use is unrelated to criminal and aggressive
behavior. Some small amount of research has been conducted in the
past on this issue, but no consistent findings have been turned
up; . . . It is because of these factual lacunae that the
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse mandated a study
of marijuana use and crime, which culminated in the Philadelphia
survey, as well as this report. </p>

<p>The findings from this study strongly support the view that
marijuana, use by itself is not related in any meaningful or
systematic fashion to criminal behavior, that marijuana use
probably does not &quot;cause criminiality. The
&quot;spurious&quot; model appears to be a far more accurate
description of the marijuana-crime connection than does the
&quot;causal&quot; model. The use of marijuana per se is probably
completely unrelated to criminal and aggressive behavior. The
drug does not &quot;cause&quot; any significant number of users
to commit crimes, or aggressive or violent behavior. The effects
of the drug seem to be, from what can be gathered from the
available data on the question, without criminogenic causality.
This does not mean that it is not possible to commit crimes,
including aggressive crimes, under the influence of marijuana-but
that being high does not increase one's probability of doing so,
that on an hour-for-hour, crime-for-crime basis, there are
probably no significant differences between being intoxicated on
marijuana and being &quot;normal,&quot; not under the influence
of any drug. </p>

<p>A wide variety of data have been brought to bear on the
marijuana-crime issue. </p>

<p>First of all, regarding the subjective self-reported effects
of marijuana, all indications are that the effects classically
described as being related to aggressive behavior and the
commissions crimes-feeling angry, frustrated, wanting to -hurt
someone, being willing to follow any and all suggestions of
others, being deranged, wanting to do something violent-have no
empirical support whatsoever; users consistently describe these
&quot;effects&quot; as non-existent or as extremely rare and
atypical, no different from normally. In fact, precisely the
opposite is the case: if anything, the effects of marijuana would
have far more to do with reducing the criminal
&quot;impulse,&quot; whatever that might be, due to the fact that
they tend to be in the direction of relaxation, feeling calm, of
not wanting to move about, feeling somewhat drowsy, sleepy.
Activity of any sort tends to be inhibited by the marijuana
intoxication. </p>

<p>Secondly, the Philadelphia survey asked the respondents about
using marijuana and/or alcohol 24 hours or less before various
crimes were committed. Marijuana very rarely figured into the
commission of crimes in any way. For only a tiny minority of all
crimes committed was the respondent under the influence. This was
especially the case for serious and aggressive crimes. Alcohol
was far more likely to be used soon before criminal activity than
marijuana. - </p>

<p>The third type of information brought to bear on the
marijuana-crime question was the self-admitted offense rate of
users versus non-users. The total number of different types of
crimes which respondents said that they had committed was
compared. The simple relationship between using marijuana and
committing offenses was positive and statistically significant,
and there was also a high correlation between frequency of
smoking marijuana and committing offenses. However, a wide range
of other variables, themselves related to both crime and to
marijuana use, were also correlated-race, education, age, the use
of other drugs, and having drug-using friends. Thus, the issue
became: is it the causal connection with these third variables
which produces the marijuana crime simple correlation, or does
the correlation hold up even when these factors are controlled?
In other words, which is right, the causal or tile, spurious
model? Is marijuana use merely dependent itself on larger,
broader, more potent factors-or does it exert an independent
power? Do users commit crimes more frequently than nonusers
because they use marijuana or because they happen to be the kinds
of people who, would have a higher crime rate, marijuana or no
marijuana. </p>

<p>The evidence from these three-variable tests support the
&quot;spurious&quot; model. The control tables show that the
differences in crime rate between users and non-users is, in most
cases, dependent not on marijuana use per se, but on these larger
factors. The fact that the relationship disappears, or is wiped
out, when some controls are applied shows that the
marijuana-crime connection is dependent on sociological
variables, and not chemical effects. When the use of other drugs
was held constant, the marijuana-crime correlation was severely
attenuated, and in some cases, washed out entirely. When the
variable of having friends who use other drugs-both marijuana as
well as stimulants, sedatives, hallucinogens and &quot;hard
drugs&quot; was applied, the relationship disappeared among those
with drug-using friends, but not those who had no drug-using
friends. When race was held constant, the marijuana-crime
connection was wiped out completely among whites, but not blacks;
among white marijuana users, their crime rate was not
statistically different from non-users, but black users did have
a higher crime rate than non-using blacks-similar in magnitude to
the original relationship. When education was used as a control
variable, we saw that among college-educated respondents, the
marijuana-crime correlation was nonexistent, but it remained
among respondents with a high school education, and for those who
had attended graduate school. And lastly, age was applied as a
control. Among the youngest groups, the marijuana-crime
relationship was attenuated, but it remained somewhat strong
among the two oldest age categories. </p>

<p>If there were truly a causal relationship between marijuana
use and crime, these disappearing correlations would not occur.
The application of sociological variables cannot wash out a
chemical reaction in the user. The enormous variability dependent
on social factors indicates that marijuana effects do not
inherently produce behavior of a criminal nature. The kinds of
people who use the drug tend to follow Patterns of behavior
regardless of whether or not they use marijuana. By itself,
marijuana, use is not a potent producer of behavior, and
certainly not criminal behavior. Individuals who commit criminal
acts are those who would do so with or without the use of
marijuana. </p>

<p>The data from this study support-the conclusion, almost
without qualification, that marijuana use does not cause criminal
behavior.* </p>

<p>*A subsequent regression analysis with the six variables used
independently as controls showed that when all six variables are
applied simultaneously, the use of marijuana in and of itself
accounts for less than 1% of the variance in committing offenses
(personal communication by the author, 24 January 1972).<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>