
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-83</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B008-142</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/tyrrell.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040100 text/html 14388
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:00:54 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:06 GMT
Content-length: 14170
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Junior Goes to School</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<p align="center"><font size="5"><b>Junior Goes to School</b></font>
</p>

<p align="center"><a name="WexPlaceHolder"><font size="2">Thomas
L. Wayburn, PhD, Executive Director</font></a><br>
<font size="2">American Policy Institute, Inc.<br>
2638 Yorktown Apt.294<br>
Houston, TX 77056-4873<br>
TWayburn@aol.com</font> </p>

<h2>IN WHICH I SAY NOT AT ALL NICE THINGS ABOUT MR. TYRRELL AND
FIND NO FAULT WITH MYSELF </h2>

<p><font size="2">&quot;No to Drug Legalization&quot; by R.
Emmett Tyrrell, Junior, is a short article that appeared in the <i>American
Spectator</i>. It does not have much substance and, in addition,
when it raises a point that needs to be proved, it refers
generally to what someone else has said. This is the weakest form
of argument. If a point is needed for the author's thesis, he
might have the courtesy to prove it rather than send the reader
off to yet another author, whose work may be troublesome to
obtain. However, the contentions are readily disproved or shown
to be irrelevant regardless of the arguments that appear
elsewhere in their defense. It is my job, then, to show that this
author has no case. On the other hand, my drug policy is
presented elsewhere and, since I am not compelled to prove
anything (merely disprove or discredit), a single literature
citation should satisfy the reader that I really have a position
on this subject that, by the way, fills the vacuum left by Mr.
Tyrrell rather nicely. Thus, I am really a creator primarily and
a destroyer only secondarily and then only in a very minor
capacity, as Mr. Tyrrell has not provided much of an edifice for
the wrecking ball.</font> </p>

<h2>IN WHICH I ALLOW MR. TYRRELL TO HANG HIMSELF </h2>

<p><font size="2">Tyrrell's argument, which I must assume is a
weak attempt at humor or, at least, jocularity, hinges on a
handful of statements that are either patently false, equivocal,
or irrelevant. I shall employ these statements as secondary
titles.</font> </p>

<h3 align="center">Drugs kill and enthrall. </h3>

<p><font size="2">The impression that Mr. Tyrrell wishes to
create is that drugs are lethal poison. Why, then, are they never
used to kill rats, insects, or ill-tempered wives? If the State,
itself, is doing the killing, the excessive cost due to
illegality would not obtain; nevertheless, illegal drugs are not
employed. If cocaine and heroin were lethal poisons, we would
have no addicts since users would expire before they became
addicted. While it is true that one can ingest enough of nearly
anything, even if it recognized as an essential nutrient, e.g.,
vitamin <img src="IMG00026.GIF" align="bottom" width="17"
height="18">, to cause death. The primary function of drugs is
not to kill, but to enhance joy, relieve pain, alleviate
discomfort, and to create altered states of consciousness, etc..
Death comes, in most cases, when the substance ingested is not
the substance expected or when the dosage is drastically
different from the dosage expected. These are accidents that do
not occur with legal drugs except in a few cases where the legal
drug is much more dangerous than the common favorite illegal
drugs most of which have been part of our culture for thousands
of years and with which we have vast experience. This is an
important point, namely, that cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and
even the relatively modern amphetamines are safer than many new
legal pharmaceuticals in proportion to our greater experience
with them, provided, of course, that we get what we expect to
get, a circumstance that we demand along with legalization.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Mr. Tyrrell employs the term enthralls
equivocally. Since we are enthralled by drugs as we would be by a
great love, it is easy to agree that these wonderful, miraculous,
divine drugs of antiquity have lost none of their charm with age.
It is as though our beloved were snatched from our arms when the
word is suddenly used to connote slavery, which we detest. We are
no more enslaved by our favorite drugs than we are by our
favorite foods - or, to bring home the sharp sword of truth, far
less than the average employed American is enslaved by his job.
The average drug user is free compared to the average corporate
employee. This is the beauty of Jack Nicholson's speech in the
pot smoking scene in the film <i>Easy Rider</i> when he tells the
bikers that the townspeople fear them because they represent
freedom. The druggies of the Beat Generation and subsequently
have been symbolic of man's quest for freedom. From among us come
the free spirits of the land. Only the oppressor's iron yoke can
bow the heads of those who dare to tread the paths of the
liberated criminal saints of the free-wheeling drug culture. The
whole world knows this is true.</font> </p>

<h3 align="center">It is not as though a drug-free society takes
the fun out of life. Druggies are about as amusing as cadavers. </h3>

<p><font size="2">To take the last first, people don't take drugs
to amuse squares. As for the first, a drug-free America wouldn't
be worth living in. Not only would it take the fun out of life
for artists and other sensitive people, it would destroy nearly
everything else worth living for including closeness to the
transcendent - whether it's called God or nothing at all. Where
do these prudes and puritanical control freaks get the idea that
people take drugs exclusively, or even predominantly, for fun?
Mr. Tyrrell, once and for all, don't knock it until you try it.
And, by the way, stay out of my face. I am not bothering you or
interfering with your pursuit of happiness; however insane,
ridiculous, and misguided your recreational activities seem to be
from where I sit? For all I care, you can dress up in baby
clothes and have your maiden aunt push you around Central Park in
a perambulator. I won't call the cops. You strike me as the sort
of man who may have played golf. As much as I despise people for
taking so much space that should be available to children and
wildlife, I won't take it away from you until someone has no
place at all, be it man or beast.</font> </p>

<h3 align="center">Drugs are indulged in solely to escape from
reality. </h3>

<p><font size="2">How would you know? Drugs are &quot;indulged
in&quot; to paint pictures, write books, poems, and, yes, essays.
To play music, to have sex, to enjoy the company of one's friends
without a bunch of puritanical, middle-class hang-ups. To get
closer to God. And for more reasons than can be known in a
philosophy so pitifully tiny that it can be wedged into so narrow
a mind. Honestly, Emmett, you say the dumbest things.</font> </p>

<h3 align="center">How many have left in their trail happy,
elegant works of art? (A rhetorical question asked without having
observed an artist at work - presumably.) </h3>

<p><font size="2">Let me turn that around. Who has not used drugs
and left behind anything worth doing? It's not that every drug
user has created great works of art. Many, if not most, have
tried, but few succeed. However, with very few exceptions, those
lucky, blessèd ones who have left behind &quot;elegant works of
art&quot; have used drugs. I'll give you one exception: George
Bernard Shaw. At least he claims not to have used drugs, but I
remain unconvinced. Of the known drug-using artists, the list is
long. Is there any doubt? The arts belong to drug users. Not just
jazz musicians. Consider all the writers, poets, painters who
have spoken of their drug use: Coleridge, Poe, etc. Where does
anyone get the temerity to challenge the contributions of drug
users to art! Ah, if only drug users went on strike, art would
cease and the souls of these Philistines who persecute us would
dry up like</font><font color="#0000FF"><font size="2"> the wings
of insects caught in our divine flame</font></font><font size="2">.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">But, scientists, too, have found inspiration in
drugs. Consider William Rowan Hamilton, without whom quantum
mechanics could not have arisen in quite the same way. Richard
Feynman admitted using drugs. The list is long and records the
names of some of the brightest stars. I will not &quot;out&quot;
living scientists despite what I know. Many of us would be
amazed.</font> </p>

<h3 align="center">Those who traffic in drugs are killers. </h3>

<p><font size="2">This is an absurd statement on the face of it.
Not, that no one who trafficked in drugs has been a killer; but,
generally, the killing has been incidental to the illegality. Who
is worse (a) a drug dealer who delivers on request a substance to
another man who wishes to ingest it or (b) a chief executive of a
chemical company who forces everyone in the neighborhood of his
plant to ingest poisonous chemical wastes whether they wish to or
not!</font> </p>

<h3 align="center">The flight from responsibility of drug users
endangers the free society. </h3>

<p><font size="2">This is a matter of calling the victim the
culprit. The heads of the multi-national corporations are the
true danger to society. And, if you will pardon me for speaking
the truth, capitalism (American style) is the real danger as it
reduces 90% or more of our population to third-world conditions
in its insatiable greed, as it starves the third world to death
and makes armed conflict inevitable. You, sir, are the danger to
a far-from-free society.</font> </p>

<h3 align="center">In many areas drugs are so freely available
they might as well be legal. </h3>

<p><font size="2">No sir, the quality is horrible; the expense is
preposterous; and the danger from the police is terrifying. No,
no, and no. You and other evil, wicked, vicious authoritarians
are winning the war against drug users and dealers, but you will
never stop the flow of drugs. All you can do is increase the
misery of the wretched who fall into your clutches. This includes
that middle-class stock-broker who does heroin on the weekend out
on Long Island. He, too, knows that he hasn't much of a future to
live for. Eat, drink, and be merry for tomorrow we die. But, at
least, his white, middle-class crumbs from the table will buy him
decent drugs. The worst quality drugs go to the ghetto. Of
course. The white middle class enjoys a higher quality of
despair. How gratifying. &quot;But, it is a far, far better thing
I do than - what I normally do during the week.&quot;</font> </p>

<h3 align="center">Our high prison population is composed of
brutes who have committed heinous acts and are more likely to
commit such acts on drugs. </h3>

<p><font size="2">The evidence shows otherwise. I'll go all the
way: the people in prison are the only ones left who can manifest
a little honor and refuse to bow to the ruling rich and their
loathsome toadies. The rich steal, but they don't rob. That's
because they are afraid of man but not afraid of God. The
criminal may not - I said <i>may</i> not - be afraid of God , but
he's not afraid of man either. The corporate bums are beneath the
respect of reptiles. I won't prove this, but you haven't proved
anything either. You had better get your philosophy together and
tell us what makes a good society and what makes a bad society. I
really don't believe you know. But, the next quote from Tyrrell
gives us a hint of his abiding faith in the essential equality of
all men (and women?).</font> </p>

<h3 align="center">...put inferior people on the shelf and out of
society. </h3>

<p><font size="2">I suppose Poe, Coleridge, Charlie Parker, Louis
Armstrong, William Rowan Hamilton, Richard Feynman, and the
millions of others who used drugs were inferior to you. You are
an exemplary man - a man of lies, deception, of light-hearted and
cruel intolerance, a trifler in matters of life and death, a
would-be inquisitor, a man of no depth or parts. What kind of man
could have written your little auto-da fé? In your last
paragraph you have said precisely nothing. Is this your idea of
humor? We are not amused.</font> </p>

<h1 align="center">Reference </h1>

<p><font size="2">Wayburn, Thomas L., &quot;No One Has a Right To
Impose an Arbitrary System of Morals on Others,&quot; in <i>Drug
Policy 1889-1990, A Reformer's Catalogue</i>, Arnold S. Trebach
and Kevin B. Zeese, Eds., The Drug Policy Foundation, Washington,
D.C. (1989).</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Houston, Texas</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">April 9, 1996</font> <br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>