
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-55</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B043-219</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/cu/cu12.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131215 text/html 41122
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:12:04 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:13:59 GMT
Content-length: 40904
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>The &quot;heroin overdose&quot; mystery and other
occupational hazards of heroin addiction</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/sch_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61536" -->

<p><b>The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs</b> </p>

<p><b>Chapter 12 </b></p>

<p><font size="5"><b>The &quot;heroin overdose&quot; mystery and
other occupational hazards of addiction</b></font> </p>

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562"
height="19"><br>
</p>

<p>Chapter 4 of this Report reviewed in detail the effects of
heroin and other opiates on addicts, including deleterious
physiological effects traceable to the drugs themselves.
Narcotics addicts today face other physiological hazards that are
traceable to the narcotics laws, to the adulteration,
contamination, and exorbitant black-market prices that those laws
foster, and to other legal and social (as distinct from
pharmacological) factors. Dr. Jerome H. Jaffe has described some
of these risks in Goodman and Gilman's textbook (1970):
&quot;Undoubtedly, the high cost and impurities of illicit drugs
in the United States exact their toll. The high incidence of
venereal disease reflects the occupational hazard of the many
females who earn their drug money through prostitution. The
average annual death rate among young, adult heroin addicts is
several times higher than that for nonaddicts of similar age and
ethnic backgrounds. . . . The suicide rate among adult addicts is
likewise considerably higher than that of the general
population.&quot; 1 </p>

<p>Because &quot;the preferred route of administration is
intravenous,&quot; Dr. Jaffe continues, &quot;there is sharing of
implements of injection and a failure to employ hygienic
technics, with a resultant high incidence of endocarditis, and
hepatitis, and other infections.&quot; 2 </p>

<p>The exorbitant price of black-market heroin, Dr. Jaffe might
have added, is one of the factors that makes intravenous
injection &quot;the preferred route of administration,&quot; for
&quot;mainlining&quot; is the cheapest way to forestall
withdrawal symptoms. And the laws restricting possession of
injection equipment, under penalty of imprisonment, increase the
risk of needleborne infections by encouraging the sharing of
implements. </p>

<p>There remains to be considered yet another risk of heroin
addiction, the most publicized hazard of all-death from
&quot;heroin overdose.&quot; Because these deaths are a source of
such widespread concern, and also because they are so widely
misunderstood, even by authorities on heroin addiction and by
addicts themselves, we shall examine the data in detail. Much of
the discussion that follows is focused on New York City, since
the deaths attributed to heroin overdose are most numerous there
and since the New York City data are published in convenient
form. </p>

<p>&quot;Prior to 1943, there were relatively few deaths among
addicts from overdosage. &quot; 3 By the 1950s, however, nearly
half of all deaths among New York City addicts were being
attributed to &quot;acute reaction to dosage or overdosage
.&quot; 4 In 1969, about 70 percent of all New York addict deaths
were assigned the &quot;overdose&quot; labels and in 1970, the
proportion was about 80 percent.- The number of deaths so
designated by New York City's Office of the Chief Medical
Examiner increased from very few or none at all before 1943 to
about 800 in 1969 and 1970 .7 </p>

<p>During this same twenty-eight-year span, addict deaths from
all other causes-infections, violence, suicide, and so
on-increased very little. The enormous increase in number of
deaths among addicts shown in Figure 2 was attributed almost
entirely to &quot;overdose&quot; deaths. </p>

<p>The number of deaths throughout the United States attributed
to heroin overdose from 1943 to date must total many thousands.
In New York City it was reported that narcotics, chiefly heroin,
were the leading cause of death in 1969 and 1970 in all males
aged fifteen to tbirty-five,8 including nonaddicts. This can
properly be characterized as an epidemic; the general alarm over
these deaths is thoroughly warranted. </p>

<p>There are two relatively simple ways, however, to prevent
deaths from heroin overdose. </p>

<p>First, addicts can be warned to take only their usual dose of
heroin rather than risking death by taking too much. </p>

<p>Second, even in cases where an addict takes a vastly excessive
dose despite the warning, death usually can be readily prevented,
for death from an overdose of opiates is ordinarily a slow
process. &quot;in cases of fatal poisoning with morphine, the
time of death may vary roughly from one to twelve hours.&quot; 9
The first signs are lethargy and stupor, followed by prolonged
coma. If, after a period of hours, death does ensue, it is
usually from respiratory failure. During the minutes or hours
following the injection of a potentially fatal overdose, death
can be readily forestalled by administering an effective
antidote: a narcotic antagonist known as nalorpbine (Nalline).10
Nalorphine brings a victim of opiate overdose out of his stupor
or coma within a few minutes. Since there is plenty of time and
since nalorphine is stocked in pharmacies and hospital emergency
rooms throughout the country, the death of anyone due to heroin
overdose is very rarely excusable. </p>

<p>But alas, the two standard precautions against
overdose-warnings against taking too much and administration of
an antidote-are in fact wholly ineffective in the current crisis,
for the thousands of deaths attributed to heroin overdose are not
in fact due to heroin overdose at all. The evidence falls under
three major rubrics. </p>

<p>(1) The deaths cannot be due to overdose. </p>

<p>(2) There has never been any evidence that they are due to
overdose. </p>

<p>(3) There has long been a plethora of evidence demonstrating
that they are not due to overdose. </p>

<p>Let us review these three bodies of data in detail. </p>

<p>(1) Why these deaths cannot be due to overdose. The amount of
morphine or heroin required to kill a human being who is not
addicted to opiates remains in doubt but it is certainly many
times the usual dose (10 milligrams) contained in a New York City
bag. &quot;There is little accurate information,&quot; Drs. A. J.
Reynolds and Lowell 0. Randall report in Morphine and Allied
Drugs (1967). &quot;The figures that have been reported show wide
variation.&quot; 12 This ignorance no doubt stems from the rarity
of morphine or heroin overdose deaths. The amounts of morphine or
heroin needed to kill a nonaddict have been variously estimated
at 120 milligrams (oral),13 200 milligrams, 14 250
milligrams,&quot; and 350 milligrams16-though it has also been
noted that nonaddicts have survived much larger doses .17 The
best experimental evidence comes from Drs. Lawrence Kolb and A.
G. Du Mez of the United States Public Health Service; in 1931
they demonstrated that it takes seven or eight milligrams of
heroin per kilogram of body weight, injected directly into a
vein, to kill unaddicted monkeys.&quot; On this basis, it would
take 500 milligrams or more (50 New York City bags full,
administered in a single injection) to kill an unaddicted human
adult. </p>

<p>Virtually all of the victims whose deaths are falsely labeled
as due to heroin overdose, moreover, are addicts who have already
developed a tolerance for opiates-and even enormous amounts of
morphine or heroin do not kill addicts. In the Philadelphia study
of the 1920s, for example, sonic addicts reported using 28 grains
(1,680 milligrams) of morphine or heroin per day.&quot;' This is
forty times the usual New York City daily dose. In one
Philadelphia experiment, 1,800 milligrams of morphine were
injected into an addict over a two-and-a-half-hour period. This
vast dose didn't even make him sick.20 </p>

<p>Nor does a sudden increase in dosage produce significant side
effects, much less death, among addicts. In the Philadelphia
study, three addicts were given six, seven, and nine times their
customary doses-&quot;mainlined.&quot; Far from causing death,
the drug &quot;resulted in insignificant changes in the pulse and
respiration rates, electrocardiogram, chemical studies of the
blood, and the behavior of the addict.&quot; 21 The addicts
didn't even become drowsy.22 </p>

<p>Recent studies at the Rockefeller Hospital in New York City,
under the direction of Dr. Vincent P. Dole, have confirmed the
remarkable resistance of addicts to overdose. Addicts receiving
daily maintenance doses of 40 milligrams to 80 milligrams of
methadone, a synthetic narcotic (see Chapter 14), were given as
much as 200 milligrams of unadulterated heroin in a single
intravenous injection. They &quot;bad no change in respiratory
center or any other vital organs .&quot; 23 </p>

<p>(2) There is no evidence to show that deaths attributed to
overdose are in fact so caused. Whenever someone takes a
drug-whether strychnine, a barbiturate, heroin, or some other
substance-and then dies without other apparent cause, the
suspicion naturally arises that he may have taken too much of the
drug and and died of poisoning an overdose. To confirm or refute
this suspicion, an autopsy is performed, following a
well-established series of procedures. </p>

<p>If the drug was taken by mouth, for example, the stomach
contents and feces are analyzed in order to identify the drug and
to determine whether an excessive amount is present. If the drug
was injected, the tissues surrounding the injection site are
similarly analyzed. The blood, urine, and other body fluids and
tissues can also be analyzed and the quantity of drug present
determined. </p>

<p>Circumstantial evidence, too, can in some cases establish with
reasonable certainly that someone has died of overdose. If a
Patient fills a prescription for a hundred barbiturate tablets,
for example, and is found dead the next morning with only a few
tablets left in the bottle, death from barbiturate poisoning is a
reasonable hypothesis to be explored. Similarly, if an addict
dies after &quot;shooting up,&quot; and friends who were present
report that he injected many times his usual dose, the
possibility of death from heroin overdose deserves serious
consideration. </p>

<p>Further, in cases where an addict has died following an
injection of heroin, and the syringe he used is found nearby or
still sticking in his vein, the contents of the syringe can be
examined to determine whether it contained heroin of exceptional
strength. And there are other ways of establishing at least a
prima facie case for an overdose diagnosis. </p>

<p>A conscientious search of the United States medical literature
throughout recent decades has failed to turn up a single
scientific paper reporting that heroin overdose, as established
by these or any other reasonable methods of determining overdose,
is in fact a cause of death among American heroin addicts. The
evidence that addicts have been dying by the hundreds of heroin
overdose is simply nonexistent. </p>

<p>At this point the mystery deepens. If even enormous doses of
heroin will not kill an addict, and if there exists no shred of
evidence to indicate that addicts or nonaddicts are in fact dying
of heroin overdose, why is the overdose myth almost universally
accepted? The answer lies in the customs of the United States
coroner-medical examiner system. </p>

<p>Whenever anyone dies without a physician in attendance to
certify the cause of death, it is the duty of the local coroner
or medical examiner to investigate, to have an autopsy performed
if indicated, and then formally to determine and record the cause
of death. The parents, spouse, or children of the dead person can
then ask the coroner for his findings. Newspaper reporters
similarly rely on the coroner or medical examiner to explain a
newsworthy death. No coroner, of course, wants to be in a
position of having to answer &quot;I don't know&quot; to such
queries. A coroner is supposed to know-and if he doesn't know, he
is supposed to find out. </p>

<p>At some point in the history of heroin addiction, probably in
the early 1940s, the custom arose among coroners and medical
examiners of labeling as &quot;heroin overdose&quot; all deaths
among heroin addicts the true cause of which could not be
determined. These &quot;overdose&quot; determinations rested on
only two findings: (1) that the victim was a heroin addict who
&quot;shot up&quot; prior to his death; and (2) that there was no
evidence of suicide, violence, infection, or other natural
cause.24 No evidence that the victim had taken a large dose was
required to warrant a finding of death from overdose. This
curious custom continues today. Thus, in common coroner and
medical examiner parlance, &quot;death from heroin overdose&quot;
is synonymous with &quot;death from unknown causes after
injecting heroin.&quot; </p>

<p>During the 1940s, this custom of convenience did little
apparent harm. Most deaths among heroin addicts were due to
tetanus, bacterial endocarditis, tuberculosis, and other
infections, to violence, or to suicide, and they were properly
labeled as such by coroners and medical examiners. It was only an
occasional death which baffled the medical examiner, and which
was therefore signed out as due to &quot;overdose.&quot; But,
beginning about 1943, a strange new kind of death began to make
its appearance among heroin addicts .25 The cause of this new
kind of death was not known, and remains unknown today-though it
is now quite common. </p>

<p>A striking feature of this mysterious new mode of death is its
suddenness. Instead of occurring after one or more hours of
lethargy, stupor, and coma, as in true overdose cases, death
occurs within a few minutes or less-perhaps only a few seconds
after the drug is injected. Indeed, </p>

<p>11 collapse and death are so rapid,&quot; one authority
reports, &quot;that the syringe was found in the vein of the
victim or on the floor after having dropped out of the vein, and
the tourniquet was still in place on the arm .&quot; 26 This
explains in part why nalorphine and other narcotic antagonists,
highly effective antidotes in true opiate overdose cases, are
useless in the cases falsely labeled overdose. </p>

<p>An even more striking feature of these mysterious deaths is a
sudden and massive flooding of the lungs with fluid: pulmonary
edema. In many cases it is not even necessary to open the lungs
or X-ray them to find the edema; &quot;an abundance of partly
dried frothy white edema fluid [is seen] oozing from the nostrils
or mouth &quot; 27 when the body is first found. Neither of these
features suggests overdose-but since &quot;overdose&quot; has
come to be a synonym for &quot;cause unknown,&quot; and since the
cause of these sudden deaths characterized by lung edema is
unknown, they are lumped under the &quot;overdose&quot; rubric. </p>

<p>Not all of the deaths attributed to heroin overdose are
necessarily characterized by suddenness and by massive pulmonary
edema, but several studies have shown that a high proportion of
all &quot;overdose&quot; deaths share these two
characteristics.28 </p>

<p>(3) Evidence demonstrating that these deaths are not due to
overdose is plentiful. This evidence has been summarized in a
series of scientific papers, beginning in 1966, by New York
City's Chief Medical Examiner, Dr. Milton Helpern, and his
associate, Deputy Chief Medical Examiner, Dr. Michael M. Baden.
At a meeting of the Society for the Study of Addiction held in
London in 1966, Dr. Helpern explained that the most conspicuous
feature of so-called &quot;overdose&quot; deaths is the massive
pulmonary edema. When asked the cause of the edema, he cautiously
responded: </p>

<p>This is a very interesting question. To my knowledge it is not
known why the pulmonary edema develops in these cases.... This
reaction sometimes occurs with the intravenous injections of
mixtures, which as far as is known, do not contain any heroin,
but possibly some other substance. The reaction does not appear
to be specific. It does not seem to be peculiar to one substance,
but it is most commonly seen with mixtures in which heroin is the
smallest component. </p>

<p>In a paper published in the New York State Journal of Medicine
for September 15, 1966, Dr. Helpern again cast doubt on the myth
that these deaths are due to overdose. &quot;Formerly such acute
deaths were attributed to overdose of the heroin contained in the
sample injected,&quot; Dr. Helpern reported-but he went on to
cite several lines of evidence arguing against the overdose
theory: </p>

<p>... Unexpected acute deaths may occur in some addicts who
inject themselves with heroin mixtures even though others who
take the same usual . . . dose from the same sample at the same
time may suffer no dangerous effect. In some fatal acute cases,
the rapidity and type of reaction do not suggest overdose alone
but rather an overwhelming shocklike process due to sensitivity
to the injected material. The toxicologic examination of the
tissues in such fatalities, where the reaction was so rapid that
the syringe and needle were still in the vein of the victim when
the body was found, demonstrated only the presence of alkaloid,
not overdosage. In other acute deaths, in which the circumstances
and autopsy findings were positive, the toxicologist could not
even find any evidence of alkaloid in the tissues or body fluids.
Thus, there does not appear to be any quantitative correlation
between the acute fulminating lethal effect and the amount of
heroin taken. . . .30 </p>

<p>Dr. Helpern's associate, Deputy Chief Medical Examiner Baden,
went on to further discredit the already implausible overdose
theory at a joint meeting of two American Medical Association
drug-dependency committees held in Palo Alto, California, in
February 1969. </p>

<p>&quot;The majority of deaths,&quot; Dr. Baden told the AMA
physicians, &quot;are due to an acute reaction to the intravenous
injection of the heroin-quinine-sugar mixture. This type of death
is often referred to as an 'overdose,' which is a misnomer. Death
is not due to a pharmacological overdose in the vast majority of
cases.&quot; 31 </p>

<p>At the same AMA committee meeting and at a meeting of the
Medical Society of the County of New York, Dr. Baden cited six
separate lines of evidence overturning the &quot;heroin
overdose&quot; theory. </p>

<p>First, when the packets of heroin found near the bodies of
dead addicts are examined, they do not differ from ordinary
packets. &quot;No qualitative or quantitative differences&quot;
are found.32 This rules out the possibility that some incredibly
stupid processor may have filled a bag with pure heroin instead
of the usual adulterated mix. </p>

<p>Second, when the syringes used by addicts immediately before
dying are examined, the mixture found in them does not contain
more heroin than usual. </p>

<p>Third, when the urine of addicts allegedly dead of overdose is
analyzed, there is no evidence of overdose. </p>

<p>Fourth, the tissues surrounding the site of the fatal
injection show no signs of high heroin concentration. </p>

<p>Fifth, neophytes unaccustomed to heroin rather than addicts
tolerant to opiates would be expected to be susceptible to death
from overdose. But &quot;almost all of those dying&quot; of
alleged overdose, Deputy Chief Medical Examiner Baden reported,
&quot;are long-term users.&quot; </p>

<p>Sixth, again according to Dr. Baden, &quot;addicts often
'shoot' in a group, all using the same heroin supply, and rarely
does more than one addict die at such a time.&quot; 33 </p>

<p>These definitive refutations of the heroin overdose theory
should, of course, have led to two prompt steps: a warning to
addicts that something other than overdose is causing these
hundreds of addict deaths annually -and an intensive search for
the true cause of the deaths. But neither of these steps has been
taken. Hence the news media go right on talking about
&quot;heroin overdose&quot; deaths. &quot;Death from acute
reaction to heroin overdose&quot; and other complicated phrases
are also used; these phrases similarly conceal the fact that
these deaths are not due to overdose. </p>

<p>How can the &quot;heroin overdose&quot; myth not only survive
but flourish even after these repeated scientific debunkings? Two
stenographic transcripts provide an answer. </p>

<p>The first is the transcript of a press conference held at the
Rockefeller University on October 27, 1969, in connection with
the Second National Conference on Methadone Treatment. In the
course of his remarks to the assembled reporters, Deputy Chief
Medical Examiner Baden there discussed at some length a case of
what he described as an &quot;addict who died of an overdose of
heroin.&quot; 34 The reporters present naturally referred
thereafter to this death as a &quot;heroin overdose&quot; case. </p>

<p>At the scientific meeting held in the same room on the same
day, however, Dr. Baden described the same death in quite
different terms. To the scientists he stated that the addict in
question &quot;died of acute reaction to injection of heroin, a
so-called overdose.&quot; When even this description was
challenged by a fellow physician, who pointed out that addicts
don't die following even enormous doses,35 Dr. Baden went on to
explain that whenever I say 'overdose,' it is in quotation
marks.&quot; 36 </p>

<p>The reporters, of course, could not see those invisible
quotation marks when they listened to Dr. Baden at his press
conferences and interviews. They quite naturally took him
literally-and continued to inform the public that addicts were
dying of overdose.* </p>

<p>Even Chief Medical Examiner Helpern eventually became
convinced that the &quot;heroin overdose&quot; publicity
emanating from his office was &quot;dangerously wrong.&quot; In
testimony before the Select Committee on Crime of the United
States House of Representatives on June 27, 1970, Dr. Helpern
stated: </p>

<p>A difficulty has been that people have considered these fatal
reactions the result of overdose. Now, to some people the
designation overdose means [taking] more than usual with the
implication that if you are careful of how much is taken there is
no danger of anything other than the usual effect. This
impression which many addicts have is dangerously wrong. 38 </p>

<p>Yet a full year after Dr. Helpern testified, neither he nor
Dr. Baden nor anyone else had yet ventured to correct the
&quot;dangerously wrong&quot; view that was being foisted on the
New York and national news media. Almost everyone who did not
read Dr. Helpern's and Dr. Baden's papers in the medical journals
still believed that heroin addicts by the hundreds were dying of
overdose. Worse yet, nobody had as yet even begun to investigate
seriously the crucial question: If these hundreds of addicts a
year aren't dying of overdose, what are they dying of? </p>

<p>Fortunately, enough is already known to suggest some promising
directions for immediate research. </p>

<p>Most deaths from so-called overdose, as noted above, are
characterized by suddenness and by pulmonary edema. No other
cause of death-such as tetanus, bacterial endocarditis,
hepatitis, or a knife or gunshot wound -is found. In
approximately 60 percent of autopsies, a 1970 study indicates,
there is also cerebral edema (accumulation of fluid in the brain)
along with widespread fragmentation of the astrocytes
(star-shaped cells) in the brain.39 A death with these
characteristics, occurring in a heroin addict, constitutes a
dramatic and readily identifiable syndrome which Dr. Helpern has
called &quot;acute fatal reaction to the intravenous injection of
crude mixtures of heroin and other substances.&quot; We shall
here apply a less cumbersome label: &quot;Syndrome X.&quot; </p>

<p>1 Thus in the New York Times for December 16, 1969, a reporter
was led to state without qualification: &quot;About 800 addicts
of all ages died this year from overdoses, according to Dr.
Baden.&quot; 37<br>
</p>

<p>One clue to the true cause of Syndrome X is its initial
appearance about 1943, its relative rarity for the next few
years, and its recent rapid increase in frequency. The time
sequence obviously suggests that the cause of Syndrome X must be
some factor introduced about 1943 and affecting a vastly
increased number of addicts during 1969 and 1970. Heroin clearly
does not qualify; it was widely used long before 1943. Indeed, a
highly significant fact about Syndrome X is that it has become
more and more frequent as the amount of heroin in the New York
City bag has gone down and down. These deaths are, if anything,
associated with &quot;underdose&quot; rather than overdose. </p>

<p>One theory sometimes advanced is that Syndrome X deaths are
caused by the quinine in the bag. Quinine was introduced as an
adulterant of heroin sometime after 1939, when an epidemic of
malaria spread by contaminated injection needles hit New York
City addicts 40 thus the time of introduction fits the Syndrome X
timetable. Some addicts discovered that the quinine contributed
to the sensation known as a &quot;rush&quot; immediately after
injection. Heroin traffickers also discovered that the bitter
taste of the quinine makes it impossible for addicts to gauge the
concentration of heroin in the bag by tasting the mixture. For
these and possibly other reasons, quinine has remained a standard
adulterant of New York City heroin ever since. </p>

<p>Perhaps the first suggestion that quinine might be causing New
York City's Syndrome X deaths came from Dr. F. E. Camps, the
United Kingdom Home Office pathologist in charge of investigating
opiate deaths in England. At a conference of the Society for the
Study of Addiction held in London in September 1966 (which Chief
Medical Examiner Helpern attended), Dr. Camps stated: &quot;The
only comparable drug to heroin which causes rapid death with
pulmonary oedema is quinine. In this case patients start off with
discomfort in their chest, and then rapidly die. It is
conceivable that this could have some relation to [New York City]
heroin deaths .&quot; 41 </p>

<p>At the same conference an American pathologist, the late Dr.
Rudolph J. Muelling of the University of Kentucky Medical School,
added that a type of lung lesion similar to that found in
Syndrome X deaths &quot;is found to occur when one studies pure
quinine cases. In the United States this kind of lesion has been
found in several nurses attempting to induce abortions on
themselves. They take the quinine orally and the condition comes
on quite rapidly. The patients die of quinine alone.&quot; 42 </p>

<p>A second possible cause of Syndrome X deaths can best be
illustrated by two examples. </p>

<p>One is the case of &quot;C. G.,&quot; a heroin addict long
accustomed to mainlining his drug, who one day got drunk, took
his &quot;customary injection of heroin and collapsed shortly
thereafter.&quot; Subsequent X-rays showed lung edema.43 </p>

<p>Another is the case of a heroin addict whose death was
recently reported by Dr. George R. Gay and his associates at the
Haight-Ashbury Medical Clinic, San Francisco. This addict first
&quot;shot some reds&quot; (that is, barbiturates) and then
&quot;fixed&quot; with heroin following the barbiturates. He died
of what was diagnosed as &quot;overdose of heroin .&quot; 44 </p>

<p>Cases such as these have given rise to the question whether
Syndrome X deaths may result from injecting heroin (with or
without quinine) into a body already laden with a
central-nervous-system depressant such as alcohol or a
barbiturate. </p>

<p>Addicts themselves would seem to deserve credit for first
suspecting that so-called &quot;heroin overdose&quot; deaths
might in fact result from the combined action of alcohol and
heroin. Back in 1958, a team headed by Dr. Ray E. Trussell and
Mr. Harold Alksne interviewed more than 200 New York City
addicts-alumni of the Riverside Hospital addiction treatment
program (see Chapter 10). In this as in other pre-1960 studies,
few addicts drank alcohol while on heroin, and they did not drink
much. When asked why, the addicts commonly gave two reasons. </p>

<p>One was that the effect of alcohol is &quot;offensive&quot; to
a man on heroin. &quot;The narcotic alone has an analgesic effect
which tends to quiet the individual. Alcohol, on the other hand
... has the capacity to agitate the individual in his
relationships with other people. This generally is offensive to
the addict.&quot; 45 </p>

<p>The other reason given by addicts in 1958 for not drinking
while on heroin is the first extant clue to the possible
relationship between alcohol and death from &quot;heroin
overdose.&quot; Addicts, the Trussell-Alksne team noted,
&quot;believe that the use of narcotics and alcohol in
combination is dangerous and might possibly lead to the death of
an individual.&quot; 46 By the 1960s, this awareness of the
hazard of shooting heroin while drunk had disappeared from the
addict scene. Addicts, like others, were evidently convinced by
the official announcements that those deaths were indeed due to
heroin overdose. </p>

<p>If the theory is sound that even an ordinary dose of an opiate
injected while drunk can produce death, then death could occur
when an ordinary drunk who is not addicted is brought into a
hospital emergency room with a painful injury and is given a
routine (10 milligram) injection of morphine to ease his pain.
Drs. William B. Deichmann and Horace W. Gerarde report in their
Toxicology of Drugs and Chemicals (1969 edition) that death may
in fact occur under such conditions. </p>

<p>&quot;The ordinary safe therapeutic dose of morphine,&quot;
they warn, in italics, in their textbook, &quot;may be fatal to
persons who have been drinking alcoholic beverages. Morphine in
therapeutic doses [similar to the doses commonly injected by
addicts] resulted in fatalities in individuals whose blood
alcohol levels ranged from 0.22 to 0.27%. Morphine is also
synergistic with barbiturates and related drugs.&quot; 47 Thus
the hazard of death from shooting an opiate while drunk on
alcohol or a barbiturate is familiar to some toxicologists even
though it has been ignored by authorities on drug addiction-and
by coroners and medical examiners-through the years. </p>

<p>If this alcohol-heroin and barbiturate-heroin explanation is
correct, the fact is of the utmost practical importance-for
hundreds of deaths a year might be prevented by warning addicts
not to shoot heroin while drunk on alcohol or barbiturates. </p>

<p>The alcohol-barbiturate hypothesis fits the Syndrome X time
schedule. Throughout the nineteenth century and well into the
twentieth, opiate addicts were known for their dislike of alcohol
while on opiates. As noted earlier, they turned to alcohol only
when deprived of their opiate supply or when trying to &quot;kick
the habit.&quot; This remains generally true today; an addict
rarely drinks while on heroin. He often drinks, however, when his
heroin supply runs out and withdrawal symptoms set in. During
World War 11, many heroin addicts were abruptly deprived of their
heroin supply for longer or shorter periods. If some of them
turned to alcohol, then connected with a fresh heroin supply and
&quot;shot up&quot; while still drunk, the first few identified
Syndrome X deaths might have occurred. The recent sharp increase
in Syndrome X deaths might similarly be explained by an increased
tendency to alternate alcohol or barbiturates with heroin as a
result of high heroin prices. As the amount of heroin in the New
York City bag went down and down, according to this theory, more
and more addicts got drunk-and died of Syndrome X following their
next &quot;fix.&quot; </p>

<p>Evidence in recent years for the use of alcohol by addicts
shortly before their death has been assembled from the New York
City files by Drs. Jane McCusker and Charles E. Cherubin. They
reviewed 588 city toxicology reports found in the files on
addicts who died in 1967. In 549 of these cases, tests for
alcohol had been run-and in 43 percent of the cases tested,
alcohol was in fact found .48 (Barbiturates were not reported
on.) Their findings led Drs. McCusker and Cherubin to suggest
that further research be promptly launched into the possible role
of alcohol and the barbiturates in so-called &quot;heroin
overdose&quot; cases. </p>

<p>The same suggestion has been tentatively made by Dr. Gay of
the Haight-Ashbury Medical Clinic. Thirty-seven percent of the
addicts attending the clinic, Dr. Gay states, report using
barbiturates &quot;for sedation and sleep&quot; when heroin
withdrawal symptoms set in; and 24 percent report using alcohol
similarly.49 Thus the stage is set for shooting heroin while
drunk on one or the other-and, perhaps, for sudden death from
overdose.&quot; </p>

<p>Two of the most publicized &quot;overdose deaths&quot; of
1970, Dr. Gay informed the National Heroin Conference in June
1971, fit precisely this pattern. These were the deaths of the
rock musician Jimi Hendrix and the singer Janis Joplin. Hendrix
was known to use both alcohol and barbiturates-and possibly also
heroin. Janis Joplin &quot;drank [alcohol] like an F. Scott
Fitzgerald legend,&quot; Dr. Gay adds-and also used narcotics.50
The magazine Time reported on October 19, 1970, shortly after
Janis Joplin's death: </p>

<p>The quart bottle of Southern Comfort [whiskey] that she held
aloft onstage was at once a symbol of her load and a way of
lightening it. As she emptied the bottle, she grew happier, more
radiant, and more freaked out.... </p>

<p>Last week, on a day that superficially at least seemed to be
less lonely than most, Janis Joplin died on the lowest and
saddest of notes. Returning to her Hollywood motel room after a
late-night recording session and some hard drinking with friends
at a nearby bar, she apparently filled a hypodermic needle with
heroin and shot it into her left arm. The injection killed her.51
</p>

<p>Janis Joplin's death, of course, was popularly attributed to
&quot;heroin overdose.&quot; If the alcohol-barbiturate-heroin
theory is correct, her fatal injection of heroin while drunk on
alcohol was the prototype of many other deaths similarly
mislabeled &quot;overdose.&quot; </p>

<p>The British experience with deaths attributed to heroin
overdose is consistent with the alcohol-barbiturate hypothesis.
Dr. Ramon Gardner of the Bethlem Royal Hospital and Maudsley
Hospital in London studied the records of 170 deaths known to
have occurred among addicts in Britain during the five-year
period 1965 through 1969. Twenty of these deaths were deemed
suicides, 24 were traceable to infections, 12 were from natural
causes, 11 were drownings, falls, murders, or other accidents,
and 6 occurred during treatment (of which two followed abrupt
withdrawal of narcotics when the addicts were imprisoned). Eight
more were due to overdose of barbiturates or other nonopiate
drugs. This left a maximum of 89 mysterious deaths out of 170
which might have been caused by accidental opiate overdose-or by
something else.52 </p>

<p>Dr. Gardner then went on to study in more detail 47 of these
deaths possibly due to heroin overdose. In a number of cases, he
found that the addicts bad been confined in a hospital, prison,
or detention center or had for other reasons been abstinent from
opiates for a week or longer, and had thus lost at least a
portion of their tolerance for opiates. They had then injected an
opiate-some of them on the day of discharge, others within the
next day or two. Thus these deaths might have been due to
overdose-though evidence was lacking that the victims had in fact
taken fatally large doses. (Merely doubling or quadrupling the
dose, it will be recalled, will not kill even nonaddicts.) </p>

<p>But in at least 21 of the 47 cases, there had been no
withdrawal from opiates prior to death, so that tolerance had not
been lost. And in some cases, the dose preceding death was so
small-as little as 20 or 30 milligrams of heroin, for example-as
to establish beyond question that overdose was not the cause .53 </p>

<p>These British deaths, accordingly, remain mysterious, like
deaths from Syndrome X in the United States. Among several likely
explanations, Dr. Gardner himself noted, is the possibility that
these addicts may have taken some other drug, perhaps a
central-nervous-system depressant, at the same time. Since there
is no quinine in British opiates, that drug must be exonerated in
the British deaths. </p>

<p>Another British drug authority adds that in Britain as in the
United States, &quot;many of those who die, in fact, have taken
barbiturates as well [as opiates] at the same time.&quot; 54 </p>

<p>It might prove absurdly easy to confirm the
alcohol-barbiturate hypothesis. All that might be necessary would
be to addict a few monkeys or other primates to heroin,
intoxicate them on alcohol or barbiturates, and then inject
modest doses of heroin. If the monkeys drop dead of Syndrome X, a
warning against shooting heroin while drunk on alcohol or
barbiturates might save many hundreds of lives a year throughout
the world. </p>

<p>Several other possible explanations of Syndrome X deaths have
been offered. No theory has yet been proved. Worse yet, no theory
has ever been experimentally tested. The time has surely come to
determine the cause (or causes) of Syndrome X and bring to a
close this tragic series of deaths. If 800 respectable citizens
instead of heroin addicts had dropped dead in New York City of a
mysterious syndrome in 1970, a gargantuan research program would
no doubt have been promptly launched. </p>

<p>If the Syndrome X deaths are due to quinine or to any other
adulterant or contaminant in the bag, the responsibility clearly
rests with the American heroin black market for selling unsafe
mixes. If the cause of these deaths is the shooting of heroin
while drunk on alcohol or barbiturates, the black-market
distribution system remains at least indirectly responsible, for
it is largely the high cost of black-market heroin that makes
heroin users turn to alcohol and barbiturates on occasion-and
thus, perhaps, to risk death from Syndrome X. </p>

<p>The two steps which must now be taken are (1) to stop sweeping
these mysterious deaths under the carpet by falsely labeling them
&quot;overdose&quot; and (2) to launch an intensive clinical and
experimental search for what is in fact killing these addicts. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61536" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>