
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-109</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B024-92</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/heroin/McCoy2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122104828 text/html 80004
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:48:18 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:53:22 GMT
Content-length: 79788
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>The CIA and the Politics of Narcotics - Alfred McCoy</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_heroin_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="opiates.htm">Heroin and the opiates</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64610" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="2">reprinted by permission of Prevailing Winds
Research POB 23511, Santa Barbara, CA 93121 (805) 899 3433</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">The CIA &amp; The Politics of Narcotics: An
Interview with Alfred McCoy by David Barsamian (conducted at
University of Wisconsin-Madison, February 17,1990)</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: This is David Barsamian and my guest
is Alfred McCoy, author of &quot;The Politics of Heroin in
Southeast Asia&quot; and &quot;Drug Traffic: Narcotics and
Organized Crime in Australia&quot;. Alfred McCoy is Professor of
History at the University of Wisconsin at Madison.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In your book, The Politics of Heroin in
Southeast Asia, you demarcate very carefully that the United
States was poised at the end of World War II, in 1945, to... I
don't have your exact words ... to terminate the problem of drug
addiction in the United States and it could have done so but for
forces that I'd like you to discuss - was unable to do so.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: The problem with America's failed chance
at essentially reducing if not eliminating drugs as a problem was
a contradiction between the needs of domestic policy and the
national security state. After World War II the United States
became a global power and set up a number of agencies to exercise
this global power, most importantly the executive agency known as
the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency when it was ultimately
formed in 1948. The CIA, in order to conduct its campaign against
communism, which was seen as an overweening evil that had to be
stopped, was willing to ally with anybody and everybody that
could provide during what was seen as a critical period, some
strength, some support in the global struggle against communism.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">In Europe and Asia the CIA allied themselves
with major drug brokers and organized crime syndicates. In sum,
what they did was to create a mainline flow of narcotics from the
Middle East through Europe to the United States which dominated
America's drug markets until the 1960s. At the same time, the CIA
was forging alliances and protecting the traffickers in Europe,
for reasons of intelligence. They also formed similar alliances
in Asia - alliances which were actually deeper and had much more
profound and lasting impact on the Asian drug trade.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">As the European trade began to diminish in the
late 1960s and early 1970s, the second stream, the flow of Asian
drug traffic came into the United States and supplanted the old
Turkey- Marseilles heroin connection. But, ultimately, when you
look at the source of supply and the politics that provided drugs
to America in the post-war era, you came down to this
contradiction between the weak drug policy and same kind of vague
commitment to doing something about drugs versus a very high
profile, very important effort to contain communism globally. In
this balance between an inarticulated, poorly formed narcotics
policy and a very clear national goal of containing communism,
narcotics policy was barely considered.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The CIA in this era was dealing with
governments, intelligence chiefs, warlords, gangsters,
traffickers of all sorts - good character was not considered of
moment. The only thing that counted during the period from the
late 1940s through the late 1960s was containing communism.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: You trace the involvement of the
Mafia - the U.S. Mafia - in the promotion of narcotics
trafficking in the United States. How did the politics get
involved with the Mafia?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: We have to step back a bit to the origin
of the drug problem. Since the 1800s western societies - Europe,
Australia, America - have had very extensive drug problems. Now,
you can really divide the western world's century of mass drug
abuse into two convenient periods. From the late 1800s to the
present we can split it down the middle. From about the 1870s
when you get big-time mass consumption of narcotics to the 1920s
drugs were legal. The name &quot;heroin&quot; for example, was a
trade name coined by the Bayer company. In 1898 they came up with
a new product which seemed to be very good for respiratory
ailments. They put it on the market and called it
&quot;heroin.&quot; That's where the term comes from. It's a
trade name coined by one of the world's major pharmaceutical
manufacturers.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The next year, 1899, they came up with another
nifty new product that seemed to do the same thing for headaches
that heroin did for respiratory ailments. They called the new
product &quot;aspirin.&quot; That one's worked out pretty well.
So we got one winner and one loser during this same period of the
global boom of pharmaceuticals.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It wasn't until the 1920s that there was a
general consensus that law would be used to regulate personal
behavior. So alcohol, gambling and narcotics were, during the
1920s, globally subject to regulation. So you have laws on the
books in the United Kingdom, Australia, the United States - not
only the nations themselves but their several states and
provinces - banning the use of narcotics.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Narcotics moved from being a personal choice -
something you picked up at your local pharmacy, your local drug
store - to being a criminal act. The process by which it becomes
illegal varied in every country and, in some cases every state.
By the time you get to about 1930, drugs were illegal around the
globe.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So, suddenly, who's moving the drugs? Well,
it's syndicates. The abolition or the prohibition of alcohol,
partial prohibition of alcohol in some countries and full
prohibition in this country, combined with the prohibition of
narcotics, transferred an enormous sector of the legitimate
economy to syndicates. So that's where you got the rise of
organized crime.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In 1932 the United States pulled back from the
prohibition on alcohol It was gradual, it was slow, but the
syndicates got out of the alcohol trade. But we've never pulled
back from the prohibition of narcotics. It's remained illegal.
That prohibition has become permanent. So, during the 1930s. the
syndicates began moving into narcotics. They were of secondary
importance initially to alcohol, but once alcohol became legal
after 1932, narcotics became correspondingly more important.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">During World War II things changed. All global
commerce was disrupted. Military controls and war zones
intervened with the normal trafficking routes. The drug trade was
totally disrupted in the United States. In Asia it continued. The
Japanese military intelligence dominated the manufacture and
distribution of heroin from China. They used it very explicitly
as a weapon against the Chinese resistance. They flooded China
with heroin, financed all of their intelligence operations and
special operations from the drug trade.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">But in the United States and Europe, the drug
traffic was disrupted. It largely disappeared. Survival had to do
with, in part, some short-term tactical alliances with the Mafia.
In 1943 the United States invaded Sicily as one of its two major
invasions of Europe, a major event in the history of World War
II, secondary to D-Day. That leap from North Africa and fighting
up the boot of Italy, bloody horrible campaign that it was, was
something that really concerned American military planners at the
time. They apparently - the U.S. Navy in particular - forged a
short-term political alliance with Lucky Luciano who'd been
convicted for operating a brothel that employed something like a
thousand prostitutes in New York City; he was in Dannemara State
Prison in New York. The Navy cut a deal with him and he used his
contacts with the Sicilian Mafia to get Mafia support because the
Mafia politically dominated western Sicily which was the area
where U.S. forces landed.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Mussolini, for reasons just purely of state,
couldn't abide the Mafia. They didn't do what he wanted. He tried
to break them. Under the U.S. military occupation of Sicily, the
Mafia revived. There were some American mafiosi deported to
Sicily after the war. They provided links back to the United
States with their confreres in organized crime. Moreover, as the
United States' campaign against communism got underway,
particularly in the Mediterranean basin - in Italy and southern
France - the United States formed tactical alliances with
Corsican syndicates and with the Mafia too. It served as a
counterweight to communist dockworker influence in places like
Marseilles particularly.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The net result is that as a result of wartime
policy and postwar anti-communist policy, you got a revival of
organized crime operating initially under some kind of U.S.
military-government protection and ultimately under CIA
protection.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">As the trafficking routes got re-established
through the Middle East and Europe, ultimately to the United
States, a revived, restored Mafia in Sicily, Corsican syndicates
in Southern France, were major participants in this traffic.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Half a world away, in Asia, you get a similar
phenomenon. We can talk about that if you want.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: In fact, the recolonization of
Indochina by the French at the end of World War II in 1946 led to
what you call the first Indochina war, and the establishment of a
major international narcotics trade which the French intelligence
was very much involved with. Is that true?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: Yes, but again I think we have to stand
back and look at this in somewhat broader perspective. It's one
of the liabilities of being a history professor - I can't
understand 1990 unless I know about 1890. It's just the way I see
things. Things have historical roots and if you deal with present
superficialities you won't have a clue as to what's going on.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">You have to understand, first of all, that the
extensive opium trade in Indochina - mass consumption,
particularly in the cities - was as a result of European colonial
policy. Nowhere else in the world - and most of the tropical
latitudes of the globe were colonized - Asia, Africa and Latin
America at one time, entirely colonized.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It's only in Southeast Asia that the colonial
governments paid for their very dynamic development, massive
infrastructural projects, irrigation that transformed the
landscape, massive road networks, rail networks, very dynamic
colonial development - all of this was paid for by direct taxes
upon Indochinese consumers. Taxes on alcohol, salt and
particularly opium. In British Malaya, 40% of colonial taxes came
from opium. In Thailand it was running about 15%. (Thailand was
an independent state but they followed the colonial model.) In
French Indochina it ranged about 15% from the period of the 1870s
up through the 1950s when, as a result of UN pressure, all of
these governments abolished the opium trade. Thailand was the
second last to do it. Thailand didn't abolish its state opium
monopoly - rather like an alcoholic beverage control that a lot
of states have. They didn't abolish this until 1957 and Laos
didn't abolish theirs until 1961.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So you had, then, mass opium consumption in
Southeast Asia as a result of this colonial policy of making the
colony pay with opium. That was the policy.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Now, most of the opium was not produced in
Southeast Asia. It came from abroad - either Southern China or,
particularly, India. The thing that changes significantly after
World War II is not the emergence of Southeast Asia as a major
area of opiate consumption - it had been so for a century or even
more. What is significant is the emergence of the mountain areas
of Southeast Asia as major areas of global opium production.
Indeed, by the early 1960s, the largest single source of opium
anywhere in the world was the so-called &quot;Golden
Triangle&quot; region of Southeast Asia.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">How did this come about? It comes about two
ways. Most importantly, we have to look at North Burma. That's
the bulk of the Golden Triangle. In fact, most of that imaginary
geographical construct penned by some unknown journalist wag or
geographer - nobody knows where this idea came from calling this
sort of triangular-shaped highland zone where opium is grown in
Southeast Asia &quot;the Golden Triangle&quot; - most of that
triangle is in Burma, northeastern Burma in particular.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So, where did opium come from? Well, if you
look at the British colonial records, because the British
colonized Bunna, you find opium production up until 1945 in
northeastern Burma was almost insignificant. There was very
little grown. Most of the opium consumption in northeastern Burma
came from India. Burma, after all, was a province of India under
the British, so they just brought it in and sold it legally. Now,
where the opium came from was a major CIA operation. One of the
biggest - the only one I know of of its scale that is yet to be
exposed by journalists or muckrakers of any sort. This was the
attempt to overthrow the People's Republic of China.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In 1949 the Red Army, Mao's Red Army, drove
south and they drove the Nationalist forces of Chiang Kai-Shek in
two directions: one down to Taiwan to the East and secondly, into
this redoubt, this highland plateau which is the Hunan province
in southwestern China. The warlord of Hunan surprisingly
surrendered, betrayed Chiang Kai-Shek, and surrendered to the
communists. Chiang Kai-Shek's plan of having his old World War II
redoubt which was the bastion of his resistance against the
Japanese. This was Chiang Kai-Shek's old mountain bastion. He
thought he could hold it and maybe use it for counter-attack.
Well, the warlord of Hunan betrayed him for reasons nobody quite
understands, turned it over to the communists, and Chiang's
forces were suddenly without a redoubt. They fled across the
border into the mountains of northeastern Burma, where the CIA
set up a massive support operation, including an air link that
was of the nature of the hump - the flight from India across the
hump of the Himalayas into the Hunan province of southern China
during World War II. They also rearranged the politics of
Thailand. the CIA became involved in the factional politics among
the military leadership in Thailand. They allied themselves with
the commandant of the Thai national police, a particularly
corrupt man named General Pao. General Pao went into the opium
business with the nationalist Chinese forces in Laos.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">What you had was the CIA sustaining nationalist
Chinese forces in Northeastern Burma on the China border,
supporting - we have records I think of two invasions of southern
China by this force which left, in a couple of battles, dead
white men on the field of battle. One can only suspect that they
were CIA operatives or contract mercenaries working for the
Agency, We don't know. No identification.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">But anyway, these invasions failed. So why
didn't they withdraw? Well, the CIA had the idea - and you can
find these in formal National Security Council documents - the
CIA and the Pentagon had the idea that there was going to be a
massive Chinese invasion of Southeast Asia at some point. This
was what the Vietnam war was all about: building up the South
Vietnamese Army, to integrate, to become an Allied force within
the U.S. conventional combat forces, to resist this projected
Chinese invasion of Southeast Asia. The falling dominoes were not
just going to fall from within, they were going to be pushed from
without by an invading China.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So they kept the Nationalist Chinese forces up
along this long difficult Burma border as a kind of trip-wire to
detect a Chinese invasion of Southeast Asia and to run
intelligence operations. They went into China, kidnapped Chinese
officials, tapped phone lines, and bought newspapers - and they
were maintained in northeastern Burma from 1949 until 1961 when a
joint Communist Chinese-Burmese Army operation drove them into
northern Thailand which is where they are today. But they still
maintained their posts, even though they couldn't keep their base
camps in Burma. That group, the Nationalist Chinese forces in
northeastern Burma, transferred northeastern Burma from a region
of very little opium production into the largest single producer
of opium anywhere in the world today.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">How did they do it? They did it through the
classic colonial policy that we saw under Leopold of the Belgians
in the Congo Free State. Under Leopold every peasant had to grow
rubber and if you didn't deliver rubber, your children's limbs
were amputated. I can show you a very famous photograph in book
published by Macmillan University Press, The Colonial Empires by
Professor B.K. Hildhouse(?) and there's a picture of an African
man sitting on his porch looking at the feet of his daughter
which had been amputated because he didn't deliver the rubber. It
was such a brutal, horrific administration that the European
colonial powers held a conference, took the Congo away from
Leopold, and gave it to the Belgian parliament to administer. It
was one of the great scandals of the 19th century, one of the
horrors of colonialism. That great novel, Heart of Darkness, that
became Apocalypse Now - that's written about the brutality of the
Belgians in the Congo Free State.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">There are many legacies in the European
imagination of how horrible this was. Well, that's exactly what
the Nationalist Chinese forces did to the Hill tribes of
northeastern Burma. I've interviewed American Baptists
missionaries who told me that ordinary peasants - hill tribesmen
- who did not deliver their opium quota, suffered the loss of
limbs. Fingers would be cut and hands were taken from you and
your family.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So people produced.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Under this forced regime of occupation where
you had the Nationalist Chinese forces backed by the CIA
occupying the mountain areas, the prime opium growing areas in
northeastern Burma, Burma went from maybe 7 or 8 tons of opium
production per annum to anywhere up to 1,000 tons of production
by the time the CIA's mercenaries were driven out in 1961. A
thousand tons would have been, in any given year, up to 60 and
70% of the world's total illicit opium production coming from
this one area as a result of a decade of CIA-Nationalist Chinese
occupation.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The other Southeast Asian area was as you
describe. Until 1950 France had an opium monopoly in Indochina.
They were under pressure from the United States and UN to clean
up. They signed the Segal(?) Convention on Narcotic Drugs with
the United Nations and they abolished the opium monopoly. But it
didn't disappear. The opium dens and opium shops were simply
transferred from the French Ministry of Finance to French
military intelligence and they, in turn, turned them over to a
criminal syndicate that was running Saigon for the French, using
their funds to buy daily intelligence and ferret out communist
terrorists in the streets of Saigon.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The communists were running a terrorist
campaign against the French. A Frenchman would sit down in a cafe
and a 12-year-old boy would come up to him and put a gun to the
back of his head and shoot him and disappear into a crowd. That's
the kind of operation. The French were powerless to control that
and they set up a very elaborate intelligence apparatus to try
and stop that terror. Money was the fuel that drove that engine
and the money came from drugs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Moreover, there were Corsican syndicates that
dominated the inner-city economy of Indochina, based in Saigon.
They began exporting to Europe where part of the so-called
Marseilles connection which has been celebrated in films - the
connection where it's supposed to be opium from Turkey coming
through the laboratories of Marseilles and then on to the United
States - part of that production - we don't know how much - in
fact, came from Saigon.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So, it's as a result of French
counter-insurgency efforts in Indochina where they integrate
narcotics into their intelligence operations, but primarily it's
as a result of CIA operations in Burma that we get the so-called
Golden Triangle where it's northeastern Burma and the adjacent
area of northern Laos going into high-scale production.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">When the Americans moved into Indochina after
the French departed in 1955, we picked up the same tribes, the
Hmong, the same politics of narcotics, the politics of heroin,
that the French had established. By the 1960s we were operating,
particularly the CIA, in collusion with the major traffickers
exporting from the mountains not only to meet the consumption
needs of Southeast Asia itself, but in the first instance
America's combat forces fighting in Vietnam and ultimately the
world market. Southeast Asia today, by the way, is the number one
source of American heroin. That's our major source. So it's those
very mountains of Burma, those very fields that were cleared and
put to the poppy as a result of this Nationalist Chinese-CIA
counterinsurgency intervention policy - that army that the CIA
maintained there - that's supplying America's addicts today with
illicit heroin.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: Was the anti-communist ideology so
powerful and so strong that the CIA would risk the worldwide
opprobrium of being linked with drug trafficking? Why would they
take that risk?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: It's easy. Look, it's effective. I
interviewed a guy named Lt. Col Lucien Conein who, since I
published my book now despises me, and I asked Col Conein why
they worked with the Corsicans in Saigon, for example. He said
that there aren't very many groups that know the clandestine
arts. When you think about the essential skills it takes to have
an extra-legal operation - to have somebody killed, to mobilize a
crowd, to do what it does when societies are in flux, when power
is unclear and to be grabbed and shaped and molded into a new
state - you want to overthrow a government and put a new one in -
how do you do it? Who does this? Accountants? - They go to the
office every day. Students? They go to classes - they're good for
maybe one riot or something, but they've got to get on to medical
school or law or whatever they're doing. Where do you get people
who have this kind of skill? You have your own operatives and
they're limited. Particularly if you're a foreigner, your
capacity to move something in the streets is very limited. You
know, sometimes you can turn to a state intelligence agency in a
country you're working with, but most effectively you can turn to
the underworld. That's why the CIA always worked very effectively
with the warlords of the Golden Triangle. It's worked very
effectively with Corsican syndicates in Europe, worked very
effectively and continuously with American Mafia - because they
have the same clandestine arts. They operate with the same
techniques.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">And they have the same kind of amorality. They
are natural allies. There was a conversion of cultures between
the milieu of the underworld and the world of the clandestine
operative.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: The French intelligence services
used the services of the Corsican Mafia during the first
Indochina war and many of those Corsicans remained behind and the
Americans picked them up. But then you have the introduction of
the American Mafia itself with the full-scale American
intervention in Indochina: people like Santo Trafficante getting
involved.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: I was interested in discovering during
the course of my research in Saigon in 1971 that the last of the
founding generation of the Mafia - I read these Mafia histories
and I wonder if they're accurate, but you know, if you read
enough of them and they're talking about the formation of a
Commission, the big five families getting together and setting
this thing up - but sometimes you wonder if it isn't a fairy tale
but everybody keeps repeating it. So let's just assume as kind of
a footnote that this may not be accurate. But let's assume this
is some kind of story that's accurate. The last of the founding
generation of Mafia titans was Santo Trafficante, Jr. He was the
boss of Tampa. He also ran Cuba for the Mafia. Cuba was one of
the major conduits of Marseilles heroin. The raw opium would come
from Indochina through the Suez Canal, across the Mediterranean
to Marseilles - or it would come through Turkey, down through
Lebanon, then across the Mediterranean to the port of Marseilles.
There it was refined and it would enter the United States.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Back in 1950, because of the very substantial
Mafia presence in Cuba - they owned most of the casinos, they
operated a lot of the prostitution industry and they were on good
terms with the Batista dictatorship. It was their major offshore
operating zone. It was a kind of vice free port. Santo
Trafficante is believed to have been heavily involved in
narcotics importation operations in a general kind of way as
somebody who was very heavily involved in Cuba. Cuba was supposed
to be - again, in these Mafia fairy tales - something of a
neutral zone. It was nobody's territory. But Trafficante kind of
ran it, providing a certain amount of protection and order for
organized crime because he was southern Florida and it was a
natural territory for him to expand into.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Well, in the late 1960s, Trafficante and his
consigliere, his counselor - again, in these Mafia charts, the
number three man was a guy named Dominic Furchi(?). Dominic
Furchi and Santo Trafficante took a trip and went to Hong Kong
and they went to Saigon. When they were in Saigon they met with
old man Furchi's kid, Frank Furchi. Now, Frank Furchi had set
himself up in Saigon and was involved in this shady world of
contracting all of these kind of murky private business
operations that were what you might call black marketeering on
the fringes of this massive U.S. war effort. Wherever you get
armies operating in the midst of war zones you get an enormous
amount of black market activity. Prostitution, clubs,
entertainment, purloining of military equipment - you know,
there's just so much men and movement and violence and such a
risk that freelancers would come in there and wheel and deal and
make money.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">This young Furchi was in there. There was a
group of Corsicans that was still operating left over from the
first Indochina war and they were dealing. Some of them were
ex-nazi Gestapo officers that had come out there as well. It was
a remarkable polyglot group of adventurers. Trafficante is
believed, according to Hong Kong police intelligence, to have
explored getting an Asian heroin connection. Some police I talked
to during this period were convinced that, in fact, he did
provide the basic contacts and connections during his trip which
began to see the start of substantial flows of heroin from
Southeast Asia to the United States. Now, whether or not, again,
this is a Mafia fairy tale, nonetheless statistically it is after
about 1970 that we see the flow of Number 4 pure white powder
heroin moving from Southeast Asia to the United States, being
detected in chemical analysis of street samples.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: One thing that has kind of perplexed
me on this particular issue - you know, the CIA being involved in
drug trafficking in Southeast Asia - very soon we see that heroin
flowing into the veins of the American GIs stationed in Southeast
Asia who are reputedly there to defeat the communists. That's
kind of bizarre to say the least.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: When I published my book I got a lot of
flak from people on the left saying that I was probably a CIA
agent because I was so moderate in my analysis. The thesis in the
heated political times of the early 1970s about drugs was this.
The CIA had two problems - or the American ruling class - whoever
these invisibles are that control this complex uncontrollable
country - supposedly had two problems. One was insurgency of
minorities - I'm speaking of black uprisings in the cities of
America. Another was winning the war in Vietnam. So they put one
and one together and they came up with two: the Southeast Asian
drug trade. Their vision was - you know, like the CIA Deputy
Director in charge of global narcotics trafficking sort of
telling the Hmong caravans to get moving out of the highlands of
Southeast Asia. &quot;Let's get that caravan now into the lab.
Okay, let's get that heroin loaded onto the aircraft right. Okay,
now we've got it into Harlem. Okay, get that kid, Kid, step
forward and buy the bag.&quot; Okay, you know, that's it.
Potentially insurgent youth has been narcotized. Write him off
for black power.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I didn't see things operating quite so
comprehensively. What I saw going on was like this. And this is
why I was accused by people on the left of being moderate and
cowardly in my analysis. When you do this kind of research, when
you move into this murky world of rumors, conspiracy, the shadow
universe that is organized crime, narcotics and intelligence,
you've got to adopt, I think, a minimalist approach. You can't
say anything you don't have a source for. You can suspect all you
want. But when you speak or write, you just don't say it. That's
speculation. You have a drink and you talk it over when you're
working with your colleagues trying to figure it out, then you
can go into anything you want. But when you actually speak or
write, you've got to stick to the facts. Otherwise, you're not
doing your job ... it's nonsense. So I adopted a policy that I
had to have sources. In fact, my book when it was published was
gone over by a corporate lawyer at Harper &amp; Row which is a
big publishing firm. The CIA actually got a copy of the
manuscript and tried to get certain passages deleted and removed.
They pressured the corporation for the right to do that.
Ultimately I had to stand behind every sentence. I had to have
sources for it. The lawyers went through every sentence and said,
&quot;Where's this?&quot; I had to have an interview notebook, I
had to show my logic.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">What I found was this. This is my image. In
effect the CIA's involvement in narcotics was originally
specific. It was going on in Laos and it didn't get much beyond
Laos. The Agency in Laos was, just like the agency globally in
the 1940s and 50s, myopic, short-sighted. It was fighting a war.
It was trying to stop the Ho Chi Minh trail from operating. In
order to do so it had a 30,000 man mercenary army made up largely
of Hmong hill tribesmen who lived in the area and were opium
growers. The consequences of their complicity in the narcotics
traffic was something they just weren't interested in. From
1964-65 to 1975 they ran this secret war with a massive</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">army of 30,000 men - an operation of an
unequaled duration and size. The CIA has never, ever run as big
an operation. I think that's even bigger</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">than the Burma operation they ran. The
Nationalist Chinese forces never got to that size.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: What about Afghanistan?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: That didn't last eleven years. When did
it start? About '81 and it's already over. It didn't make it. It
lasted eight years. I don't think also .. you see, the Mujahadin
are not as integrated with the CIA. Those were just rebels that
the CIA was backing. This is a 30,000 man army that the CIA ran.
It was their army. They bought every bullet, they trained</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">every soldier, they had a mercenary officer
corps under General Vang Pao that they ran. It wasn't a
&quot;hands-off' operation. It was their army. That's</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">why we've got all these Hmong in Los Angeles
and Minnesota and Wisconsin - because we're looking after our
loyal tribe that fought and died for us in some kind of twisted
logic. But that's why they're all here. That's why we have all
these mountain peasants trying to adapt to life in this country.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Anyway, the CIA was complicitous in the Laotian
drug trade at a number of levels. First of all, let's look at the
situation. Why would the CIA be complicitous in the drug trade?
Okay. They are allying themselves with a people which grows two
products up in the mountains: they grow rice for subsistence and
they grow opium for cash. They've grown opium really at a high
level since World War II. They grew small amounts before, but
with the boom in production in the Golden Triangle their
production of opium expanded and they became dependent upon it as
a source for cash.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">When the CIA allied itself with this tribe,
after a few years, by 1970, the economy, the culture, the whole
of Hmong tribal society and the CIA's secret army were one. It
was a total merger. It was as much an alliance between the CIA
and the Hmong as it was between the United States and Great
Britain in World War II. We just didn't give the British bullets,
we financed their whole economy. We integrated our economy, our
polity with Britain. Two societies, two states merged.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Well, in a funny kind of way, that's what's
going on in Laos right now. The rice crop disappears because of
the Meo policy of slash and burn - they chop down the trees, they
burn it, that clears the land and leaves ash and phosphate on the
ground and you get maybe two or three rice crops out of it before
the land goes bad and the men, because there's a distribution of
labor in the tribes, the men have to cut down the trees. The
women till the crop, harvest the rice crop. Now, opium, well
done, can go ten or twelve years whereas rice can only go two or
three. So once it was started, very quickly the Hmong ran out of
rice and the CIA began dropping rice to them. But they still had
their opium. Now, the Hmong growing opium meant the CIA felt that
they had to support the Meo's opium crop because there's only two
cash crops. So they started actually using their remarkably
extensive energistics network of light aircraft and helicopters
to actually move the opium out of the mountains for the Meo
because the war had disrupted the normal caravan routes of
Chinese merchants that comb the hills for the opium. That was
gone by 1966 as the war spread. So the CIA collected the opium
and became the major source of transport, moving the opium from
field to market, getting into the actual flow of regional
international commerce.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: This is the Air America fleet?</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: This is the Air America fleet, yeah.
It's the CIA's contract airline. It's just a fig leaf. It was the
CIA's airline.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: I notice you use Hmong and Meo
interchangeably. Is that correct?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: Yes. The word has been used
traditionally, Hmong, but it means slave in Chinese. But if you
look at all the ethnographic literature before the Hmong migrated
to this country, it always refers to them as Meo. Since they've
gotten here, the Hmong have regarded Meo as an impolite term and
everybody... You know, one of the dynamics of a multi-cultural
society is that the group gets to pick its own name. If
African-Americans want to be African-Americans, that's what you
call them and you don't worry about it. The oppressed get to pick
the label of their oppression. So if the Hmongs want to be called
Hmongs, we call them Hmong.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Anyway, the CIA was absolutely aware of what it
was doing. I went into a Meo district - I spent ten days there in
1971 - and I went house to house and asked every farmer how much
opium they grew this year, last year, the year before. I went
back ten years. I said, &quot;Okay, now, how much do you
grow.&quot; They said, &quot;Well, we each grow about ten
kilos,&quot; which will make you one kilo of heroin by the time
you boil it down and combine it.&quot; Most of them grow about
ten kilos from their fields. So, &quot;What do you do with your
ten kilos?&quot; &quot;Well, up to about five years the Chinese
used to come through with their mules and we'd sell it to them
and they'd give us some cloth, some money, this or that and
flashlight batteries, whatever, and we'd deal with them. Or
sometimes we'd take it down to the market down in the provincial
capital.&quot; &quot;So what have you done over the last few
years?&quot; &quot;What happens is the Air America helicopter
comes in and officers in the army, Hmong officers in the army,
get out and we sell them our opium.&quot;</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Opium stinks. It's like wrapping up cow dung in
leaves. You've got a whole helicopter full of cow dung and you'd
say to the pilot, the American CIA pilot - do you know what
you're carrying? He'd say, &quot;Yeah, I'm carrying cow
dung.&quot; &quot;How do you know?&quot; &quot;Well, I can smell
it.&quot; Opium, in that kind of confined space, load up a
helicopter with opium and you know what you're carrying.
Everybody knows what it smells like. So they all knew that they
were carrying it. This entire district that I interviewed
established a pattern beyond doubt. The helicopters came there
and left.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Where did it go? It went down to a place name
Long Tien. Long Tien was one of the most secret U.S.
installations anywhere in the world. It was the headquarters of
the whole secret war in Laos, this attempt to fight the Ho Chi
Minh trail, to cut it with this mercenary army. Long Tien was
closed to any American other than somebody that had top
intelligence classification.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I learned from Hmong sources that Vang Pao
operated a very large heroin lab there. At this point the CIA got
hands off. They didn't mind moving the opium out of the hills,
but when it came to actually carrying the Number 4 heroin that
came out of that lab, they wouldn't touch that. What they did was
they established a private air line for Vang Pao called Zeng
Kwan(?) Air Transport, the province where he came from was Zeng
Kwan. So they created, you know, home-town province airlines and
gave it to Vang Pao. They were hands-off from that point.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Then what happened was there was a flow, there
were other labs, and the Chief of Staff of the Royal Laotian army
- 99% of the Royal Laotian army's budget came from the United
States - the Chief of Staff of the Laotian army operated the
largest heroin refinery in the world in northwestern Laos. This
flow of heroin went down to southern Laos where Nguyen Cao Ky's
sister ran a hotel. There were three routes into Vietnam from
southern Laos. One was Nguyen Cao Ky's pilots would fly over from
Tonsonhut(?) Airport in Saigon and would pick up and fly back in.
The Prime Minister of Vietnam, the President of Vietnam also had
their own distribution apparatuses. Our allies in Vietnam, the
three major political players, ran heroin distribution networks.
There was a time in the 1970s when I think half a dozen members
of the South Vietnamese parliament were picked up by customs by
mistake carrying heroin in from Laos and Thailand. You know, the
whole South Vietnamese government was dealing heroin to our
troops. That was where it was coming from.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The CIA didn't know about that. I mean, they
didn't care about that; they didn't worry about it. Once it was
out of the mountains and out of the labs they didn't think about
it very much. Now, what's the legacy of Laos. Well, the legacy of
Laos, I think, is something that nobody's really thought about.
Let's look at it. For ten years the CIA's biggest operation was
completely integrated with the structure of the Indochina opium
trade. The capacity of that army to fight and move, the capacity
of those people to survive and to keep replacing soldiers
(because they were killed by the tens of thousands). We were
fighting with boy soldiers by the time it was over. I mean, those
soldiers had to keep delivering the troops. The whole apparatus
was integrated with the opium trade, the whole secret war
apparatus was part of the opium trade. We ran that war through
Vang Pao. He was a general in the Laotian army, but more
importantly, he was the CIA's general. Now, Vang Pao was not from
a traditional elite family. He was never very popular with the
Hmong, certainly not at that time. And his capacity to get
recruits out of the villages once the war started taking heavy
casualties and people were seeing one and two and three sons
dying, his capacity to extract more and more recruits to keep
that war going relied upon him being able to pressure those
villages.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I was in a village in Laos that stopped sending
recruits and the CIA cut off the rice supply and those people
were pushed to the brink of starvation. They had lost all the
males down to the 14-year-olds. The village and district leader
didn't want to send the 14-year-olds. &quot;This is the next
generation,&quot; he said. &quot;If we lose these kids, then we
will disappear. We won't produce another generation. We can't do
this.&quot; And so he said no, we've been doing this for six or
seven years now, we've lost everybody, we're not going to do it
any more. So they cut off his rice.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The other thing that Vang Pao had was the
opium. Remember, they had the two basic commodities - rice to
survive and opium for cash to buy everything that they needed. So
Vang Pao became the big opium broker for the Hmong and, as such,
he gained extraordinary power over their economy and thus over
their lives. So that by controlling those two products, opium and
rice - the supply of rice and the export of opium from the
villages - Vang Pao controlled those villages and could force
them to support him even after the casualties began to mount.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">My metaphor for Vang Pao is kind of like a
Judas Goat. Do you know what a Judas goat is? In the stockyards,
I don't know if it's still done, but let's say when you're
leading sheep to the slaughter, there's a goat that will lead the
sheep through the maze of the stockyards and then, as they're
heading into the chute, the Judas goat jumps aside and the flock
of sheep go pelting through to get hit with electrodes or hammers
and be slaughtered. That's how you have to think of Vang Pao - as
kind of like a tribal Judas goat leading the males to the
slaughter. Except, the Hmong are not like sheep - they know
what's going on - they know that they're being slaughtered. It's
not like they're being slaughtered in one room at one time -
they're being slaughtered slowly over a decade. So how does he
get to keep leading them? Through the control over these two
products.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">You've got, then, a CIA secret war which in an
essential way, in a fundamental way is linked with the opium
traffic. More than that, it appears that a number of CIA
operatives as individuals got involved. They started smuggling,
started wheeling, started dealing and started doing a couple of
bags here and there. We know, for example, there's a famous case
of a CIA global money-moving bank called the Nugan-Hand bankwhich
was established in Australia. The founder of that was a Michael
John Hand. He was a green beret who was a contract CIA operative
in Laos. When he first came to Australia in 1969-1970 Australian
federal police got intelligence on him - I've seen the files -
saying that what he's basically doing is he's bringing down light
aircraft that are flying from Thailand to northern Australia into
those abandoned air strips that were left over from World War II
and he's dealing heroin. That's what Michael John Hand, according
to Australian federal police intelligence, was doing. So, as
individuals CIA operatives were getting involved and more or less
what you've got then as a result of Laos is that the policy of
integrating intelligence and cover operations with narcotics gets
established.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">You get, then, an entire generation of covert
action warriors used to dealing with narcotics as a matter of
policy. In short, you get a policy and personnel which integrates
covert action with narcotics. This manifests itself in a number
of ways. First of all the Nugan-Hand bank. Not only was it moving
money globally for the CIA, but it was the major money laundering
conduit that was trimming funds up to Southeast Asia from
Australia and linking the Golden Triangle heroin trade of
Southeast Asia with the urban markets of Australia. In
Afghanistan as well, this same distributing pattern that we saw
in Laos emerges.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">This is one case that hasn't been well studied.
I've spoken to one correspondent for the Far East Economic Review
which is a Dow-Jones Publication, Mr. Lawrence Lifschultz(?), a
friend of mine, and what he found was something of a similar
pattern that I found in Laos. He was a correspondent in Pakistan
and Afghanistan during the Mujahadeen campaign and he wrote
articles in the Nation and elsewhere describing this similar
pattern. You've got Pakistani government officials very heavily
involved in narcotics, you've got the Mujahadeen manufacturing
heroin, they're exporting it to Europe and the United States.
They're using it to support their guerrilla campaign. the
Pakistanis and the CIA are complicitous on the level of (1) not
doing anything or (2) actually getting involved in the case of
some of the Pakistani elite. So, it's a case where the Mujahadee
operation becomes ultimately integrated with the narcotics trade
and the CIA is fully informed of the integration and doesn't do
anything about it.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Moving on to our fourth instance, one close to
home, is the whole Iran-contra operation.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">First of all, I think the Laos parallel is very
strong in the Iran-contra operation. Just in the formal outlines
of the policy - you know, you've got the contras on the border of
Nicaragua, they're a mercenary army, they're supported through a
humanitarian operation, they're given U.S. logistic support,
they're given U.S. equipment and they're given U.S. air power
backup to deliver the equipment and the logistic support. All the
personnel that are involved in that operation are Laos veterans.
Ted Shackley, Thomas Clines, Oliver North, Richard Secord - they
all served in Laos during thiten-year war. They are all part of
that policy of integrating narcotics andbeing complicitous in the
narcotics trade in the furtherance of covert action.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">In this case, what I think we can see is it's
not just the same. It's not just simply that the CIA was
complicitous in allowing the contras to deal in cocaine, to serve
as a link between the Andes and across the Caribbean into the
United States. I think we can see the situation has gotten worse.
In Laos, as I said, the CIA was hands-off. Once it got beyond
their secret base, they wouldn't touch it. They gave Vang Pao the
aircraft and once it got any further they didn't really know
about it and didn't want to know about it. They remained ignorant
about it. And ultimately what you're looking at was a traffic
that was in a remote region which, in a way I don'tthink the CIA
saw was going to happen, wound up serving Americans. An estimate
of 50% of U.S. combat forces in Vietnam taking drugs, what was
common at that time. But it's still remote and it's still not
going directly into the United States.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The level of cynicism in Central America is
even worse. We're not talking about original traffic or moving
the raw product - we're talking about taking finished cocaine,
providing aircraft, moreover providing protection for these
traffickers as they fly across the Caribbean with these massive
loads of cocaine. Now, I don't know. Can one estimate what
percentage of the cocaine was politically protected by these
intelligence operations. Until there's a formal investigation,
which there's not likely to be, it's difficult to say.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">I think that one can say that as you look at
the drugs flowing into the United States during the 1960s when
this Lao operation was going, there was probably a much smaller
percentage of narcotics entering the United States from
politically protected brokers than there is today. In other
words, this CIA policy of integrating covert action operations
with narcotics, both at a level of individuals being involved and
also just turning a blind eye to the fact that our allies are
drug brokers, this complicity in the narcotics trade has gotten
worse. It's closer to home. It's not moving the raw material out
in the jungles, it's actually bringing the finished narcotics,
cocaine, into the United States. So it's gotten that much closer
to homeand that much more cynical.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: Could you talk about the 1971 Nixon
&quot;War on Drugs&quot; and the 1989 version of the same war
launched by George Bush? Do you see any parallels?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: The parallel is striking and I'm
surprised that commentators haven't made more of it. My own
feeling is that the Bush war on drugs is modeled exactly on the
war fought by his mentor, president Bush's mentor, Richard Nixon.
America has in its history of a century of drug abuse, attempted
two times a solution to the drug problem. The first one was the
Nixon war on drugs in 1972-73 and the second is now the Bush war
on drugs.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Let's look at the Nixon war on drugs in order
to get some sense of the probable outcome of the Bush war. Nixon
declared war on drugs in 1973 in the Anatolian plateau. There's a
pretty good book by a man named Robert J. Epstein called Agency
of Fear looking at the drug agency involved in this war on drugs.
What he concluded was that Nixon was faced with a delicate
political problem when he took office. He'd promised law and
order.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Once he got into office, Epstein says that he
found out that the federal government's actual intervention in
law enforcement in the United States is minimal. It's local
police that do law enforcement. It's everybody's property taxes
that put cops in their cars. So the American president may be
powerful in many respects, but he's not powerful in law
enforcement areas. What Nixon very quickly worked out is the only
substantive area law enforcement where the federal government had
any authority and capacity for action was in narcotics. So what
he did was he manufactured a crisis and then he came up with a
solution.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The crisis came from a series of press releases
from the Drug Enforcement Administration, releasing statistics
showing a massive expansion in the number of addicts. Now, they
even took me in on this. I read those statistics like everybody
else and I said, &quot;My god, this is getting out of
control.&quot; But all they had done was to change the
statistical ratio. In the 1960s before Nixon, our numbers of drug
addicts - about 60,000 - came from two things: (1) a central
registry of addicts into which police put the name of every
addict. Another way figures were derived was through a
statistical ratio between the number of bodies in the morgue from
overdoses and the overall addict population. All the DEA did
under Nixon was to change the ratio between corpses and addicts.
They just simply said ... I forget now the statistics - let's say
it was 1 to 2. For every corpse you're likely to have two
addicts. Then they made it 1 to 10 - for every corpse you can
have ten addicts. So suddenly we had this massive expansion but
it was just a result of statistical manipulation, changing the
ratio between the known (the corpse) and the unknown (the number
of addicts). In this way they manufactured this enormous sense of
crisis.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Moreover, there was more crime that was
probably somewhat drug-related in the 60s and 70s - maybe, maybe
not, I don't know. But in any case, they made this equation.
We've got more drugs, we've got more addicts, we've got more
crime. Having manufactured this crisis, having
&quot;discovered&quot; the problem of this massive expansion in
heroin addiction, Nixon then declared war as his solution.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Nixon's image of the drug trade went like this:
that there was raw opium being diverted from licensed opium
growers in Turkey. There is, in fact, a legitimate pharmaceutical
need for morphine which comes, like heroin, from the opium poppy.
Turkey was a legal producer of opium for the pharmaceutical
market, for patient's in hospitals who are dying of cancer and in
incredible pain - they needed morphine. Troops use it in battle -
it's a big market for people in accidents, all sorts of things.
It's an important drug and has been for millennia.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Turkey was a legitimate producer but what was
happening, according to Nixon, was that peasants were producing
more than their quota and selling it to the black market; it was
working its way down through Lebanon, across the Mediterranean
into Marseilles labs and then the United States. So Nixon said
that he was going to fight his war on drugs, battle one on the
Anatolian plateau of Turkey. It was a very simple war. It was a
war that didn't involve very much. All Nixon did was announce
this war. He then used the very close defense relationship
between Turkey and the United States to pressure the Turks
through normal well-established diplomatic channels, to force
their farmers to go out of production.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">The Turkish government was faced with a choice
- they could risk their whole strategic relationship with the
United States in defense of farmers from a remote small region
who were producing a minor product. Although it offended
nationalism, they did it. They went along with it. Nixon also
offered them, I think, $35 million to develop substitute crops,
so there was a carrot-and-a-stick. The stick was the threat of a
troubled strategic relationship and the carrot was this foreign
aid bonus that was going to help these farmers produce a new
crop.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So the Turks went along and it was a very
simple battle. Nixon then declared war. He started then
manipulating the statistics downward, changing them so the public
would see the problem was getting under control. Then Watergate
intervened and all of his political plans went awry. A number of
the people that were hired for his super drug agency called DALE
became, in fact, the people that were involved in the Watergate
conspiracy itself. So, as Watergate erupted, his whole drug
program blew up and he got into a whole set of different problems
and his drug strategy went away. But the DEA, long after the
klieg lights were turned off and the correspondents went home,
was still fighting the war on drugs and we went to Nixon to Ford
and Carter. They had greatly expanded operational funds and a
greatly expanded establishment.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">What the first war of drugs seemed to have
produced, on balance, was a worsening of America's drug problem.
The attempted interdiction failed - not only did it fail, it
worsened the drug problem. Why do I say this, because it's a
fairly strong conclusion? It's one I reached by looking at it.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">The United States applied a very simple law
enforcement model to a complex global commodity trade. Let me
look at those words now. What's a law enforcement model? Okay.
You've got a prostitute or a group of prostitutes operating on a
street corner in a brothel. You raid them, you put them in jail,
you stop prostitution. It can be done. You've got somebody, let's
say, more localized - running peep shows. Close them down. There
goes peep shows. You've got people doing, let's say, stealing
cars and cutting up auto parts - well, you can handle that. It's
localized. It's within police capacities. This is a simple thing.
This is a small business, being run by a limited number of
definable vice entrepreneurs. They are subject to an enforcement
operation which can wipe out their business.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">This is not true of narcotics. The variables,
the points of pressure are global. We can't control them all. For
two centuries now we've had integration of the first world demand
for drugs, initially legal and now illegal - people in this
society, and they're different people at different times, take
illicit drugs. They take coca and opiate based products. They
take cocaine and heroin and they have now for centuries. So this
well-established demand for drugs, which save for the disruption
of war has never gone away, it's just constant, there's a market
here, has been tied into the complex political economy of the
highland regions of the Andes and the southern Asian mountain
rim. You're not talking about small localized areas. You're
talking about the whole Andes, from Bolivia all the way through
to Ecuador for coca. In Asia, for opium, when you actually look
at a map, you're looking at almost a unitary drug zone that
ranges for nearly 5,000 miles across the southern rim of Asia. It
starts in the rest in the Anatolia plateau of Turkey, it then
goes into Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Burma, Thailand, Laos,
and once upon a time North Vietnam but not any more. It runs
right across the whole southern rim of the Asian land mass. So
when Nixon came into Anatolia and wiped out the Anatolian market,
Anatolia is just one player! In fact, if you look at the
percentages, they were less than 10% of the illicit market. What
did that do?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Well, as any farmer will tell you, if Russia
doesn't produce any wheat, we're going to do very well here. We
will know about that - if we don't know about it this year, we'll
know about it next year - American farmers will get more money.
They will go out and plant more wheat - they'll have a big bumper
crop because Russia's not producing wheat, the crop's failed, the
price goes up.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Well, in the case of the Nixon drug war in
Anatolia, we wiped out illicit production in Anatolia. What
happened? The price for reliable, available illicit narcotics
shot up in the world. So Southeast Asia's Golden Triangle, which
is the world's largest supplier, met that demand. So we got then
the Southeast Asian market, which had hitherto been just
regional, coming out of the mountains of Southeast Asia to the
cities of Southeast Asia - now began to export to the United
States, let's say the northwestern United States. By 1974 in
Seattle, nearly 50% of all the drug seizures in the streets of
Seattle were from Southeast Asia. So the Nixon White House got
upset - &quot;We just wiped it out in Turkey! Let's get a
firebreak team out to Southeast Asia!&quot; So they sent a
firebreak team out to Southeast Asia, okay. They sent 40 agents
into Bangkok and they're all bankrolled to the hilt. They rented
an entire division of the Thai national police!</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">They put out the word on the streets that
anybody that sells drugs can turn the drug buyer in and, no
questions asked, they'll give him a bonus. So in Bangkok if you
were a dealer you could sell to a foreign buyer and you could
then turn around and turn them in so you get a percentage bonus
on busting this guy! They actually then put what I call a
&quot;customs shield&quot; down. The cost of expo went up because
you had all these seizures. For every kilo you're sending, maybe
you're losing one in three - we don't know how many they were
sendingexactly, but they were losing a lot. The seizures went way
up.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So, what did the drug exporters of Southeast
Asia do? Well, I wasn't privy to their councils, nobody was. My
feeling is the drug warlords of Southeast Asia sat around and
were faced with two choices: (1) they could go out of business,
but they weren't about to do that; and (2) they find a new
market.That's what they did. They found new markets and I'm sure
they thought it over like we would. Mere are only four areas of
the world that have the standards of living to support the very
high cost of international narcotics trafficking. They're North
America(Canada and the United States), Japan, Europe and
Australia. Well, the North American market was closed for reasons
we just described, so what did the exporters do? They started
exporting to Australia and Europe. Australia and Europe had no
drug problem. In 1970, Holland had maybe 800 addicts. In 1976
Holland had 10,000 addicts. And that's what happened all over
Europe. Europe's got a big drug problem. The Southeast Asian
syndicates just started shipping straight to Europe.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Australia had no drug problem in 1975. They now
have a drug problem with heroin, as large in proportion as the
United States. It came from the same period. So you suddenly have
two big new markets - not only America as your destination. Well,
meanwhile, American dealers can't get their stuff fromSoutheast
Asia so they turn to Mexico. Mexico booms, Mexico gets closed
down and then they turn to Southwest Asia - Pakistan and
Afghanistan. In short, what you get as a result of this attempt
at suppression is an elaboration of global trafficking routes -
not just one big market, America, but now three big markets -
Europe, Australia and America. And not just one major source,
Turkey, but in fact, the whole of this mountain band of Asia is
ready to supply the world. There's now been a disruption with
cocaine in Central America because of all this pressure and
there's been some disruption in Afghanistan. Southeast Asia is
now number one. In short, what we have then is an elaboration of
trafficking routes - more areas of consumption, more areas of
production, more tightly knit together so that the attempted
interdiction complicated the global trafficking to the point that
it's now beyond any interdiction effort. I would think that the
probable consequences of the Bush attempted interdiction in Latin
America will be similar. You can't predict quite how it's going
to work out, but based on what we knowfrom the Nixon drug wars,
it'll make the problem worse.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: And in your view, the enforcement
effort has been totally compromised?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: Well, yeah, the enforcement effort such
as it is. Although, you know, it's usually run by bureaucrats
that are reasonably dedicated to what they're doing. If you meet
drug agents and you talk to them about whatthey're doing, they
believe they're trying to do something good. They think that
keeping drugs out of America is a good thing to do and I think
that everybody would agree that these guys are doing an important
job. That's why we keep hiring more of them and they get killed
like Camarena in Mexico and take a lot of risks. I'm not talking
about them, okay? But what are they essentially trying to do?
What are these drug agents trying to do?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">They're trying to find out who the drug brokers
are, they're trying to get the drug brokers arrested, they're
trying to get the host government where they're operating -
whether it be Mexico or Thailand - to use their very substantial
police forces to crack down on the drug lords. The next thing
they're trying to do is to cut the connection between 'Thailand
and Mexico or Central America and the United States. So, over the
short term, they're trying to stop the drugs, make seizures,
disrupt it. Over the long term, identify the traffickers, the
brokers and their political supporters, and get these guys out of
business. That's the job of the anti-drug bureaucracy.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">It's only been a strong bureaucracy now for
about 15 years, since the Nixon war on drugs they beefed the DEA
up and it keeps getting beefed up. One of the things that will
happen as a result of the Bush drug war I expectwill be another
major expansion of the DEA. Working against that has been the
Central Intelligence Agency. Because of their mandate to stop
communism or to run a secret army in Laos or to harass the
Nicaragua government with the contra operation - because they've
had a political covert action mandate- they have found it
convenient to ally themselves with the very drug brokers the DEA
is trying to put in jail. While you're working with the CIAyou
are untouchable. The CIA backs you up. There are instances of
minor traffickers being arrested in the United States for
importing drugs and the CIA will actually go to the local police
and courts and get them off and out because oftentimes they
threaten to talk, make trouble, so the CIA just gets them out.
What the CIA does in these known instances it does more broadly.
I, for example, had reason to gather evidence based on talking to
American officials in my own inquiry that the Chief of Staff of
the Royal Laotian Army and the commander of the CIA secret army
was involved in drugs. What happened when I made this allegation?
The CIA did everything to discredit my allegations. They attacked
me. 'They didn't attack Vang Pao who was operating a heroin ring.
They didn't go after General Owen Radicone(?) who had the world's
biggest heroin operation - they went after me! They tried to
suppress my book, they threatened to murder my sources, they
spent $25 million in staging a massive opium burning by the
Nationalist Chinese forces in northern Thailand announcing they
were retiring from the drug trade. I mean, they went through all
kinds of hoops to discredit me and my allegations. They protect
these guys. While you're working with the agency, you are
protected.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">So at critical points in the history of the
international drug trade, the CIA has moved in and allied itself
with local drug brokers. Often times the brokers have been able
to use that alliance to their advantage and at a critical time
when they were making new connections, they were reaching out and
opening new markets there their whole apparatus was exposed in a
way that it won't be once they get it tied down and get the
procedures established. At this critical point they're under
protection from the CIA.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: Are there any facets of the
documentation that you developed and the evidence that you
uncovered in your research in writing The Politics of Heroin in
Southeast Asia, any new information that you've uncovered in
recent years that you might add or change regarding your original
investigations?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: The book was, for whatever reason,
pretty solid. A number of CIA people I've met since have said
that it's pretty accurate. Some of them - the only complaints
I've had are some who say that &quot;it wasn't really us in
analysis, it was really the covert action boys.&quot; It was
really what's called &quot;plans,&quot; the director of the
plans, which is one of four divisions of the CIA. A lot of agency
people who I'm sure are in intelligence analysis feel kind of
besmirched and offended, but they generally agree that it's a
pretty accurate depiction of what's going on.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: Do you think that the current war on
drugs might be used as a vehicle of U.S. intervention in foreign
countries?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: That is something I can't answer. We can
only speculate. This is a conversation, so I'll speculate. The
evidence brought out by Jonathan Marshall who's preparing a book
on cocaine in Central America - he's the op ed page editor of the
Oakland Tribune - and most recently by the New York Times, raises
real questions about the Panama operation. I mean, Noriega was
portrayed as this desperate drug lord, this satanic figure that
had to be knocked out in order for the drug war to go ahead. And
we knocked out this evil man, Noriega, and put him on trial in
Miami.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Then we put in a government which, according to
the New York Times g don't know if you saw that report) ... a
government which is, in fact, linked either personally or their
relatives are linked with the Panamanian banking industry.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Now ... why is there a big banking industry in
Panama?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Panama is a little tiny country that was
formerly a province of Colombia before the United States
separated them and built the canal. For Colombians, Panama is
just like next door. It's the old province. And yet it's not a
part of Colombia any more. So if you're a Panamanian cocaine</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">merchant, if you're the Medellin cartel or the
Cali cartel, where do you do your banking? You don't do it in
Bogota, you do it in Panama City and you do it through these big
Panamanian banks. If you've ever noticed the photographs of the
financial district of Panama City, it looks like a mini-Wall
Street or a mini4owntown Los Angeles. Why? Why in this poor
economy do you have this elaborate banking structure? It's built
from money laundering and the Endara government, as individuals -
and of his vice presidents, several of his cabinet ministers -
are an the boards of banks which have been big in the money
laundering industry. Moreover, one of Endara's key cabinet people
was actually a lawyer for one of the big drug lords of Colombia.
So what you're looking at is we replaced Manuel Noriega who is
supposedly this evil drug dealer who moved a million dollars of
drugs and made $4 million from the Medellin cartel - we replace
this guy with people who represent the Panamanian money-
laundering industry which was moving the money from the United
States to Colombia. We got rid of some petty thug, some tough guy
on the street who's stealing hubcaps, and we put the Mafia in
power.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Why? Why? I don't know yet. I mean, what it
means to me is that the whole Panamanian operation didn't have
anything to do with the drug war. I think it has to do with
essentially trying to maintain influence in Panama. And Noriega,
whatever else he was, was a nationalist who was very good at
manipulating the United States. I think that infuriated us. Just
to continue my speculative theme, my scenario - uninformed and
totally ignorant, just based at looking at Laos and then guessing
what could be going on in Colombia and Panama - my scenario would
be that the hidden history of Panama maybe reads like this:</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">You have a nationalist general who takes this
colonial creation of the United States, this country of Panama,
and gives it some dignity, a charismatic figure - General Omar
Torrijos. The United States hated Torrijos. They hated him why?
Because Torrijos was a convincing nationalist. He mobilized the
Panamanian people, he had some kind of intentional prestige, and
he forced the United States to give up our greatest jewel of
empire - the canal, which for a certain type of American is
embedded in our consciousness. I mean, what India was to the
British, what the Netherlands Indies was to Holland, the Panama
Canal is to us. That's our empire, you know, our great triumph.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">So Torrijos took away the canal and - guess
what!? - Reagan comes into office and Torrijos has an aircraft
accident.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Why? How? It's never been explained. Maybe he
was killed. The CIA runs a lot of maintenance and aircraft firms
in the Caribbean - maybe they did it. Anyhow, somebody kills
Torrijos so they're looking around for some new pliable man to
put in power to make sure they don't have trouble. So they
install Noriega and they know Noriega's reliable because they
know Noriega's been doing the drug operations for them in a small
kind of petty way. So they know they've got him. He's manageable
- he moves the drugs, he does whatever he wants, he's the
intelligence chief under Torrijos. Now he's the CIA's liaison and
perfectly reliable. What does Noriega do? He turns around and
does exactly what Torrijos did. He plays to the nationalist
crowd, he uses the drug money and the Panamanian economy to build
up an independent political base so that he's no longer
controllable. So what do we do? We stigmatize him as a drug lord,
we go in and invade, we get rid of him, we put in an ugly,
pliable government. We got rid of a man who maybe made $4 million
from drugs and we replace him with a cabinet who are
representatives of a multi-billion dollar bank-cum-money
laundering industry.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">To me the logic is not so much to get rid of
drugs but to maintain U.S. influence in a key strategic area at a
time when the Canal is about to be turned over and the Canal
still remains strategically significant for the United States. So
my hunch, my guess, my uninformed opinion is that the Panamanian
intervention has very little to do with drugs and everything to
do with U.S. power abroad We dressed up our national strategic
interest,no longer in the ball gown of anti-communism but in the
formal wear of anti-narcotics policy. We're still just
maintaining U.S. power and it's likely that the drug war is going
to have other episodes like this. Whether or not the whole drug
war will ultimately become a prisoner, a creation of U.S. global
strategic interests I don't know. It's too early to say. But
inthis particular instance the major battle in the drug war looks
very dubious.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: In your view, there will be a marked
increase and expansion of drug addiction and drug use in the
United States, Europe and Australia - Incidentally, earlier you
mentioned that the drug flow went into Europe and Australia, but
not into Japan, is that correct?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: Yes.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Barsamian: Why not?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">McCoy: The relationship between the ruling
Liberal Democratic Party (the conservatives) and the big
organized crime syndicates, which are enormous in Japan, is a
very tight one and has been historically since the end of World
War II. There's been a very close integration with the organized
crime operations and the ruling conservative party. The
conservatives have been in power now in Japan since 1948. It's
one of the longest reigns of any party anywhere in the world.
There's a kind of entente, an understanding between the
syndicates and the government - it's not rigid - but the basic
understanding is no drugs. That's the basic thing. Don't move
drugs. And the Japanese police are ruthlessly efficient. If any
of the syndicates, any of the big families - some of them have
10,000 members in them - broke this rule, the police have
sufficient mechanisms of control to punish them for it. So in
this complex politics of organized crime in Japan, they can do
prostitution, they can do all kinds of fraud, they can do many
things - but not drugs. So Japan's never opened up.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">DeGaulle had a very similar relationship with
the Corsican syndicates during his reign in the 1960s and early
1970s. The understanding was that the Corsican syndicates in
Marseilles would manufacture in Marseilles under protection. But
they would not sell in France. They would only export to the
United States. That began to break down. DeGaulle died, Pompidoux
replaced him and the Gaullists lost power, there was pressure on
the syndicates, some new groups came in and started breaking the
rule, and France wound up with a drug problem. But for
practically a decade that rule held.</font> </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_heroin_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="opiates.htm">Heroin and the opiates</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64610" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>