
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-90</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B002-290</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao5.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032247 text/html 26761
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:22:39 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:18:23 GMT
Content-length: 26543
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Use Measurement </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body>

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>Drug Use Measurement </h2>

<h3>Strengths, Limitations, and Recommendations for Improvement </h3>

<p> <b>Statement of Frederick Mulhauser, Assistant Director,
Program Evaluation and Methodology Division</b> </p>

<p> <b>GAO/T-PEMD-94-4</b> </p>

<p> <b>October 5, 1993 </b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> United States General Accounting Office </p>

<p> GAO Testimony </p>

<p> Before the Subcommittee on Legislation and National Security,
Committee on Government Operations, </p>

<p> House of Representatives </p>

<p> Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee: </p>

<p> I am pleased to respond to your invitation to testify about
the work GAO has conducted for the committee in the area of drug
use measurement.' We examined three nationally prominent drug use
studies: the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (NHSDA), the
High School Senior Survey (HSSS), and the Drug Use Forecasting
(DUF) study of booked arrestees, each cited in the President's
National Drug Control Strategy. </p>

<p> Let me discuss our findings from three perspectives: what the
studies have found, what confidence we should have in those
findings, and how drug use measurement studies could be improved,
with a particular focus on high-risk populations. In brief, all
three studies show a decreasing trend in the overall rate of
marijuana use. Since 1985, NHSDA and HSSS have also estimated a
decreasing trend in the overall use of cocaine. DUF data, on the
other hand, have described an overall stable, high rate of
cocaine use among booked arrestees during the first 4 years of
the study (1987-90). The use patterns for heroin and other
opiates are less clearly identified, due to the problems
experienced in obtaining access to users of these drugs. Thus,
the three studies produce information regularly on marijuana and
cocaine use, but we still do not have adequate prevalence
measures of heroin usage in the United States. This is a serious
problem in light of recent increases in heroin availability and
purity, and decreases in the price charged for this drug. </p>

<p> What confidence can we have in the studies' estimates? We
believe that both NHSDA and HSSS have been important in the
development of national drug control strategies, since they
represent our most highly sophisticated drug prevalence studies
to date. We did, however, find a number of limitations. For
NHSDA, we found exclusion of groups at high risk for drug use,
problematic measurement of heroin and cocaine use, and reliance
on subject self-reports. We found that HSSS excludes dropouts and
absentees, yields questionable estimates of the drug use patterns
of nonwhite populations, does not adequately measure heroin use,
and also relies on subject self-reports. Finally, although DUF
employs an objective drug use detection technique-urinalysis--in
addition to self-reports, the study's results cannot be
generalized either to the booking facilities studied or the
geographic areas specified in DUF publications. DUF also lacks
standardization across study sites, which minimizes comparability
across these sites. In summary, we judge NHSDA and HSSS national
prevalence estimates to be conservative measures of actual drug
use patterns. In addition, our confidence in DUF results is
limited since we cannot determine the extent to which DUF drug
use findings actually characterize the population of booked
arrestees housed in each locality. </p>

<p> What recommendations can we make for improving drug
prevalence measurement? We focused our efforts along two lines of
work: (1) enhancing the NHSDA, HSSS, and DUF studies; and (2)
developing new methods for studying high-risk groups. Promising
methodologies, such as hair analysis, deserve exploration as less
intrusive means than urinalysis to validate self-reports. Hair
analysis can also determine drug use over a more extended period
of time, while urinalysis detection is typically restricted to
the initial 12 to 96 hours following use. Expanding the
subsamples of current surveys and conducting new studies aimed at
hard-to-reach groups should improve the coverage of
underrepresented, high-risk target populations. </p>

<p> Let me now give you the details of our findings and
recommendations, as well as highlight specific implications for
the development of a national drug control strategy. </p>

<p> <u>DRUG USE PATTERNS OF TARGETED GROUPS IN NHSDA, HSSS, AND
DUF</u> </p>

<p> As already noted, each of these surveys reported a decline in
the overall rate of marijuana use. Between 1979 and 1990, the
NHSDA past year rate decreased from 18 to 10 percent, while the
HSSS yearly rate decreased from 51 to 27 percent. During 1987-90,
the DUF booked-arrestee marijuana rate declined from 36 to 19
percent, based on urinalysis test results. </p>

<p> NHSDA and HSSS have demonstrated declines in the overall rate
of cocaine use between 1985 and 1990. The NHSDA yearly rate
decreased from 6 to 3 percent, and the HSSS yearly rate decreased
from 13 to 5 percent. Cocaine use among booked arrestees
participating in the DUF study, however, remained high during the
period 1987 to 1990. In 1987, 46 percent of all those tested by
urinalysis procedures were found to be positive. Three years
later, the rate was still above 40 percent (43 percent). This
points up the need to develop appropriate cocaine treatment
strategies for specific target populations in our national drug
control strategies. </p>

<p> NHSDA has not been a useful tool for tracking heroin use, nor
was it expected to be given that heroin users frequently do not
live in typical household settings. Through 1990, the National
Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) judged both the pastmonth and
past-year use estimates to be too imprecise to publish. HSSS
publishes separate heroin and other opiate use rates on an
ongoing basis. For 1979-90, the high school senior rate of
pastyear heroin use remained stable at less than 1 percent; the
rate for other opiate use varied around the 5-percent level. DUF
provides a combined score for heroin and other opiate use, <b>based
</b>on urinalysis testing. During the period of study, 1987-90,
the DUF heroin and other opiate use rate dropped from 14 to 10
percent. </p>

<p> <u>STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THE THREE STUDIES</u> </p>

<p> <u>National Household Survey on Drug Abuse</u> </p>

<p> Six particular strengths are emphasized in our report: <u>(1)
</u>project management skills; (2) national population coverage;
(3) high screening and interview completion rates; (4) inclusion
of all major illicit drug types, as well as alcohol and tobacco;
(5) statistical determination of drug use patterns and trends;
and (6) use of cognitive laboratory procedures to assess more
effective, user-friendly ways of acquiring drug use data. </p>

<p> Four selected limitations are discussed here in greater
detail because of their implications for drug use measurement and
the development of a national drug control policy. </p>

<p> <u>The Accuracy of Subject Self-Reports</u> </p>

<p> NHSDA findings rely entirely on the honesty of subject self
reports. Recent studies (1985-91) provide mixed evidence
regarding the accuracy of drug use self-reports. Some studies
have confirmed the validity of the self-report method. Others
found particular groups providing inaccurate responses (for
example, arrestees, pregnant females, and discharged clients).
Underreporting of the more socially disapproved drugs has also
been noted. </p>

<p> The accuracy of self-reported responses for household
respondents in NHSDA has never been effectively evaluated,
despite the high price tag associated with the study
(approximately $12 million in 1991). We therefore cannot be sure
of the veracity of subject responses, particularly as related to
the more stigmatized, or socially disapproved, drugs (for
example, heroin and cocaine). </p>

<p> <u>Problems In Heroin Measurement</u> </p>

<p> NHSDA includes few subjects who have indicated use of heroin
either during the past month or during the past year. In part,
this reflects the relatively low prevalence rate of heroin use in
this country. But it is also a function of the fact that heroin
users are frequently not situated in the household environment or
are excluded from the sample because they are transients. In
1990, only 1 Hispanic male, 7 black males, and 13 white males
indicated using heroin in the past year. During the same time
period, there were only 4 Hispanic females, 3 black females, and
4 white females who indicated heroin use. The generalization of
NHSDA results to various subgroups of the population is therefore
impractical given these limited numbers. </p>

<p> Nevertheless, in 1991, 142,000 heroin users were nationally
estimated based on projections from one 79-year-old woman
participating in the survey, and 32 percent of the annual heroin
users were judged to be older than age 60 based on projections
from just seven heroin-using subjects. </p>

<p> Given national concerns about a potential increase in the
heroin use rate, it is imperative that additional data sets be
integrated to track the prevalence and incidence rates of this
drug. Policy planners cannot rely on NHSDA for good documentation
of heroin use. </p>

<p> <u>Problems in Cocaine Measurement</u> </p>

<p> In the 1990 NHSDA, the number of individuals said to be using
cocaine &quot;once a week&quot; or more was estimated at 662,000.
In 1991, this estimate increased to 855,000, indicating a jump of
almost 200,000 weekly cocaine users within a single year. This
sharp increase has been taken as one indicator of the need to
fight a &quot;two-front drug war&quot;: one with casual,
recreational users; the other with more hard-core, frequent
users. However, the 855,000 estimate was subsequently shown to be
incorrect. Due to imputation problems, the National Institute on
Drug Abuse (NIDA) revised the 1991 user population estimate,
first from 855,000 down to 654,000 and then to 625,000, implying
that the frequency of weekly cocaine users in NHSDA had, in fact,
not risen between 1990 and 1991. obviously, greater quality
control procedures need to be in place to catch errors of such
significant policy relevance. </p>

<p> Questions have also been raised about the validity of
national estimates of &quot;frequent&quot; cocaine users. In
1990, 41 percent of the survey's past-month cocaine users did not
initially indicate use of the drug during this time period. The
contractor subsequently modified their responses to eliminate
contradictory results. However, the procedures for modifying a
subject's response pattern are not believed to be entirely
justifiable. </p>

<p> <u>Frequency of NHSDA Survey Administration</u> </p>

<p> The Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 requires that the extent of
alcohol and drug abuse among the general population be assessed
annually. (NIDA had been conducting the NHSDA every 2 to 3 years
previous to 1990.) A yearly data collection strategy is
questionable for three reasons: (1) the 1991 total cost
allocation was sizable, at $11.5 million; (2) prevalence rate
changes have been minimal between survey administrations; and (3)
hard-core, frequent drug users are often not found in the
household environment. </p>

<p> <u>The High School Senior Survey</u> </p>

<p> Five particular strengths are highlighted in our report: </p>

<p> (1) HSSS is managed by a distinguished group of social
scientists at the University of Michigan who have guided the
project since its inception in 1975; (2) a sophisticated design
is utilized to obtain between 15,000 and 19,000 participating
seniors each year, drawn from between 120 and 140 public and
private schools; (3) the refusal rate among available students
has consistently been less than 1 percent; (4) all illicit drug
types, as well as alcohol, tobacco, and steroids, are considered;
and (5), as in NHSDA, statistical tests have been used to
determine whether there have been significant score changes
between survey administrations. </p>

<p> Five limitations potentially affecting the validity of HSSS,
and thereby the development of national drug policy, are
highlighted in our report. </p>

<p> <u>The Accuracy of Subject Self-Reports</u> </p>

<p> Like NHSDA, HSSS has not assessed the accuracy of
selfreported drug use against objective criteria. While the study
investigators provide reasonable self-report correlative evidence
that the findings may be valid, an &quot;honesty&quot; survey
question shows that high school senior lifetime drug use
estimates for marijuana, heroin, and the amphetamines may be
understated. As in the case of NHSDA, objective confirmation of
the accuracy of HSSS is needed. </p>

<p> <u>Exclusion of High School Dropouts</u> </p>

<p> By design, dropouts have not been included in the sampling
frame of HSSS since the inception of the study in 1975. Since
they are thought to have higher rates of drug use than students
in school, this implies some underestimation of drug use rates
among the age cohort of high school seniors. Correction factors
introduced by project officials have not been universally
accepted. In fiscal year 1992, NIDA awarded a 5-year grant to
HSSS investigators to study drug use among dropouts. </p>

<p> <u>Exclusion of School Absentees</u> </p>

<p> The HSSS field staff does not engage in follow-up school
visits because of costs and logistics. As a result, students
absent on the day of the survey administration are excluded from
participation. According to the coprincipal investigators,
absentees constitute approximately 17 to 23 percent of enrolled
students. HSS is therefore missing about one in five students
because of absenteeism. Drug correction factors have been based
on the assumption that absenteeism is a fairly random event and
thus the absentee patterns of those present (at the time of the
survey) represent those who are absent. This assumption, while
plausible, has not been confirmed. </p>

<p> <u>School Nonparticipation and Replacement</u> </p>

<p> The school nonparticipation rate has tended to be between 20
and 40 percent. Since school officials do not indicate school
drug problems as a reason for nonparticipation, the assumption
has been made that no drug bias occurs in the school replacement
process. This conclusion too has never been empirically proven. </p>

<p> <u>Minority Drug Use Estimates</u> </p>

<p> Drug use estimates for nonwhite seniors have traditionally
not been reported on a yearly basis in HSSS press releases and
publications. Nor have safeguard procedures been adopted to
ensure the representativeness of minority groups in the HSSS
survey sample. As a result, annual nonwhite drug use patterns
among high school seniors over the years have remained unclear. </p>

<p> <u>Drug Use Forecasting</u> </p>

<p> Four strengths of DUF are highlighted in our report: (1)
establishment of a much needed drug use data base at the local
level; (2) resort to an objective drug use criteria, rather than
reliance on subject self-reports; (3) high urinalysis
participation rates; and (4) use of a centralized laboratory to
minimize potential specimen test biases. </p>

<p> I will discuss three of the principal DUF limitations in my
testimony today. The full range of significant limitations are
detailed in our report. </p>

<p> <u>Geographic Site Variations</u> </p>

<p> DUF collects self-report interviews and urinalysis specimens
from booked arrestees at central booking facilities. These
participating facilities, however, often serve very different
geographical areas. Some facilities serve an entire city; others
part of a city, a central city plus additional cities, an entire
county, or parts of a county. These differences are not made
clear in DUF publications. Based on annual reports, the
impression is created that drug use findings are generated for
entire cities, when in fact this is not always the case. Criminal
justice planners and decision makers must therefore exercise
caution in using these data for the development of overall city
and county drug policies. </p>

<p> <u>Subject Sampling Procedure</u> </p>

<p> DUF has not been able to demonstrate a representative sample
of booked arrestees either at the central booking facility level
or in the geographic locales highlighted in DUF reports. The
sampling procedures, as described in the DUF procedures manual,
are not being followed closely by all sites. </p>

<p> <u>Privacy in the Interview Situation</u> </p>

<p> Not all facilities use a private office for arrestee
interviews. Subjects have been interviewed in hallways traversed
regularly by police department personnel; in small alcoves, with
a police officer standing guard at the entrance; or through the
bars of a holding cell, in close proximity to other arrestees.
Under such conditions, there is a potential for underreporting
drug use, particularly since arrestees are awaiting arraignment
before a judge. (Though pledges of confidentiality are given,
arrestees may not fully believe them.) Urinalysis rates, however,
should not be affected. </p>

<p> <u>RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF DRUG PREVALENCE
ESTIMATES</u> </p>

<p> <u>Enhancing the NHSDA, HSSS, and DUF Studies</u> </p>

<p> In our report, we recommend to the Congress: </p>

<p> -- That part A of title V of the Public Health Service Act be
amended to provide that the Secretary of Health and Human
Services collect survey data only biennially, rather than each
year, on the national prevalence of the various forms of
substance abuse among high school students and among the general
population. But if local or regional indicators portend an
increase in drug use, then the Secretary should have the
authority to initiate new or augment current studies to determine
the nature and degree of the problem. </p>

<p> Implementation of this recommendation can result in an NHSDA
savings of approximately $13 million per year, based on 1993 cost
estimates, if the current methodology is maintained. A portion of
this cost-savings could be usefully applied toward studying the
drug use patterns of those high-risk groups disproportionately
impacting criminal justice and health system resources,
field-testing new methodologies, and validating our current
measures and findings. </p>

<p> We also recommended that the Secretary of Health and Human
Services: </p>

<p> -- Give high priority to validating self-reports of the use
of illicit drugs, particularly focusing on objective techniques
such as hair testing. Hair testing has received publicity both in
the United States and abroad because of its potential to
distinguish the use of illicit drugs in hair specimens for
extended periods of time. At present, we conclude that hair
analysis has sufficient scientific merit to justify its use in
self-report validation field trials. (This should not be
construed to mean that we also support hair analysis in
employment testing and court testimony, for which maximal
precision would be required.) A hair validation study of four
drug types, involving 2,000 subjects, using both a hair screen
and a confirmatory test, would cost approximately $150,000
(including subject payment incentives), a relatively small
allocation compared to the $13 million cost of conducting just
one round of NHSDA. </p>

<p> -- Develop or improve supplementary data sources to more
appropriately determine heroin and cocaine prevalence patterns
and trends. </p>

<p> In 1991, NHSDA was expanded beyond just a household survey to
include the sheltered homeless, civilians on military bases, and
residents of college dormitories. These target populations,
however, do not encompass the totality of heroin and cocaine
users. If we are to more accurately judge the prevalence of
heroin and cocaine use in this country, we must come up with
ingenious ways of identifying and accessing the relevant
population groups (that is, those living in institutional and
noninstitutional quarters and on the streets), as well as devise
ways to prevent double counting (for example, of a homeless
person formerly living in public housing). </p>

<p> -- Incorporate methodological design changes into HSSS so
that nonwhite individuals are adequately sampled. </p>

<p> Nonwhite annual drug use rates have typically not been
discussed in HSSS reports because of methodological study
concerns. We therefore know little about minority drug use rates
at the high school level and their contribution to overall
national drug prevalence patterns. If we are to plan prevention
and treatment strategies aimed at this diverse subgroup, we must
certainly ascertain the nature and extent of their drug use on a
more timely basis. </p>

<p> -- Retain the current design of NHSDA to provide national
estimates only (and not expand the design to provide state-level
estimates of drug use). </p>

<p> Expanding NHSDA to the state level would be too costly, given
other drug area priorities. The Department of Health and Human
Services and NIDA have estimated a cost of about $110 million for
state-level survey expansion. Such an effort would also duplicate
other already existing studies being conducted in multiple
states. </p>

<p> Further, we recommended that the Director of the National
Institute of Justice review the practicality of improving the DUF
design, such as by using a standardized methodology across sites;
and give priority to creating a DUF arrestee data base that can
be generalized to booked arrestees in the geographic areas
surveyed. </p>

<p> The development of generalizable findings requires several
stages of decision making. First, the geographic unit of study
must be clarified. (For example, if cities are the relevant unit,
then county data from outside city boundaries must be excluded.)
Second, central booking facilities must be chosen that adequately
represent a cross section of arrestees being detained in that
geographic unit. (This may involve the selection of one or more
booking facilities.) Third, a sample of arrestees must be
obtained from each booking facility to yield an appropriate cross
section of that facility's arrestees. </p>

<p> <u>Developing New Methods for Studying High-Risk Groups</u> </p>

<p> Since NHSDA and HSSS do not sufficiently measure drug use
among high-risk target groups, supplementary methods must be
conceptualized, field-tested, and implemented if we are to better
understand drug prevalence rates and trends among these groups. </p>

<p> Until recently, only modest efforts were being made in this
area. But momentum is building. We have already discussed NIJ's
pioneering work with booked arrestees. Particularly over the past
3 years, NIDA has been active in sponsoring studies aimed at
identifying, gaining access to, and interviewing individuals at
high risk for substance abuse. The Washington, D.C., Metropolitan
Area Drug Study (DC*MADS) was designed to develop prototype
methodologies in the Washington, D.C., area for replication in
other metropolitan areas. High-risk groups in the study include
the homeless and transient populations, school dropouts, juvenile
and adult offenders, and the institutionalized. NIDA intends to
publish methodological, substantive reports in 1993 describing
the procedures adopted in the field experiments, success levels
achieved, and resultant drug use findings. It is premature at
this time for us to comment on the utility of the various
methodologies for obtaining drug use data from these high-risk
groups. However, transference to other metropolitan areas is
certainly going to be a function of study costs. Budget
submissions in September 1990 to the Office of Management and
Budget for initial study were quite high (for example, for the
homeless and transient study, $883,628; for the school dropout
study, $576,033; and for the adult offender study, $577,550). </p>

<p> NIDA funded a 5-year grant award to the University of
Michigan's HSSS investigators aimed at following up a national
cohort of 8th and 10th graders every 2 years to learn more about
the drug use of school dropouts. It is also too soon to comment
on the effectiveness of this study, given that the award was made
in fiscal year 1992. The direct costs of this study range from
$319,000 in the first year of the grant to $619,000 in the fifth
year. </p>

<p> The Senate Committee on the Judiciary and the Office of
National Drug Control Policy have sought to estimate the number
of hard-core and heavy cocaine users through secondary analyses
of existing data bases. Ethnographic street studies have been
incorporated in high-risk group prevalence estimation efforts, as
have nominative techniques and a wide range of traditional
operations research procedures. These types of studies are still
in their early stages of development with respect to drug use,
requiring much more elaboration and specificity, but are
certainly worthy of continued attention and funding. </p>

<p> To undertake such work on high-risk groups in an orderly,
scientific manner, we recommended that the Secretary of Health
and Human Services </p>

<p> -- conduct a systematic program for the study of drug
prevalence rates among underrepresented, high-risk groups. </p>

<p> It is not sufficient for agencies to engage ad hoc in
singular studies of specific high-risk groups. Given the
impingement of these groups on the health care delivery system,
policymakers and health officials must have comprehensive data
bases from which to plan needed prevention and intervention
strategies. </p>

<p> Mr. Chairman, this concludes my remarks. I would be happy to
answer any questions you or Members of the Subcommittee may have.
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>