
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-9</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B023-235</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140157 text/html 46692
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:01:46 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:09 GMT
Content-length: 46474
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>CHAPTER 2 INTRODUCTION </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE
ABUSE AND ADDICTION </b> </p>

<p> <b>US Government Office of Technology Assessment</b> </p>

<p> October 18, 1994 </p>

<p> <b>CHAPTER 2 INTRODUCTION </b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> Substance abuse and addiction are pervasive in our society,
with their consequences felt by people in every economic, social,
racial, and political boundary. </p>

<p> The United States has grappled with problems associated with
substance abuse and addiction for over a century (see appendix A
and table 2-1). In 1986, then-President Ronald Reagan launched
what has become known as the war on drugs. Federal spending to
combat drugs increased from $1.5 billion in 1981 to more than $12
billion in 1994, with spending in 1995 projected to pass the $13
billion mark (see table 2-2). Nearly two-thirds of the federal
antidrug budget goes toward efforts to curb the supply of drugs
(e.g., border interdiction, law enforcement), with the remainder
being spent on drug treatment and prevention programs. While the
use of illegal drugs has declined in the United States in recent
years, a vigorous debate continues as to whether the nation is
indeed winning the war on drugs, and what the balance of federal
effort should be in formulating programs to decrease the supply
of drugs, treat drug abusers and addicts, and educate Americans
about problems associated with drug abuse and addiction. </p>

<p> Congress has enacted a number of laws in an attempt to create
a national policy to fight the scourge of drug abuse and
addiction. As part of oversight responsibility for national drug
policy, several committees of Congress have requested the Office
of Technology Assessment (OTA) to undertake a study addressing
the socioeconomic, psychological, physiological, and genetic
underpinnings of substance abuse and addiction (see table 2-3). </p>

<p> OTA has been asked to address a number of questions: </p>

<ul>
    <li> o What are the root causes of substance abuse and
        addiction? </li>
    <li> o Why and how does addiction occur? </li>
    <li> o Who are the substance abusers? </li>
    <li> o What factors, scientific and social, lead to
        addiction? </li>
    <li> o What are the implications for prevention? </li>
</ul>

<p> ROOT CAUSES </p>

<p> At the outset, OTA was asked to address the root causes of
substance abuse and addiction. The term root causes has been used
in political discussions and debate (see box 2-1), and although
many people have strongly held opinions as to what constitutes
the root causes of drug abuse, no consensus exists as to what, if
anything, is inherent in every case of substance abuse and
addiction. OTA conducted a search of various bibliographic
databases, which revealed only limited discussion about root
causes of drug abuse (2). </p>

<p> Research into drug abuse looks not at root causes per se, but
rather at risk and protective factors that increase or decrease
the possibility that substance abuse and addiction will occur
(see table 2-4), and how these risk and protective factors affect
various subpopulations in different settings. </p>

<p> WHAT ARE SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND ADDICTION? </p>

<p> Drug consumption is divided into three levels or stages
commonly distinguished by clinicians and researchers: use, abuse,
and dependence (see figure 2-1). Each of these stages is, on
average, more hazardous, more obtrusive, and more likely to
provoke or induce social interventions (e.g., punitive sanctions,
attention by prevention programs, admission to treatment) than
the one before (4). A substance is abusable if it has the
capacity to induce dependence in those who use it. Dependence, a
term that is often used interchangeably with the term addiction,
can include psychological dependence (a form of obsessive
behavior whose objective is the attainment of pleasure or the
avoidance of unpleasantness) and physical dependence (development
of tolerance, causing the user to need increasing amounts of the
drug for it to have its desired effect, and withdrawal symptoms
if drug use is stopped) (5). </p>

<p> Nevertheless, there is considerable controversy about what
constitutes substance abuse and addiction. A number of issues
come into play, such as: </p>

<p> o What substance is being used? A wide range of psychoactive
substances has the potential for abuse (see box 2-2). The
possession and use of several substances--such as marijuana,
heroin, cocaine--are illegal in all 50 states. Other addictive
substances--such as tobacco and alcohol--may be legally
purchased, possessed, and consumed by a majority of Americans.
Other abusable substances--such as inhalants-- may be legally
purchased, possessed, and consumed by anybody. </p>

<p> o Does experimental use constitute abuse? Some maintain that
any use of an abusable or addictive substance constitutes abuse.
Others suggest that experimentation-- particularly with such
psychoactive substances as alcohol or tobacco that are available
for purchase by adults of legal age--is part of normal
development and does not necessarily have harmful consequences. </p>

<p> o In what context are substance abuse and addiction being
addressed? Four broad arenas that encounter substance abuse
related issues include: mass communications, criminal justice,
medicine, and public health. These entities often operate
independently of one another, and use substantially different
terms when describing the use of illicit substances or the
illegal use of licit substances (see appendix C). </p>

<p> Public Health Model </p>

<p> The traditional public health model incorporates the host-
agent-environment relationship. Each of these factors has an
individual, as well as an interrelated role in the potential use
and/or harmful use of a substance. Host factors may include
possible genetic, psychological, and biological susceptibility.
Agent factors incorporate the substance's abuse liability
capacity, as well as how the substance is marketed. Lastly,
environmental factors encompass not only the availability of the
substance, but the social, cultural, political, and economic
climate as well. The focus of the public health perspective is to
understand the importance social norms, environment, and
availability play in the shaping of alcohol- and drug-related
problems both on an individual and societal level. </p>

<p> The public health approach toward substance abuse has several
defining characteristics: </p>

<p> o The substance abuse problem is primarily one of health, and
risks for ill-health. In every recreational, mood- altering drug
user, use increases the risk of contracting one or more diseases
or conditions damaging to one's health. Drug use always creates
the potential, from great to small, for developing one or more
drug-related health problems. </p>

<p> o The legality or illegality of a drug is an artificial
barrier that is not as relevant as the health-related
considerations stemming from all types of drug use. Rather than
using legal/illegal, the public health approach categorizes drugs
by such characteristics as addictive potential and long-term
health risks. </p>

<p> o The drug abuse problem and the drug-related crime problem
are not one and the same. As two distinct, interrelated problems,
they have different, interrelated solutions. </p>

<p> o Dealing with the drug problem primarily as a moral problem
is considered inappropriate and counterproductive. </p>

<p> Medical Model </p>

<p> Within the fields of medicine, the two most frequently cited
texts for the definitions of substance abuse and dependence are
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)
issued by the American Psychiatric Association and used widely in
American medical practice, and the International Classification
of Diseases (ICD) published by the World Health Organization
(WHO). </p>

<p> The current ICD and DSM definitions of substance dependence
are nearly identical. However, the two manuals differ sharply on
the concepts of abuse, which DSM classifies as a maladaptive
pattern of substance use leading to impairment or distress, as
manifested by one or more of several events occurring over the
same 12-month period (e.g., failure to fulfill major role
obligations at work, school, or home; recurrent substance-related
legal problems, such as arrests for substance-related disorderly
conduct. The current ICD-10 category of harmful use, while
applicable cross-culturally, is limited to a pattern of
psychoactive substance use that is causing damage to health. The
damage may be physical, as in cases of hepatitis from the
self-administration of injected drugs, or mental, such as
episodes of depressive disorder secondary to heavy consumption of
alcohol (see appendix C for a full discussion of DSM and ICD
definitions). </p>

<p> Criminal Justice Model </p>

<p> While it is well-known that many crimes are committed by
persons with substance use disorders and that these disorders can
be major contributors to their crimes, the criminal justice
system has no systematic policy for the evaluation of these
disorders. In many jurisdictions, whether federal, state, or
local, the prevailing sentiment is that any use of an illicit
substance and/or use of a licit substance in an illegal manner is
considered criminal abuse. A limited set of quantitative analyses
including blood, urine, and breath tests can be performed to
detect illegal levels of alcohol and/or the presence of illicit
substances. Besides the limited amount of testing and evaluation,
psychological screening examinations or structured interviews are
used infrequently to determine the level and severity of use,
abuse, or dependence. </p>

<p> For purposes of this report, OTA does not adopt any single
definition for the terms substance abuse or substance
addiction/dependence. The focus of this report, the underlying
causes of substance abuse and addiction, relates to each of the
definitions discussed above. </p>

<p> MAGNITUDE OF THE PROBLEM </p>

<p> The abuse of licit and illicit drugs represents a major
public health problem in the United States. Abuse of alcohol and
other drugs has been associated with many problems (see figure
2-2) costing Americans an estimated $144.1 billion annually. </p>

<p> Federal survey data estimate that 11.4 million Americans aged
12 and older used illegal drugs in 1992, continuing a steady
decline from a peak of 24 million in 1979. Findings from the 1992
National Household Survey found the following about specific
drugs: </p>

<p> o Illegal drugs. Since 1979, overall rates of current use
(defined as use within the last 30 days) have dropped in all age
groups, except those aged 35 and older, whose use of drugs has
remained level. This has resulted in a general shift in the age
distribution of illegal drug users. In 1992, 23 percent of
illegal drug users were aged 35 and older, compared with only 10
percent in 1979. </p>

<p> o Cocaine. The number of cocaine users decreased 31 percent
from 1.9 million users in 1991 to 1.3 million in 1992. This is
down from a peak of 5.8 million in 1985. The number of occasional
users (defined as those who used the drug in 1992 but less often
than monthly) also continued a sharp decline from 4.3 million in
1991 to 3.4 million in 1992. This is down from a peak of 8.6
million in 1985. Frequent use of cocaine (defined as use on a
weekly basis) remained unchanged between 1991 and 1992. In fact,
no significant change has occurred in this number since it was
first estimated in 1985. </p>

<p> o Marijuana. This is the most common illegal drug--used by 78
percent of all illegal drug users in 1992. </p>

<p> o Other illegal drugs. No major changes in the prevalence of
the use of hallucinogens, such as lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD) and phencyclidine (PCP), between 1991 and 1992. The survey
estimates that approximately 1.8 million Americans have used
heroin at least once. However, the data on these categories are
somewhat unreliable, as these users are less likely to be
contacted and reported in a household survey. </p>

<p> o Alcohol. In 1992, approximately 98 million persons over the
age of 12 had used alcohol in the last month, which is
approximately 48 percent of the population aged 12 and older.
This number is down from an estimated high of 106 million
drinkers in 1988. The number of heavy drinkers (defined as having
five or more drinks per occasion on five or more days in the past
month) has remained steady at an estimated 9 million people. </p>

<p> o Tobacco. An estimated 54 million Americans were smokers in
1992, a rate of 26 percent of the population aged 12 and older.
Cigarette smoking has declined since 1988, when an estimated 57
million Americans smoked cigarettes. </p>

<p> o Smokeless tobacco. An estimated 7.5 million Americans used
smokeless tobacco in 1992, the vast majority of whom (7.1
million) were males. </p>

<p> o Inhalants. The use of inhalants (e.g., gasoline, glue, and
nitrites) dropped slightly in 1992 as compared to 1991. </p>

<p> o Prescription drugs. The estimated current nonmedical use of
psychotherapeutics (sedatives, tranquilizers, stimulants, or
analgesics) dropped from 1991 to 1992. </p>

<p> The survey also provides demographic variables useful to
understanding substance use and abuse in the United States (see
box 2-3). However, these figures, as all data on drug use, are
suspect. Most surveys have strengths and weaknesses, which have
led stakeholders and policymakers to make widely divergent
conclusions based on the same sets of data. </p>

<p> MEASURING SUBSTANCE USE AND ABUSE </p>

<p> Like the old fable about blind men describing an elephant,
individual drug statistics usually tell us only part of the story
(13). Each survey provides useful information, but at the same
time, each survey is flawed. Currently, no single measurement can
by itself describe drug use and abuse in all its complexity.
Nonetheless, several useful indicators do provide information to
policymakers. </p>

<p> Three major national drug monitoring systems are the primary
data source for this review: The National Household Survey on
Drug Abuse (the Household Survey), the National Survey of High
School Seniors (the Seniors Survey), and the Drug Abuse Warning
Network (DAWN). These continuing data series have been sponsored
by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) since the 1970s.
Supplementary data sources include the few small area studies
that compare drug use by poverty or income status and the Drug
Use Forecasting System (DUF), sponsored by the National Institute
of Justice, which provides quarterly estimates of drug use among
the criminal population in selected cities. </p>

<p> National Household Survey on Drug Abuse </p>

<p> Since 1974, NIDA has commissioned the Household Survey every
one to three years. The survey is based on a multistage random
sample of the household population in the 48 contiguous United
States. The sample excludes persons living in group quarters,
including institutions, prisons, military quarters, and college
dormitories, and those with no permanent address, including the
homeless. </p>

<p> Since 1985, a number of enhancements have been made to the
Household Survey. In 1985, blacks and Hispanics were oversampled
to provide additional cases for subgroup analyses, and new
measures of drug use frequency were introduced to identify
persons who used drugs monthly and weekly during the previous
year. In 1991, special supplementary samples were added for six
metropolitan areas with highly publicized drug problems.
Similarly, reports published since the early 1980s provide
greater detail on the demographic characteristics of users by
frequency of use. </p>

<p> National Survey of High School Seniors </p>

<p> Every year since 1975 researchers at the University of
Michigan have surveyed a nationally representative sample of
approximately 16,000 high school seniors. Beginning in 1976, a
followup survey of members from each graduating class, including
an over-sampling of drug users, has been conducted by mail. In
1990, the followup sample included young adults aged 19 to 32. </p>

<p> Drug Abuse Warning Network </p>

<p> DAWN, established in 1972, is the federal government's major
data system for tracking patterns and trends in the serious
health consequences of drug use. DAWN reports include statistics
on the total number of hospital emergency room visits (episodes),
separate counts of the number of drugs mentioned per episode
(drug mentions), and drug-related deaths. </p>

<p> Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, the DAWN program focused
primarily on data from emergency rooms and medical examiners in
27 metropolitan areas. The selection of reporting facilities,
over 700 emergency rooms and 87 medical examiners by 1989, was
not random, however, and the number of facilities reporting
varied from year to year, with facilities in metropolitan areas
being overrepresented. Beginning in 1990, DAWN implemented a
national probability sample for the collection of drug-related
emergency room visit data to allow reporting of national as well
as metropolitan area information. </p>

<p> Drug Use Forecasting System </p>

<p> DUF, initiated in 1988 by the Department of Justice, provides
estimates of drug use among booked arrestees in selected cities
based on urinalysis tests. The tests, administered shortly after
arrest, measure very recent drug use among lawbreakers. Four
times a year, samples of about 250 male adult arrestees in
participating cities are tested; some areas also test female
arrestees and juveniles. The proportion of persons arrested
explicitly on drug charges is limited to 25 percent of the total
sample. </p>

<p> Limitations of the Data </p>

<p> The national drug monitoring surveys have several limitations
for studying drug use, abuse, and addiction: </p>

<p> o Most surveys rely on self-reporting. The results of such
surveys rely on the veracity of the person responding to the
survey. A major, and widely recognized, limitation in the
national surveys is that respondents may be unwilling or unable
to report their drug use accurately. Comparisons of self-report
and urinalysis results based on DUF data indicate that, among
arrestees, the tendency to underreport drug use is substantial
(12). As one Member of Congress noted, &quot;how in the hell can
you expect people who live in households to share with anybody,
let alone the government, how often they use drugs?&quot; (3). </p>

<p> o Surveys miss populations at risk for drug abuse.
TheHousehold Survey, by definition, excludes certain groups who
do not reside in households, such as the homeless and persons in
jail or prison. Although the excluded groups represent only 2
percent of the total population, drug use may be higher, or
different, among excluded groups such as the homeless and jail or
prison inmates. The Household Survey may also fail to capture
drug users within the target population. Although overall survey
response rates are high (82 percent in 1990), drugs users may
have been more difficult to locate and interview because their
lifestyles may involve irregular hours, avoiding authority, and
other behaviors that reduce the likelihood of survey response. In
addition, response rates tend to be generally lower among young
adults and residents of metropolitan and low-income areas, and
those not interviewed may be more likely to use drugs than those
who respond to the survey. </p>

<p> o Poverty indicators per se are not available. The national
drug monitoring systems contain very limited data on poverty, and
none that meet the official poverty definition (in 1991, the
poverty thresholds varied from $6,932 for a person living alone
to $27,942 for a family of nine or more members (6). The proxy
variables relating to employment, education, place of residence,
and race and ethnicity unsuccessfully separate the effects of
income from the effects of other correlated factors. Information
on drug use by income status is available only in the most recent
Household Surveys, and then only by family income without regard
to household size. More information is provided by the Household
Survey on other variables related to poverty, including
employment status, race and ethnicity, and neighborhood
characteristics. The Seniors Survey provides no income data. For
high school seniors, the only regularly reported indicators of
socioeconomic status are college plans and parental education. No
socioeconomic indicators are available for the followup sample of
young adults except current enrollment in college. Race and
ethnic status are not regularly reported for either sample, but
for high school seniors racial and ethnic patterns of drug use
are analyzed and published separately. DAWN has severe
limitations for an analysis of poverty and drug use. The only
indicators in DAWN related to poverty are race and ethnicity. No
data are available on income status of patients or the economic
status of areas served by the facility. </p>

<p> o Surveys may over- and underrepresent findings regarding
populations at risk for drug abuse. Populations at risk for both
poverty and drug abuse, for example, are excluded or
underrepresented in the major surveys and overrepresented in
reports from hospital emergency rooms. These problems mean that
the findings from these surveys are suggestive rather than
definitive (see box 2-4). </p>

<p> o Drug measures focus on use, rather than abuse or addiction.
The common measures of drug use employed by the Household and
Seniors Surveys--lifetime, past year, and past month use--are
insufficiently refined to distinguish between casual and
dependent drug use. Definitions of alcohol, drug abuse, and
dependency --such as those set forth in DSM (1)-- link the
quantity and frequency of use to indications of persistent,
uncontrolled consumption, impaired social and psychological
functioning as a result of use, and physical problems including
withdrawal symptoms. No published estimates of the number of drug
users meeting medical criteria for abuse or dependence by poverty
indicators are available, with the single exception of the DAWN
estimates of emergency room contacts for dependency, which are
reported by race and ethnicity. </p>

<p> o The surveys include few multivariate analyses. Since the
surveys do not examine variables while controlling for factors
related to drug use, an accurate link of drug use with the role
of income, race, education, and place of residence is impossible.
The dearth of such analyses results in part from sample size
limitations and in part from the fact that secondary analyses of
the national survey data have not been encouraged. </p>

<p> ORGANIZATION AND SCOPE OF THE REPORT </p>

<p> This report has four parts: necessary preconditions,
individual factors, community contexts, and policy options. </p>

<p> The first part, Necessary Preconditions (chs. 3-5), focuses
on several factors necessary for substance abuse to occur. The
second part, Individual Factors (ch. 6), explores research
conducted on risk and protective factors thought to be indicators
in assessing an individual's substance use, abuse, and addiction.
The third part, Activity Settings (chs. 7 and 8), looks at how
risk and protective factors play out in various population
subgroups and in various community settings (home, school,
workplace, recreation, and neighborhood). The fourth section,
Policy Options (ch. 9), addresses the range of legislative issues
and options for Congress arising from chapters 3 through 8. </p>

<p> This report focuses on factors that contribute to or protect
against substance abuse and addiction, and the implications for
prevention. It does not address in any depth drug treatment or
law enforcement issues and interventions. Based on the
literatures reviewed by OTA about causes and prevention, however,
it is clear that comprehensive prevention strategies will
generally need drug treatment and law enforcement components, if
they are to be effective. While drawing on data from federal
antidrug prevention programs, the effectiveness of such
approaches needs to be studied in greater depth than was possible
in this report. </p>

<p> This report is the second and final publication of this
assessment. The first publication, a background report on
Biological Components of Substance Abuse and Addiction, described
genetic, pharmacological, and abuse liability research issues
(9). Readers are also referred to earlier OTA reports that
address issues related to drug interdiction efforts (10);
alcohol, tobacco, and drug abuse prevention and services issues
in adolescent health (7); the effectiveness of drug abuse
treatment in controlling AIDS/HIV infection (11); and alternative
coca reduction strategies (8).<br>
</p>

<p> BOX 2-1: Root Causes: Two Views From the Political Arena </p>

<p> &quot;Many states and cities are on shoe-string budgets and
must provide services and alternatives to substance abuse in
local communities. The failure to address the fundamental causes
of substance abuse and to provide immediate intervention
strategies will impact city residents most... The committee
recommends that the National Drug Control Strategy be framed by
broader social and economic problems which require dramatic
reforms in order to attack the root causes of substance abuse. We
need to begin to build the infrastructure necessary to improve
the quality of treatment services by requiring medical schools to
provide comprehensive training to identify and treat substance
abusers; provide adequate treatment services at the community
level, including after care, vocational, educational, and
psychiatric assessments; and develop alternative leisure
activities for youth and adults to replace `street life' and
assist individuals to escape the drug culture.&quot; </p>

<p> House Committee on Government Operations committee report </p>

<p> &quot;One of [the Democrats'] tactics was to talk about the
root causes of drug use, the `deeper and more profound problems,'
as they put it, of homelessness, poverty, helplessness, and the
like. The elites liked this shift in emphasis, too. It took the
discussion away from moral considerations to the (for them) more
comfortable ground of social theory. They wanted to talk about
`hopelessness' as a condition caused by lack of government
involvement. We talked about hopelessness, too, but talked about
it as a condition caused by social decomposition and the
breakdown of the family and a lack of law and order in these
communities . . . I found it shocking and disappointing that when
we argued for more police, jails, courts, and prisons because of
the exploding crime epidemic in some of America's inner cities,
some people responded by saying, `But what are the root causes of
this? `That's an interesting debate which should go on at an
elite university. But if there are drug dealers going around
shooting people in the affluent suburbs, the citizenry will not
call for a seminar on root causes. They will raise hell and
demand that the dealers be arrested. And they are right to do
so.&quot; </p>

<p> William Bennett Former director, U.S. Office of National Drug
Control Policy </p>

<p> SOURCES: U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on
Government Operations, H.Rept. 101-992, &quot;The Role of Demand
Reduction in the National Drug Control Strategy&quot;; Bennett,
W., The De-Valuing of America: The Fight for Our Culture and Our
Children (New York, NY: Summitt Books, 1992).
F:\USERS\LL\SUBSTAN\BOX2-2.TXT October 7, 1994<br>
</p>

<p> BOX 2-2: Overview of Alcohol and Some Other Psychoactive
Substances <br>
</p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> ALCOHOL (ethyl alcohol) </p>

<p> Alcohol, one of the most widely used of all drugs, is a
central nervous system depressant with effects similar to those
of sedative-hypnotic compounds (see below). At low doses, alcohol
may be associated with behavioral excitation thought to be due to
the depression of inhibitory neurons in the brain. Alcohol
differs from sedative-hypnotic compounds in that it is used
primarily for recreation or social rather than medical purposes. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Beer. 2. Wine. 3. &quot;Hard&quot; liquor (e.g., whiskey,
gin).<br>
</p>

<p> SEDATIVES, HYPNOTICS, OR ANXIOLYTICS Sedative-hypnotics are
drugs of diverse chemical structure that exert a nonselective
general depressant on the central nervous system. In addition,
they reduce metabolism in a variety of tissues in the body,
depressing any system that uses energy. Depending on the dose,
any sedative hypnotic compound may be classified as a sedative
(an agent that allays excitement), a tranquilizer (an antianxiety
agent), a hypnotic (a sleep-inducing agent), or an anesthetic (an
agent that eliminates pain). Sedative-hypnotics are used
medically as sedatives, anxiolytics (antianxiety agents),
hypnotics, antiepileptics, muscle relaxants, and general
anesthetics. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Barbiturates (&quot;downers&quot; or &quot;barbs&quot;):
pentobarbital sodium[NembutalR], secobarbital sodium [SeconalR],
amobarbital [AmytalR]--taken orally. </p>

<p> 2. Nonbarbiturate hypnotics: methaqualone [QuaaludesR]--
taken orally. </p>

<p> 3. Tranquilizers: diazepam [ValiumR], chlordiazepoxide
hydrochloride [LibriumR]--taken orally.<br>
</p>

<p> CANNABIS (THC) THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) the active agent in
marijuana, alters perceptions, concentration, emotions, and
behavior, though the mechanisms of action are not entirely clear.
Researchers have found, however, that THC changes the way in
which sensory information is processed by the brain. It can be
used medically to relieve nausea and side effects of chemotherapy
in cancer patients; it is very rarely used to treat glaucoma. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Marijuana (&quot;pot&quot; or &quot;grass&quot;)--smoked
or eaten. 2. Hashish (&quot;hash&quot;)--smoked or eaten. 3.
Hashish oil (&quot;hash oil&quot;)--smoked (mixed with tobacco.
4. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-- taken orally in capsules.<br>
</p>

<p> NICOTINE Nicotine, obtained naturally from tobacco, is a
central nervous system stimulant.(c) It exerts its action
secondary to stimulation of certain cholinergic (excitatory)
synapses both within the brain and in the peripheral nervous
system. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Cigarettes. 2. Smokeless tobacco (e.g., snuff or chewing
tobacco). <br>
</p>

<p> COCAINE Cocaine, obtained naturally from coca leaves, is a
potent central nervous system stimulant.(c) It stimulates the
sympathetic nervous system, which regulates the activity of
cardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and glands. It also produces
bronchodilation in the lungs. It is used medically as a topical
anesthetic for surgical procedures. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Cocaine hydrochloride powder (&quot;coke&quot; or
&quot;street cocaine&quot;)--usually snorted or injected
intravenously.d </p>

<p> 2. Cocaine alkaloid (&quot;freebase&quot; or
&quot;crack&quot;)--smoked.e <br>
</p>

<p> AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED STIMULANTSf 1. Amphetamines
Amphetamines are a group of three closely related compounds, all
of which are potent central nervous system and behavioral
stimulants.(c) Some amphetamines are used medically to treat
attention deficit disorder or minimal brain dysfunction in
children, narcolepsy (recurrent, uncontrollable, brief episodes
of sleep), or (rarely) depression. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Amphetamine (&quot;speed&quot; or &quot;uppers&quot;
(BenzedrineR]--taken orally, injected, or snorted.(g) </p>

<p> 2. Methamphetamine (&quot;speed&quot; or &quot;crystal
meth&quot; or &quot;ice&quot;) [MethadrineR]--taken orally,
injected, or snorted.(g,h) </p>

<p> 3. Dextroamphetamine [DexedrineR]--taken orally, or injected.
<br>
</p>

<p> 2. Nonamphetamine stimulants Like amphetamines,
nonamphetamine stimulates are central nervous and behavioral
stimulants. Some non-amphetamine stimulants (e.g., PreludinR) are
used for weight control, and some (e.g., RitalinR and CylertR)
are used medically to treat hyperactivity, minimal brain
dysfunction, narcolepsy, or (rarely) depression. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Pheumetrazine hydrochloride [PreludinR]--taken orally or
injected.d </p>

<p> 2. Methylphenidate hydrochloride injected.d </p>

<p> 3. Pemoline [CylertR]--taken orally. [RitalinR]--taken
orally, or injected.(d) </p>

<p> HALLUCINOGENS Hallucinogens, or psychedelics, are a
heterogeneous group of compounds that affect a person's
perceptions, sensations, thinking, self-awareness, and
emotions.(i) </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) or
&quot;acid&quot;--taken orally or put in the eyes. </p>

<p> 2. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethylox- phenylethyl amide) or
&quot;mesc&quot; and peyote--disks chewed, swallowed, or smoked;
tablets taken orally. </p>

<p> 3. Psilocybin (&quot;magic mushrooms&quot;)--chewed and
swallowed. 4. MDMA (methylene dioxymethamphetamine)--taken
orally. </p>

<p> INHALANTS Inhalants are chemicals that produce psychoactive
vapors. Although different in makeup, nearly all of the abused
inhalants produce effects similar to those of anesthetics, which
act to slow down the body's functions or produce feelings of
dizziness. At low doses, users may feel slightly stimulated. Amyl
nitrite is used for heart patients because it dilates the blood
vessels and increases blood supply to the heart. There are no
medical indications for most of the inhalants. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Solvents (model airplane glue, nail polish remover,
lighter and cleaning fluids, and gasoline)--vapors inhaled. </p>

<p> 2. Aerosols (e.g., paints, hairsprays)--vapors inhaled. </p>

<p> 3. Some anesthetics (e.g.,nitrous oxide)--vapors inhaled. </p>

<p> 4. Amyl nitrite (&quot;snappers&quot; or &quot;poppers&quot;)
and butyl nitrite (&quot;rush&quot;)--vapors inhaled.<br>
</p>

<p> OPIATES (NARCOTICS) AND RELATED ANALGESICS Opiates are
natural or synthetic drugs that, like morphine, a substance
derived from the opium poppy, have analgesic (pain-relieving)
properties. Heroin is not approved for medical uses in the United
States. The major medical use of other opiates is for the relief
of pain (i.e., as analgesics); some narcotics are used to relieve
coughing (i.e., as antitussives) or to treat diarrhea. Methadone
is used in the treatment of narcotic abstinence syndromes and as
an analgesic in terminal illness.<br>
</p>

<p> 1. Heroin (&quot;smack&quot; or &quot;horse&quot;)--
injected, smoked, or inhaledd. </p>

<p> 2. Codeine (codeine sulfate)--taken orally or injected.d </p>

<p> 3. Morphine (morphine hydrochloride)--injected, smoked, or
inhaled. </p>

<p> 4. Synthetic opiates (e.g., methadone [DolophineR]);
hydromorphone hydrochloride [DilaudidR], meperidine hydrochloride
[DemerolR], oxycodone and asprin [PercodanR]-- taken orally or
injected. </p>

<p> PCP (PHENCYCLIDINE) AND SIMILARLY ACTING SYMPHATHOMIMETICS </p>

<p> Phencycyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, alters the
functions of the neocortex and has been called a dissociative
anesthetic. It was developed in the 1950s as an anesthetic but
was subsequently taken off the market in 1967 when it was
discovered that the drug caused hallucinations in some people.(j)
PCP is now used legally only in veterinary medicine as an
immobilizing agent. </p>

<p> PCP (&quot;angel dust&quot; or &quot;lovely&quot;)--taken
orally, or smoked (sprayed on joints or cigarettes).(d) </p>

<p> ______________ (a) According to Julien, one could conceivably
classify psychoactive drugs by at least three methods: 1)
mechanism of action, 2) chemical structure, and 3) behavioral
effects. Probably the most useful approach would be to classify
them by mechanism of action, but knowledge of the brain's
physiology is too limited for this approach to be comprehensive.
A limitation of the second approach is that many drugs of
apparently similar structure exert quite different effects, and
many drugs of dissimilar structure exert quite similar effects.
The classification in this table largely reflects the behavioral
effects approach. The classification used here is based on the
categories in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed., revised.
According to the American Psychiatric Association, all of the
classes of psychoactive substances listed in this box except
nicotine are associated with both abuse and dependence. Nicotine
is associated with dependence but not abuse. </p>

<p> (b) The potential physiological, psychological, and
behavioral effects of using the psychoactive substance shown are
discussed in the sources listed below. The consequences depend in
part on the specific drug used, the dosage level and mode of
administration. </p>

<p> (c) Central nervous system stimulants are drugs that can
elevate mood, increase alertness, reduce fatigue, provide a sense
of increased energy, decrease appetite, and improve task
performance. They can also produce anxiety, insomnia, and
irritability. The drugs differ widely in their molecular
structures and mechanisms of action. </p>

<p> (d) According to the American Psychiatric Association, the
route of administration of a psychoactive substance is an
important variable in determining whether use will lead to
dependence or abuse. In general, routes of administration that
produce more efficient absorption of the substance in the blood
stream (e.g., intravenous injection) tend to increase the
likelihood of an escalating pattern of substance uses that leads
to dependence. Routes that quickly deliver psychoactive
substances to the brain (e.g., smoking or intravenous injection)
are associated with higher levels of consumption and with an
increased likelihood of toxic effects. Use of contaminated
needles for intravenous administration of amphetamines, cocaine,
and opiates can cause hepatitis, HIV infection, and other
illnesses. </p>

<p> (e) Freebase cocaine is a form of cocaine made by converting
&quot;street cocaine&quot; (cocaine hydrochloride) to a purified
base that is smoked. The effect of smoking freebase is similar to
that of intravenous injection but smoking provides a shorter more
intense high than sniffing or ingestion because of the rapid
absorption of the drug through the lungs. &quot;Crack
cocaine&quot; is the street name given to freebase cocaine that
has been processed from cocaine hydrochloride to a chemical base
by cooking it with baking soda and water. The term crack refers
to the cracking sound that is heard when the mixture is smoked
(heated), presumably due to the sodium bicarbonate. </p>

<p> (f) Describing a drug as a stimulant does not adequately
describe its properties. Drug use surveys typically mean
amphetamines when they use the word stimulants. Some surveys
regard as stimulants both prescription (amphetamines) and
nonprescription substances (e.g., caffeine-based compounds used
in No-Doz, diet pills, and &quot;fake pep pills&quot;). Cocaine
and nicotine (described above) are also central nervous system
simulants. </p>

<p> (g) According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse,
designer drugs are structural analogs of substances scheduled
under the Controlled Substances Act that are prepared by
underground chemists to mimic the psychoactive effects of
controlled substances or produce other psychoactive effects.
Because such analogs are not identical to their parent compound,
their manufacture and distribution does not violate the law. As
of June 1986, there were synthetic analogs of PCP, fentanyl and
meperidine, and amphetamine and methamphetamine. </p>

<p> (h) In the past, abuse of methamphetamine had been in the
form of tablets or intravenous injection. More recently,
&quot;ice&quot; (one of the common street names for
d-methamphetamine hydrochloride) has gained popularity in a form
suitable for smoking. </p>

<p> (i) Most of the agents in this class of drugs can induce
hallucinations if the dose is high enough. But the term
hallucinogen does not adequately describe the range of
pharmacological actions of the diverse group of substances
usually included in the class. The term psychedelic was proposed
by Osmond in 1957 to imply that these agents all have the ability
to alter the sensory perception and thus may be considered
&quot;mind expanding.&quot; The effects of hallucinogens are
unpredictable and depend on the amount taken, the user's
personality, mood and expectations, and the surroundings in which
the drug is used. </p>

<p> (j) PCP is considered a hallucinogen in some surveys of drug
use.<br>
</p>

<p> SOURCES: Office of Technology Assessment, 1991, based on the
following sources: American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed. revised
(Washington, DC: 1987); R.M. Julien, A Primer of Drug Action, 5th
ed. (New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Co., 1988); J.F. Kauffman, H.
Shaffer, and M. Burglass, &quot;The Biological Basics: Drugs and
Their Effects,&quot; Alcoholism and Substance Abuse: Clinical
Interventions (New York, NY: 1985); U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and
Mental Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
&quot;Hallucinogens and PCP, Inhalants, Marijuana, Opiates,
Sedative-Hypnotics, Stimulants, and Cocaine,&quot; Rockville, MD,
1983; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,
National Institute on Drug Abuse, &quot;Designer Drugs,&quot;
NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD, June 1986; U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug
Abuse, and Mental Health Administration, National Institute on
Drug Abuse, &quot;Marijuana Update,&quot; NIDA Capsules,
Rockville, MD, May 1989; U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental
Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
&quot;Methamphetamine Abuse,&quot; NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD,
January 1989; and U.S. Department of Education, Growing Up Drug
Free: A Parent's Guide to Prevention (Washington, DC: 1989).<br>
</p>

<p> BOX 2-3: Household Survey Demographic Portrait According to
the 1992 National Household Survey on DrugAbuse:o Illegal drug
use is most prevalent in the 18- to 25-yearage group.o Most
illegal drug users are in the white population (76percent of all
current users or 8.7 million people).o Men have a higher rate of
current illegal drug use thanwomen.o Illegal drug use is highly
correlated with educationalstatus. Those who had not completed
high school had thehighest rate of use.o Unemployed people are
twice as likely as employed peopleto be using illegal drugs.o The
prevalence of illegal drug use in large metropolitancities is
slightly higher than in nonmetropolitan areas.SOURCE: Office of
Technology Assessment, 1994, based on U.S.Department of Health
and Human Services data. </p>

<p> BOX 2-4: Two Contrasting Surveys Measuring Cocaine Use </p>

<p> Because of populations not represented in the Household
Surveys (including homeless, run-away children, and
institutionalized populations such as the incarcerated), the
surveys may greatly underestimate the involvement of the poor in
drug use. Two years ago, for example, Abt Associates conducted a
study to determine the number of heavy cocaine users in the
United States. Two measures of heavy cocaine use were employed,
both of which measured use of cocaine in the very recent past.
Estimates of the number of regular weekly cocaine users from the
1990 Household Survey were compared to estimates of the number of
recent cocaine users based on urinalysis tests of arrestees from
the Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program. DUF urinalysis tests were
conducted at the time of booking, and the results measured
cocaine use during the day or two before arrest. DUF estimates
therefore measured the prevalence of very recent drug use among
those involved with the criminal justice system in selected major
cities. </p>

<p> The two data systems generated significantly different
estimates. From the Household Survey, Abt estimated that there
were about 662,000 heavy cocaine users in this country in 1990.
This is substantially lower than the Abt estimate of 1.709
million heavy cocaine users derived from DUF data. Reasons for
the differences include both possible underreporting on the
Household Survey and the fact that many heavy cocaine users may
be excluded from the household population or may be exceedingly
difficult to locate and interview. Overall, the study indicated
that approximately two-thirds of the heavy cocaine users in this
country are not counted by the Household Survey and that
approximately 87 percent of all heavy cocaine users are involved
with the criminal justice system. </p>

<p> SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994; based on Abt
Associates, Heavy Cocaine Use in the United States: The Number of
Users (Washington, DC: Abt Associates, 1991). _ </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>