
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-55</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B021-263</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ms1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103707 text/html 16930
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:36:57 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:38 GMT
Content-length: 16712
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Effect of Cannabinoids on Spasticity and Ataxia in
Multiple Sclerosis</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/_private/schaffer_logo.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">EFFECT OF CANNABINOIDS ON SPASTICITY AND ATAXIA
IN MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS*&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">H.M. Meinck, P.W. Schonle, and B. Conrad &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Department of Clinical Neurophysiology,
University of Gottingen, Federal Republic of Germany&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">J Neurol (1989) 236: 120-122&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Summary. The chronic motor handicaps of a
30-year-old multiple sclerosis patient acutely improved while he
smoked a marihuana cigarette. This effect was quantitatively
assessed by means of clinical rating, electromyographic
investigation of the leg flexor reflexes and electromagnetic
recording of the hand action tremor. It is concluded that
cannabinoids may have powerful beneficial effects on both
spasticity and ataxia that warrant further evaluation.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;Key words: Multiple
sclerosis---Spasticity---Ataxia---Cannabinoids---Flexor reflex
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Introduction &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This study was prompted by a young man with
multiple sclerosis (MS) who used marihuana as a remedy for his
various motor, micturition and sexual handicaps. After smoking a
marihuana cigarette on the ward, he clinically improved. He
agreed to the beneficial effects of marihuana being investigated
by means of quantitative clinical and electrophysiological
assessment. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Case Report&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This male patient, born in 1955, had had MS
since 1983. At the time of our experiments he was bound to a
wheelchair because of severe limb and gait ataxia and spastic
tetraparesis. After micturition, his residual urine volume was
100-150 ml. He complained of impotence, with erections lasting
less than 5 min and lacking ejaculation. He tried a marihuana
cigarette in about 1984 and noted an instantaneous improvement of
his motor and sexual functions lasting for several days. Since
then, he regularly took some marihuana biscuits each week, which
enabled him to climb stairs, to walk on even ground, and to have
erections for more than 30 min. allowing him a quite satisfactory
sexual life. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Methods &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&gt;From 12 October 1985 the patient abstained
from all drugs, including marihuana. He was hospitalized between
17 October and 25 October. On 22 October, one
&quot;experimental&quot; marihuana cigarette was allowed, and
various electrophysiological experiments were performed as
described below. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Clinical rating was performed daily by the same
neurologist and on 22 October before and after the
&quot;experimental&quot; cigarette. Rating comprised motor
functions relevant to the electrophysiological tests described
below (see Fig. 1).&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The flexor reflex was elicited by a painful
electrical shock to the foot sole and recorded from the
quadriceps (Q), posterior biceps (PB), gastrocnemius (G) and
tibialis anterior (TA) muscles. The EMG was full-wave rectified,
and eight consecutive reflexes were summated. Five control series
of eight consecutive reflexes were run at intervals of about 5
min. The patient was then asked to take one whiff of his
&quot;experimental&quot; cigarette, and further series of
reflexes were run in the manner described above (for details see
[12]).&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Finger movements were recorded in a
standardized pointing task performed before and after both the
&quot;experimental&quot; cigarette and the flexor reflex
experiment. Basically, the recording device consisted of a
three-coil-transmitter system generating non-homogeneous magnetic
fields, and a miniaturized receiver coil attached to the finger
tip. When the finger moved through the magnetic fields a signal
was induced in the receiver coil, allowing the computation of the
two-dimensional movement trajectory (for details see [15]). Ten
trials were performed before and after marihuana smoking, each
consisting of a pointing movement of the right index finger over
a 10-cm distance. The forearm rested on a stable support, but the
finger and hand could not reach the target. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Results &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Clinical rating showed a moderate deterioration
of motor functions between 17 October and 22 October (Fig. 1) On
22 October, before the &quot;experimental&quot; cigarette, he was
incapable of walking a few steps even with support: his muscle
force in the legs did not exceed MRC grade 3. Muscle tone ranged
between slightly and moderately increased, and the leg deep
tendon reflexes were exaggerated or clonic with sustained ankle
and knee clonus. The receptive field of the Babinski sign covered
the whole foot and the shin. Ataxia in the arms was severe and
could not be tested in the legs because of distinct hip flexor
paresis. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">About 145 min after the marihuana cigarette,
muscle force was somewhat increased in the knee extensors and
ankle flexors (but not in the hip flexors), and muscle tone was
reduced. The leg deep tendon reflexes showed normalization, too,
corresponding to a clear shortening of the periods of clonus. The
receptive field of the Babinski sign was confined to the lateral
foot sole margin. Ataxia in finger-nose testing was moderate.
After the flexor reflex experiment, the patient was able to walk
a few metres between the couch and his wheelchair with support.
Some of these improvements lasted beyond 23 October and even 24
October (Fig 1). &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The flexor reflex showed the desynchronized and
prolonged reflex pattern typical of spastic paresis (Fig. 2a: cf
[13]). As soon as 2 min after the whiff of the marihuana
cigarette, a clear attenuation of the reflex activity was noted.
Attenuation was about equal in all four muscles (20%-30% of the
last three control recordings) and progressed until 17 min after
the whiff. A second whiff (18 min after the first one) did not
induce further reflex attenuation. Single sweep recordings showed
that the reflex attenuation after marihuana was not due to
enhanced habituation;: after marihuana even the first of the
eight consecutive reflex responses was attenuated. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Electromagnetic recording of action tremor
revealed a coarse 3 Hz hand and finger tremor with an amplitude
between 1 and 3 cm, persisting throughout nearly the whole
movement. Hours after the &quot;experimental&quot; cigarette,
action tremor was almost completely abolished, although the
movements were made at about the same speed (Fig. 2b).&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Discussion&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Our findings clearly show that there are indeed
motor actions of marihuana which were (a) reproducible in a
laboratory situation most exhaustive to the patient. (b)
quantitatively assessable by means of electrophysiological
testing, and (c) in line with the results of clinical rating. Our
findings further correspond with earlier anecdotal clinical
reports [4, 6, 11, 14]. Little is known about the
neurophysiological background of the antispastic and antiataxic
actions of marihuana seen in our patient. However, some findings
in experimental animals seem relevant to our observations.
Cannabinoids in higher dosages attenuate the monosynaptic reflex
[1,2,17,18] principally corresponding to the attenuation of both
deep tendon reflexes and clonus in our patient (Fig. 1).
Polysynaptic reflexes were also attenuated after
tetrahydrocannabinol derivatives in experimental animals [1, 7,
20], fitting in well with the narrowing of the receptive field of
the Babinski sign (Fig. 1) and with the results of our flexor
reflex experiment. As cannabinoids have analgesic properties
[16,20], attenuation of the pathological flexor reflex in the
present case could represent analgesic rather than antispastic
effects of the drug. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">However, analgesic effects are also attributed
to several antispastic drugs [10,21] and, on the other hand,
classical analgesics such as opioids may improve spastic symptoms
[19]. One might, therefore, indeed wonder whether both the
antispastic and analgesic actions of such drugs are in fact at
least to a substantial degree based on common neuronal mechanisms
such as an increase of presynaptic inhibition or a decrease of
postsynaptic excitation of multireceptive interneurones at
various levels of the neuraxis. Whatever the mechanism, the
antispastic actions of marihuana in both clinical rating and
electrophysiological testing are similar to those seen in spastic
patients after either 0.3 mg tizanidine [13], 150 mcg clonidine,
or 10 mg diazepam (unpublished observations). The important
difference is that marihuana apparently also has antiataxic
actions (Fig. 2b: see also [4] not ascribed to any antispastic
drug. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The biochemical basis of the motor effects of
marihuana is obscure. Available data, although somewhat
controversial, suggest that cannabinoids release brain serotonin
from its storage sites and block its re-uptake [8], inhibit the
synthesis of prostaglandins within the CNS [9] and-- in large
doses -- elevate brain acetylcholine and reduce its utilization
[5]. The relationship of these neurotransmitters to spasticity
and ataxia is unknown: none of the well-established antispastic
drugs is thought to interfere with them; they are only scarcely,
if at all, found within the cerebellum [3].</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Acknowledgement. We thank our patient for his
kind cooperation throughout this study. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;References &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1. Boyd ES, Merritt DA (1965) Effects of a
tetrahydrocannabinol derivative on some motor systems in the cat.
Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 153: 1-12&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2. Capek R, Esplin B (1976) Effects of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the homosynaptic depression in
the spinal monosynaptic pathway: implications for transmitter
dynamics in the primary afferents. In: Nahas GG, Paton WDM,
Idaanpaan-Heikkila JE (eds) Marihuana -- chemistry, biochemistry,
and cellular effects. Springer, New York Berlin Heidelberg. pp
385-395&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3. Chan-Palay V (1984) Purkinje cells of the
cerebellum: localization and function of multiple neuroactive
substances. Exp Brain Res [Suppl] 9: 129-144&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">4. Clifford DB (1983) Tetrahydrocannabinol for
tremor in multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 13: 669-671 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">5. Domino EF (1976) Effects of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabinol on rat brain
acetylcholine. In: Nahas GG, Paton WDM, Idaanpaan-Heikkila JE
(eds) Marihuana -- chemistry, biochemistry and cellular effects.
Springer, New York Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 407-413 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">6. Dunn M. Davis R (1974) The perceived effects
of marijuana on spinal cord injured males. Paraplegia 12: 175
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">7.Gilbert PE (1981) A comparison of THC,
nantradol, nabilone, and morphine in the chronic spinal dog. J
Clin Pharmacol 21: 311-319 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">8. Ho BT, Johnson KM (1976) Sites of
neurochemical action of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol: interaction
with reserpine. In: Nahas GG, Paton WDM, Idaanpaan-Heikkila JE
(eds) Marihuana -- chenistry, biochemistry, and cellular effects.
Springer, New York Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 367-381&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">9. Howes JF, Osgood PF (1976) Cannabinoids and
the inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis. In: Nahas GG, Paton
WDM, Idaanpaan-Heikkila JE (eds) Marihuana -- chemistry,
biochemistry, and cellular effects. Springer, New York Berlin
Heidelberg. pp 415-424 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10. Jurna J (1984) Depression of nociceptive
sensory activity in the rat spinal cord due to the intrathecal
administration of drugs: effects of diazepam. Neurosurgery 15:
917-920 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">11. Malec J, Harvey RF, Cayner JJ (1982)
Cannabis effect on spasticity in spinal cord injury. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil: 116-118 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">12. Meinck H-M, Conrad B (1986)
Neuropharmacological investigations in the stiff-man syndrome. J
Neurol 233: 340-347 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">13. Meinck H-M, Benecke R. Conrad B (1985)
Cutaneo-muscular control in health and disease: possible
implications on spasticity. In: Struppler A, Weindl A (eds)
Electromyography and evoked potentials, theories and
applications. Advances in applied neurological sciences, vol 1.
Springer, New York Berlin Heidelberg, pp 75-83 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">14. Petro DJ, Ellenberger C (1981) Treatment of
human spasticity with delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. J Clin
Pharmacol 21: 413-416 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">15. Schonle PW, Grabe K, Wenig P, Hohne J,
SchraderJ, Conrad B (1987) Electromagnetic articulography -- use
of alternating magnetic fields for tracking movements of multiple
points inside and outside the vocal tract. Brain Lang 31: 26-35</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;16. Segal M (1986) Cannabinoids and
analgesia. In: Mechoulam R (ed) Cannabinoids as therapeutic
agents. CRC Press Boca Raton, Fla, pp 105-120 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">17.Tramposch A, Sangdee C, Franz DN, Karler R,
Turkanis SA (1981) Cannabinoid-induced enhancement and depresion
of cat monosynaptic reflexes. Neuropharmacology 20: 617-621</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;18. Turkanis SA, Karler R (1983) Effects
of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol on cat spinal motoneurons. Brain
Res 288: 283-287 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">19. Will JC, Bussel B (1980) Evidence for a
direct spinal mechanism in morphine-induced inhibition of
nociceptive reflexes in humans. Brain Res 187: 212-215</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;20. Yaksh TL (1981) The antinociceptive
effects of intrathecally administered levonantradol and
desacetyllevonantradol in the rat. J Clin Pharmacol 21: 334-340</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;21. Yaksh TL, Reddy SVR (1981) Studies in
the primate on the analgetic effects associated with intrathecal
actions of opiates, a-adrenergic agonists and baclofen.
Anesthesiology 54: 451-467</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;Received November 30, 1987/ Received in
revised form October 6, 1988/</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Accepted November 6, 1988</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>