
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-84</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B002-116</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/peru1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032055 text/html 29195
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:20:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:14 GMT
Content-length: 28977
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>U.S. Antidrug Efforts in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Drug Control: </h1>

<h2>U.S. Antidrug Efforts in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley </h2>

<p> (Letter Report, 12/07/94, GAO/NSIAD-95-11). </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> Nearly two-thirds of the world's coca crop is grown in Peru.
Most of that coca is processed into a cocaine base, which is
flown to Colombia to make cocaine for shipment to the United
States and Europe. Since the 1980s, the primary coca-growing and
drug-trafficking activities in Peru have been in the Upper
Huallaga Valley. The United States has supported Peruvian efforts
to eradicate coca seedbeds and conduct law enforcement operations
against drug traffickers. This report discusses (1) the rationale
for, and costs associated with, the construction, the
maintenance, and the operations of the Santa Lucia base, an
antidrug base in the Upper Huallaga Valley; (2) the subsequent
rationale for discontinuing support of the Santa Lucia base; and
(3) the current status of U.S. efforts to restructure antidrug
programs in Peru. </p>

<p> --------------------------- Indexing Terms
----------------------------- </p>

<p> REPORTNUM: NSIAD-95-11 </p>

<p> TITLE: Drug Control: U.S. Antidrug Efforts in Peru's Upper </p>

<p> Huallaga Valley </p>

<p> DATE: 12/07/94 </p>

<p> * * </p>

<p> * A printed copy of this report may be obtained from the GAO
Document * </p>

<p> * Distribution Facility by calling (202) 512-6000, by faxing
your * </p>

<p> * request to (301) 258-4066, or by writing to P.O. Box 6015,
* </p>

<p> * Gaithersburg, MD 20884-6015. We are unable to accept
electronic orders * </p>

<p> * for printed documents at this time. * </p>

<p> ************************************************************ </p>

<p> Cover </p>

<p>
================================================================
COVER </p>

<p> Report to Congressional Requesters </p>

<p> December 1994 </p>

<p> DRUG CONTROL - U.S. ANTIDRUG EFFORTS IN PERU'S UPPER HUALLAGA
</p>

<p> VALLEY </p>

<p> GAO/NSIAD-95-11 </p>

<p> Drug Control </p>

<p> Abbreviations </p>

<p>
===============================================================
ABBREV </p>

<p> CORAH - Coca Eradication in the Upper Huallaga Valley </p>

<p> DEA - Drug Enforcement Administration </p>

<p> NAS - Narcotics Affairs Section </p>

<p> INM - International Narcotics Matters </p>

<p> Letter </p>

<p>
===============================================================
LETTER </p>

<p> B-258650 </p>

<p> December 7, 1994 </p>

<p> The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., </p>

<p> Chairman </p>

<p> The Honorable Alfred A. McCandless </p>

<p> Ranking Minority Member </p>

<p> Legislation and National Security Subcommittee </p>

<p> Committee on Government Operations </p>

<p> House of Representatives </p>

<p> In response to your request, we are providing you information
on U.S. antidrug efforts in Peru. Specifically, we ascertained
(1) the rationale for, and costs associated with, the
construction, maintenance, and operations of the Santa Lucia
base, an antidrug base in the Upper Huallaga Valley; (2) the
subsequent rationale for discontinuing support of the Santa Lucia
base; (3) and the current status of U.S. efforts to restructure
antidrug programs in Peru. </p>

<p> BACKGROUND </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------
Letter :1 </p>

<p> Nearly two-thirds of the world's coca crop is grown in Peru.
Most of that coca is processed into cocaine base, which is flown
to Colombia to make cocaine for shipment to the United States and
Europe. Since the 1980s, the primary coca-growing and
drug-trafficking activities in Peru have been in its Upper
Huallaga Valley. </p>

<p> During the early 1980s, the United States provided support
for Peru to conduct manual eradication of mature coca leaf.
However, because of security concerns for personnel conducting
manual eradication, these activities ceased in 1987. Gradually,
the United States began to (1) support Peruvian efforts to
eradicate coca seedbeds and (2) conduct law enforcement
operations against drug-trafficking activities. Before 1989, both
operations were conducted by helicopter from Tingo Maria, about
150 miles southeast of Santa Lucia, the center of illegal drug
activities. In 1989, the United States and Peru moved their
operations to a base located near the town of Santa Lucia. The
base, which became the center of U.S. and Peruvian eradication
and law enforcement operations, supported between 430 and 492
personnel, including 32 U.S. personnel. The United States
continued to provide support to the base until late 1993. The map
on page 3 shows the locations of these bases. </p>

<p> The Departments of State and Defense and the Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA) coordinate antidrug activities with Peruvian
law enforcement and military organizations. At the U.S. embassy
in Peru, these functions are carried out by the Narcotics Affairs
Section (NAS), the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group, and
the DEA Country Attache's Office. Other U.S. agencies also
provide support to Peruvian antidrug programs and operations. </p>

<p> RESULTS IN BRIEF </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------
Letter :2 </p>

<p> The Santa Lucia base was constructed to serve as a secure
center to house and support antidrug forces responsible for
eradicating coca and conducting law enforcement activities to
stop the flow of illegal drugs from Peru through Colombia to the
United States. Between fiscal years 1988 and 1993, the State
Department spent about $49.2 million to construct, maintain, and
operate the base. In fiscal year 1994, the Congress reduced the
State Department's international Narcotics Control Program from
$148 million to $100 million. In December 1993, the U.S. embassy
restructured its antidrug programs in Peru because it could not
continue to support the base while also supporting other efforts
required in the U.S. antidrug strategy. The restructuring efforts
included (1) moving U.S. helicopter maintenance operations to a
Peruvian naval base in Pucallpa (see fig. 1), (2) turning over
the operation and maintenance of the Santa Lucia base to Peru,
and (3) returning the State Department's fixed-wing aircraft that
were used to support the base to the United States. </p>

<p> As part of the decision to stop supporting the Santa Lucia
Base, the executive branch approved a formal mobile basing
concept to implement antidrug efforts, which included
establishing an operational planning group within the U.S.
embassy. The U.S. embassy has been slow in implementing the
mobile basing concept because of maintenance problems with
helicopters, internal differences within the U.S. embassy over
how the group actually would function to coordinate law
enforcement operations, and the May 1994 decision by the United
States to stop sharing with the government of Peru information
that could be used to shoot down civilian aircraft suspected of
drug trafficking. Legislation was recently passed to allow
information sharing to resume; however, the administration has
not reached agreement with Peru on certain required
preconditions. </p>

<p> Figure 1: Map of Peru </p>

<p> (See figure in printed edition.) </p>

<p> Note: Boundaries are not necessarily authoritative. </p>

<p> RATIONALE FOR BUILDING THE SANTA LUCIA BASE </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------
Letter :3 </p>

<p> According to U.S. officials, the rationale for building the
Santa Lucia base was to place U.S. personnel in the safest
possible environment from which to conduct antidrug activities.
U.S. personnel flying into the heart of the drug-trafficking area
were increasingly at risk because in the mid-1980s, the Sendero
Luminoso--a Maoist organization attempting to overthrow the
Peruvian government--took control of the area. This group
protected those trafficking in drugs in return for monetary
support for the Sendero. </p>

<p> In 1988, the United States began to build the Santa Lucia
base, which included an airfield, a maintenance facility for 6 to
10 U.S. UH-1H helicopters used for eradication and law
enforcement missions, and housing. Because the base was in a
highly dense, tropical area with no safe, accessible roads,
fixed-wing aircraft (C-123s and C-130s) were supplied by the
State Department's Bureau of International Narcotics Matters
(INM)\1 to transport personnel, equipment, and supplies to the
base from Lima several times each week. In addition, DEA and
Peruvian aircraft used the base for law enforcement operations. </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \1 INM maintains an air wing of rotary and fixed-wing
aircraft to assist host governments in conducting
counternarcotics operations in several Central and South American
countries, including Peru. </p>

<p> COSTS OF THE SANTA LUCIA BASE </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------
Letter :4 </p>

<p> According to INM and U.S. embassy records, about $49.2
million was provided to construct, maintain, and operate the
Santa Lucia base during fiscal years 1988-93. These funds were
included as part of the State Department's International
Narcotics Control Program, which is authorized under the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961, section 481, as amended. INM provided
these funds for five projects in Peru (see table 1). </p>

<p> Table 1 </p>

<p> Costs Associated With the Santa Lucia Base During Fiscal
Years 1988-93 </p>

<p> (Dollars in millions) </p>

<p> Project Cost </p>

<p> -------------------------------------------------- -------- </p>

<p> Construction of the base $ 9.8 </p>

<p> Coca Eradication in the Upper Huallaga Valley 16.9 </p>

<p> (CORAH) </p>

<p> Law enforcement 6.4 </p>

<p> Program development and support 4.6 </p>

<p> Fixed-wing aircraft 11.5 </p>

<p> ============================================================ </p>

<p> Total $49.2 </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------ </p>

<p> CONSTRUCTION COSTS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :4.1 </p>

<p> Included in the $9.8 million construction project are the
costs of daily laborers to construct the base and its related
infrastructure; installation of prefabricated housing; equipment
and commodities needed to construct and operate helicopter and
fixed-wing aircraft facilities and an airstrip; recreational
equipment, food, and clothing; and miscellaneous items such as
payments to the Peruvian engineer in charge of constructing the
airstrip and the rental of heavy equipment. </p>

<p> CORAH COSTS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :4.2 </p>

<p> The $16.9 million for CORAH was provided for the direct and
indirect costs of supporting between 200 and 250 Peruvian workers
to help construct, maintain, and operate Santa Lucia base;
provide support services; and perform limited antidrug duties.
Direct costs were for activities on the base, including operating
equipment such as electrical generators, providing food service,
cutting the grass, procuring supplies, and monitoring
U.S.-provided equipment to ensure that it was used for
counternarcotics purposes. </p>

<p> Indirect costs were for support provided from the CORAH
headquarters at Tingo Maria, including the purchase of food,
construction equipment such as trucks and a bulldozer, supplies
and materials, and general supplies for Santa Lucia; and
administrative support functions for CORAH personnel at the base.
</p>

<p> Between March 1990 and November 1993, 10 CORAH workers
eradicated coca seedbeds about 3 to 4 hours a day, 3 to 4 days a
week. This work was suspended in November 1993 because of
budgetary constraints. In addition, up to 50 CORAH workers
installed concrete obstacles to block </p>

<p> 10 illegal airstrips in the Upper Huallaga Valley. The costs
for blocking the airstrips could not be readily determined, but
the embassy's Narcotics Affairs Section said they were included
in the direct and indirect costs discussed above. </p>

<p> LAW ENFORCEMENT COSTS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :4.3 </p>

<p> About $6.4 million was spent for police support at Santa
Lucia, including (1) per diem for Peruvian police officers
stationed at the base to provide security for the base and for
workers on eradication missions and (2) commodities used by the
police to support the base. </p>

<p> PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND SUPPORT COSTS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :4.4 </p>

<p> About $4.6 million was provided for salaries and expenses of
the NAS staff and activities related to administrative support of
the base as well as other antidrug programs in Peru. Such support
included processing procurement vouchers for goods and services. </p>

<p> FIXED-WING AIRCRAFT COSTS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :4.5 </p>

<p> About $11.5 million was spent on operating and maintaining
the fixed-wing aircraft that transported personnel, supplies, and
other items to and from Santa Lucia. Generally, two C-123 and two
C-130 aircraft were used for these missions. This was funded by
INM's airwing account and not included in Peru's antidrug program
budget. </p>

<p> RATIONALE FOR SUSPENDING U.S. SUPPORT FOR SANTA LUCIA BASE </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------
Letter :5 </p>

<p> The Congress reduced the State Department's annual
International Narcotics Control Program request for fiscal year
1994 from $148 million to $100 million. After coordinating with
various U.S. agencies involved in antidrug activities regarding
program options, the State Department decided that it could not
adequately support maintenance and operations at the Santa Lucia
base while supporting its antidrug programs in Peru and other
countries. Thus, in December 1993, the United States stopped
supporting the base and the Peruvian government assumed
responsibility for the base's administrative and operational
control. </p>

<p> State Department officials reported that although trafficking
activities had moved outside of the immediate range of
U.S.-provided helicopters, they would have maintained the Santa
Lucia base had the budget not been reduced. U.S. embassy
officials stated that they had already begun to cover an expanded
area by conducting helicopter operations using forward operating
locations outside of the Santa Lucia area. </p>

<p> STATUS OF RESTRUCTURING COUNTERNARCOTICS OPERATIONS IN </p>

<p> PERU </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------
Letter :6 </p>

<p> Some aspects of the restructured programs have been completed
and are in place. Specifically, NAS has moved its helicopter
maintenance facilities from Santa Lucia to Pucallpa and the
government of Peru is now responsible for operating the Santa
Lucia base. In addition, INM-owned fixed-wing aircraft used to
support U.S. antidrug operations have been returned to the United
States and fixed-wing aircraft are now being rented from Peru.
However, the U.S. embassy has faced a number of obstacles to
fully implementing a mobile basing concept for conducting
antidrug missions, including problems with helicopter
maintenance, internal conflicts over the responsibility for
planning and coordinating antidrug operations, and a U.S.
decision not to share with Peru real-time information and
assistance that could lead to the shoot down of civilian aircraft
suspected of drug trafficking. </p>

<p> MOVE TO PUCALLPA </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :6.1 </p>

<p> To stay within the budget, the State Department moved
helicopter maintenance facilities and associated U.S. and
Peruvian police personnel from Santa Lucia to several different
sites in Pucallpa, where an international airport is located. The
airport serves as the center from which operations are conducted
and for resupplying and supporting maintenance operations. The
airport also houses U.S. fixed-wing aircraft used by DEA and
other agencies to support law enforcement operations. The
maintenance facilities, aviation ground support equipment, and
spare parts for 10 UH-1H helicopters are located at a Peruvian
naval base in Pucallpa. About 15 U.S. contractor personnel assist
the Peruvian police in maintaining and operating the
helicopters.\2 A total of about 30 U.S. and 30 to 35 Peruvian
personnel live in a hotel about 10 minutes from the naval base. </p>

<p> The United States spent about $450,000 for (1) security
improvements to the hotel, (2) improvements to three warehouses
behind the hotel, (3) improvements to a refueling area, and (4)
refurbishment of a warehouse and extension of the perimeter wall
at the naval base. Planned projects include improvements to the
hotel and naval base and construction of a small hangar and ramp
area at the airport for fixed-wing aircraft. Cost estimates for
these projects were not available. </p>

<p> U.S. embassy personnel stated that U.S. personnel are not
allowed to leave the hotel unless they are transported in
official vehicles to and from work because of security concerns.
According to NAS personnel, morale at Santa Lucia was much better
because personnel were free to move around the base after work
and tended to interact more readily. </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \2 DynCorp Aerospace, Inc., a private contractor, provides
management, administrative, rotary-wing, and maintenance
services. </p>

<p> PERU'S SUPPORT OF SANTA LUCIA </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :6.2 </p>

<p> With the loss of U.S. support to Santa Lucia, the government
of Peru agreed to administer the base and maintain it as a
location from which antidrug operations could be conducted.
According to the U.S. Embassy's NAS Director, U.S. officials were
concerned that the government of Peru might be unable to provide
the resources needed to maintain and operate the base adequately.
At the time of our visit, the airstrip needed repair because of
holes in the runway and other maintenance problems. The NAS
Director estimated that about $1.5 million is needed to repair
the airstrip. Nevertheless, DEA is continuing to conduct antidrug
operations from the base. </p>

<p> ELIMINATING THE USE OF INM-OWNED FIXED-WING AIRCRAFT TO
SUPPORT ANTIDRUG OPERATIONS </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :6.3 </p>

<p> Because the State Department stopped supporting the Santa
Lucia base, INM-owned fixed-wing support was terminated. In
December 1993, INM's fixed-wing aircraft--two C-123s and two
C-130s--and almost $10.1 million in aircraft spare parts were
shipped for storage to Davis Monthan Air Force Base in Tucson,
Arizona. The 28 personnel responsible for maintaining the
aircraft were returned to the United States. To support antidrug
missions at Pucallpa, the embassy now rents fixed-wing aircraft
from the Peruvian air force and civilian companies. According to
the embassy, the monthly rental costs should be less than
$20,000. </p>

<p> MOBILE BASING CONCEPT </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :6.4 </p>

<p> The embassy's implementation of the mobile basing concept has
been complicated by several problems. The concept included the
following assumptions: </p>

<p> 8 to 10 helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft would be
available for antidrug operations, and an operational planning
group would be established in the embassy to plan law enforcement
operations. </p>

<p> In early 1994, the Defense Department notified State that it
had to ground UH-1H helicopters that had certain engine numbers,
which had to be overhauled because of mechanical problems. This
created maintenance problems with the UH-1H helicopters that
limited the embassy's ability to fully support the mobile basing
concept. Five of the 10 helicopters used in Peru were grounded
for 6 weeks because their engines required overhaul. A total of
11 engines had to be overhauled at a cost of $1.65 million. The
five remaining helicopters were used extensively during the
6-week period, and thus, all subsequently needed maintenance at
about the same time. In June 1994, 3 of the 10 helicopters were
in for scheduled maintenance, leaving the embassy with only 7 to
conduct operations. Recent embassy reports say that high levels
of metal particles are being found in gear boxes and engines,
indicating excessive wear and use. An embassy official indicated
that this situation may cause future maintenance problems and
affect mobility of operations. </p>

<p> According to DEA officials, helicopter maintenance problems
have limited their ability to plan and conduct operations. For
example, a DEA official stated that of the 13 missions requiring
helicopter support during a recent 3-month period, the
helicopters experienced mechanical problems during 6 of them. In
two cases, DEA teams were delayed in the jungle because of the
problems. In addition, DEA's CASA-212 fixed-wing transport
aircraft was grounded for several months because of maintenance
problems. Finally, an embassy official stated that Peruvian
aircraft are frequently grounded because their mechanics have not
been properly trained. </p>

<p> To further complicate matters, the operational planning group
was not formally established by the U.S. Ambassador until July
1994, 7 months after the mobile basing concept was approved, and
has not yet been staffed. The delay was caused by internal
differences within the U.S. embassy about the structure and
staffing of the group. The NAS Director believed that the group
should be responsible for more than law enforcement operations
and include eradication operations, administrative and training
support to the Peruvian police, and other operations that may be
needed. He also believed that, since the group would be under the
DEA attache that it should be composed primarily with persons
having law enforcement backgrounds to ensure that DEA conducts
operations meeting U.S. antidrug objectives in Peru. DEA and U.S.
military personnel, on the other hand, believed that the group
should be primarily responsible for planning law enforcement
operations and be staffed with military personnel, who would be
more experienced in planning specific operations and identifying
logistics support requirements for law enforcement operations in
the jungle and interacting with Peruvian military forces in
planning military-type operations. According to U.S. officials,
the group will be staffed with DEA agents as well as military
personnel providing operational, communications, and logistical
expertise. The group will be under the control of the DEA country
attache. According to a U.S. embassy official, no specific
assignments of military personnel have been made to date. </p>

<p> CUT-OFF OF REAL-TIME U.S. ANTIDRUG INFORMATION </p>

<p> ----------------------------------------------------------
Letter :6.5 </p>

<p> Another factor affecting the mobile basing concept's
implementation is the May 1, 1994, decision to stop sharing
certain drug-trafficking information with the governments of
Colombia and Peru, which we reported on in August 1994.\3 </p>

<p> This step was taken because of legal concerns about the
probable criminal liability of U.S. personnel who provide
information that could lead to the shooting down of a civilian
aircraft suspected of transporting illegal drugs. According to
U.S. officials, the sharing of real-time information is critical
to ensuring that they can take timely action against
drug-trafficking activities to increase the risks associated with
these activities. The officials stated that the policy decision
had impacted on their ability to conduct antidrug operations. </p>

<p> Although the impact that the policy has had on the flow of
drugs being shipped from Peru to Colombia is unclear, it is clear
that pilots flying between Peru and Colombia have changed their
operations, since there is little fear of interception by U.S.
and Peruvian forces as long as detection capabilities remain
negligible and there is no sharing of information. </p>

<p> Various U.S. reports and officials have stated that, before
the May decision, drug traffickers wanted to minimize their
exposure to the air interdiction threat. Thus, they (1) used
fewer flights with larger drug loads, (2) flew mainly in the
early evening hours, and (3) spent on an average only about 10 to
12 minutes in loading and unloading their cargoes. U.S. officials
in Peru said that since the policy change, drug traffickers have
changed their operations and (1) have begun multiple flights with
smaller drug loads and (2) have begun flying during the day, and
some traffickers have doubled their time on the ground. In
addition, U.S. officials stated that an analysis of flight
patterns indicates that traffickers are reverting to more direct
air routes from Peru into Colombia instead of the indirect and
more time-consuming routes they were taking before the cutoff of
information. DEA officials advised us that the policy to not
share real-time information has caused them to forego law
enforcement operations against illegal drug activities. Finally,
a recent Defense Department report states that the policy of not
sharing real-time information has reduced the risks associated
with drug-trafficking activities in Peru. </p>

<p> On October 5, 1994, the President signed legislation that
provides official immunity for authorized U.S. personnel from
liability, notwithstanding any other provision of law, if
information they provide is used to shoot down civilian aircraft
suspected of drug trafficking. However, before sharing of
information can resume, the President must determine that (1)
illicit drug trafficking poses a national security threat to Peru
and (2) Peru has appropriate procedures in place to protect
against the innocent loss of life. The executive branch is
discussing this issue with the Peruvian government. As of
November 30, 1994, the sharing of information had not yet
resumed. </p>

<p> -------------------- </p>

<p> \3 Drug Control in Peru (GAO/NSIAD-94-186R, Aug. 16, 1994). </p>

<p> SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY </p>

<p> ------------------------------------------------------------
Letter :7 </p>

<p> To obtain information for this report, we interviewed
officials and reviewed pertinent documents at the Departments of
State and Defense and the Drug Enforcement Administration in
Washington, D.C.; the U.S. Southern Command in Panama; and the
U.S. Embassy in Lima, Peru. We also interviewed Peruvian police
officials responsible for counternarcotics programs. </p>

<p> We did our review between April and July 1994 in accordance
with generally accepted government auditing standards. As
requested, we did not obtain written agency comments on a draft
of this report. However, we discussed the information in this
report with agency officials and included their comments where
appropriate. </p>

<p> ---------------------------------------------------------
Letter :7.1 </p>

<p> Unless you release its contents earlier, we plan no further
distribution of this report until 10 days after its issuance. At
that time, we will send copies of the report to the Secretaries
of Defense and State, the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, and the Director of the Office of National Drug
Control Policy. We will also provide copies to others on request.
</p>

<p> This report was prepared under the direction of Mr. Benjamin
Nelson, Associate Director, who may be reached on (202) 512-4128.
Other major contributors are Mr. Andres Ramirez, Assistant
Director, and Mr. Ronald D. Hughes, Evaluator-in-Charge. </p>

<p> Joseph E. Kelley </p>

<p> Director-in-Charge </p>

<p> International Affairs Issues <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>