
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-16</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B013-130</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/drinkwater.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101420 text/html 6738
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:14:08 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:05 GMT
Content-length: 6521
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Simple Way to Beat Urine Tests - Just Drink Water</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<p><font size="3">SIMPLE WAY TO BEAT URINE TESTS -- JUST DRINK
WATER</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Report from American Academy of Forensic
Sciences</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Forensic Drug Abuse Advisor, Vol. 6, Issue 3,
March 1994</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Workplace drug testing programs can be foiled
by adulterating the specimen, and the adulterants can be added
inside or outside of the body. Last summer it became apparent
that many peole were cheating by adding solutions of concentrated
glutaraldehyde (Urinaid) to their voided sample. New data,
presented in February at the annual meeting of the American
Academy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS), suggests that there is a
simpler way to foil urine screening tests: drink lots of water.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Edward Cone of the Addiction Research
Center (ARC) in Baltimore, described the results of a study he
had undertaken at the request of Donna Smith, Acting Director of
the Department of Transportation's (DOT) Office of Drug
Enforcement. Smith was concerned that advertising claims for some
herbal teas and &quot;internal cleansing&quot; agents might
actually be true. Cone was at first skeptical, but, as he
reported at the AAFS meeting, the study was a
&quot;sleeper.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Cone set up a series of experiments designed to
assess the effect of various measures on &quot;in vivo
adulteration.&quot; Two of the most popular &quot;teas&quot; were
chosen for study; Naturally Klean Herbal Tea&quot; and
&quot;Golden Seal&quot; root capsules. Healthy drug-free
volunteers with a history of recent drug use were recruited for
the study. They were housed in a closed ward for six weeks. The
participants were tested under a number of different protocols
during that six week period.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">At 9:00 AM on the morning of Day One the study
subjects smoked a standardized marijuana cigarette (3.58% THC).
On Day Three they snorted 40 mg of cocaine. Twenty three hours
after each drug was given, they drank one of the following
combinations: (1) &quot;Naturally Klean Herbal Tea&quot; in one
gallon of water, (2) one gallon of water without any
&quot;cleansing agent&quot; (3) one gallon of water with 50 mg of
hydrochlorothiadize (a diuretic), (4) four &quot;Golden
Seal&quot; capsules and one gallon of water, or (5) twelve ounces
of water. Each participant was tested under each protocol and all
of the urine was collected.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The urine specimens were then tested by EMIT II
assay for cannabinoids at a 50 ng / ml cutoff, and cocaine at a
300 ng / ml cutoff. Specific gravity and creatinine content was
measured for each sample, and the two indicators were found to
co-vary almost identically. Just drinking 12 ounces of water was
enough to cause a significant decrease in both specific gravity
and creatinine, but not enough to cause a negative test response.
For example, urine cannabinoids levels which were higher than
10,000 ng / ml dropped to the low 100's after drinking 12 ounces
of water. After drinking a gallon of water, with or without one
of the &quot;cleansing agents&quot; added, it only took an hour
for the specific gravity to drop to less than 1.005.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">When one gallon of water was drunk, not only
did specific gravity fall to very low levels (creatinine&lt;20,
and specific gravity &lt;1.003), but the marijuana assay turned
negative and stayed that way, even after specific gravity levels
had returned to normal! The cocaine tests turned negative for a
few hours, but then turned positive again. The same results were
observed whether or not tea was used, however, when diuretics
were given, the test for both cannabinoids and cocaine turned
negative and stayed that way.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Cone concluded that &quot;drug test outcome is
highly susceptible to water dilution; and the effects of dilution
are reflected concurrently in creatinine and specific gravity
measures.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">COMMENT: This observation will cause some
consternation in the drug testing community, and create more
problems than glutaraldehyde and Urinaid adulteration did. It is
not that difficult to develop detection strategies for chemicals
like glutaraldehyde. That may explain why the practice is already
starting to disappear, but setting standards for dilution will be
much more difficult. Eventually, it may be necessary to measure
drug / creatinine ratios to rule out dilution. Since tests may
remain negative even after the specific gravity returns toward
normal, it appears that low specific gravities cannot be relied
upn to reveal &quot;adulterated&quot; specimens. </font></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>