
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-90</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B011-296</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/myths/myths6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101003 text/html 13829
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:09:55 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:22:01 GMT
Content-length: 13611
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Lessons of Prohibition and Drug Legalization</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<h2>Chapter Five: The Lessons of Prohibition and Drug
Legalization </h2>

<hr>

<p><b>DISCUSSION</b> </p>

<p><b>I. Their Argument</b> </p>

<p>Proponents of legalization suggest that the United States
experience with alcohol prohibition in the 1920's provides ample
proof of the problems that result when the government attempts to
make a popular substance illegal. Legalizers point to ostensible
increases in organized crime such as that associated with Al
Capone in order to make their point. Basically, they say, it is
better to legalize, tax and regulate than simply to declare drugs
illegal. </p>

<p><b>II. Our Argument</b> </p>

<p>The legalizers' arguments here are deeply flawed and merit two
primary responses: first, the circumstances surrounding
Prohibition are so different than those of today's world that it
practically is impossible to use its history as a means of
analyzing present-day policy; second, Prohibition was in fact
successful and did not create the negative consequences that the
legalizers say it did. </p>

<p>But to the first point. David Teasley, an analyst with the
Congressional Research Service of the Library of Congress,
undertook an in-depth analysis in 1992 entitled, &quot;Drug
legalization and the 'lessons' of Prohibition.&quot; Teasley
ultimately concluded that </p>

<p>[A] comprehensive analogy between Prohibition and the modern
drug problem is problematic in at least two major ways. First,
between the two eras there are significant differences that tend
to undermine the prolegalization analogy. Second, many arguments
of the prolegalizers are weakened by their reliance upon a widely
held set of popular beliefs about Prohibition rather than upon
recent historical evidence. Such attempts to create this analogy
based upon these popular beliefs about Prohibition serve only to
confuse the debate over legalization of illicit drugs.97 </p>

<p>Let us examine the differences that Teasley (and others) cite
between the era of Prohibition and the era in which we now live. </p>

<p>First, during prohibition the government sought to restrict
the consumption of alcohol although it lacked the moral consensus
of the nation. That is, even during Prohibition, most people were
accepting of alcohol.98 Such is not the case today, for the vast
majority of citizens do feel that illicit drugs should remain
illegal [see Chapter Eleven]. Thus, Prohibition went against the
national consensus whereas illegalization of drugs does not. </p>

<p>Second, the laws of Prohibition themselves were different than
those dealing with illicit drugs today. During Prohibition, it
was not illegal to drink alcohol, it was only illegal to sell it.
Today, however, it is both illegal to sell and to use illicit
drugs. Consequently, today's laws can target the users while
those of the Prohibition era could not.99 </p>

<p>Third, during the Prohibition era several states did not
support the federal laws. This fact created tension between the
state and federal governments and hampered effective prosecution
of alcohol distributors. Today, 48 states have signed the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, and all are in effective agreement
with the federal government in matters of drug policy - a
state/federal consensus exists that was not present during
Prohibition.100 </p>

<p>Fourth, criminal penalties are much more severe today than in
the 1920's. For example, the first-offense bootlegger faced a
maximum fine of $ 1,000 or six months in prison. Today, a
first-offense trafficker of cocaine or heroin (of less than 100
grams) faces fines up to $1 million and imprisonment for up to 20
years.101 </p>

<p>Fifth, during Prohibition the United States was a
&quot;dry&quot; nation within a &quot;wet&quot; international
community. Just as the Prohibition policies were counter to the
moral consensus within the U.S., they were also at odds with that
of the international community (which explains why so much
alcohol was imported from Canada). But as discussed in Chapter
Three, the international community is resolute when it comes to
drug policy; in December of 1988 over 80 countries signed the
Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances.102 Sixth and finally, the administrative
structure of the government agencies designed to carry out the
Prohibition laws was narrow, unstable, and filled with political
appointees. Today's national drug strategy involves over a dozen
federal agencies coordinated by the Office of National Drug
Control Policy. In short, the governmental bodies that prosecute
today's drug violators are much larger, have much better
resources, and are much more professional than their Prohibition
counterparts.103 </p>

<p>Thus, it is factually incorrect for the legalizers to
analogize our history with Prohibition to today's drug policies.
They simply do not have that much in common. But should the
legalizers choose to make such an analogy, they also should be
made aware of the fact that Prohibition was on balance a
successful program. </p>

<p>First, use of alcohol decreased significantly during
Prohibition.104 This decrease in turn lead to a marked decrease
in the incidence of cirrhosis of the liver.105 Also,
alcohol-related arrests decreased 50%. 106 Finally, the suicide
rate also decreased by 50%.107 </p>

<p>A second reason why Prohibition was a successful program is
due to the fact that it did not -- contrary to popular myth --
cause an increase in the crime rate. It is true that there was an
increase in the homicide rate during Prohibition, but this is not
the same as an increase in the overall crime rate. Furthermore,
the increase in homicide occurred predominantly in the
African-American community, and African-Americans at that time
were not the people responsible for alcohol trafficking.108 The
drama of Elliot Ness and Al Capone largely was just that, drama
sensationalized by the media of the time. </p>

<p>In short, it is doubtful that one legitimately may analogize
Prohibition with our current efforts to control drugs. There are
too many differences in the laws, the political establishment,
the moral consensus, and the international community to make such
analogizing worthwhile. Nonetheless, the fact remains that
Prohibition accomplished many of its goals, improved the health
of the entire nation, and did not cause a significant increase in
the crime rate. Mark Kleinman, who has proposed legalizing
marijuana109 notes, the U.S. experience with Prohibition is the
best evidence to support the continued illegalization of illicit
drugs.110 </p>

<p>97 David L. Teasley, &quot;Drug legalization and the 'lessons'
of Prohibition,&quot; Contemporary Drug Problems, Spring 1992. </p>

<p>98 Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Stop Legalization of Illegal
Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter, July 1988. </p>

<p>99 David L. Teasley, &quot;Drug legalization and the 'lessons'
of Prohibition,&quot; Contemporary Drug Problems, Spring 1992. </p>

<p>100 Id. </p>

<p>101 Id. </p>

<p>102 Id. </p>

<p>103 Id. </p>

<p>104 Id. </p>

<p>105 Charles Krauthammer, &quot;Legalize? No,
Deglamorize,&quot; The Washington Post, May 20,1988. </p>

<p>106 Robert L. DuPont, &quot;The<b> </b>Case Against Legalizing
Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter. </p>

<p>107 Robert Stutman, &quot;Reasons Not to Legalize Drugs,&quot;
Drug Awareness Information Newsletter. </p>

<p>108 David L. Teasley, &quot;Drug legalization and the
'lessons' of Prohibition,&quot; Contemporary Drug Problems,
Spring 1992. </p>

<p>109 Mark A.R. Kleiman and Aaron J. Saiger, &quot;Drug
Legalization: The Importance of Asking the Right Question,&quot;
Hofstra Law Review Vol. 18, 1990. </p>

<p>110 Letter from John C. Lawn to Joseph E. DiGenova, Drug
Enforcement Administration, June 3, 1988. </p>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<h2>Chapter Five Summary Sheet: The Lessons of Prohibition and
Drug Legalization </h2>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>The lessons of Prohibition can be used to analyze the present
policies, prohibition in illicit drugs. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you say...</b> </p>

<p>Whereas there was not a moral consensus for Prohibition U.S.
citizens overwhelmingly are in favor of the the continued
illegalization of illicit drugs. [Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Stop
Legalization of Illegal Drugs;&quot; Drug Awareness Information
Newsletter, July 1988]. </p>

<p>During Prohibition, only the sale, and not the use, of alcohol
was illegal. Today, both sale and use of illicit drugs are
illegal. Consequently, present drug policies can target users
whereas Prohibition laws could not. [David L. Teasley, &quot;Drug
legalization and the 'lessons' of Prohibition,&quot; Contemporary
Drug Problems, Spring 1992]. </p>

<p>During Prohibition, there was much tension between federal and
state alcohol policy. Today, 48 states have signed the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, and the federal and state governments
work in concert. [David Teasley, citation above]. </p>

<p>During Prohibition, criminal sanctions were not extreme - a
first-time bootlegger could receive a $1,000 fine or six months
in prison. Today, fines for first-time cocaine or heroin
trafficking are up to $1 million and prison sentences go as high
as 20 years. [David Teasley, citation above). </p>

<p>During Prohibition, the U.S. was a &quot;dry&quot; country in
a &quot;wet&quot; international community. Today, almost all
countries are in agreement that drugs should be illegal, as
witnessed by the fact that 80 countries signed the 1988
Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances. [David Teasley, citation above]. </p>

<p>The political administration responsible for enforcing
Prohibition was small, underfunded, and unprofessional. In
contrast, the current drug control program is run by over a dozen
agencies coordinated by the Office of National Drug Control
Policy. [David Teasley, citation above]. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>Prohibition caused more harm than good. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you say...</b> </p>

<p>During Prohibition, alcohol use declined significantly [David
Teasley, citation above]. </p>

<p>During Prohibition, incidence of cirrhosis of the liver
decreased by 35%. [Charles Krauthammer, &quot;Legalize? No,
Deglamorize,&quot; The Washington Post, May 20, 1988]. </p>

<p>During Prohibition, the suicide rate decreased 50%. [Robert
Stutman, &quot;Reasons Not to Legalize Drugs,&quot; Drug
Awareness Information Newsletter]. </p>

<p>During Prohibition, the incidence of alcohol-related arrests
also declined by 50% [Robert L. DuPont, &quot;The Case Against
Legalizing Drugs,&quot; Drug Awareness Information Newsletter]. </p>

<p>Contrary to popular opinion, the crime rate did not markedly
increase during prohibition. What did increase was the homicide
rate (not the same as the overall crime rate) among
African-Americans. And African-Americans had little to do with
alcohol trafficking. [David Teasley, citation above]. </p>

<p>Mark Kleiman admits that the U.S. experience with Prohibition
is one of the strongest arguments in favor of the continued
illegalization of illicit drugs. [Letter from John C. Lawn to
Joseph E. DiGenova, Drug Enforcement Administration, June 3,
1988]. <br>
<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>