
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-55</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B014-321</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/cocaine/cocagum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122042735 text/html 5934
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:27:17 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:31:35 GMT
Content-length: 5717
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Experts push legalization of cocaine gum to wean addicts </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Experts push legalization of cocaine gum to wean addicts </h1>

<p> <b>By DAN FREEDMAN</b> </p>

<p> <b>Hearst News Service</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> WASHINGTON -- Quenn Victoria did it. Winston Churchill in his
youth did it, and millions of peasant farmers in South America do
it. So why not allow it in America? </p>

<p> Why not let people chew on low-potency cocaine lozenges or
gum? </p>

<p> &quot;Millions have used these products, and we have no
evidence of harm associated with it,&quot; says Ethan Nadelmann,
a professor at Princeton University's Woodrow Wilson School of
International and Public Affairs. &quot;It may be less addictive
than coffee.&quot; </p>

<p> Nadelmann and others who advocate changing the government's
zero-tolerance approach to drugs want to create a weakened
version of cocaine that could be sold over the counter as a
substitute for the hard stuff. </p>

<p> Then potential consumers would have an alternative to crack
cocaine, which is smoked, and high-purity regular cocaine, which
is snorted, the way beer and wine are alternatives to high-proof
vodka. </p>

<p> The idea of marketing cocaine-lite is not making much
head-way at a time when the American public is fearful of crime
and when the crime bill moving through Congress is promising more
prisons and punishment for drug offenders. </p>

<p> But raising the possibility of such a product goes to the
core of the debate over the best way to undercut criminal drug
enterprises. </p>

<p> Nadelmann and others argue that low-potency cocaine might
draw potential customers away from drug-trafficking organizations
smuggling tons of cocaine from South America and violent street
gangs peddling crack. </p>

<p> &quot;If some people want to distill those products down to
something more potent, let them,&quot; Nadelmann wrote in an
editorial with Rolling Stone Publisher Jann Wenner in the May 5
issue of the magazine. &quot;But most people won't want to buy
it.&quot; </p>

<p> However, Herbert Kleber, a psychiatrist and a White House
anti-drug official in the Bush administration, says low-potency
cocaine would not undercut criminal drug gangs because no one
would use it as an alternative. </p>

<p> Now a vice president of Columbia University's Center on
Addiction and Substance Abuse, Kleber calls the idea of a cocaine
substitute &quot;scientifically naive,&quot; adding that it
&quot;totally misunderstands the reason why people use and misuse
drugs.&quot; </p>

<p> Kleber compares the temptation of low-potency cocaine for the
uninitiated or the recovering addict with his experience in
quitting smoking. </p>

<p> &quot;I smoked for 25 years and if i have just one, I'm back
to two packs a day,&quot; he said. &quot;It's the same with
low-dose cocaine.&quot; </p>

<p> Dr. Andrew Weil of the University of Arizona medical school
disagrees. </p>

<p> He says the widespread chewing of coca leaves among Andean
peasants suggests that, in low dosages, cocaine is not addictive.
</p>

<p> Weil also says that the product is good for treating stomach
ailments and motion sickness. </p>

<p> &quot;It's a shame that we've made disappear from our world a
form of a drug that has a whole bunch of benefits,&quot; Weil
says. </p>

<p> Watered-down cocaine was common in turn-of-the-century
America and Europe. Recently uncovered records in Scotland
suggest that Queen Victoria and her young house guest, Winston
Churchill, consumed cocaine-filled lozenges for sore throats and
other maladies contracted while staying at Balmoral Castle. </p>

<p> At the same time, cocaine was an ingredient of Coca-Cola and
several varieties of patent medicines sold in America. All that
changed in 1914 with the Harrison Act, which banned cocaine
without a prescription. </p>

<p> Drug-law defenders say cocaine was banned because it is
dangerously addictive. </p>

<p> &quot;There are some genies you can't let out of the
bottle,&quot; Kleber says. </p>

<p> Low-potency cocaine differs from regular cocaine powder and
crack in terms of its purity level, and how fast and thoroughly
it alters brain chemistry. </p>

<p> According to Weil, the coca leaf chewed by peasant farmers in
Bolivia and Peru is half of 1 percent pure cocaine. By contrast,
cocaine smuggled in by traffickers is 50 percent to 60 percent
pure. </p>

<p> The effect of crack is even more intense because it is smoked
and its chemicals reach the brain in seconds. Cocaine inhaled
through the nose takes 30 minutes to be fully effective. Orally
ingested cocaine in lozenges or gum takes an hour, according to
Kleber. </p>

<p> John Gregich of the White House Office of National Drug
Control Policy argues that &quot;the notion you can create a safe
stimulant out of something as addictive as cocaine doesn't match
our experience.&quot; </p>

<p> Still, the University of Arizona's Weil notes that decades of
tough law enforcement measures against drug traffickers and
dealers have &quot;made worse what we want to make better,
destroying the peasant society of South America and creating the
crack culture in American cities.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>