
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-98</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B013-277</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/alcohol/vcl1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122042208 text/html 13965
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:21:57 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:35:21 GMT
Content-length: 13747
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The VCL: Architects of Repeal of Alcohol Prohibition</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>The VCL: Architects of Repeal </h1>

<p> <b>By Richard M. Evans</b> </p>

<p> Richard M. Evans is an attorney with offices at 56 Main St.,
Northampton, Mass. 01060. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>Search all the parks in all your cities. You'll find no
statues of committees.</b> </p>

<p> <b>-Unknown</b> </p>

<p> <b>You saved the very foundation of our Government. No man
can tell where we would have gone, or to what we would have
fallen, had not this repeal been brought about.</b> </p>

<p> <b>-Letter to the VCL, 1933</b> </p>

<hr>

<p> This is a story about a small, remarkable group of lawyers
who took it upon themselves, as a self-appointed committee, to
propel a revolution in drug policy: the repeal of the 18th
Amendment. </p>

<p> In 1927, nine prominent New York lawyers associated
themselves under the intentionally-bland name, 'Voluntary
Committee of Lawyers,&quot; declaring as their purpose 'to
preserve the spirit of the Constitution of the United States [by]
bringing about the repeal of the so-called Volstead Act and the
Eighteenth Amendment.&quot; With the modest platform they thus
commanded, reinforced by their significant stature in the legal
community, they undertook first to draft and promote repeal
resolutions for local and state bar associations. Their success
culminated with the American Bar Association calling for repeal
in 1928, after scores of city and state bar associations in all
regions of the country had spoken unambiguously, in words and
ideas cultivated, shaped, and sharpened by the VCL. </p>

<p> As it turned out, this success was but prelude to their
stunning achievements several years later. Due in large part to
the VCL's extraordinary work, the 18th Amendment was, in less
than a year, surgically struck from the Constitution. Repeal was
a reality. The patient was well. People could drink. </p>

<p> Here is how it happened. </p>

<p> Climaxing decades of gathering hostility towards saloons and
moral outrage over the general degeneracy said to be flowing from
bottles and kegs, the Constitution of the United Stated had been
amended, effective 1920, to prohibit the manufacture and sale of
'intoxicating liquors.' The Volstead Act, the federal statute
implementing the prohibition amendment, prohibited commerce in
beer as well. </p>

<p> At first, prohibition was popular among those who had
supported it, and tolerated by the others. But before long,
unmistakable grumbling was heard in the cities. To meet the
uninterrupted demand for alcohol, there sprang up bathtub
ginworks and basement stills, tight and discrete illegal supply
networks, and speakeasies: secret, illegal bars remembered
chiefly today as where, for the first time, women were seen
smoking in public. </p>

<p> Commerce in alcohol plunged underground, and soon fell under
the control of thugs and gangsters, whose organizations often
acquired their merchandise legally in Canada. Violence often
settled commercial differences - necessarily, it might be said,
as suppliers and distributors were denied the services of
lawyers, insurance companies, and the civil courts. On the local
level, widespread disobedience of the prohibition laws by
otherwise law-abiding citizens produced numerous arrests. Courts
were badly clogged, in large part because nearly all defendants
demanded jury trials, confident that a jury of their peers was
likely to view their plight sympathetically. </p>

<p> With the growth of well-organized and serious national
anti-Prohibition groups like Americans Against the Prohibition
Amendment and the Women's Organization for National Prohibition
Reform, popular support for repeal grew geometrically during the
thirteen years of Prohibition. In the midst of the 1932
presidential election campaign, it erupted. </p>

<p> It was summer. Millions were broken from economic depression,
beleaguered by crime and corruption, and thirsty. </p>

<p> As expected, the Republicans nominated the incumbent
President, Herbert Hoover, who was pledged to support
Prohibition. The VCL made a stalwart effort to gain a repeal
plank in the platform, taking the debate as far as the convention
floor, where they were turned away by a preponderance of
delegates. </p>

<p> The situation was much different with the Democrats. Governor
Franklin D. Roosevelt of New York, who led in the delegate count,
had carefully avoided taking a position on repeal. At the
convention, a successful floor fight produced a pro-repeal plank
drafted and defended by the VCL - in the Democratic platform,
which FDR unambiguously endorsed in his acceptance speech. 'This
convention wants repeal,&quot; he declared. &quot;Your candidate
wants repeal.&quot;, </p>

<p> During the election campaign, FDR made one unequivocal speech
endorsing repeal. Otherwise, both candidates successfully avoided
the issue, despite or perhaps because of - their having taken
opposite positions. 'Politics is the art of changing the
subject,' observed Walter Mondale many years later.' </p>

<p> When the only thing standing in the way of repeal was the
election of FDR, thousands of 'wets' and hundreds of 'wet&quot;
organizations moved unambiguously behind the Democrat. The
message was clear: Roosevelt meant repeal, and repeal meant
Roosevelt. </p>

<p> People wanted both, and Roosevelt triumphed in the election.
The number of 'wets' in Congress grew significantly. In nine
states, voters passed referenda repealing the state prohibition
laws. </p>

<p> This is when the VCL stepped forward and took on the
remarkable leadership and responsibility for which they were so
uniquely equipped. It required no particular insight into the
nature of democracy to know that when the weight of public
opinion demanded repeal of Prohibition, Prohibition would be
repealed. The question was how. Certainly, lest the repeal
process - like any important undertaking -become mired in
political and legal entanglements, a thorough and solid legal
plan was essential. </p>

<p> For years, repeal advocates had urged that the repeal
question should be resolved by conventions in the states,
which-is one of two methods prescribed in the Constitution for
ratifying amendments. Problem was, this method had never been
used. Always, the matter of amending the Constitution had been
(and to this day has been) decided by state legislatures. But to
'wets,' that was out of the question, as state legislatures were
notoriously 'dry,&quot; being dominated by rural, fundamentalist
interests, passionate in their defense of prohibition. (The 'one
man, one vote' rule would not become law for another thirty-one
years.) The repeal resolution had to bypass state legislatures
and go to popularly-elected conventions, if it were to succeed. </p>

<p> But by whom were such conventions to be called? How were
delegates to be chosen? When and where were they to convene? Who
would preside? By what rules should the convention conduct
itself'.? What rights and privileges would delegates have? How
were conflicts between state and federal law to be resolved? </p>

<p> Heavy questions, these, and neither Congress nor any state
had spoken on the subject. Enter the VCL. </p>

<p> Conferring with eminent Constitutional scholars, conducting
exhaustive legal and historical research, feverishly circulating
drafts of statutes, memoranda, briefs, summaries, etc. - the
working drawings of legal change - the VCL quickly produced a
prototype state statute, which dealt with all of the
organizational problems involved in setting up Constitutional
conventions in the states. It was as invulnerable to legal
challenge as the best legal minds could make it. Called 'truly
representative,' the conventions were carefully set up to mirror
exactly the preferences of voters. This was accomplished by
voters electing delegates pledged for or against repeal, and
apportioning delegates based on the popular Vote. </p>

<p> Thus the convention process became essentially a two-step
referendum: voters would speak, and delegates would vote
accordingly. In no way were the conventions to be deliberative
bodies. The pretense of debate was not to stand in the way of
repeal. </p>

<p> Copies of the draft bills were sent to every governor and
legislative leader in all the states. Utilizing their impressive
network of affiliate-members throughout the forty-eight states,
as well as their exquisite and plucky legal skills, the VCL
provided expert witnesses for legislative hearings, submitted
thorough legal briefs, defended legal challenges, answered
Constitutional questions - in short, enabled states to prepare
for the day that Congress would pass a repeal resolution and send
it to the states for ratification. </p>

<p> Congress finally loosened the steamroller on February 20,
1933, and by December 5, in thirty-six states (the necessary
three-fourths) legislation setting up conventions had been
enacted, the conventions had been called, delegates had been
elected and convened, and the repeal resolution had passed! The
final roll call vote, in Utah, was eagerly monitored by millions
over a national radio broadcast. </p>

<p> Nearly all the states that ratified the repeal resolution
relied heavily on the prototype statute promulgated by the VCL.
Many enacted it verbatim, others borrowed from it heavily. </p>

<p> Several hours after Utah ratified the 2lst Amendment, while
millions of Americans were celebrating, the VCL treasurer quietly
balanced the books by making a final contribution from his own
pocket in the amount of $6.66, and closed them permanently. </p>

<p> Who were they? </p>

<p> At its peak, the VCL claimed around 3,500 'affiliate' lawyers
in all states among its members. The organization was managed,
however, by a tight coterie of nine impeccably established 'white
shoe' lawyers. </p>

<p> For the entire term of its existence, the VCL was chaired by
Joseph H. Choate, Jr., a graduate of Harvard College and Harvard
Law School, son of Theodore Roosevelt's ambassador to England,
and an eminent Park Avenue lawyer. The organization's treasurer
was Harrison Tweed, another Harvard/Harvard man, one of the
country's most successful lawyers, and a prime mover in many
important civic causes. </p>

<p> Choate and Tweed and seven others, similarly pedigreed,
called themselves the Executive Committee, and prudently managed
the affairs of the organization. They were elite, but by no means
elitist. They solicited affiliates in every state and
participation by as many lawyers as possible, using ads placed in
lawyers' magazines. Every inquiry brought a thoughtful and
deliberate response as well as an appeal for financial support. </p>

<p> The executive committee hired an Executive Secretary, Mrs.
H.P. Rhoudy, who ran the national office, and visited many state
capitals, enlisting local lawyers and political figures in the
cause. Her dispatches back to NewYork ring of diplomacy at its
best. </p>

<p> What motivated these men? Their formal corporate charter,
adopted in 1927, declared their grievances: </p>

<p> The Eighteenth Amendment and the Volstead Act violate the
basic principles of our law and government and encroach upon the
powers properly reserved to the States and the people. The
attempt to enforce them has been productive of such evils and
abuses as are necessarily incident to a violation of those
principles, including: disrespect for laws; obstruction of the
due administration of justice; corruption of public officials;
abuse of legal process; resort by the Government to improper and
illegal acts in the procurement of evidence; infringement of such
constitutional guarantees as immunity from double jeopardy and
illegal search and seizure. </p>

<p> Surely, the VCL executive committee were men of society where
Prohibition was decidedly unpopular, but their declared objective
was to excise from the Constitution a vexatious and festering
sore. When they achieved that objective, they disbanded. </p>

<p> What are the lessons of their success? Certainly, timing,
preparation, and the creed of any good lobbyist: that one doesn't
have to be a politician to make policy. </p>

<p> A more foreboding lesson is that the United States
Constitution, upon which we ultimately rely for the preservation
of our form of government and our sacred individual liberties, is
highly vulnerable to the force of public opinion. If the 18th
Amendment can be repealed in a mere 288 days, cannot the First,
or the Fifth? As the VCL prototype statute was not specific to
repeal, the mechanism they helped put in place likely remains on
the book in all states that enacted it. </p>

<p> Leaders of the VCL were railroad lawyers. What railroads paid
them handsomely for, they did for the public gratis. They saw a
train coming, and hurriedly secured all the rights and easements
necessary if it were to reach its destination, avoiding a morass
of debilitating lawsuits and other legal complications. Had they
not made this vital contribution, ratification may well have
failed. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>