
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-21</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B015-85</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/brief1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051302 text/html 44842
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:12:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:54 GMT
Content-length: 44624
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Ralph Seeley's successful lawsuit for his own medical
marijuana. </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical/medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="59406" -->

<h1>Plaintiff's Reply Brief </h1>

<p><b>Ralph Seeley's successful lawsuit for his own medical
marijuana.</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>SUPERIOR COURT OF THE STATE OF WASHINGTON </p>

<p>COUNTY OF PIERCE </p>

<p>RALPH SEELEY, </p>

<p>latest </p>

<p>Plaintiff, </p>

<p>vs. </p>

<p>STATE OF WASHINGTON, </p>

<p>Defendant. </p>

<p>________________________________ </p>

<p>No. 94-2-11862-1 </p>

<p>PLAINTIFF'S REPLY BRIEF </p>

<p>SUPPORTING SUMMARY JUDGMENT </p>

<p>IN FAVOR OF PLAINTIFF </p>

<p>HEARING DATE: OCTOBER 6, 1995 </p>

<p>I. INTRODUCTION </p>

<p>The characterization of this plaintiff as bringing &quot;the
latest in a series of fruitless attempts to legalize marijuana
and bypass the legislature's exercise of its broad
discretion&quot; (defendant's brief, page 7 line 24) is an
egregious insult which trivializes the experiences of this lawyer
which led to this lawsuit. </p>

<p>DECLARATION OF RALPH SEELEY </p>

<p>I am Ralph Seeley, a lawyer and the pro se plaintiff in the
above-captioned case. I am competent to testify, and I am
testifying from my own knowledge. In the course of my
chemotherapy, despite being under the care of full-time nurses at
one of the finest cancer-treatment facilities in the country, I
found myself violently nauseated, retching uncontrollably, losing
control of my bowels, lying on the floor, covered with my own
vomit and excrement. </p>

<p>These same violent, uncontrollable symptoms would come on with
less than a minute's warning days after returning home. The only
relief I could obtain was from inhaled marijuana. Tablets
prescribed (including THC as Marinol or Dronobanol) were vomited
up undissolved. (During the years of my treatments, the cost of
the tablets went from 87 cents to more than $5 each.) </p>

<p>I undertook this lawsuit with grave misgivings as to
allocating so much of my limited time and energy (my cancer is
considered terminal) to a cause most likely to benefit only
others in the future. After a great deal of soul searching, I
elected to proceed because I believe it is every lawyer's duty to
attempt to remedy wrongs in our society, and not to simply be
'hired guns' to advocate for those who can afford to hire our
services. </p>

<p>I brought the lawsuit not as 'the latest in a series of
fruitless attempts to legalize marijuana and bypass the
legislature's exercise of its broad discretion...' as stated by
opposing counsel, but because it my educated opinion that the
legislature's system to regulate drugs has been corrupted by
zealots who contend that my suffering is justified to promote
some mythical 'greater good' of society. Further, my research
showed clearly that marijuana as medicine has not been considered
properly, both because of the misunderstandings and hysteria
surrounding the subject, and because drug certification in this
country is driven by the profit motives of pharmaceutical
companies, for which marijuana offers no resource to tap -- you
can't patent a plant. </p>

<p>I certify under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State
of Washington that the above is true. </p>

<p>Signed and dated in ________________, Washington this ___ day
of __________, </p>

<p>1995. </p>

<p>________________________ </p>

<p>Ralph Seeley </p>

<p>By resorting to such 'cheap shots' as accusing this lawyer of
'the latest in a series of fruitless attempts. . .', opposing
counsel has improperly inserted an ad hominem attack instead of
addressing the issues at hand. Her conclusory statements
regarding the nature of this lawsuit and its genesis, and the
motives of the plaintiff, should be given the consideration they
deserve -- none. </p>

<p>II. FACTS </p>

<p>Numerous mis-statements of facts as well as
mischaracterizations of facts appear in the defendant's brief: </p>

<p>The 'limited anecdotal evidence Plaintiff offers to support
his claim. . .' Defendant's brief, page 6 line 24. Primarily, the
plaintiff relies on the findings and conclusions of the DEA's own
Administrative Law Judge, Francis L. Young, whose 68-page opinion
followed hundreds of hours of testimony in three cities and
consideration of copious written evidence. A copy is attached as
Exhibit A. (Not provided to opposing counsel to conserve paper,
per discussion with opposing counsel, since counsel already has
copies.) The judge concluded that the provisions of [the
Controlled Substances] Act permit and require the transfer of
marijuana from Schedule I to Schedule II. </p>

<p>* * * </p>

<p>There are those who. . .argue that the transfer of marijuana
to Schedule II will 'send a signal' that marijuana is 'OK'
generally for recreational use. </p>

<p>This argument is specious. It presents no valid reason for
refraining from taking an action required by law in light of the
evidence. If marijuana should be placed in Schedule II in
obedience to the law, then that is where marijuana should be
placed, regardless of misinterpretation of the placement by some.
. .The fear of sending such a signal cannot be permitted to
override the legitimate need, amply demonstrated in this record,
of countless sufferers for the relief marijuana can provide when
prescribed by a physician in a legitimate case. </p>

<p>The evidence in this record clearly shows that marijuana has
been accepted as capable of relieving the distress of great
numbers of very ill people, and doing so with safety under
medical supervision. It would be unreasonable arbitrary, and
capricious for the DEA to continue to stand between those
sufferers and the benefits of this substance in light of the
evidence of this record. </p>

<p>Opinion and Recommended Ruling, Findings of Fact, Conclusions
of Law and Decision of Administrative Law Judge, pages 67-68,
Docket No. 86-22, Dept. of Justice, Drug Enforcement
Administration ('Judge Youngis Opinion')(emphasis added). </p>

<p>For opposing counsel to state that this multi-year effort by
Judge Young, cited and quoted in plaintiff's opening brief,
constitutes 'the limited anecdotal evidence Plaintiff offers to
support his claim' (defendant's brief, page 6 line 24) is clear
indication of the disdain for legitimate lawmaking held by
opposing counsel -- unless the outcome conforms with that which
'everybody knows' is correct. </p>

<p>The opinion is worth reading in its entirety. It reveals the
endless circularity and self-fulfilling 'logic' of the
prohibitionists, and establishes many facts which are intuitively
obvious. Included in that category is the issue of the entire
pharmaceutical-approval process being designed to accommodate
companies interested in marketing new drugs, referred to in the
plaintiff's declaration, above. </p>

<p>Uncontroverted evidence further establishes that in this
country today 'new drugs' are developed by pharmaceutical
companies possessing resources sufficient to bear the enormous
expense of testing a new drug, obtaining FDA approval. . .and
marketing it successfully. No company undertakes the investment
required unless it has a patent on the drug, so it can recoup its
development costs and make a profit. . .Since the substance being
considered in this case is a natural plant rather than a
synthetic new drug, it is unreasonable to make FDA-type criteria
determinative of the issue in this case. . . </p>

<p>Judge Young's Oponion, page 33-34. The opinion is not 'limited
anecdotal evidence,' but is a compendium of research and
reasoning which, taken as a whole, offers compelling and
well-supported evidence for the plaintiff. </p>

<p>The defendants make statements such as 'Scientifically
reliable evidence shows that the currently available therapies
are more effective and do not carry with them the same risks.'
(Defendant's brief page 7 line 21.) Such statements are
conclusory, false, and in any event, irrelevant, since there is
no requirement to show that marijuana is risk-free or more
effective to all persons. </p>

<p>This sort of statement is reiterated by numerous 'experts'
throughout the defendant's brief, and in sworn statements
attached. All of them assert that 'new' drugs are better and
safer. None cite any tests comparing the drugs with marijuana,
for one of the primary reasons this plaintiff brought this
lawsuit: </p>

<p>The defendant's logic, and that of its experts, is flawed
because no comparison with marijuana can be done, because the
government will not permit possession of marijuana for
experiments. See Affidavit of Doblin, Exhibit F to plaintiff's
original brief. </p>

<p>In the only scientific test cited by either party which
actually utilized marijuana (Levitt, University of Manitoba,
1984, defendant's brief at page 16 line 1, deposition of Conrad,
Exhibit C, page 18-19), involved 20 patients undergoing
chemotherapy. Fifteen to 17 had nausea, vomiting or both. They
were given, at random, tobacco cigarettes, marijuana cigarettes,
or THC tablets. Out of the 20 patients, nine had no preference,
seven preferred THC, and four preferred marijuana cigarettes. See
Conrad Deposition, pages 18-19, attached as Exhibit C. </p>

<p>As Judge Young phrased it: there is no question but that this
record shows a great many physicians, and others, to have
'accepted' marijuana as having a medical use in treatment of
cancer patients' emesis. True, all physicians have not 'accepted'
it. But to require universal, 100% acceptance would be
unreasonable. Acceptance by 'a respectable minority' of
physicians is all that can reasonably be required. </p>

<p>The record here establishes conclusively that at least 'a
respectable minority' of physicians has 'accepted' marijuana as
having a 'medical use in treatment in the United States.' That
others may not makes no difference. </p>

<p>Judge Young's Opinion, page 29. What the defendant has done is
to round up some physicians and others who weigh in on the 'anti'
side. It is perfectly predictable that such persons may be
located and their sworn statements taken. That the defendant has
done so is of no value to the Court in evaluating the merits of
the plaintiff's case. </p>

<p>The question before this court does not involve some cosmic
overview of marijuana vis-a-vis every palliative drug in the
universe. Rather, the plaintiff has posed the question: Why does
our government permit the legal amelioration of suffering among
people who can absorb THC through their digestive systems
(through prescription of Marinol tablets), while subjecting the
plaintiff to exposure to arrest for possessing the same drug in a
form he can ingest through his lungs? </p>

<p>The example of heroin cited by the defendant (brief at page 7
line 7) makes the plaintiff's point. In the bottom half of page 7
the defendant makes the point that 'several successive
generations of effective anti-emetics now [are] currently
available to cancer chemotherapy patients.' Those 'several
generations' were developed and placed on the market since the
plaintiff was diagnosed with cancer in 1986. As the defendant
pointed out, it took 18 years for the medical community to
discover that heroin was more addictive than morphine. Like
heroin and other drugs (Thalidomide and Halcyon come to mind),
the new generations of anti-emetics may yet prove to be more
dangerous than helpful. Marijuana, on the other hand, has been
used therapeutically for 5,000 years, and there is no death yet
recorded as caused by an overdose. </p>

<p>The broad statements such as that quoted above concerning
other drugs with 'decreased risk' should be ignored by this court
as not supported by evidence, and not relevant to the outcome of
this case; the defendant has cited no scientific evidence
whatsoever that THC does not remain an effective, prescribed drug
for the relief of nausea in chemotherapy. </p>

<p>The statement by defendant that 'Dr. Grinspoon's testimony is
undeniably biased by his position that all drugs should be
available for recreational use' is false and should be ignored as
the red herring that it is. </p>

<p>The defendant's attorney undoubtedly bases such a false
accusation on Dr. Grinspoon's embracing of the 'harm reduction'
model of drug laws used successfully in The Netherlands, where
drug abuse is treated as a medical, not a legal, problem. Hard
drugs remain unlawful in that country, but are available through
medical channels to the addicted. Thus, they have a small
fraction of the drug addicts compared to those in the United
States, and an even smaller fraction of the secondary (crime)
problems associated with drug addiction, since there is no black
market driving drug costs up and creating huge profit motives for
the unscrupulous. That Dr. Grinspoon embraces such a model in
contrast to our own policies (build more prisons, fill them up),
is no reason to question his knowledge or research-supported
opinion on the medical issues at hand. (For some overall insight
into the circular logic and straightforward falsehoods employed
by our federal officials in the 'war on drugs,' see the attached
pamphlets, exhibits B and E, and note the hundreds of citations
to authority.) </p>

<p>In fact, Dr. Grinspoonis book, The Speed Culture: Amphetamine
Use and Abuse in America, Harvard University Press, 1975, was
among the first to sound the warning that 'popping little white
pills' (in the words of the country-western song 'Six Days On The
Road') was far more harmful than anyone was giving it credit for
at that time. In the aftermath of the publishing of that book,
the potential for harm of that class of drugs became more widely
known, and the drugs became more carefully controlled. </p>

<p>Dr. Grinspoon is a physician and scientist with impressive
memberships in professional associations, and publication both in
books for lay persons and in scientific literature, including the
prestigious, juried New England Journal of Medicine. (His
Curriculum Vitae is attached to those portions of his deposition
submitted by the defendants.) His views are 'refuted' by the
defendants with an anonymous author who writes for U.S. News and
World Report, who in turn cites a former politician (defendant's
brief, page 14), who in turn recites the tired ritual statement
'Children who smoke pot are 85 times more likely to use cocaine.'
This myth is not supported by fact. See 'Myth #11' of Exposing
Marijuana Myths, attached as Exhibit B, and the scientific and
authoritative publications cited. </p>

<p>The defendant's attorney confuses correlation with causation.
It is absolutely true, upon statistical analysis, that, for
example, persons with larger feet are more adept at mathematics
than those with small feet. It is equally true that the density
of fire hydrants accurately predicts the incidence of diabetes.
The former is true because infants can't do math at all, and have
small feet. The latter is true because the density of fire
hydrants predicts the density of population, thus the statistical
appearance of any disease that occurs randomly throughout the
population. According to the logic presented in the defendant's
brief, we should stretch person's feet to increase their ability
at mathematics; outlaw fire hydrants to eliminate diabetes; and
continue to outlaw the relief of suffering among desperately ill
people to eliminate cocaine use. </p>

<p>What most obviously is true is that 100 percent of the persons
using cocaine are using cocaine -- a Schedule II drug. Using the
drug without a prescription carries exactly the same penalties as
using a Schedule I drug. So what 'signal' is being sent by
changing marijuana from Schedule I to Schedule II? </p>

<p>Whether 85 percent of pot-smoking children eventually use
cocaine is completely irrelevant to this case. In any event, this
seems to be a re-hash of the argument that to allow marijuana use
by prescription will 'send a signal' to young people, who will
then use other illegal drugs. This was addressed as 'specious' by
Judge Young. See Opinion of Young excerpt, supra. </p>

<p>The 'facts' presented on this subject are an attempt to
sidetrack the Court, and should be ignored by the Court for what
they are -- false statements of fact supporting illogical
analysis, and in any event, not relevant to the controversy at
hand. </p>

<p>The argument that 'there are no safe standards' because 'The
marijuana plant contains over 400 different chemicals and is not
chemically consistent' is another contention that is irrelevant
and not supported by evidence. (See defendantis brief, page 17.) </p>

<p>As established by the Affidavit of McKinney, Exhibit D,
attached, the technology exists to produce pharmacologically pure
THC from the natural marijuana (hemp) plant, which can be smoked
and absorbed through the lungs in its pure form. </p>

<p>Thus, if this '400 chemicalsi argument were a legitimate
reason to force the plaintiff to continue choosing between
suffering and breaking the law, there is a simple method of
overcoming the problem. However, this entire line of argument is
clearly a smokescreen (sorry) for attempting to legitimize what
'everybody knows.' Put another way, however many chemicals may be
created by burning the leaves of the hemp plant, there is still
no evidence that in 5,000 years of use, it has ever caused a
death. The same cannot be said of aspirin, which kills
approximately 180 persons per year, and caffeine, which kills
approximately 1,000. See Compare Legal Drugs With Illegal Drugs,
Washington Hemp Education Network, page 10-11 and note 58. </p>

<p>It is noteworthy that the pamphlets attached as Exhibits B and
E contain 66 and 107 citations to legitimate authorities,
respectively. This is more of the 'limited anecdotal evidence'
which the defendant counters with unsupported opinions. </p>

<p>The '400 unknown chemicals' argument is without merit. The
facts establish that burning the leaves or buds of the hemp plant
and inhaling the smoke relieves grievous suffering, with
virtually no risk. That is established by the legitimate inquiry
and report by the Drug Enforcement Administration's chief
Administrative Law Judge, who considered that and other arguments
before issuing his report. (To eliminate pronoun confusion, the
late Judge Francis Young was a man.) The plaintiff brought this
suit because the process following that report was corrupted, to
the detriment of the sick and helpless. The defendant now
attempts to regurgitate as 'fact' those opinions which have
already been shown not to be factual, not to be relevant, and
which would not change the outcome of a legitimate inquiry such
as the plaintiff hopes is the result of this suit, even if they
were true. </p>

<p>III. ARGUMENT </p>

<p>The arguments presented by the defendant are excruciatingly
circular and self-validating. Expert after expert states that
scientific studies do not support the plaintiff's position. But
the only scientific study actually utilizing vegetable-state
marijuana showed that some of the patients preferred it.
Deposition of Conrad, Exhibit C page 19. Meanwhile, no further
studies are permitted, because the government won't allow them,
because the drug is illegal. It is illegal because no scientific
evidence supports its use. (See Affidavit of Doblin, attached to
plaintiffis opening brief as Exhibit F.) And the circle starts
again. </p>

<p>A. THE DEFENDANT HAS MIS-STATED THE BURDEN ON THE PLAINTIFF,
WHO MAY PREVAIL UNDER SEVERAL THEORIES OR ANALYSES. </p>

<p>The defendants mis-characterize this lawsuit as a challenge to
'the legislature's classification system for controlled
substances on its face.' Defendant's brief, page 5,6. The entire
analysis is based on that assumption. Included in the defendant's
analysis is the statement that, because this is a 'facial'
challenge, the plaintiff must overcome the presumption of
constitutionality of a statute 'beyond a reasonable doubt.' </p>

<p>The plaintiff is not challenging the statute as
unconstitutional 'on its face.' The plaintiff concedes that the
legislature had every right to enact the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, RCW .50, in 1971, and to place marijuana in
Schedule I based on the information available at that time, just
as Congress had every right to enact similar federal statutes. </p>

<p>However, in both the federal and state statutes, officials are
charged with reviewing drugs to place them in different
categories as new facts are brought to light. This process was
followed to the extent that Judge Young spent several years of
effort examining evidence and issuing a report and
recommendation, attached as Exhibit A. What followed was a
shameful corruption of the system by law enforcement officials,
not medical persons. </p>

<p>In essence, the head of the DEA stated, 'I don't care what the
evidence shows or what Judge Young recommends based on the
evidence, marijuana is staying in Schedule I because I say so.'
This was appealed to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, which
pointed out the flawed logic -- a drug that is illegal can never
meet the criteria of 'currently accepted medical use.' The head
of the DEA then re-worded his opinion, still refusing to
re-schedule the drug, and his new language withstood the narrow,
technical test applied by the circuit court. </p>

<p>This plaintiff brings this lawsuit before a Washington judge,
based on the Washington constitution, because our constitution
contains more powerful protections of individual rights. It is
this plaintiff's hope that under Washington law the broad,
self-serving statements concerning the 'greater good' of society,
unsupported by evidence, will not overcome this individual's
right to relieve his suffering without breaking the law. </p>

<p>/ / / </p>

<p>1. The 'equal protection' analysis borrowed from the federal
government should not apply, but the plaintiff should prevail
even if the court employs it. </p>

<p>In the plaintiff's opening brief, Justice Utteris dissenting
opinion in State v. Smith, 117 Wn.2d 263, 282, 814 P.2d 652
(1991), was adopted by reference. </p>

<p>The analysis set forth calls for a completely different
approach to our Privileges and Immunities clause, Const. Art. 1
ss 12, than the 'levels of scrutiny' borrowed from the federal
analysis of the Equal Protection clause of the 14th Amendment to
the U.S. Constitution. Below, plaintiff navigates through that
analysis. </p>

<p>The defendant contends that the Court should utilize the
'levels of scrutiny' analysis, and that the court should adopt
the lowest level of scrutiny. </p>

<p>First, if the Court is to indulge in this analysis, the
highest level of scrutiny should be used, since the right of a
doctor to relieve the suffering of his patient, and the right of
a patient to have the relief of suffering available without being
subjected to arrest, are fundamental rights. This can be found in
various cases stated as a right to medical privacy, or a liberty
interest protected by due process. See: In re Ingram, 102 Wn.2d
827 (1984) (incompetent person's right to medical
self-determination); O'Hartigan v. Dept. of Personnel, 118 Wn.2d
111 (1991) (level of scrutiny re: privacy); In re Colyer, 99
Wn.2d 114 (1983) (privacy in medical decisions); State v. Koome,
84 Wn.2d 901 (1975) (doctor and patient's medical privacy); In re
Hamlin, 102 Wn.2d 810 (1984)(right to choose termination of
medical treatment -- here we are asserting a right to choose a
particular medical treatment less harmful than the treatments
permitted). These are in addition to the citations in the
plaintiffis opening brief. </p>

<p>Whatever level of scrutiny the Court chooses to apply (if
any), the plaintiff should prevail, because the countervailing
interest of the state is illusory. Which is to say, even the
'rational relationship' test used at the lowest level of scrutiny
provides no rationale for the plaintiff to be forced to lie on
the floor covered with his own excrement and vomit, or
alternatively to break the law. </p>

<p>The only benefit to the State that can be discerned in
defendant's argument is that (1) the State has a duty to 'ensure
the public of the adequacy, efficacy and safety of substances
used in the treatment of illnesses,' defendant's brief at page 5
line 1; to 'protect ill and vulnerable members of the public from
unsafe and/or ineffective medical treatments,' Id. line 16, and
by implication, to prevent abuse of the drug on a larger scale,
Id. Page 19. </p>

<p>The state has provided only conclusory, illogical and
non-factual statements to support the contention that maintaining
marijuana in Schedule I supports any of those goals. </p>

<p>In fact, the clear evidence is to the contrary. Surely, nobody
denies that thousands of patients in the shoes if the plaintiff
are smoking marijuana for the relief of their symptoms. Because
the drug is in Schedule I, we must all obtain the drug on the
black market, where its purity is unknown and unregulated. By
placing the drug in Schedule II, we would be able to obtain
pharmaceutically pure medication -- the stated goal of this sort
of regulation. </p>

<p>To hold that the Equal Protection/Levels-of-Scrutiny analysis
borrowed from the federal government and applied to our
Privileges and Immunities clause calls for the continued
prohibition of this valuable herb as medicine is to stretch legal
fictions to the level of the absurd. </p>

<p>2. Under the 'privileges and immunities' analysis properly
applied to our state's constitutional clause, the plaintiff
should prevail. </p>

<p>As Justice Utter pointed out in State v. Smith, supra,
(Exhibit G to plaintiff's opening brief), the analysis which
should be applied under Wash. Const. Art. I ss 12 is by applying
four questions: (1) was the challenged state action properly
performed under lawful authority; (2) does the action implicate a
'privilege' or 'immunity'; (3) does the action allegedly
discriminate against an individual or a class; and if so, (4) is
the discrimination permissible? Id., 117 Wn.2d at 288
(parenthetical numbers added). There is no requirement to
establish a 'class,'i which squares with the plain language of
the Constitution: </p>

<p>No law shall be passed granting to any citizen. . .privileges
or immunities which upon the same terms shall not equally belong
to all citizens. . . </p>

<p>Const. Art. 1 ss 12. As cited by Justice Utter: </p>

<p>The clause. . .may be invoked by an individual who demands
equality of treatment with other individuals as well as by one
who demands equal privileges or immunities for a class to which
he or she belongs. </p>

<p>State v. Smith, supra (citations omitted). </p>

<p>Here, the plaintiff is simply pointing out that other persons,
who can absorb THC through their digestive systems, are given the
privilege of ending their suffering and immunity from arrest for
possession of THC, while the plaintiff, whose suffering can be
ended through absorbing THC through his lungs, is arbitrarily
denied the privilege of ending his suffering and the immunity
from arrest through prescription. </p>

<p>The first three questions posed in the analysis, then, are
answered 'yes.' </p>

<p>The fourth question remains - 'Is the discrimination
permissible?' </p>

<p>According to the only serious, long-term study by a neutral
official, Judge Francis Young, it is not; he stated that it would
be unreasonable, arbitrary and capricious to withhold the drug
from persons such as the plaintiff. Further, the only comparative
scientific study (Levitt, supra) determined that for some
patients, smoked marijuana was the treatment preferred. No other
experimental data is available because the government prohibits
the experiments. See Affidavit of Doblin, Exhibit F of
plaintiff's original brief. </p>

<p>The plaintiff and thousands of persons in his shoes are not
ignorant, illiterate or stupid. We read medical literature, legal
documents (such as the Young opinion), and we experiment to end
our suffering. We use marijuana because it works, as Judge Young
found, and because other drugs do not. </p>

<p>The evidence' supporting the value to the state of the ongoing
discrimination against the plaintiff is circular, self-serving,
and makes a mockery of both procedural and substantive law.
Further, it makes criminals of society's most helpless people,
and their families. There is no justification for the
discrimination, and in the name of compassion, reason, and to end
the massive mockery of the law by medical users across the
country, this court should find that the ongoing classification
of marijuana as a Schedule I drug is a violation of the
plaintiff's rights under Article I ss 12 of the Constitution of
the State of Washington. </p>

<p>B. THE DEFENDANT'S CONTENTION THAT THE WASHINGTON SUPREME
COURT HAS ALREADY REJECTED PLAINTIFF'S CLAIM IS REFUTED BY THE
OUTDATED CITATIONS RELIED UPON. </p>

<p>As stated above, the primary evidence relied upon by the
plaintiff is Judge Young's opinion, issued in 1988. In Section B
of the defendantis brief, defendant cites a 1981 case, contending
that the state's supreme court has already ruled on this issue..
Clearly, the Washington Supreme Court has not analyzed this issue
in light of the massive effort put forth by Judge Young, and his
68-page report recommending that marijuana be re-scheduled. </p>

<p>Further, in State v. Smith, 93 Wn.2d 329, 610 P.2d 869 (1980),
the court held that statutory punishment for possession of
marijuana did not rise to the level of cruel and unusual
punishment. Justice Dolliver wrote a 14-page dissent, in which
two other justices concurred. Thus, only two more Justices would
be required to find marijuana legal without analyzing its medical
value. </p>

<p>Under these circumstances, to claim that our Supreme Court has
put this matter to rest is, in a word, ridiculous. </p>

<p>C. THE FEDERAL PROCESS FOLLOWING THE ISSUANCE OF JUDGE YOUNG'S
OPINION WAS CORRUPTED, AND WASHINGTON COURTS ARE UNDER NO
OBLIGATION TO DENY THE PLAINTIFF THE PROTECTION OF WASHINGTON'S
CONSTITUTION BASED ON FEDERAL BUREAUCRATIC TURF WARS. </p>

<p>The plaintiff set out the outlines of 'the federal farce' in
pages 14 through 18 of his opening brief. The plaintiff, as a
lawyer and officer of the court, does not label federal agency
and court actions as 'farce' lightly. But no other, less
pejorative word applies. </p>

<p>The overarching question is: Why are we letting the police
make our medical decisions? </p>

<p>The Drug Enforcement Administration is a law-enforcement
agency. It is not charged with the advancement of science or the
alleviation of suffering. </p>

<p>Congress put in place a method for evaluating whether a drug
should be re-scheduled upon discovery of new evidence of more or
less efficacy or harm than was known when the drug was originally
scheduled. Judge Young followed that procedure, and found that
the law 'requires' marijuana to be re-scheduled to alleviate 'the
legitimate need, amply demonstrated in this record, of countless
sufferers for the relief marijuana can provide when prescribed by
a physician.' Young Opinion, page 67-8. </p>

<p>After that, the 'drug czar' or 'top cop' or whatever currently
accepted name is in vogue for the head drug-law enforcer simply
invoked the bureaucratic power of ipse dixit to deny
rescheduling. </p>

<p>It is well-established law that Washington's constitution
provides safeguards to personal liberty which are absent in the
federal constitution. Indeed, Article I ss 1, cited but not
quoted by the defendant, states unequivocally that governments. .
.are established to protect and maintain individual rights. </p>

<p>Id. In addition to the cases cited in plaintiff's opening
brief, see State v. Bartholomew, 101 Wn.2d 631, 639 (1984)(due
process); and State v. Young, 123 Wn.2d 173 (1994)(right to
privacy). </p>

<p>Thus, while federal courts may bow to the power of federal law
enforcement agencies and their head bureaucrats in determining
which citizens shall suffer for lack of medication and who shall
not, the judges in this state are not bound by those decisions. </p>

<p>The dozens of opinions of federal courts and doctors to the
effect that marijuana is not the best medicine for many people
most of the time is irrelevant. This plaintiff found that
marijuana relieved excruciating, demeaning, demoralizing
suffering in a manner that no prescribed medicine could begin to
approach. (Declaration of Seeley, Exhibit B to original brief,
which the plaintiff urges the Court to re-read in its entirety.)
This plaintiff's experience is not unique, as asserted by Judge
Young's opinion citing to 'countless' sufferers. Young opinion at
68. </p>

<p>The invoking of federal procedure in Section C of the
defendant's brief is of no consequence to resolving this dispute
under the Washington constitution. </p>

<p>D. THE CITATION TO THE 'RELEVANT MEDICAL COMMUNITY' REJECTING
MARIJUANA IS A RESULT, NOT A CAUSE, OF MARIJUANA'S ILLEGAL
STATUS. </p>

<p>The smear tactics against Lester Grinspoon, M.D., engaged in
by the defendant in their brief at Section D, has been addressed
above, in the 'facts' section. </p>

<p>As stated and reiterated supra, only one experiment has been
reported which actually used vegetable-state marijuana in
comparison with other anti-emetics. A substantial minority of the
patients treated preferred it. See deposition of Conrad, Exhibit
C, page 19. </p>

<p>No other experiments have been done, because the federal
government prohibits them. See Affidavit of Doblin, Exhibit F to
plaintiff's opening brief. </p>

<p>So what we have is opinion based on rhetoric stacked on top of
other opinion based on rumor. This is not a battle of opinions.
However many credentialled persons the defendant may round up to
state that 'marijuana is not proven. . .' is of no consequence.
This plaintiff had an experience that cannot be disputed by
'experts' who have not shared the experience. The years and reams
of paper expended by Judge Young to arrive at an overview have
the validity of having been performed by someone out to determine
the truth, not someone brought in to testify on one side of an
issue. </p>

<p>As the defendant points out (brief at page 7), it took 18
years of use by the medical community before they figured out
that heroin was a more addictive painkiller than morphine.
Marijuana has not had the benefit of 18 years of use by the
modern medical community. How then do these 'experts' dare to
claim they can reach valid conclusions? </p>

<p>As the defendant also points out, more studies need to be
done, a point virtually all agree upon. Placing marijuana in
Schedule II would result in more studies -- virtually every
patient in the plaintiff's shoes would be the subject of those
studies, by the mere gathering of statistical data. </p>

<p>The defendant labels their group of 'experts' as the 'relevant
medical community.' Plaintiff asserts that the 'relevant medical
community' is the group of persons who have undergone the same
horrendous chemotherapy nausea, vomiting and loss of bowel
control as the plaintiff. Gathering statistics from that
community is difficult, since many of the people die, and others
are reluctant to admit to breaking the law. But according to
Judge Young's opinion, they are 'countless.' </p>

<p>The 'relevant community' argument is an attempt to transfer
the legal issue to 'my expert is better than yours.' It has no
place in this litigation, and should be ignored by the Court. </p>

<p>E. THE 'NO SAFE STANDARDS' IS BOTH FALSE AND A SPECIOUS
ARGUMENT AGAINST 'SELF-TITRATION.' </p>

<p>The plaintiff is regularly sent home from the hospital with
enough narcotics (oxycodone, Dilaudid (hydromorphone), etc.) to
kill several people. He is expected to take the tablets as
directed. To do otherwise would be unsafe. The plaintiff could
easily ingest a lethal dose of the drug, as is true of many
prescription drugs. There is no lethal dose of vegetable-state
marijuana. See Exhibit E page 8 and supporting endnotes. </p>

<p>Instead of 'self-titration,' which the plaintiff indulges in
by smoking a few puffs of marijuana and waiting a few minutes to
see if it is enough (see Declaration of Seeley, Exhibit B to
original brief), the defendant asks that the Court enforce the
current law requiring that THC be administered in pre-measured
doses, which results in much worse side effects, and much longer
debilitation from those side effects. </p>

<p>Again, in the only serious fact-finding effort made on the
subject, Judge Young specifically held that marijuana has been
accepted as capable of relieving the distress of great numbers of
very ill people, and doing so with safety under medical
supervision. </p>

<p>Young Opinion at 68. What is true, and was raised supra, is
that currently, the purity of black-market marijuana can be
questionable, which would cease to be a problem if the drug were
available by prescription. </p>

<p>F. THE 'NO NEW SCIENTIFICALLY RELIABLE EVIDENCE' ARGUMENT IS
MORE OF THE SAME CIRCULAR, SELF-SERVING, OUTDATED NONSENSE. </p>

<p>Defendant's argument in Section F is a rehash of arguments
made and refuted above. Note that all cases pre-date Judge
Young's opinion. </p>

<p>And once again, Why is there no new scientific evidence?
Because the federal government prohibits experiments. Affidavit
of Doblin, Exhibit F to original brief. </p>

<p>G. MARIJUANA HAS A 'HIGH POTENTIAL FOR ABUSE:' SO WHAT? </p>

<p>The plaintiff frankly believes the 'abuse' of marijuana is
overstated and misunderstood throughout the judicial and law
enforcement communities. But even conceding that it has a 'high
potential for abuse,' that is of no relevance. Opium and cocaine
also have high potentials for abuse, and they are Schedule II
drugs. </p>

<p>Again, Judge Young noted that Marijuana can be harmful.
Marijuana is abused. But the same is true of dozens of drugs or
substances which are listed in Schedule II so that they can be
employed in treatment by physicians in proper cases, despite
their abuse potential. Young Opinion at 67. This is simply not a
valid reason to make the plaintiff suffer as he was forced to do
without breaking the law. </p>

<p>I. DEFENDANT'S ARGUMENTS UNDER SECTIONS I, J AND K OF
DEFENDANT'S BRIEF ARE ADDRESSED ABOVE, AND IN PLAINTIFF'S OPENING
BRIEF. </p>

<p>The defendants re-hash old arguments, and fail utterly to
defend against plaintiff's contention that he is protected by
Article I ss 32, the 'frequent recurrence to fundamental
principles' clause. </p>

<p>1. Of course the state can control 'drugs of abuse,' but so
what? </p>

<p>The argument set forth in Section J of defendant's brief
implies that the plaintiff believes the state should not
'control' marijuana. Nothing could be further from the truth.
History teaches us that prohibition results in loss of control,
while regulation (and sane laws) result in control. We need only
look to the experiment with national alcohol prohibition. </p>

<p>The state is not now 'controlling' marijuana use. It is
prohibiting marijuana use. The plaintiff is asking the Court to
change that, so the state will control the use of marijuana for
medical purposes, the same as it does with cocaine, opium, and
other potentially harmful but extremely helpful drugs. There is
no question that the state has the power to regulate the use of
marijuana, and that is what the state should do. Placing
desperately ill people in jail for the use of a valuable
medicine, however, is a crude and cruel method of regulation, and
the state should get out of that business forthwith. </p>

<p>J. THE 'FREQUENT RECURRENCE TO FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES' CLAUSE
DICTATES THE PLACING OF MARIJUANA IN SCHEDULE II. </p>

<p>There is little case law interpreting Article I ss 32. Absent
reasons to do otherwise, words of laws should be read to assert
their standard, understood meanings. (This itself is a
fundamental principle A valid interpretation of the clause, and
the reason for it, lies in the common human experience of taking
a number of small, seemingly reasonable steps, then finding
oneself in an unreasonable situation. It becomes time to pause,
take stock, perhaps return to the last intersection and try a
different road. </p>

<p>That is what is needed here, now. When marijuana was placed in
Schedule I, it belonged in Schedule I. With Judge Young's careful
research and analysis, it should have been placed in Schedule II
in 1988. </p>

<p>We now have compassionate judges granting quasi-judicial
permission to ill people to use this valuable drug to ease their
suffering, which amounts to 'prescription by going to jail.' See
Declaration of Subin, Exhibit E of plaintiff's opening brief. It
is a fundamental principle that judges should not be placed in
that position by the continued enforcement of unreasonable laws
levied against desperately ill and helpless citizens. The
plaintiff asks this Court to review the 'fundamental principles'
discussion in the opening brief at pages 36-39, and to find that
the plaintiff's rights, and the rights of countless others,
established under that clause, are violated by the continued
placement of marijuana in Schedule I. </p>

<p>IV. CONCLUSION </p>

<p>Whether under the federal 'equal protection' analysis, under
the separate 'privileges and immunities' analysis, the 'frequent
recurrence to fundamental principles' analysis, or under all
three, the Court should grant the plaintiff's motion for summary
judgment, and issue a declaration that the continued placement of
marijuana under Schedule I of the Uniform Controlled Substances
Act is a violation of the plaintiff's rights as protected by the
Constitution of the State of Washington. </p>

<p>SIGNED AND DATED this ___ day of ____________, 1995. </p>

<p>By: _________________________ </p>

<p>RALPH SEELEY, WSBA 22469 </p>

<p>(pro se) </p>

<p>PLAINTIFF'S REPLY BRIEF </p>

<p>law offices of </p>

<p>NEIL J. HOFF </p>

<p>252 Broadway </p>

<p>Tacoma, Washington 98402 </p>

<ol>
    <li>383-3434 </li>
</ol>

<p><br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical/medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="59406" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>