
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-69</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B006-324</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/findings.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134857 text/html 39701
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:48:47 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:32 GMT
Content-length: 39483
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana - Findings</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana </b></p>

<h1>FINDINGS </h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p><b>Rorschach Test</b> </p>

<p>Table 14 gives the Rorschach findings for 45 subjects both in
the undrugged and drugged states. The measurable changes on the
test which occurred during the period of drug intoxication were
few and not far-reaching. They may be considered indications of
tendencies rather than of significant alterations of the
personality. </p>

<p>(TABLE 14) </p>

<p>When the subjects were under the influence of marihuana
(either 3- 6 cc. or cigarettes, the number of cigarettes being at
the discretion of the smoker) there was a slightly freer flow of
associations than there was when they were in the undrugged
state, an increased productivity which coincided with the
impressions obtained from general observation of the subjects
when they were &quot;high.&quot; Without drug the average number
of interpretations made was 20.0, with drug 23.3. This increased
number of responses was due primarily to the subject's greater
awareness of small, extraneous details which in his undrugged
state he overlooked. Thus, while 17 per cent of the subjects'
answers were small or rare detail responses when no marihuana had
been administered, with marihuana this increased to 21 per cent.
Coincidental with his increased absorption in the irrelevant
there was a slight decrease in the subject's drive to organize
and synthesize. Whereas without drug 40 per cent of the responses
involved the entire blot, with drug this was true of only 36 per
cent of the interpretations. Under the influence of marihuana
there was a mild tendency for the subject to become preoccupied
with minutiae rather than to concern himself with the larger,
more important aspects of a situation, and this implies some
falling off in meaningful constructive behavior. </p>

<p>When the subject had taken marihuana there was some decrease
in the objectivity with which he sized up situations. This was
indicated by the fact that without drug 92 per cent of his
interpretations were good form, that is, they corresponded to the
form of the blot, while with drug this percentage fell to 86 per
cent. The drug had an adverse effect on the individual's critical
faculty and he was more prone to jump to erroneous conclusions
than he was when he was in the undrugged state. </p>

<p>The only other change that occurred on the Rorschach test
after the ingestion of marihuana was the decrease in the
subject's ability to think in line with the group. This showed
itself in the decreased number of popular interpretations made,
the drop being from 27 per cent without drug to 20 per cent with
drug. In other words, during the period of drug intoxication an
individual is somewhat less likely to see the obvious and the
commonplace than he is in his normal state. </p>

<p>As important, or possibly even more important, than the
changes which occurred on the Rorschach after ingestion or
smoking of marihuana, is the fact that some of the most basic
personality attributes remained unchanged. Thus it appeared that
33 per cent of the subjects in the undrugged state were what is
described as introversive, that is, they were individuals who
tend to withdraw somewhat from the world about them and depend
primarily on their own inner resources for emotional stimulation;
20 per cent were extraversive, depending mainly on their
environment for affective satisfaction; 20 per cent were
ambivert, showing equal potentialities in both directions; and 27
per cent were emotionally constricted to the point where they
gave little or no evidence of emotional response of any type.
With drug 36 per cent were introversive, 22 per cent were
extraversive, 20 per cent were ambivert, and 22 per cent were
constricted. Marihuana ingestion or smoking served to dilate the
emotional life of only 2 of the subjects and shifted the type of
1. In all 3 cases the change was actually a very slight one. The
fact that the emotional trends remain essentially unchanged under
the influence of marihuana was further revealed by the fact that
the ratio for evaluating the individual's emo tional type, that
is, the ratio of movement to color, remained roughly the same
before and after he had taken the drug, being 2.3:1.6 when he was
in the undrugged state and 2.9:2.1 when he was in the drugged
phase. </p>

<p>Although the quantitative changes occurring with marihuana
ingestion or smoking were not large, there was a qualitative
difference in the protocols obtained from the subjects in the
undrugged and drugged stages. Not only was there a slight
increase in the actual number of interpretations made, but the
amount of talking and extraneous comment increased. The subject
played around with answers and often repeated them. He seemed
anxious to get his every thought clearly across to his audience.
More than this, he was much freer in the type of interpretation
he allowed himself. </p>

<p>For example, one interpretation on Card II read: &quot;Two
dogs. Now wait a minute. I don't want to jump to conclusions but
it looks as if the dogs were having intercourse and there was a
rupture.&quot; This response was not repeated when the subject
was retested in the undrugged state. Nor was this individual
unique in showing this qualitative difference. The disinhibition
and lessening of restraint which was a definitely observable
effect of the drug was also reflected in the assured explanations
and lengthy tirades which the subject offered on topics which in
his undrugged state he would undoubtedly feel were beyond him.
Thus one subject interpreted Card X as &quot;old bark of trees,
roots dried up. It's thousands of years old; it takes thousands
of years to do that. I got to tell you that. I got to cover for
you. You wouldn't know about a thousand years ago. I'm smart
now.&quot; In some instances the &quot;cockiness&quot; induced by
his drugged condition produced an entirely new attitude in the
subject. Instead of the customary deferential, almost
ingratiating approach there was now a confident
&quot;know-it-all&quot; manner. </p>

<p>The effects of marihuana ingestion on user and non-user were
essentially the same, as indicated by the findings in Table 14,
except that on the whole the alterations which did occur were
more marked for the non-user than for the user. Thus, for
example, while the average number of responses given by the user
increased only 11 per cent, those of the non-user rose 26 per
cent. Again, the user when drugged gave only 6 per cent fewer
whole answers as against a decrease of 15 per cent in the whole
responses of the non-user in the drugged state. The user showed a
29 per cent increase in small detail interpretations, the
non-user 31 per cent. There was only a 2 per cent drop in good
form interpretation by the user as against a 12 per cent drop for
the non-user. Only in the loss of popular interpretations did the
user exceed the non-user, his falling off being as great as 31
per cent as compared with 24 per cent for the non-user. While the
number of subjects in both groups was too small to allow of
definite statements, the trend seemed to indicate that the
ingestion or smoking of marihuana has a greater adverse or
disorganizing effect on the neophyte than on the experienced
smoker, again, as was the case in the study of mental
functioning, suggesting the possibility of psychological
habituation. </p>

<p>When the protocols obtained from these marihuana users in
their undrugged state are compared with those of the nonusers or
with the norms postulated for average adults of this age level,
certain deviating personality traits in these users may be noted.
The most striking deviation is the small percentage of users who
showed an extraversive personality. Only 15 per cent of the
marihuana users used in this study responded primarily to
emotional stimuli in the world about them as compared with 28 per
cent of the non-users. </p>

<p>While no definite figures are given in the literature for the
degree of extraversion in the general population, it seems
definitely more than 15 per cent. Altogether the personality
types among the non-users show a much more even distribution than
those among the users as seen in Table 15. Judging by the
personality types the majority of marihuana users lack social
ease and adroitness and are likely to find it difficult to make
good outgoing social contacts. </p>

<p>(TABLE 15) </p>

<p>Sixty-two per cent of the marihuana users' interpretations
were determined by the form or outline of the blot. Such
responses require an objective critical attitude unmodified by
emotional factors. However, when this attitude is maintained to
the point where more than 50 per cent of the answers are of this
nature the individual has a constricted affective life the degree
of constriction being in proportion to the increase in form
interpretations Thus, as was previously noted, there was more
than average emotional inhibition evident among the marihuana
users studied in this experiment. Since emotional inhibition
frequently causes intellectual constriction it is not surprising
to find that the stereotypy in these records was slightly above
expectancy, as indicated by the fact that 59 per cent of the
responses were animal or animal detail interpretations as
compared with a norm of from 25 to 50 per cent. </p>

<p>Finally the marihuana users (as well as the non-users in this
experiment) showed a depressive outlook in that more of their
responses were determined by the gray and black colors than by
the vivid colors. In interpreting this fact it must be borne in
mind that the subjects were all prisoners and their depressive
attitude may have been a reflection of their present situation
rather than of a basic trait. </p>

<p><b>Goodenough Test (Drawing of a Man)</b> </p>

<p>This test is helpful in studying each individual both in the
drugged and undrugged state, but group results are not meaningful
(except for one finding given below) because of a lack of
similarity both in the drawings obtained in the undrugged state
and in the direction of change which occurred after drug
ingestion or smoking. However, certain qualitative findings
proved interesting and are therefore reported here. In a number
of cases the identical drawing was produced in the undrugged, 2
cc., 5 cc., and cigarette state, but the size of the figure
increased consistently with the amount of marihuana taken. This
increase in size may have been a reflection of a physical
sensation induced by the drug, rnay have been due to a tendency
to macrographia which was noted in the writing of some subjects,
or may have been the psychological representation of increased
feelings of confidence and security. </p>

<p>With marihuana there was an increase in the percentage of
subjects who remembered to give their man ears. This again may
have been due to a heightened awareness of ears because of
physical or auditory sensations or might denote a greater
receptivity to what others have to say. </p>

<p>In some cases the amount of time consumed in execution of the
drawings was considerably greater when the subject was
&quot;high.&quot; This additional time was rarely used for
elaborating the picture but was caused by the subject's altered
mood. In many instances the laughter and joking in which he
indulged kept him from completing the job with dispatch. In other
cases depression or nausea slowed him up. Although aware of the
details which should be included, the subject was often satisfied
to indicate such items by a single line or dash rather than
discipline himself to the point where he could make a careful
picture. In some of these cases the drawing had attributes which
resemble the findings sometimes seen in productions of
individuals in a manic mood. </p>

<p>When a person is given a sheet of paper and is asked to draw a
man on it, the paper and the figure he draws become the situation
he must manipulate. If the figure is well centered so that the
finished product gives a balanced composition, the subject has
handled the circumstance in adequate fashion. The one consistent
finding for this test was the fact that the subject's ability to
handle situations was not improved by drug ingestion or smoking.
In the case of both user and non-user the percentage of balanced
compositions produced in the various drug states did not change
from the results obtained in the undrugged condition. It is,
however, interesting to note that 59 per cent of the marihuana
users made &quot;unbalanced&quot; drawings in the undrugged state
as compared with only 29 per cent of the non-users. It may be
inferred from this that fewer users than non-users are inclined
to come out into the center of the scene. This carries with it
implications of poor adjustment and insecurity. </p>

<p><b>Level of Aspiration Test</b> </p>

<p>In the undrugged state the majority of the subjects manifested
reactions which are usual in the experience of other experiments,
namely, the tendency to place their estimate just a little above
their actual performance. This was demonstrated by the fact that
while the average performance time needed for carrying out a set
task (putting sixteen blocks in a box, red side up) was 23.6
seconds, the subjects' average estimate for accomplishing this
was 21.9 seconds. As their performance improved with practice,
the subjects tended to allow themselves less time for the job.
Such statements as, &quot;I should do better this time,&quot; or
&quot;I'll take a chance,&quot; were not infrequent. Some
subjects wanted to know the best score ever made, and worked
energetically to attain it. </p>

<p>With 2 cc. of marihuana there was a slight increase in the
average estimated time for the entire group although there was no
concomitant increase in performance time. Under this dosage the
estimated time was 23.1 seconds, performance time 23.4 seconds.
Although the subject actually took no longer to do the job he
thought he would work more slowly and in predicting his
achievement gave himself more time. His attitude during the test
was a much easier, more happy go-lucky one. He occasionally
stopped in the middle of the experiment to discuss something with
the examiner or call out to someone passing in the hall. There
thus appeared to be a small loss in drive which, though not
revealed by significant statistical differences, was indicated by
the numerical trend and by the subject's attitude toward the
test. </p>

<p>After the ingestion of 5 cc. of marihuana the average
estimated time was 23.2 seconds and the performance time 24.4
seconds. Here the relationship between estimated and performance
time was similar to that found in the undrugged phase, that is,
there was a 1.2 second gap between them. During this drug phase
the subjects seemed less relaxed than they were under 2 cc., and
their main interest seemed to be to get back to bed and be left
undisturbed. </p>

<p>Under the influence of marihuana cigarettes the trend was
similar to that found with 2 cc., the difference between the
estimated time and the performance time being only 0.3 second. As
with 2 cc., subjects behavior was generally happy and relaxed. </p>

<p>When the group was divided into users and non-users the trend
was the same for both. </p>

<p>(TABLE 16) </p>

<p>On the whole it appears that small doses of marihuana and of
marihuana cigarettes tend to lower the individual level of
aspiration, that is, there is a slight lessening in the subject's
drive and his will to achieve. Larger doses (5 cc.) do not
produce this effect. </p>

<p><b>Frustration Test </b></p>

<p>The results of the frustration experiment indicated no
statistically significant differences between the subject's
reactions before and after he had taken marihuana. Again, after
the ingestion of marihuana there was a slight trend toward
lowering the level of aspiration (Table 17), but the over-all
change was not startling when compared with results on the Level
of Aspiration Test when no frustrating experience was introduced.
</p>

<p>(TABLE 17) </p>

<p><b>Binet Lines</b> </p>

<p>Binet's interpretation of this test was based upon the
principle that suggestible individuals, once embarked on a
particular form of activity (in this instance, drawing lines of
increasing length), ale more prone to continue this activity when
the stimulus is altered than are less suggestible people. Judging
by the results as given in Table 18, small doses of marihuana (2
cc. and cigarettes) induced thus type of perseverative behavior
in the users but not in the non- users. In other words, the
marihuana user when under the influence of the drug tended to
continue an activity he had started without being too
discriminatory or controlled about it. The non-user, on the other
hand, showed a curtailment in activity and responsiveness. One
possible explanation of this difference in effect on user and
non-user appears to lie in the fact that the drug made the user
more relaxed and easy-going and less controlled in motor activity
than he was in his undrugged state, while the non-user was often
more tense and disturbed. As was so often the case in the
personality tests, the effect on the user of large doses of the
drug (S cc.) was contrary to that of the small ones, probably
because in many cases he was made physically uncomfortable and
intellectually disorganized. </p>

<p>(TABLE 18) </p>

<p>The lack of consistency in the findings seems to suggest that
the individual's psychological and physiological &quot;set&quot;
toward the drug affects his reaction and behavior. Thus small
doses, which the marihuana user anticipates with pleasure make
him more easy-going and therefore probably more suggestible than
he would be in his undrugged state, while large doses have a
contrary effect. The non-user, on the other hand, appears to be
less suggestible as a result of drug ingestion than he ordinarily
is. <br>
</p>

<p><b>Wechsler Vocational Interest Blank</b> </p>

<p>The average number of positions chosen by the subjects when
they were in the undrugged state was 13.2. With 2 cc. of
marihuana the average was 12.9; with 5 cc., 12.7; and with
cigarettes, 11.8. There was a very slight but not statistically
significant trend toward a decrease in job interest. However, the
absence of any appreciable change in the number of positions
liked after the ingestion or smoking of marihuana indicates that
no real withdrawal is implied. </p>

<p>Analysis of the type of position chosen shows that under the
influence of marihuana there was no swing to the more feminine
occupations, but in the case of some subjects, especially
marihuana users, there was a falling off in the popularity of
some jobs which require considerable activity. For example, under
the influence of 2 cc. of marihuana or of marihuana cigarettes
the jobs of detective, policeman and taxi driver were found among
his least desired occupations though they were not in this place
when he was in the undrugged state. </p>

<p>The trend was the same for the user and the non-user in both
the drugged and undrugged phase. For the user the jobs of
aviator, gymnasium teacher, newspaper reporter, sailor and
soldier were most frequently chosen; for the non-user aviator,
doctor, explorer, forest ranger, newspaper reporter and prize
fighter were most popular. </p>

<p><b>Loofbourrow Personal Index: Test I</b> </p>

<p>Before taking marihuana, the user and non-user on an average
indicated familiarity with an identical number of words, 65.2.
After he had smoked marihuana cigarettes, the user's vocabulary
showed a gain of 6 words, the non-user's 5 words. In both cases
the subject's confidence in his verbal capacity was enhanced by
the use of marihuana.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Wechsler Free Association Test</b> </p>

<p>In the undrugged state the user and non-user were disturbed by
the same stimulus words, namely &quot;lonely,&quot;
&quot;passionate,&quot; &quot;insult,&quot; and &quot;sin.&quot;
The only differences were the disturbance the user showed in
response to the words &quot;wish&quot; and &quot;murder&quot; and
the delayed reaction of the non-user to the word
&quot;pity.&quot; </p>

<p>Under the influence of 5 cc. of marihuana or of marihuana
cigarettes the user was less disturbed by all these words with
the possible exception of &quot;insult,&quot; but there was a
sharp increase in the agitation aroused by the words
&quot;suicide&quot; and &quot;death.&quot; It appears that the
feeling of well-being produced by the drug tended to alleviate
the loneliness, guilt, and frustration which the subject felt,
but it was also accompanied by a fear of death. This may be tied
up with the anxiety the marihuana user always experiences in
regard to the amount of drug he is taking, the always present
fear of his &quot;blowing his top,&quot; or it may be a
reflection of the problems which were most disturbing to him. </p>

<p>The non-user, after taking marihuana, was also less disturbed
by the words &quot;lonely,&quot; &quot;passionate,&quot; and
&quot;sin.&quot; His reaction to &quot;pity&quot; was also
diminished but he, too, was still upset by the word
&quot;insult.&quot; The new disturbing stimulus words were not
those which upset the user but those which were more closely
related to his own immediate problems namely &quot;honest,&quot;
&quot;money,&quot; and &quot;sex.&quot; Since the non-user in our
group was generally an individual who had been sent to prison
because of stealing or a sex offense, it seems it was these
problems which the disinhibiting action of the drug brought to
the fore.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Pressey X-O Test</b> </p>

<p>This test was taken by only 10 subjects, 5 users and 5
nonusers. In general, the smoking of marihuana brought about some
increase in the number of words which had an unpleasant meaning
to the subject and in the number of things about which he had
worried. There was some decrease in the number of things for
which the drugged subject thought a person should be blamed. The
number of his associations with any one word remained roughly the
same in the drugged and undrugged state. </p>

<p>Although less inclined to censure when under the influence of
marihuana, the subject was nevertheless more readily disturbed
and worried. This undercurrent of irritability and anxiety seemed
to be a concomitant of the more obvious feeling of general
well-being which is the predominant effect of the drug. Two
possible explanations can be given here for this finding: the
physiological changes occurring with the smoking -of the drug
gave the subject a feeling of anxiety, and the disinhibition
which occurred at this time released the restraints which had
been imposed not only on the happier reactions but on all the
repressed unpleasantness as well, and things which the subject
had repressed because he wished to forget them now came to the
fore. This was noted when at least two of the subjects had
&quot;crying jags&quot; when drugged, reproaching themselves for
what they had done to their mothers and wives.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Downey Will-Temperament Test: Test I</b> </p>

<p>The changes in the subjects' responses on this test showed a
shift in their attitude toward themselves as a result of
marihuana ingestion. On the whole, more subjects appeared to
think better of themselves when they were &quot;high&quot; than
they did in their undrugged state. This is indicated by the fact
that there was an increase in the number of individuals who under
the influence of 5 cc. of marihuana or of marihuana cigarettes
believed themselves to be careful, cautious, ambitious, accurate,
industrious, impulsive, enthusiastic, and possessing superior
characters. There was also a decrease in the number who
considered themselves suggestible or extravagant. The only
negative traits which the subject admitted to more frequently
when he was &quot;high&quot; than he did in his normal state were
suggestibility, poor memory and aggression. The change in
attitude in regard to aggression was most striking among the
marihuana users, 88 per cent of whom considered themselves
aggressive after they had had the drug as compared with only 42
per cent in the undrugged state. This increase in the feeling of
aggression was not paralleled by the findings of the other tests
nor by the behavior of the subjects when they had taken the drug.
Like the increased vocabulary noted on the Loofbourrow it can
best be interpreted as an indication of the subject's increased
feelings of confidence and self-assurance. </p>

<p>(Table 19)<br>
</p>

<p>In general the changes which occurred on this test after the
subject had had marihuana were not consistent for the user and
the non-user or for different amounts of the drug. They merely
served to indicate that when the subject was under the influence
of marihuana there were shifts in his feelings about himself
which reflected a prevailing mood of confidence and self-
satisfaction. </p>

<p>Thematic Apperception Test </p>

<p>Without cigarettes the needs most frequently expressed in the
subjects' stories were &quot;affiliation,&quot;
&quot;aggression,&quot; &quot;sex,&quot; &quot;dominance,&quot;
&quot;succorance,&quot; &quot;self-abasement,&quot; and
&quot;play.&quot; These terms may be defined as follows:(1)
Affiliation: to be sociable, to make friends, to love.
Aggression: to fight, to criticize, to blame, to accuse or
ridicule maliciously, to injure or kill, sadism. Sex: to seek sex
objects, to court, to enjoy intercourse. Dominance: to influence
or control others, leadership. Succorance: to seek aid,
protection or sympathy. Selfabasement: to comply, to surrender,
to accept punishment, to apologize, to condone, to atone, to
depreciate ego, masochism. Play: to relax tension and alleviate
stress by pleasurable and humorously irresponsible activity,
motor, verbal or mental. </p>

<p>In general the frequency with which all needs were expressed
fell off after the subjects had smoked marihuana cigarettes. The
most striking drops were in the need for self-abasement and
aggression where the frequency of occurrence changed from 2.4 to
1.1 for the former, and from 2.7 to 1.7 for the latter. Contrary
to the general trend there was an increase in the need for
dominance. </p>

<p>When the subjects were not &quot;high&quot; the environmental
influences most frequently mentioned in their stories were
illness and death and accepting parents. After smoking marihuana
the general trend was similar to that noted for the
&quot;needs,&quot; that is there was a falling off in the
frequency with which the subjects used most of the concepts. </p>

<p>There was, however, no diminution in the number of times that
illness and death played a part in their tales, the average
number being 2.1 before smoking and 2.2 after smoking. Likewise
the awareness of restraint and imprisonment remained constant,
occurring 1.1 times before smoking and 1.2 after. Contrary to the
general trend there was an increased awareness of an accepting
love object. This concept appeared in the stories on an average
of .8 time before smoking and 1.2 after. </p>

<p>The decrease in the number of times both needs and
environmental pressures were expressed in the stories given after
the subjects had had cigarettes was not due to a curtailment in
the length of the story. The tales were often more wordy in the
drugged than in the undrugged state, but their length was
frequently due to embellishment and repetition, and there was
likely to be less meaningful material. In general the stories
obtained from the subjects after smoking indicated that they had
less capacity for expressing themselves directly and clearly, and
also less concern with self-abasement and aggression. As defined
on this test these needs represent a conflict between aggression
against the self and against others and appear to stem from
insecurity and feelings of guilt and inadequacy. In the drugged
state the subjects appeared less disturbed by this conflict and
had less need to harry themselves and others. They had a greater
need for dominance, a desire for leadership. This ties in with
the greater self-assurance demonstrated by other tests and with
the increased awareness of acceptance by a love object found on
this test. </p>

<p>It is interesting to note that these subjects showed no
falling off in their awareness of illness and death or of
restraint and imprisonment after smoking. The frequency of the
latter concept was undoubtedly related to their status as
prisoners, while the former ties in with the findings on the Free
Association Test where the word &quot;death&quot; remained a
disturbing factor even after marihuana had been smoked or
ingested. </p>

<p>(1) Directions for Thematic Apperception Test prepared by
Robert W. White and R. Nevitt-Sanford, Harvard Psychological
Clinic, February 1941. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>FINDINGS ON WOMEN SUBJECTS</b> </p>

<p>As in the case with the men, when the female subject was under
the influence of marihuana her basic personality structure did
not change and only some relatively superficial emotional
reactions were different. As a group, the women used in this
study showed a somewhat constricted personality, and this
constriction was not lessened when the subject was
&quot;high.&quot; The emotional reactions revealed in the
Rorschach Test showed that the subjects in this particular group
were primarily extraversive, and this remained unchanged after
the administration of marihuana. Again, like the men, when under
the influence of the drug the women lowered the achievement
levels they set for themselves. However, they did not show any
increased self-confidence as did the men, either by an increase
in the number of words they claimed to know in the Loofbourrow
Test or in their appraisal of themselves as indicated in the
Downey Will-Temperament Test. In general, the women exhibited a
loss of drive for participation in anything requiring effort.
This is inferred from their performance in the Level of
Aspiration Test, the Vocational Interest Blank, and the Binet
Lines Test, as well as from their behavior. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>BEHAVIOR DURING THE TEST PERIOD OF SUBJECTS UNDER THE
INFLUENCE OF MARIHUANA</b> </p>

<p>The findings reported here have all been in terms of
objective, quantitative measures. Some effects of the drug,
observable during examinations, cannot be quantified but are
nevertheless important to the understanding of the drug action.
These effects were reflected in those reactions of the subjects
which were not directly related to the test situation Behavior
was somewhat different when the subject had ingested marihuana
concentrate than it was when he had taken the drug in cigarette
form. With pills gastrointestinal disturbances were more
pronounced and drowsiness and fatigue seemed greater and more
enduring. Some individuals were so overcome by fatigue that they
worked for a few seconds only, and then sat with their heads on
the table. If spoken to, they made a great effort to do the work
but rarely continued for very long. When summoned to take the
test, especially toward the end of the day when they were almost
invariably lying on their beds, the subjects were overcome with
fatigue and were aroused only with the greatest difficulty. In
some instances there was definite resentment of this disturbance
and the impression was that only the presence of the police
officer and all the implications in the prison set-up prevented a
definite refusal to continue cooperatively. With both pills and
cigarettes many of the men had difficulty in concentrating and
maintaining a fixed goal. Subjects often stared vacantly for long
periods and when addressed came back to the test with a start.
Many burst into uncontrollable laughter over a test which in
their undrugged state had evoked no merriment. The laughter
frequently affected the entire group and most markedly those who
had been given marihuana. </p>

<p>The behavior of the user and non-user with marihuana
cigarettes was somewhat different. The user was pleasantly
excited at the thought of smoking, selected his cigarettes with
the manner of a connoisseur, and criticized or praised the
product offered him. His smoking took on something of a
ritualistic ceremony and was done in a careful and prearranged
fashion which varied slightly from individual to individual. In
general the men first opened the end of the cigarette to examine
the marihuana, then wet the &quot;stick&quot; by inserting it in
their mouths to prevent the paper from burning too rapidly. When
the cigarette was ignited the men took several short puffs, at
the same time inhaling as much air as possible. This caused the
tip of the &quot;stick&quot; to glow and resulted in a succession
of low gasping sounds from the subject The smoke was retained as
long as possible, occasionally causing severe paroxysms of
coughing. Although eager to be &quot;high&quot; the user was
consistent in his fear of &quot;blowing his top,&quot; and there
was always a point beyond which no amount of talking or cajoling
could make them continue smoking. </p>

<p>As a rule, the user liked to smoke in company. He was
generally satisfied if one friend, a &quot;kick partner,&quot;
could be with him. To this friend he would explain his thoughts
and feelings which to the objective observer were very
superficial. In trying to make a point, and usually a minor one
at that, the user, when smoking, would talk on endlessly and soon
lose his goal. He cracked many &quot;jokes&quot; which were
uproariously funny to him. In some instances &quot;leaping&quot;
or involuntary jerking of the arms, head, shoulders or legs
occurred The subject described his sensations as floating,
leaping, rocking or most often as being &quot;in the
groove.&quot; He was obviously enjoying pleasant physical
sensations and wanted to be left to himself to lie on his bed,
listen to soft music and dream or carry on &quot;deep&quot;
conversations. The test questions were frequently called a
&quot;bring down&quot; in that they forced the subject to face
reality and abandon his pleasurable feelings. Several subjects
concurred in describing part of their drug experience as
comparable to the twilight state between sleeping and waking in
which the individual floats pleasantly and does not allow outside
stimuli to impinge. Just as strong extraneous sensations will
bring the sleeper face to face with reality, so the insistence of
the examiner that the subject perform certain tasks served to
destroy his general feeling of well-being. Aside from the test
situation any unpleasant circumstances can serve as a &quot;bring
down.&quot; This &quot;bring down&quot; apparently only results
in destroying the subject's pleasure but cannot do away with the
disadvantageous effect on intellectual functioning. </p>

<p>When testing was completed the subject generally lay on his
bed and dozed or listened to the radio. His drowsiness persisted
for many hours. </p>

<p>Most non-users approached the smoking with apprehension. They
were instructed by the users in the art of lighting and inhaling,
but they rarely cooperated to the fullest extent? though this was
undoubtedly unconscious on their part. </p>

<p>The effects of marihuana on the non-users were variable. A few
of them enjoyed the results so much that they claimed they would
continue to smoke whenever they had a chance. They described such
sensations as &quot;lying in fur,&quot; and &quot;floating in
space.&quot; Some became acutely nauseous and could not continue
with their work, while others experienced little or no change in
feeling, undoubtedly because they never smoked correctly. </p>

<p>When the subjects were &quot;high,&quot; particularly in the
case of the non- user, there was a general loss of inhibition and
lessening of many social restraints which had previously been
exercised. Thus, all the men talked much more freely, confronted
each other more directly, and manifested a state of well-being at
times amounting to euphoria. They were much more confiding?
talked spontaneously about love and sexual affairs, and in two
instances exposed themselves and masturbated. </p>

<p>Although there was an undeniable increase in overt sex
interest following the ingestion of marihuana, it seems probable
that this interest was not the result of direct sexual
stimulation but rather a manifestation of a falling off in
inhibiting factors. This sex interest seems to have been due
primarily to the fact that these men had been imprisoned for
varying periods and had not had access to women. It is not at all
certain that under free conditions or with different subjects
this behavior would have been manifested. In any case, the
behavior of these prisoners was more like that which any man
deprived of sexual activity for a long period of time would
display under a releasing stimulus and not at all like the
behavior shown at marihuana &quot;tea-pads.&quot;<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>