
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-11</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B024-24</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ota/ch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122140220 text/html 43656
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 14:02:11 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:45 GMT
Content-length: 43438
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>CHAPTER 4 - AVAILABILITY </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> <b>TECHNOLOGIES FOR
UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND ADDICTION US
Government Office of Technology Assessment </b>October 18, 1994 <b><font
size="5">CHAPTER 4 - AVAILABILITY <img
src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"></font></b> </p>

<p> Availability is a precondition for drug abuse and dependency.
A person cannot become a drug abuser unless a drug is available
to be used. </p>

<p> Drug availability is often thought of as mere physical
presence of an abusable substance. In addition, however,
availability is affected by social norms (social availability),
prices (economic availability), and personal values (subjective
availability) (see table 4-1). Marketing techniques for both
licit and illicit drugs can alter social, economic, and
subjective availability, and thus are addressed in this chapter
(see box 4-1). </p>

<p> A substantial body of literature addressing the relationship
between drug availability and drug demand does exist. However,
most of this information addresses tobacco and alcohol, rather
than illicit drugs. In addition to conducting a literature search
(primarily of mass media), the Office of Technology Assessment
(OTA) contracted with the National Center for Juvenile Justice
(NCJJ) to conduct a survey of juvenile probation officers on the
perceived availability of drugs and to conduct a workshop on
availability issues (see appendix F for a list of participants). </p>

<p> AVAILABILITY </p>

<p> Availability is a concept usually reserved for the supply-
side of the substance abuse policy equation (i.e., making drugs
available to supply an already existing demand). However, the
proximity of drugs and drug dealers to potential users, and the
ease with which these substances can be purchased or otherwise
obtained can affect demand, use, and abuse. This is especially
true when one considers aggressive marketing efforts by
suppliers, who seek to create or expand the demand for drugs by
convincing potential consumers of the benefits, acceptability,
and availability of these substances. While availability is a
concept that applies to the whole range of drugs, most of what we
know about its role in drug use and abuse comes from research in
the arena of alcohol and tobacco abuse (1,9,10,14) (see box 4-2
and figure 4-1). </p>

<p> Research has shown that when alcohol is more available, the
prevalence of drinking, the amount of alcohol consumed, and the
heavy use of alcohol all increase (5). Alternatively, the
literature also suggests that physical conditions that restrict
alcohol availability reduce rates of alcohol consumption (1). A
review of alcohol-related literature reveals that availability
can be conceptualized in four different, yet related categories. </p>

<p> Physical Availability </p>

<p> Physical availability refers to a basic element--the
proximity and accessibility of an abusable substance. Simple
logic dictates that if a substance is absent, it cannot be used.
Government interdiction and law enforcement policies target the
physical availability of illicit drugs. Other policies, such as
limitations on the point-of-sale, hours, or age of purchasers,
target the physical availability of other abusable drugs, such as
tobacco and alcohol products. </p>

<p> Responses to the OTA survey of juvenile probation
administrators indicated that respondents perceived two ways in
which physical availability is increased: through contamination
by outsiders (e.g., youth gangs, tourists, foreigners) bringing
drugs into the community, and through proximity to a source of
drugs or alcohol. </p>

<p> Gangs and organized drug trafficking were mentioned often by
respondents as reasons for increases in the availability of
drugs. Respondents from all over the country, representing both
rural and urban areas, registered concerns about gangs and their
role in marketing and trafficking drugs. A respondent from
Canton, Mississippi, for example, attributed the increase in drug
availability simply to &quot;gang leaders from California.&quot;
A respondent from Waterbury, Connecticut, was more explicit about
the age and ethnicity of the gang influences, attributing the
observed increase in drugs to the &quot;emergence of gang
activity for the 12-to-15-year-old age group, particularly in the
Hispanic and black ethnic groupings.&quot; A respondent from
Paducah, Kentucky, said that the &quot;increase in drugs has been
from gangs entering the community from Memphis, Tennessee,
Arkansas, and Chicago, Illinois.&quot; The respondent from
Davenport, Iowa, attributed the increase to attempts by
&quot;Chicago gang members to establish crack markets in Quad
Cities--lots of arrests of Chicago residents including
juveniles.&quot; Even cities with an established history of youth
gangs identified gangs as being responsible for increases in
drugs. For example, a respondent from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
attributed the observed increase to the fact that &quot;gang
participation has become increasingly sophisticated.&quot; </p>

<p> However, gangs were not the only phenomena associated with
increasing the physical availability of drugs and alcohol. Many
respondents were concerned with the potential for contamination
due to proximity to areas thought to be established drug markets
or through proximity to the means for widespread drug
distribution (e.g., major highways and roads, prisons). </p>

<p> Physical availability is necessary but not solely responsible
for drug use. For example, drugs often are physically available
but are not always used. Also, seeking to prevent or reduce drug
use solely by eliminating or reducing physical availability may
be doomed to failure, since it has proven to be very difficult to
keep drugs out of communities. So although the concept of
physical availability is important, it is limited, both as a
cause and a cure to drug use and abuse. </p>

<p> Economic Availability </p>

<p> Economic availability may be increased when a person has
access to surplus income or the costs of drugs are low, illegal
drug sales are a key component of the local economy, or the price
per unit of a drug or drugs in general is reduced. In describing
the difference between &quot;private&quot; and
&quot;flagrant&quot; drug markets, one article specified some of
the dimensions of the changing economics of addiction: </p>

<p> If cigarettes were sold only by the carton and whiskey only
by the case, the effect would be to decrease the total
consumption of tobacco and whiskey. Presumably, few people would
start smoking cigarettes if the first experimental purchase were
a $20 carton rather than a $1 pack. Similarly, fewer poor people
would drink if they were required to buy whiskey by the case. A
similar effect would, in all likelihood, hold true if open air
and flagrant drug markets were eliminated (3). </p>

<p> In addition to overall conditions, economic availability of
all substances can be affected by the pricing of products. For
licit products such as alcohol and tobacco, economic availability
is also affected by taxes levied by federal, state, and local
authorities. </p>

<p> In 1989, federal excise taxes on tobacco, alcoholic
beverages, and motor fuels raised $24.4 billion in revenue--
about 2.5 percent of total federal revenues (11). Excise
taxes--taxes on specific products--while representing a small
part of total taxes, are an important consideration in the
economic availability of licit substances. </p>

<p> Excise taxes are seen by many as having three impacts: </p>

<p> o to raise revenue for government programs; </p>

<p> o to make certain harmful substances less affordable and,
hence, less used and abused; and </p>

<p> o to cover societal costs that accrue from the use of various
substances (e.g., environmental costs from the use of gasoline,
health costs resulting from smoking and drinking). </p>

<p> Whether taxation of alcoholic beverages and tobacco products
is an appropriate means of reducing societal costs caused by
their use is a continuing public debate. Some argue that the
public health costs and other external costs are so significant
as to justify substantial excise taxes. Others counter that such
taxes are regressive--impacting the poor more than the rich--and
reduce the satisfaction experienced by millions of sensible
drinkers without necessarily reducing the harm caused by
excessive drinkers (8). </p>

<p> Social Availability </p>

<p> Social availability refers to those factors within the
community conducive to drug use. One study explored alternative
explanations for reported declines in cocaine use among high
school seniors, using questionnaire data from annual nationwide
surveys conducted from 1976 to 1988 (2). Results of this analysis
indicated that although lifestyle factors showed strong links
with the use of marijuana and cocaine, these factors had not
developed trends in ways that could account for declines in the
use of either drug. Reported physical availability of either drug
had not been reduced. Instead, increases in perceived risks and
disapproval appear to have contributed substantially to the
recent declines in the use of marijuana and cocaine. The study
concluded that it was important to lower demand by reducing
social availability, as opposed to trying to reduce supply by
reducing physical availability. </p>

<p> Increasingly, grass roots community action groups are working
to diminish both the subjective and social domains of
availability. These efforts usually entail developing and
presenting public awareness and fact-based education to consumers
and potential consumers, decreasing community tolerance for drug
use while increasing collective pride in the community, and
developing or otherwise demonstrating alternatives to substance
use and abuse. </p>

<p> Subjective Availability </p>

<p> Subjective availability encompasses individual differences in
how people perceive their access to substances. For example, an
individual may choose to use one type of abusable substance, but
not another. Or, an individual may choose to use a drug (e.g.,
cocaine), but only in certain forms (i.e., a person may choose to
snort a line of cocaine but refuse to smoke or inject it). The
person who refuses to use illicit drugs has interjected his or
her personal values in a way to make illicit drugs unavailable,
even if they are physically and economically available. </p>

<p> One reviewer identified four components of subjective
availability as it relates to alcohol: 1) willingness to go out
of one's way to purchase alcohol, 2) perceived convenience of
buying alcohol, 3) discomfort about buying alcohol, and
4)?importance of the price of alcohol. Subjective and social
availability were demonstrated to have direct influences on
alcohol consumption, and subjective and social aspects of
availability can mediate and outweigh the influence of physical
availability (1). </p>

<p> Subjective availability is likely to increase when an
individual holds attitudes or values favorable toward use; lives
in a community that condones, or even celebrates, drug use; and
has ready access to drugs that are highly valued, particularly if
those agents are addictive. </p>

<p> ARE DRUGS READILY AVAILABLE? </p>

<p> A number of surveys exists for measuring drug use (see
chapter 2). In addressing the question of whether drugs are
readily available, several measures exist (e.g., marketing
figures related to alcohol and tobacco sales, tallies of illegal
drugs seized by law enforcement authorities). In addition to
quantitative measures of drug use, many people perceive various
drugs to be widely available. In an attempt to measure these
anecdotal perceptions, OTA surveyed juvenile probation
administrators randomly selected from a database maintained by
NCJJ. </p>

<p> The purpose of the survey was to identify communities that
have experienced a sudden, observable change in the abuse of
drugs or alcohol in the past 12 months and to collect preliminary
data about the events and circumstances leading to the change in
abuse. Such anecdotal evidence could be gathered from a number of
groups; OTA chose to survey juvenile justice officials because of
their involvement in drug issues and the availability of a
nationwide database of such officials who could be accessed. </p>

<p> Responses were received from 246 juvenile justice
administrators across 38 States. The data provide a glimpse at
some of the drug and alcohol availability issues being addressed
by juvenile courts and probation departments across the United
States. Seven findings resulted from the survey: </p>

<p> o Most respondents consider substance abuse to be a serious
problem in their communities. Using a scale of 1 (not serious) to
10 (very serious), the respondents, on average, rated the problem
of substance abuse among juveniles in their communities at 7.4.
In addition, 85.8 percent of the respondents rated substance
abuse seriousness at six or above. </p>

<p> o Almost half of the respondents indicated a dramatic
increase in availability of drugs and/or alcohol in their
communities. A total of 46.7 percent of the survey respondents
reported a dramatic increase in the availability of drugs and/or
alcohol in their communities. Some 50.8 percent of the
respondents indicated &quot;no dramatic changes&quot; in
perceived availability of drugs and/or alcohol. Only 2.4 percent
indicated a dramatic decrease in availability. </p>

<p> o Factors affecting physical availability (i.e., sales and/or
distribution of drugs) were selected most often and were rated
highest in terms of increasing availability of drugs. Given an
opportunity to select and rate commonly cited reasons for
increased availability of drugs and alcohol, the respondents
selected items that were strongly associated with the sales and
distribution of drugs and alcohol (see table 4-2). </p>

<p> o Crack cocaine and cocaine were much more likely than other
drugs to show dramatic increases in availability. Respondents
were given an opportunity to report whether they had noticed a
change (ranging from a dramatic decrease to a dramatic increase)
in the availability of a range of drugs, including alcohol. Crack
(24.5 percent) and cocaine (17.8 percent) had the highest
percentage of respondents indicating a &quot;dramatic
increase&quot; in availability. The next closest were inhalants
at 14.6 percent (see table 4-3). </p>

<p> o Economic conditions and the perceived lack of real
opportunities for many youths were frequently cited as factors
contributing to the increased availability of drugs in many
communities (see box 4-3). </p>

<p> o Survey respondents listed several factors contributing to a
sense of social availability, including lack of parental/guardian
supervision, consequences for alcohol and drug offenses,
alternative activities, as well as portrayals of alcohol and drug
use by the mass media as a glamorous and healthy activity (see
box 4-4). </p>

<p> o Substance abuse prevention and early intervention efforts
were rated highest as important community responses to increases
in the availability of drugs and alcohol. Over 80 percent of
respondents agreed that an increase in prevention and
intervention efforts was an important response to an increase in
the availability of drugs. Trailing behind prevention and early
intervention were increased law enforcement (68.4 percent),
increased treatment (68.2 percent), and stiffer judicial
penalties (68.0 percent). Respondents were also asked to rate the
relative effectiveness of the listed responses to availability on
a scale of 1 (not effective) to 10 (very effective). Prevention
and early intervention (6.4 percent) was rated the highest in
terms of perceived effectiveness, but not much higher than law
enforcement (6.2 percent), increased treatment (6.0 percent), and
stiffer judicial penalties (6.2 percent) (see table 4-4). </p>

<p> MARKETING </p>

<p> Standard marketing strategies used to increase consumption of
legal goods are used in equally effective ways to increase
consumption of illicit drugs. Marketing refers to efforts by
individuals interested in the sale or trade of a product to
maintain or increase sales by maintaining market shares and
opening new markets. Marketing includes efforts to increase the
perceived availability of a product or products by enhancing the
sense of both subjective and social availability in prospective
consumers. To the extent that those efforts are successful, then
purveyors of consumer products will attempt to make the supply
match the demand (physical availability) at a cost that maximizes
both sales to consumers (economic availability) and profits to
the sellers. </p>

<p> Illegal Drugs </p>

<p> Illegal drugs are marketed aggressively in the United States.
Some of the strategies for marketing illicit drugs are very
similar to those strategies for marketing licit products.
Sometimes the distinction between licit and illicit products is
difficult to determine. Take, for example, the case of so-called
head shops. Drug paraphernalia are items sold specifically to
promote the preparation, manufacture, or marketing of drugs. Head
shops may sell a wide variety of products that are often
associated with specific drugs, for example: </p>

<p> o Stash cases, rolling machines, pipes, bongs (marijuana). </p>

<p> o Bottles, concert kits, brass straws, spoons (cocaine). </p>

<p> o Glass pipes, vials, stems, screens, shaker bottles (crack
cocaine). </p>

<p> o Testing kits, scales, adulterants (heroin). </p>

<p> o Canisters, balloons, tanks (inhalants). </p>

<p> Head shops represent the most shrewd form of pro-drug
marketing by targeting mostly young customers and providing the
technology and products required to increase the ability of users
to procure, prepare, hide, and ingest drugs. Despite Federal
legislation prohibiting the sale of drug paraphernalia (18 USC
Ap4), heads shops continue to flourish. These shops can avoid the
intention of the law because the definition of what constitutes
drug paraphernalia is ambiguous and open to interpretation. Head
shop owners will simply emphasize the legitimate use of their
products. For example, they may sell a scale designed to weigh
drugs as a product to weigh food for dieting purposes.
Specifically, head shops contribute to the drug abuse problem by:
</p>

<p> o sending a double message--if drugs are so bad, why is drug
paraphernalia sold openly? </p>

<p> o operating, in some cases, in the guise of candy stores,
exposing children to drug paraphernalia and stimulating curiosity
about drugs; </p>

<p> o serving to facilitate the use, marketing, and sale of
drugs; </p>

<p> o selling items designed as conversation pieces which serve
to glamorize drug use; and </p>

<p> o becoming hubs for drug abusers, indirectly serving to
increase crime in the neighborhoods in which they operate. </p>

<p> Another example of a marketing strategy used for licit
substances and now being adapted for illicit substances is total
marketing, which consists of four basic strategies-- promotion,
product, price, and place--to maximize theexposure of a product
in a positive light to the most likely consumer groups (4). </p>

<p> A key component of total marketing is promotion, or
advertising particular product lines to appeal to particular
subpopulations of the consuming public. Promotion is a standard
practice in the marketing of legitimate products-- it is also a
very powerful force for manipulating consumer habits. </p>

<p> Promotion includes activities like advertising and
sponsorship of sporting and entertainment events (7). For illicit
drugs, promotional activities may include sponsoring a party in
which the illegal drug is dispensed free or at a dramatic
discount along with other attractions (e.g., sex, drug
paraphernalia) (15). </p>

<p> Total marketing also entails the development of a product
line that can be targeted to subpopulations within the larger
consumer community. For example, alcohol and tobacco
manufacturers will produce an array of products targeted at
several consumer groups--premium beers for one group, wine
coolers for another, rugged masculine cigarettes for one group,
thin feminine cigarettes for another. Similarly, purveyors of
illegal drugs have begun to develop product lines--powdered
cocaine for one group, crack cocaine for another. The use of
brand names is one technique used by marketers to establish a
niche in the larger market, which is one reason people become
unwilling participants in the marketing wars between Coke and
Pepsi or Visa and American Express or even Bud and Bud Light. </p>

<p> A great deal of uniformity exists in the price, quantity, and
quality of drugs sold in the same city, especially in the same
neighborhood or street market. As a result, a dealer will
occasionally try to capture a larger share of the market by
increasing the weight or strength of the product and applying a
brand name for recognition (3). </p>

<p> In Washington, DC, for example, brand name heroin is sold
under the name of &quot;Smurf,&quot; &quot;Mr. T,&quot;
&quot;Brown Wrapper,&quot; and &quot;Black Poison.&quot;
Phencyclidine (PCP) is occasionally sold under the brand name
&quot;Hinkley&quot; (after John Hinkley, the man who shot Ronald
Reagan), &quot;Gofer&quot; (a reference to a television character
on the &quot;Love Boat,&quot; which is a popular street name for
PCP), and &quot;Keys to St. E's&quot; (a reference to a local
mental institution). Crack cocaine is sometimes hawked under the
brand names of &quot;Conan,&quot; &quot;007,&quot; and
&quot;Baseball.&quot; </p>

<p> Pricing is the process of assigning a retail cost to each
item in a given product-line that matches the ability of the
targeted subgroup to pay. By producing a line of products at a
wide range of prices, the purveyor of the goods can maximize the
consumer population. For example, whether a consumer of tobacco
products is smoking low-priced generic cigarettes from the
supermarket or high-priced cigarettes from the tobacconist, that
individual is included in the range of consumers. Illegal drug
sellers also price their particular products to move. For
example, while powdered cocaine may be too expensive for some
economically disadvantaged consumers to purchase regularly,
almost everyone can afford a $5 vial of crack cocaine. Drug
dealers also manipulate the cost for their goods to attract
customers. </p>

<p> Once a product has been developed, promoted, and priced to
move, a place must be found to most effectively sell the product.
Legal nonmedical drugs are packaged and made available at retail
outlets in such a way as to make their purchase as convenient as
possible. </p>

<p> Wine coolers, for example, are a type of beverage aimed
particularly at women and young people. With its sweet, light
taste, low prices, and convenient packaging, the wine cooler
competes with beer and soft drinks for occasions such as picnics
and sports events, where traditional wine products are unlikely
to be consumed. Wine cooler ads promote just these types of uses.
Packaging has taken on a beer or soft drink look, and the
industry is successfully obtaining access to convenience stores
and supermarket outlets to make purchases easier (6). </p>

<p> Illicit drugs can also be packaged and made available at
&quot;retail&quot; outlets where purchasers can conveniently
obtain the product(s) of their choice. One news account suggests
that &quot;mass marketing that would have made McDonald's
proud&quot; is responsible for the evolution of crack cocaine
from a drug derided as &quot;garbage rock&quot; just a few years
ago into a national craze. </p>

<p> Crack was not invented, it was created by a sharp crowd of
sinister geniuses who took a simple production technique to make
a packaged, ready to consume form of the product with low unit
price to entice massive numbers of consumers. Cocaine powder
required an investment of nearly $75 for a gram, but a hit of
crack costs as little as $5. Equally alluring was crack's
incredible &quot;high&quot;--an instantaneous euphoria because it
was smoked--that could create addicts in weeks (16). </p>

<p> Two kinds of retail drug markets exist in the United States:
the private market place and the open-air or flagrant drug
markets (3). The private drug market involves transactions that
occur between people who are known to one another or are referred
by a trusted acquaintance. Referrals in the private marketplace
are usually not very far removed from the original connection;
they may be classmates in college, business associates,
relatives, or persons belonging to the same club. </p>

<p> The familiarity of the parties in the private drug market
usually means that there is a reduced level of public exposure
and violence. The desire to keep the flow of traffic to the site
of transactions at a minimum means that sales in the private
marketplace tend to be of larger quantities of drugs than those
in street transactions. Because most of the transactions take
place &quot;behind closed doors&quot; or in some other
clandestine fashion, a high degree of impermeability exists in
the dealer-customer relationship (3). Examples of private drug
markets include &quot;speak easies&quot; during prohibition and
the &quot;traditional&quot; (i.e., before crack) cocaine markets.
</p>

<p> Another aspect of the private drug market is the ritualistic
aspect of procuring the product. Consider, for example, the
ritual associated with purchasing cocaine. One author describes
&quot;a day in the office&quot; of a street-level cocaine
distribution network. The office itself is a highly structured
operation, complete with receptionists to screen potential
customers, guards, a &quot;catcher&quot;--held on retainer to
retrieve cocaine thrown out of a window during a bust-- and the
merchant who sets prices, arranges to barter goods and services,
gives credit, and makes day-to-day decisions regarding sales
(15). </p>

<p> A typical transaction involves a positive identification of
the buyer, a greeting and brief social contact (e.g., handshake,
hug, kiss) between the merchant and the buyer, a formal request
for an amount of cocaine, and a discussion of method of payment
(e.g., cash, barter). Sometimes the transaction involves a brief
discussion of the relative quality of the drugs in the street, a
sample of the drug available from this particular merchant, and
possibly some haggling over price. The public weighing and
packaging of the cocaine is central to this type of transaction.
The scale, in fact, becomes a central point of power and
authority in the business; only those with the highest level of
trust and respect can operate the scale (15). </p>

<p> Open air and flagrant drug markets, on the other hand, tend
to be far more impersonal and much less ritualistic than the
private marketplace. Many of the concepts used by mass marketers
of licit products are used in the flagrant marketplace--targeted
consumer groups, small and widely affordable units of sale,
prepackaged goods with fixed prices, convenient retail outlets.
One research team describes the mechanics of a typical open-air
drug market transaction: </p>

<p> A car drives down a residential street with enormous
apartment buildings on either side. Young men wave to the car; a
few of the more aggressive dealers step into traffic to signal
autos to stop. Even before the wheels have stopped rolling,
several young men are at the window; &quot;You looking?&quot;
says one. &quot;Smoke, smoke. I've got crack. Whatever you
want&quot; says the other peering over his shoulder. The answer
from the driver is simple and short: &quot;Two dimes.&quot; Two
small brown glass vials are exchanged for a 20 dollar bill and
the transaction is over in a matter of seconds (3). </p>

<p> Although the exact method for conducting a transaction may
vary slightly from place to place around the country, the essence
of the transaction is remarkably similar across the United
States. Flagrant or open-air drug markets have many of the same
structural characteristics as legal marketplaces: demographic and
product segmentation, brand loyalty, cartel pricing, aggressive
salesmen working on commission, and careful recruitment of loyal
and productive employees (3). </p>

<p> Alcohol and Tobacco </p>

<p> The marketing of legal yet addictive substances, especially
tobacco and alcohol, has become controversial in recent years.
Issues stemming from the marketing of licit substances include
advertising, taxation, and labeling. </p>

<p> Advertising </p>

<p> Alcohol and tobacco products have long been advertised in the
United States. In the 1950s and 1960s, these products were
advertised with minimal restrictions. Following the Surgeon
General's report on the hazards of smoking in 1964 (13), public
sentiment against cigarette advertising increased. The most
famous example of Federal regulation is the ban on broadcast
cigarette advertising in January 1971 resulting from the passage
by Congress of the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act of 1969
(Public Law 91-222). In recent years, attention has focused on
legislative proposals to ban all forms of cigarette advertising,
and to control the advertising of alcoholic products. </p>

<p> Taxation </p>

<p> The federal government currently levies excise taxes on
alcoholic beverages and tobacco products. Excise taxes on all
types of alcoholic beverages were raised in 1990 to their current
levels. Currently, for example, beer (six pack 12-ounce cans)
carries a 33 cent federal excise tax, a 750 ml bottle of wine
carries a 21 cent federal excise tax. A pack of cigarettes
carries a federal excise tax of 24 cents. </p>

<p> A number of studies in the 1980s focused on the impact of
federal excise taxes on cigarette consumption. A 1986 study
concluded that an 8- to 16-cent increase in the federal cigarette
excise tax would encourage from 1 to 2 million young persons and
8,000 to 1.5 million adults to quit smoking or not to start.
Thus, a tax increase could prevent hundreds of thousands of
premature smoking-related deaths, while a tax decrease would
contribute to the disease burden of tobacco (14). The General
Accounting Office, in a review of the literature on teenage
smoking and excise taxes, concluded that an increase in the
cigarette excise tax would be an effective way to reduce teenage
smoking (12). </p>

<p> Labeling </p>

<p> Federal law addresses the labeling of both cigarettes and
alcoholic beverages. In both cases, Congress declared that the
purpose of such labeling is to make sure the American public is
informed about the potential health hazards that may result from
consumption (36 USC 1331; 27 USC 213). Manufacturers of
cigarettes must use one of four rotating warnings on each
package, while manufacturers of alcoholic beverages must post a
prescribed warning (see box 4-5). Proponents of labeling have
stated that such warnings do not create legal restrictions, but
only help to inform the consumer about possible health risks.
Opponents of labeling have argued that no scientific proof exists
to link labeling with reduced use or improved health. </p>

<p> SUMMARY </p>

<p> The second set of preconditions for drug abuse and dependency
includes availability and marketing. A person cannot become a
drug abuser unless a drug is physically available to be used. In
addition, however, availability is affected by social norms
(e.g., factors within the community conducive to drug use,
including level of parental or guardian supervision, lack of
consequences for alcohol and drug offenses, lack of alternative
activities, portrayals of alcohol and other drug use by friends
and the media as a glamorous and healthy activity), prices
(economic availability), and personal values (subjective
availability). </p>

<p> The primary focus of U.S. antidrug policy has been to attack
the physical availability of illicit drugs through law
enforcement efforts aimed at disrupting the production,
transport, and sale of drugs. While this focus has increased
drug-related arrests--nearly half of newly sentenced federal
inmates in 1991 were imprisoned on drug charges--illicit drugs
are still widely available. </p>

<p> Marketing techniques for both licit and illicit drugs can
alter social, economic, and subjective availability. Key
components of marketing include the promotion and advertising of
particular product lines to appeal to particular subpopulations
of the consuming public; development of a product line that can
be targeted to subpopulations within the larger community of
consumers; pricing strategies to attract new buyers; and
identification of retail outlets for sales. </p>

<p> Federal law regulates the merchandising of licit yet abusable
substances such as tobacco, alcohol, and prescription drugs by
placing a variety of restrictions on how such products may be
marketed. Despite current restrictions, debate continues as to
whether and how a variety of legal drugs should be marketed.<br>
</p>

<p> BOX 4-1: What Is Marketing? </p>

<p> Marketing includes any activity involved in moving goods from
producer to consumer. In the context of drugs, marketing includes
a variety of activities covering a wide range of licit and
illicit substances. </p>

<p> For licit substances, such as alcohol, tobacco, and
inhalants, it includes market research, advertising, pricing, and
taxation. A number of government policies in the marketing
arena--taxes, advertising restrictions, point- of-sale controls,
and age restrictions on certain products-- directly affects the
availability of licit, yet abusable, substances. </p>

<p> For illicit drugs, such as marijuana, cocaine, and
hallucinogens, marketing techniques can include street markets,
gang activity, and private, closely controlled distribution and
sales systems. Government control in this area--prohibiting the
possession, use, and sale of such substances--likewise affects
the availability of these substances. </p>

<p> SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994.<br>
</p>

<p> Box 4-2: Availability and Tobacco </p>

<p> The evolution of tobacco from a relatively rare product
requiring preparation, thought, and ritual to a product that is
ubiquitous, prepackaged, and consumed without much fanfare
provides a graphic illustration of how increased physical
availability of a product can dramatically increase drug use,
abuse, and addiction. Three major developments in the history of
tobacco use paved the way for making this drug imminently
available for use by consumers: the invention of the cigarette
manufacturing machine, the invention and perfection of matches,
and the proliferation of the use of vending machines to sell
tobacco products. </p>

<p> The first successful cigarette manufacturing machine was
developed in 1881 by James A. Bonsack. This machine had the
capacity to produce more than 200 cigarettes per minute. Prior to
the advent of this machine, smokers had to roll each cigarette by
hand, a time-consuming and often ritualistic process. </p>

<p> Once rolled, a cigarette must be lit to be consumed. This was
no easy task prior to the introduction of the safety match, first
invented in 1896 but not perfected until 1912. Without matches,
smokers were required to enter cigar stores to light cigarettes
from gas or oil lamps provided specifically for the purpose of
lighting tobacco products. These developments changed forever the
way that cigarettes were consumed by making them readily
available for consumption at any moment during the day. Instead
of a thoughtful, often ritualistic exercise, cigarette
consumption has evolved for some into an almost unconscious
habit. Following the invention of the manufacturing machine and
the safety match, the rate of cigarette consumption soared during
the late 19th and early 20th century. </p>

<p> The use of vending machines may be the most revolutionary
aspect of tobacco availability. First introduced in 1926, vending
machines require no sales person, are not restricted by selected
hours of operation, and are not concerned with the age or
legality of the purchaser. Vending machines make cigarettes
available almost anywhere, appearing in bars, hotels, train and
bus stations, airports, hotels, and restaurants. By 1953, nearly
half a million cigarette machines existed and were responsible
for sales of more than 3 billion packs of cigarettes a year. The
upward trend in sales from cigarette machines continued through
the mid- 1970s: by 1973 more than 900,000 vending machines were
in operation, selling almost 5 billion packs per year. Some early
research indicated that the existence of vending machines
throughout the physical environment is a major inducement to
impulse smoking. </p>

<p> SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994, based on J.
Mosher, &quot;The Environmental Approach to Prevention,&quot; The
California Prevention Network Journal 3, 42-44 (1990); R. Tenant,
The American Cigarette Industry: A Study in Economic Analysis and
Public Policy (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1950); R.
Sobel, They Satisfy: The Cigarette in American life (Garden City,
NJ: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1978); Marshall, M.V., Automatic
Merchandising; A Study of the Problems and Limitations of Vending
(Cambridge, MA: The Riverside Press, 1954).<br>
</p>

<p> BOX 4-3: Survey Comments, Economic Availability </p>

<p> Economic factors impact on perceptions of availability in a
number of ways. For example, because Sioux Falls, South Dakota,
was experiencing a &quot;strong economy . . . juveniles have had
an abundance of cash available for alcohol/drug usage.&quot; More
frequent, however, were comments stating the opinion that a poor
economy increased the economic availability of drugs and alcohol:
</p>

<p> Frankfort, Kentucky: &quot;Profit motive due to national
economy and lack of job training/jobs. Lack of hope and
opportunity for some causes increased sale of drugs due to high
profit.&quot; </p>

<p> Barbourville, Kentucky: &quot;Drug dealers that cannot make
it flipping hamburgers, but are successful at selling drugs and
have a lot of material evidence of their success. Law enforcement
needs to confiscate these material items in prosecution of case.
Also, involvement of drug dealing by law enforcement and
politicians is a problem. &quot; </p>

<p> Harrisburg, Pennsylvania: &quot;Teenaged drug dealers have
status, money, jewelry, cars, designer clothes, etc., which many
of their peers cannot afford.&quot; </p>

<p> Fort Worth, Texas: &quot;Depressed economic conditions--Lack
of legitimate means to obtain income. It's easy money with
minimal consequences for conviction.&quot; </p>

<p> SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994.<br>
</p>

<p> BOX 4-4: Survey Comments, Social Availability </p>

<p> Conway, New Hampshire: &quot;Our law enforcers are known and
make little inroads towards prosecuting drug traffickers or
sellers. Many young adults supply liquor and drugs to underage
kids in our area.&quot; </p>

<p> Mount Holly, New Jersey: &quot;The legal system does not
fairly prosecute offenders. It gives some juveniles the message
that depending upon your circumstances it is OK to use and sell
drugs.&quot; </p>

<p> Muskogee, Oklahoma: &quot;The lack of prosecutive vigor in
alcohol-related offenses (Minor in possession, public
intoxication, D.U.I.). District attorney does not vigorously
pursue and law enforcement treats D.U.I. as public
intoxication.&quot; </p>

<p> Prineville, Oregon: &quot;This community is basically a blue
collar community. There is an attitude of acceptance of juveniles
using alcohol. Kind of a boys will be boys attitude.&quot; </p>

<p> South Bend, Indiana: &quot;We have seen an increase in
alcohol consumption that appears to be tolerated or even
encouraged by adults (primarily parents).&quot; </p>

<p> Hillsboro, Illinois: &quot;Lack of education, interest,
cooperation of parents. Not enough interest with higher officials
(e.g., school teachers, church members, government officials,
businesses, and senior citizens).&quot; </p>

<p> Baraboo, Michigan: &quot;Lack of appropriate teen activities.
Lack of parental interest.&quot; </p>

<p> Jacksonville, Illinois: &quot;Decrease in the ability and
willingness of individual family units to educate, instruct, and
monitor juvenile behaviors.&quot; </p>

<p> Nicholasville, Kentucky: &quot;Alcohol is supplied willingly
to juveniles by a large number of adults. Inhalants are available
at any department store.&quot; </p>

<p> Brownstown, Indiana: &quot;Children, mostly high school age,
come in contact with adults, ages 18-23, who are very willing to
buy alcohol or sell drugs to their younger friends. In addition,
these children who do not have money on hand are likely to steal
items and trade them for drugs or cash to buy alcohol and
drugs.&quot; </p>

<p> SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994.<br>
</p>

<p> BOX 4-5: Cigarette and Alcoholic Beverage Warnings </p>

<p> It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, package, or
import for sale or distribution within the United States any
cigarettes the package of which fails to bear one of the
following labels: </p>

<p> SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung Cancer, Heart
Disease, Emphysema, And May Complicate Pregnancy. </p>

<p> SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now Greatly
Reduces Serious Risks to Your Health. </p>

<p> SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Smoking By Pregnant Women May
Result in Fetal Injury, Premature Birth, And Low Birth Weight. </p>

<p> SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains Carbon
Monoxide. </p>

<p> It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, import, or
bottle for sale or distribution in the United States any
alcoholic beverage unless the container of such beverage bears
the following statement: </p>

<p> GOVERNMENT WARNING: (1) According to the Surgeon General,
women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy
because of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption of
alcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car or
operate machinery, and may cause health problems. </p>

<p> SOURCE: 36 USC 1331; 27 USC 213. _ <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>