
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-49</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B030-194</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/asap/florida_guide.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110009 text/html 34413
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:59:51 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:44:06 GMT
Content-length: 34194
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Florida Guidelines for Management of Pain Using Dangerous
Drugs and Controlled Substances</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_asap_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="asapmain.htm"><font size="3">ASAP - American Society for
Action on Pain</font></a><font size="2"> </font></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43622" -->

<p><font size="3">MEDICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES</font></p>

<p><font size="3">for practitioners licensed under Florida
Statutes Chapter 458 (Medicine) or Chapter 459 (Osteopathic
Medicine)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">MANAGEMENT OF PAIN USING DANGEROUS DRUGS AND
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Florida</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Agency for Health Care Administration (AHCA)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">in consultation with</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The Florida Pain Commission</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The Florida Board of Medicine</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The Florida Board of Osteopathic Medicine</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">Endorsed on October 25, 1996</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Permission to duplicate and disseminate
granted.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">The Agency for Health Care Administration
wishes to acknowledge the contributions of Alvin E. Smith, MD.,
chairman of the Florida Pain Commission and past president of the
Florida Medical Association, in the development of this
guideline. </font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">TABLE OF CONTENTS Page</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Published Official Endorsement Notice 1-2</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Florida Generic Clinical Practice Guideline on
the Management of Pain</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Using Dangerous Drugs and Controlled Substances
3-12</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Part I. Preface 3-4</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Part II. Practice and Regulatory Guidelines 5-8</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Part III. Other Endorsed Pain Management
Guidelines 8-12</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Florida Statutes s. 458.326 - Intractable Pain:
Authorized Treatment 5</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Information on the Narcotic Bowel Syndrome
13-16</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Regulatory Process Information, Division of
Medical Quality Assurance 17</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">FLORIDA</font></p>

<p><font size="3">AGENCY FOR HEALTH CARE ADMINISTRATION (AHCA)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">NOTICE ON MEDICAL PRACTICE PARAMETERS</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Published in the Florida Administrative Weekly
on</font></p>

<p><font size="3">October25, 1996</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">GENERIC PAIN MANAGEMENT USING DANGEROUS DRUGS
AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">The Agency for Health Care Administration, in
consultation with the Florida Pain Commission, the Florida Board
of Medicine and the Florida Board of Osteopathic Medicine,
endorses the following practice parameter or guideline pursuant
to the Florida Health Care and Insurance Reform Act of 1993,
Chapter 93-129, Laws of Florida; Florida Statutes s.
408.02&#151;Practice Parameters--of the Health Care
Administration Act; and Florida Statutes s. 458.326--Intractable
Pain; Authorized Treatment--of the Medical Practice Act. This
practice parameter has been approved as a working document by the
Florida Board of Medicine and the Florida Board of Osteopathic
Medicine.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">This guideline is published for information,
education and review by the medical community, other
professionals and the public. This practice guideline has been
created in recognition that some dangerous drugs, including
controlled substances under schedules II-V as provided in Florida
Statutes s. 893.03, can be vital in the treatment of pain,
including intractable pain. They are useful for relieving and
controlling many other pain related symptoms.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">These drugs may be prescribed for the treatment
of pain and related symptoms as a result of a prudent medical
diagnosis, in proper doses and for appropriate lengths of time,
which in some cases, may be for as long as the pain or related
symptoms exist.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">Pain, and many of the symptoms associated with
intractable pain, can result in subjective complaints and the
appropriateness and the adequacy of drug and drug doses will vary
from patient to patient. The physician is expected to exercise
sound medical judgment in treating pain and its related symptoms
with dangerous drugs and controlled substances.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">This generic guideline applies primarely (sic)
to the treatment of chronic and intractable pain with the use of
dangerous drugs and controlled substances. At the end of the
text, there are additional Agency for Health Care Administration
endorsed guidelines that target pain management. These guidelines
contain information about the management of specific acute and
chronic pain and injury conditions using prescription drugs,
controlled substances and other modalities. The guidelines also
contain the mandated scientific base for this generic pain
management guideline.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">Guidelines are not intended to be used as fixed
protocols. They are parameters for patient management strategies
which are not entirely inclusive or exclusive of all methods of
reasonable care that can achieve comparable results. They do
permit the consideration of the unique exigencies of each
individual and available resources. Many patients will require
more or less treatment to achieve relief from pain.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">Treatment must be based on patient need as well
as professional judgment. Therefore, these guidelines can be
tailored to fit distinctive patient needs that are affected by
the medical setting, the available resources and by other
factors. Deviations can be justified by individual circumstances.
</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">While standards are intended to be rigid and
mandatory, making exceptions rare and troublesome to justify,
guidelines are more flexible, but it is advisable they be
followed as closely as is prudent. Guidelines are revisited every
three years or less and reviews are based on scientific updates.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">FLORIDA GENERIC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE</font></p>

<p><font size="3">MANAGEMENT OF PAIN USING DANGEROUS DRUGS AND
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PART I</font></p>

<p><font size="3">PREFACE</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">The State of Florida recognizes that pain,
including intractable pain, is often undertreated. Unrelieved
pain can have harsh and sometimes disastrous influence on the
quality of life for patients and their families.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PAIN MANAGEMENT SHOULD BE A HIGH PRIORITY IN
FLORIDA</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Principles of quality medical practice dictate
that citizens of Florida who suffer from pain should seek
relief-with treatment that is currently available. The
appropriate application of current knowledge and treatments can
greatly improve the quality of life for many Florida citizens and
reduce the morbidity and costs associated with untreated pain. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">In addition to promoting competent patient
care, these guidelines are intended to help physicians avoid
investigation if controlled substances are appropriately
prescribed for short or long-term pain management.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PRESCRIBING DANGEROUS DRUGS AND CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES FOR PAIN </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The proper treatment for any patient's pain
depends upon a careful diagnosis of the etiology of the pain,
selection of appropriate and cost effective treatments and the
ongoing evaluations of the results of treatment. Patients with
chronic pain may demand more time of the practitioner because of
the complexity of their problem. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Opioid analgesics and other dangerous and
controlled substances are useful for pain treatment. They are the
cornerstone of treatment for acute pain due to trauma or surgery
and of chronic pain due to progressive diseases, such as cancer.
Other than that specified in the Physician's Desk Reference
(PDR), large doses, if documented, may be necessary to control
severe pain. Extended therapy may also be needed to alleviate
chronic pain. Published formularies, relating to commercial
financial incentives, should not be a deterrent to achieving
optimal pain relief.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Opioid analgesics may also be useful in
treating patients with intractable nonmalignant pain especially
when efforts to remove or treat the pain with other modalities
have failed. Such intractable pain may have a number of different
etiologies and might require several treatment methods. In
addition, the extent to which pain is associated with physical
and psychosocial impairment varies greatly. Therefore, when
patients are selected for therapy trials using dangerous drugs
and opioid therapy, care should be used to assess the pain as
well as the patient's disability. The duration of drug therapy
should depend on the physician's evaluation of the results of
treatment, including the degree of pain relief, the changes in
physical and psychological functioning and the appropriate
utilization of health care resources. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Addiction in relation to these substances
should be placed in proper perspective. Physical dependence and
tolerance are normal physiological consequences of extended
opioid therapy and are not the same as addiction. Addiction is a
behavioral syndrome characterized by psychological dependence and
aberrant, drug-related behaviors. Addicts use drugs in a
compulsive manner and not for medical purposes. An addict may
also be physically dependent or tolerant. Patients with chronic
pain should not be considered addicts merely because they are
being treated with opioids. Physicians need to be cognizant of
the fact that patients with a history of drug abuse may be
particularly problematic to the management of pain. </font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PAIN MANAGEMENT, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND THE
LAW</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Federal government laws and regulations and
those of the State of Florida impose special requirements for
dangerous drugs and controlled substances prescription. These
regulations are aimed at preventing harm to the consurner from
dangerous prescription drugs which are diverted to nonmedical
uses. It is legitimate medical practice for physicians to
prescribe controlled substances for the treatment of pain,
including intractable pain. The Agency for Health Administration
supports the examination of prescriptions for analgesics and
opioids for the treatment of pain. This examination must be based
on the documented diagnosis and treatment rather than on the drug
dosage or on the number of prescriptions written. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Concerns about regulatory scrutiny should not
cause physicians to be reluctant to prescribe or administer
dangerous and controlled substances, including Schedules II-V
drugs as provided for in Florida Statutes s. 893.03, for patients
with legitimate medical needs. Physicians need not fear
administrative action when prescribing dangerous drugs and
controlled substances to patients in their care for a pathology
or condition when the prescription is issued after a good faith
examination and there is medical indication for the prescription.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The regulatory boards may identify a pattern of
dangerous and controlled substance use which merits further
examination, but private, courteous and professional inquiry can
usually determine whether the physician is appropriately
prescribing for patients in good faith or whether an
investigation is warranted. The Florida Board of Medicine and the
Florida Board of Osteopathic Medicine must judge the prescription
validity relative to the physician's documented diagnosis and
treatment and if the prescribed drugs are appropriate for the
patient's condition. Predetermined limits should not be placed on
dosages or length of drug therapy. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">It is the goal of the Agency for Health Care
Administration to change practitioner perception of regulatory
scrutiny and recognize the commitment of regulatory boards to
improving pain management in order to enhance the quality of
lives of pain-affected patients in Florida. Federal and State
laws and regulatory policies should not hamper the appropriate
use of dangerous drugs and controlled substances for the relief
of pain. </font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PART II</font></p>

<p><font size="3">PRACTICE AND REGULATORY GUIDELINES</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">The Florida Board of Medicine and the Florida
Board of Osteopathic Medicine may use the following guidelines to
determine whether conduct violates the physician's respective
practice act, including Florida Statutes s. 458.326--Intractable
Pain; Authorized Treatment--of the Florida Medical Practice Act,
below, in regard to prescribing, administering, ordering or the
dispensing of pain medications and other drugs and to address
their side effects.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">Excerpted from Florida Statutes Chapter 458,
Medical Practice</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">Florida Statutes s. 458.326 - Intractable pain;
authorized treatment. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">(1) For the purposes of this section, the term
&quot;intractable pain&quot; means pain for which, in the
generally accepted course of medical practice, the cause cannot
be removed and otherwise treated.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(2) Intractable pain must be diagnosed by a
physician licensed under this chapter and qualified by experience
to render such diagnosis. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a physician may prescribe or administer any controlled substance
under Schedules II-V, as provided for in</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(4) 893.03, to a person for the treatment of
intractable pain, provided the physician does so in accordance
with that level of care, skill, and treatment recognized by a
reasonably prudent physician under similar conditions and
circumstances.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(5) Nothing in this section shall be construed
to condone, authorize, or approve mercy killing or euthanasia,
and no treatment authorized by this section may be used for such
purpose. History.--s. 3, ch. 94-96.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">DEFINITIONS</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">INTRACTABLE PAIN - A pain state in which the
cause of the pain cannot be removed or otherwise treated and
which, in the generally accepted course of medical practice, no
relief or cure of the cause of the pain is possible or none has
been found after reasonable efforts.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">NONTHERAPEUTIC USE - A medical use or purpose
that is not legitimate in nature or in manner.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">ABUSER OF NARCOTIC DRUGS, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
AND DANGEROUS DRUGS - An individual who takes a drug or drugs for
other than legitimate rnedical purposes.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">1. The treatment of pain, including intractable
pain, with dangerous drugs and controlled substances has a
legitimate medical purpose when performed in the usual course of
medical practice.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2. Physicians duly authorized to practice under
their respective practice act and to prescribe controlled
substances and dangerous drugs in Florida, shall not be subject
to disciplinary action by their respective licensure board for
prescribing, ordering, administering or dispensing dangerous
drugs or controlled substances for the treatment and relief of
pain, including intractable pain, in the usual course of
professional practice for a legitimate medical purpose in
compliance with applicable state and federal law.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3. The prescribing, ordering, administering or
dispensing of dangerous drugs or controlled substances for pain
will be considered to be for a legitimate medical purpose if
based upon scientific knowledge of the treatment of pain,
including intractable pain; and are not in contravention of
applicable state and federal law, and if prescribed, ordered,
administered or dispensed in compliance with the following
guidelines where asoronnate and as is necessary to meet the
individual needs of the patient.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">A physician will be considered in compliance
if:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">a. The medication is prescribed after a
documented patient history and physical examination by the
physician prescribing or providing the medication, which
includes: an assessment and consideration of the physical and
psychological impact of the pain, any patient history or
potential for substance abuse, for coexisting diseases and
conditions and the prescience of a recognized medical indication
for the use of a dangerous drug or controlled substance.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">b. If medications are prescribed pursuant to a
written treatment plan tailored for the individual needs of the
patient and if treatment progress and success can be evaluated
with stated objectives such as pain relief and improved physical
and psychosocial function. Such a written treatment plan will
consider pertinent medical history and physical examination as
well as the need for further testing, consultations, referrals or
the use of other treatment modalities.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">c. The physician should discuss with the
patient, significant other(s) or legal guardian, if appropriate,
the risks, i.e., narcotic bowel syndrome (inforrnation attached),
addiction and other side effects in comparison to the benefits
from the use of dangerous and controlled substances.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">d. The patient will be subject to documented
periodic review of the care by the physician at reasonable
intervals and in view of the individual circumstances of the
patient in regard to progress toward reaching the stated
objectives. The review will take into consideration the course of
medications prescribed, ordered, administered or dispensed, as
well as any new information about the etiology of the pain.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">e. Complete and accurate records of the care
provided are kept as set forth in a-d, above. When controlled
substances are prescribed, records are made which include names,
quantities prescribed, dosages and number of authorized refills.
This record takes into account that pain-affected patients with a
history of substance abuse, or patients who live in an
environment that</font></p>

<p><font size="3">may pose a risk for medication misuse or
diversion, may require special consideration. Management of these
patients may warrant closer monitoring by the physician managing
the pain and require consultation with appropriate health care
professionals.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">4. A physician's decision not to adhere
strictly to the provisions of number 3, above, will not if
&quot;good faith or cause&quot; is shown, constitute grounds for
board disciplinary action. Each case of prescribing for pain will
be evaluated on an individual basis. The physician's conduct will
be evaluated to a great extent by the treatment outcome, taking
into account: 1/ whether the drug used is medically or
pharmacologically recognized to be appropriate for the diagnosis,
2/ the patient's individual needs, including any improvement in
functioning, and 3/ recognizing that some types of pain cannot be
completely relieved.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">5. If the provisions set out in numbers 1-4,
above, are met, and if all drug treatment is properly documented,
the board will consider such practices as prescribing in a
therapeutic manner, and as prescribing and practicing in a manner
consistent with public health and welfare. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">6. Quantity of pharmaceutical and chronicity of
the prescription will be evaluated on the basis of the documented
appropriate diagnosis and treatment of the recognized medical
indication. Documented persistence of the recognized medical
indication, and properly documented follow-up evaluations with
appropriate continuing care as set out in these guidelines, will
also be evaluated.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">7. A physician may use any number of treatment
modalities for the treatment of pain, including intractable pain,
which are consistent with legitimate medical purposes.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PART III</font></p>

<p><font size="3">OTHER ENDORSED PAIN MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The Agency for Health Care Administration has
endorsed the following pain management guidelines. These
guidelines provide the scientific base for the generic guideline.
The following listings were excerpted from the Catalog of
Endorsed Practice Parameters and Their Sources, 1993-1995. </font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PRACTICE PARAMETER SUBJECT: MEDICAL PAIN
MANAGEMENT</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Endorsed on October 14, 1994, under the
authority of s.408.02, Florida</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Statutes</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">NO. GUIDE GUIDELINE ORDER FROM COST</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">7</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1 1.1 Clinical Practice Guideline - Agency for
Health Care </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Free copy</font></p>

<p><font size="3">ACUTE PAIN MANAGEMENT: Administration from</font></p>

<p><font size="3">OPERATIVE OR MEDICAL (AHCA) AHCA</font></p>

<p><font size="3">PROCEDURES AND TRAUMA. Medical Guidelines while</font></p>

<p><font size="3">145 pages. U.S. Department of Clearinghouse
supplies</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Health and Human Service, Public 2727 E. Mahan</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Drive, last</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Health Service, Agency for Health Bldg. 3</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Care Policy and Research Tallahassee, FL 32308-</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(AHCPR). 1992. AHCPR 5403</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Publication No. 92-0032. FAX (preferred:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(904) 488-1261</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Telephone:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(904) 922-5505</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">2 1.2 Quick Reference Guide for or write: Free</font></p>

<p><font size="3">copy</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Clinicians -ACUTE PAIN AHCPR from</font></p>

<p><font size="3">MANAGEMENT IN ADULTS: Center for Research AHCA</font></p>

<p><font size="3">OPERATIVE PROCEDURES. Dissemination and while</font></p>

<p><font size="3">22 pages (same publisher Liaison supplies</font></p>

<p><font size="3">as above). 1992. AHCPR P.O. Box 8547 last</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Publication No. 92-0019. Silver Springs, MD</font></p>

<p><font size="3">20907</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">or call:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">AHCPR clearinghouse</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1 -800-358-9295</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PRACTICE PARAMETER SUBJECT: MEDICAL PAIN
MANAGEMENT</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Endorsed on October 14, 1994, under the
authority of s. 408.02, Florida</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Statutes</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">NO. GUIDE GUIDELINE ORDER FROM COST</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3 1.3 Quick Reference Guide for Same as above
Free</font></p>

<p><font size="3">copy</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Clinicians - ACUTE PAIN from</font></p>

<p><font size="3">MANAGEMENT IN INFANTS, AHCA</font></p>

<p><font size="3">CHILDREN, AND while</font></p>

<p><font size="3">ADOLESCENTS: OPERATIVE supplies</font></p>

<p><font size="3">AND MEDICAL PROCEDURES. last</font></p>

<p><font size="3">22 pages (same publisher as</font></p>

<p><font size="3">above). 1992. AHCPR</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Publication No. 92-0020.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">4 1.4 PAIN CONTROL AFTER</font></p>

<p><font size="3">SURGERY - A PATIENT'S</font></p>

<p><font size="3">GUIDE. 13 pages (same publisher</font></p>

<p><font size="3">asabove). 1992. AHCPR</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Publication No. 92-0021.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">5 1.5 FORMAS DE CONTROLAR EL Igual que arriba
Gratis</font></p>

<p><font size="3">de</font></p>

<p><font size="3">DOLOR DESPUES DE UNA AHCPR</font></p>

<p><font size="3">OPERACION - GUIA PARA EL</font></p>

<p><font size="3">PACIENTE. 9paginas. Publicado</font></p>

<p><font size="3">porlaAHCPR. 1992. AHCPR</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Publicacion No. 92-0068.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">6 6.1 Clinical Practice Guideline- AHCPR Free
copy</font></p>

<p><font size="3">MANAGEMENT OF CANCER Center for Research from</font></p>

<p><font size="3">PAIN. 257 pages (same publisher Dissemination
and </font></p>

<p><font size="3">AHCPR</font></p>

<p><font size="3">asabove). Marchl994. AHCPR Liaison</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Publication No. 94-0592. P.O. Box 8547</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Silver Springs, MD</font></p>

<p><font size="3">20907</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">or call:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">AHCPR Clearingkouse</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1-800-358-9295</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">NO. GUIDE GUIDELINE ORDER FROM COST</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">7 6.2 Quick Reference Guide for Same as above
Free</font></p>

<p><font size="3">copy</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Clinicians- MANAGEMENT OF from</font></p>

<p><font size="3">CANCER PAIN: Adults. 28 pages AHCPR</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(same publisher as above). March</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1994. AHCPRPublication</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Number 94-0593.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">8 6.3 MANAGING CANCER PAIN- Same as above Free
copy</font></p>

<p><font size="3">PATIENT GUIDE. 21 pages from</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(same publisher as above). March AHCPR</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1994. AHCPR Publication</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Number 94-0595.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">9 6.4 EL CONTROL DEL DOLOR Igual que arriba
gratis</font></p>

<p><font size="3">de</font></p>

<p><font size="3">CAUSADO POR EL CANCER- AHCPR</font></p>

<p><font size="3">GUIA PARA EL PACIENTE.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">21 paginas. Publicado por la</font></p>

<p><font size="3">AHCPR. March 1994. AHCPR</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Publicacion No. 94-0596.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PRACTICE PARAMETER SUBJECT:
NEURO-MUSCULO-SKELETAL SUBJECTS:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">*LOW BACK PAIN AND INJURY &#150; FEDERAL
GUIDELINES </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Endorsed on February 24, 1995; amended on
February 2, 1996; under the</font></p>

<p><font size="3">authority of s. 408.02</font></p>

<p><font size="3">and s. 440.13(15), Florida Statutes.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">NO. GUIDE GUIDELINE ORDER FROM COST</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">1 1.1 *Clinical Practice Guideline - Agency for
Health Care </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Free copy</font></p>

<p><font size="3">ACUTE LOW BACK PROBLEMS Administration (AHCA) </font></p>

<p><font size="3">from</font></p>

<p><font size="3">INADULTS. 160pages. U.S. MedicalGuidelines </font></p>

<p><font size="3">AHCA-</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Department of Health and Human Clearinghouse
while</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Services, Public Health Service, See Guideline
1,</font></p>

<p><font size="3">above supplies</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Agency for Health Care Policy and last</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Research(AHCPR). December,</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1994. AHCPR Publication No. 95-</font></p>

<p><font size="3">0642.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PRACTICE PARAMETER SUBJECT:
NEURO-MUSCULO-SKELETAL SUBJECTS:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">*LOW BACK PAIN AND INJURY &#150; FEDERAL
GUIDELINES </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Endorsed on February 24, 1995; amended on
February 2, 1996; under the</font></p>

<p><font size="3">authority of s. 408.02</font></p>

<p><font size="3">and s. 440.13(15), Florida Statutes.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">NO. GUIDE GUIDELINE ORDER FROM COST</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">2 1.2 *Quick Reference Guide for or write: Free</font></p>

<p><font size="3">copy</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Clinicians - ACUTE LOW BACK Agency for Health
Care </font></p>

<p><font size="3">from</font></p>

<p><font size="3">PROBLEMS IN ADULTS: Policy and Research </font></p>

<p><font size="3">ASSESSMENT AND (AHCPR)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">TREATMENT. 25 pages (same Center for Research</font></p>

<p><font size="3">publisher as above). 1994 Dissemination and</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">PRACTICE PARAMETER SUBJECT: MEDICAL PAIN
MANAGEMENT</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">NO.GUIDELINE ORDER FROM REVIEW COMMENTS COST</font></p>

<p><font size="3">AND INFORMATION</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">10 Florida Generic AHCA Guidelines
Scientifically-valid </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Free</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Clinical Practice Clearinghouse review comments
should </font></p>

<p><font size="3">copy</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Guideline - FAX (preferred) be sent to:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Management of Pain (904)488-1261 Christiane J.
Guignard,</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Using Dangerous R.N., Coordinator,</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Drugs and Controlled Telephone (if no Fax
Medical</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Guideline</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Substances. 20pages. machine available):
Development,</font></p>

<p><font size="3">AHCA,</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Agency for Health (904) 921-5505 Bldg. 3., 2727
E. Mahan</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Care Administration. Drive, Tallahassee, FL</font></p>

<p><font size="3">October 25, 1996. 32308-5403</font></p>

<p><font size="3">(904) 922-5855</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_asap_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="asapmain.htm"><font size="3">ASAP - American Society for
Action on Pain</font></a><font size="2"> </font></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43622" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>