
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B045-35</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/cocccp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122114719 text/html 32618
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:47:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:17:02 GMT
Content-length: 32400
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Coca Cultivation and Cocaine Processing</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_govpub_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications </a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61753" -->

<p>COCA CULTIVATION AND COCAINE PROCESSING: </p>

<p>AN OVERVIEW </p>

<p>DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION </p>

<p>INTELLIGENCE DIVISION </p>

<p>STRATEGIC INTELLIGENCE SECTION </p>

<p>SEPTEMBER 1993 </p>

<p>EXECUTIVE SUMMARY </p>

<p>Two of the lesser understood aspects of the illicit cocaine
traffic are the </p>

<p>cultivation of the coca plant and the conversion of the coca
leaf into </p>

<p>cocaine hydrochloride (HCl). While the coca plant can be found
throughout </p>

<p>most of Latin America, varieties containing the cocaine
alkaloid (the basis </p>

<p>for cocaine HCl) are cultivated and converted primarily in
Peru, Bolivia and </p>

<p>Colombia. </p>

<p>There are two different species and several different
varieties of coca </p>

<p>plants which contain the cocaine alkaloid and these varieties
prosper under </p>

<p>quite different climatic conditions. At the same time, the
methods used to </p>

<p>cultivate and harvest coca leaf differ depending on
climate,tradition,and </p>

<p>other factors. The conversion of coca leaf into coca paste,
cocaine base, and </p>

<p>cocaine hydrochloride is also a varied process with many steps
involved and </p>

<p>many chemicals necessary. </p>

<p>THE COCA PLANT </p>

<p>It has been estimated that there are over 200 Erythroxylum
species growing in </p>

<p>the Western Hemisphere. Only 17 species can be utilized to
produce cocaine. </p>

<p>Fifteen of the 17 species contain relatively low levels of
cocaine alkaloid </p>

<p>and subsequently are not cultivated. In South America two
species and two </p>

<p>varieties within each of these species are cultivated. They
are: </p>

<p>--E. coca Species </p>

<p>var. coca </p>

<p>var. ipadu </p>

<p>--E. novogranatense Species </p>

<p>var. novogranatense </p>

<p>var. truxillense </p>

<p>These varieties are traditionally cultivated in the following
areas: </p>

<p>--Bolivia </p>

<p>E. coca var. coca </p>

<p>--Peru </p>

<p>E. coca var. coca </p>

<p>E. novogranatense var. truxillense </p>

<p>E. coca var. ipadu </p>

<p>--Colombia </p>

<p>E. novogranatense var. novogranatense </p>

<p>E. coca var. ipadu </p>

<p>E. novogranatense var. truxillense </p>

<p>The most widely grown variety of coca is E. coca var. coca
which is </p>

<p>cultivated on the eastern slope of the Andes from Bolivia in
the south to as </p>

<p>far north as central Ecuador. This area of the Andes has a
tropical climate </p>

<p>and experiences high amounts of rainfall. Coca in this region
is usually </p>

<p>grown between 1,650 and 4,950 feet in elevation. </p>

<p>E. novogranatense var. novogranatense thrives in the drier
regions of </p>

<p>Colombia and, to a lesser extent, Venezuela. It is also grown
at lower </p>

<p>elevations where the climate is generally hotter. The main
variety of </p>

<p>E.novogranatense, var. truxillense, is grown up to an
elevation of 4,950 </p>

<p>feet. The last variety, E. coca var. ipadu, is found in
southern Colombia, </p>

<p>northeastern Peru, and western Brazil in the Amazon basin. E.
coca var. ipadu </p>

<p>is primarily cultivated by Indians for their own consumption
and is not as </p>

<p>high in cocaine alkaloids as the other three. </p>

<p>It is not an easy task, even for an expert, to readily
distinguish between </p>

<p>the different varieties of coca plants. One of the ways to
identify the </p>

<p>variety is to look at the leaves. Both varieties of E. coca
(E. coca var. </p>

<p>coca and E. coca var. ipadu) have broadly elliptic leaves. The
leaf of var. </p>

<p>ipadu has a rounded apex, whereas the apex of var. coca is
more pointed. The </p>

<p>leaf of var. coca is large, thick and dark green in color. </p>

<p>The leaf of E. novogranatense var. novogranatense is pale
green with a </p>

<p>rounded apex and is somewhat narrower and thinner than the
leaf of var. ipadu </p>

<p>and var.coca. E. novogranatense var. truxillense is very
similar to var. </p>

<p>novogranatense except that it does not possess the lines
parallel to the </p>

<p>central vein of the leaf that are characteristic to so many
varieties of coca </p>

<p>plant. </p>

<p>The cocaine alkaloid content of the E. coca and the E.
novogranatense species </p>

<p>also serves to distinguish between these species and the many
other species </p>

<p>of wild coca that grow in Latin America. These other species
contain much </p>

<p>lower levels of cocaine alkaloid. The usual cocaine alkaloid
content of a </p>

<p>sample of coca leaf material is between 0.1 and 0.8 percent.
The cocaine </p>

<p>alkaloid content can go much higher, however, as was shown in
one sample of </p>

<p>coca leaf from the Chapare region in Bolivia that measured 1.2
percent. Coca </p>

<p>grown on the upper slopes of the Andes also contain more
cocaine alkaloids </p>

<p>than coca grown in low-lying areas. It is therefore believed
that the best </p>

<p>quality coca is grown at higher altitudes. </p>

<p>CULTIVATION </p>

<p>While methods of cultivating the coca plant are similar in
many ways </p>

<p>throughout Peru, Bolivia, and Colombia, there are differences
in techniques </p>

<p>because of terrain, tradition, and other factors. </p>

<p>Some coca plantations have been in existence for years. In
other areas, </p>

<p>however, such as Peru's Upper Huauaga Valley, new plantations
are being </p>

<p>established daily. A typical farmer who is preparing a field
for coca will </p>

<p>usually pick an area that slopes slightly so that water will
not drown his </p>

<p>plants. He will then begin clearing his field, normally by
cutting trees and </p>

<p>stumps and setting fire to the debris, a clearing method known
as slash and </p>

<p>bum. The felled trees are left in the field and the coca is
simply planted </p>

<p>around them. The farmer has no motivation to move the logs
since there is no </p>

<p>market for the timber. Logs are absent from the older fields
because of rot </p>

<p>or because the farmer gradually cleared his field. </p>

<p>Once the field is cleared for cultivation, the farmer can
ready his crop for </p>

<p>planting. The first step in cultivation generally begins with
the seed. Seeds </p>

<p>are usually gathered from December through March from plants
ranging from two </p>

<p>to three years in age. They are often poured into water at the
onset to </p>

<p>identify bad seeds, which will usually float to the top and
are discarded. </p>

<p>The good seeds are planted in small plots that are kept shaded
from the sun. </p>

<p>Seeds are sown about two inches apart at a depth of
approximately one half </p>

<p>inch in humus enriched soil. These seedbeds are kept well
watered and weeded </p>

<p>frequently and the seeds will usually germinate within 20 to
30 days. </p>

<p>Sometimes the seeds are presoaked in water to hasten
germination which will </p>

<p>then occur in about ten days. </p>

<p>Seedlings usually reach transplanting size in about two
months. At this age </p>

<p>they are about 12 inches tall. While the measurements vary,
seedlings </p>

<p>generally are planted in holes about a foot deep and about one
and-one-half </p>

<p>feet from each other within rows about three feet apart. </p>

<p>Another popular method of establishing new fields of E. ipadu
involves taking </p>

<p>a cutting from an established coca bush and planting it in the
ground. This </p>

<p>method (cloning) is getting more popular as it gives the
farmer a head start. </p>

<p>There are two methods of planting a cutting. One involves
sticking several </p>

<p>branches a couple of feet long into the ground. The other
method is to cut </p>

<p>three or four inch cuttings from a branch, each one with
protruding smaller </p>

<p>branches. The cutting is soaked in water a day or so and then
planted in </p>

<p>loose, fertile soil. It is reported that coca leaf can be
harvested from </p>

<p>these plants within six months and seeds develop on these
plants after one </p>

<p>year but the seeds lack embryos and are not viable. </p>

<p>A coca plant cultivated from seed will generally reach full
maturity and its </p>

<p>leaves harvested between 12 and 24 months after being
transplanted. Even </p>

<p>though coca growing in the wild has been known to reach
heights of up to 30 </p>

<p>feet, that which is cultivated is almost always pruned back to
facilitate </p>

<p>harvesting the coca leaf. Cultivated fields are usually kept
at a height of </p>

<p>three to six feet. All picking of coca leaf is done by hand.
Harvesters have </p>

<p>to be very quick in their work yet careful not to damage the
leaf buds on the </p>

<p>bush while stripping off the leaves. Leaves are said to be
ready for harvest </p>

<p>when they take on a yellowish tint and have a tendency to
crack when bent. </p>

<p>Coca leaf can be harvested between two and six times per year
depending on </p>

<p>climatic conditions. Coca growing at lower altitudes will
usually be </p>

<p>harvested more often than coca growing at higher altitudes.
The most abundant </p>

<p>harvest, sometimes accounting for about half of the total
yearly harvest, </p>

<p>takes place after the rains in March. Subsequent harvests take
place in </p>

<p>June/July and November, the normal dry season in South
America. Some </p>

<p>harvesting, however, takes place all year round. </p>

<p>When the leaves are harvested, they are put in sacks and taken
to a closed </p>

<p>room and spread out on the floor. The next day, the leaves are
taken to a </p>

<p>flat area, where they are spread in thin layers on a tarpaulin
in direct </p>

<p>sunlight and left to dry. If there is a lot of sunshine and
minimal cloud </p>

<p>cover, the drying phase can be completed in six hours. During
inclement </p>

<p>weather, it takes much longer because at the first sign of
rain the leaves </p>

<p>are gathered up and taken into shelter. If a load of coca
leaves is caught by </p>

<p>a rainstorm during drying, it could ruin the whole load. This
is because the </p>

<p>leaves will ferment if the moisture goes over 14 percent. This
tends to cause </p>

<p>a breakdown of the cocaine alkaloids. </p>

<p>After the drying phase is completed, the coca leaves are swept
into large </p>

<p>piles and left for about three days before being taken to
market and/or </p>

<p>processing facilities. The weight of packaged leaves varies
from the 100 </p>

<p>pound &quot;carga&quot; in the Bolivian Chapare, to the 25
pound &quot;arroba&quot; in Peru's </p>

<p>Upper Huallaga Valley. In Colombia, coca leaves are not
usually sold; </p>

<p>however, when dried coca leaves are sold, it is usually in
packages of 25 </p>

<p>pounds. </p>

<p>Peru </p>

<p>Peru, the world's largest source of coca, has both licit and
illicit </p>

<p>cultivation. Licit coca is cultivation by farmers registered
with the </p>

<p>National Coca Monopoly (ENACO). ENACO buys and sells it to
retailers either </p>

<p>for resale domestically, for chewing or for herbal tea, or for
export to </p>

<p>produce soft drink flavoring or pharmaceuticals. The 18,000
hectares that </p>

<p>have been registered for licit coca cultivation are centered
in the </p>

<p>department of Cuzco. </p>

<p>Illicit coca cultivation occurs primarily in the Upper
Huallaga Valley region </p>

<p>of northern Peru including the departments of San Martin,
Huanuco, and </p>

<p>Ucayali. Other areas under cultivation include the valleys of
La Convencion </p>

<p>and Lares in the department of Cuzco, and the provinces of
Huanta and La Mar </p>

<p>along the Rio Apurimac in the department of Ayachucho. There
are also smaller </p>

<p>growing areas located in the departments of Puno and Pasco. </p>

<p>The Upper Huallaga Valley is a tropical area with a mild
climate that </p>

<p>receives an average of 12.44 feet of rain during the year.
June through </p>

<p>September is the dry season when the region gets very little
rainfall. The </p>

<p>mean annual temperature is 55 degrees Fahrenheit. Coca is
usually grown here </p>

<p>between 1,980 to 2,640 feet above sea level but is sometimes
planted up to </p>

<p>6,270 feet in altitude. The soil in the Upper Huallaga Valley
is well drained </p>

<p>and rich in iron, an important element for all plant life. </p>

<p>The area surrounding Cuzco has an average rainfall of between
1.32 and 5.94 </p>

<p>feet annually which usually falls between the months of
October and April. </p>

<p>The average temperatures in this region are greater than 53
degrees </p>

<p>Fahrenheit. Coca is generally grown between 2,409 and 4,257
feet above sea </p>

<p>level. The soil is especially poor in iron content. </p>

<p>A semi-tropical climate with warm days and abundant rain fall,
between 6.6 </p>

<p>and 7.26 feet per annum, characterizes the Ayacucho area. Coca
is usually </p>

<p>grown on steep slopes which require terracing at an elevation
of between </p>

<p>1,650 and 4,290 feet. Soils in this area are red and high in
iron. </p>

<p>Bolivia </p>

<p>Bolivia is the world's second largest source of coca leaf.
There is both </p>

<p>licit and illicit coca cultivation occurring in this country
as well. In </p>

<p>mid-1988, a law became effective that made coca cultivation
illegal in most </p>

<p>of the country. The law also established legal, transitional,
and illegal </p>

<p>zones of cultivation and declared that 12,000 hectares of coca
would be the </p>

<p>amount grown to meet the traditional demand for coca. </p>

<p>There are roughly three main growing areas in Bolivia. The
three areas are </p>

<p>the Yungas de La Paz, the Chapare, and the Apolo. Coca
cultivation in the </p>

<p>Yungas de La Paz is located between the cities of Guanay and
Inquisivi, </p>

<p>northeast of La Paz on the eastern slope of the Andes.
Cultivation in the </p>

<p>Chapare occurs in the provinces of Carrasco, Chapare, and
Arani in the </p>

<p>department of Cochabamba, east of La Paz. The small area of
Apolo is in the </p>

<p>La Paz department north of the city of La Paz. </p>

<p>Nearly all the licit coca is grown in the traditional growing
areas of the </p>

<p>Yungas. The overwhelming amount of illicit coca is grown in
the Chapare where </p>

<p>it is estimated that about 75 percent of the country's coca
crop is </p>

<p>cultivated. The amount of coca grown in the Apolo is much less
than in either </p>

<p>of the two other areas. </p>

<p>Parts of the Yungas have been cultivated for hundreds of
years. Coca is </p>

<p>planted at between 4,800 and 6,000 feet in altitude on
terraced fields, </p>

<p>generally on steep slopes. Some of these fields have a slope
of more than 45 </p>

<p>degrees. The Yungas is characterized by a five-month rainy
season that runs </p>

<p>from December to April receiving about 4 feet of rainfall per
year, followed </p>

<p>by seven dry months. The soil content is poor, and this area
has suffered </p>

<p>severe erosion problems. </p>

<p>In the Chapare, the weather is continually wet and warm, with
an annual </p>

<p>rainfall averaging around 13 feet. The growing areas in this
region are </p>

<p>broad, low plains containing some hills. Coca is cultivated at
between 660 </p>

<p>and 1,650 feet above sea level where the temperature averages
around 57 </p>

<p>degrees Fahrenheit. The soil is clay based, rich alluvial
(sediment deposited </p>

<p>by flowing water). </p>

<p>The Apolo, located in La Paz department, is also a noteworthy
coca-growing </p>

<p>region of Bolivia. Coca in the Apolo region is often
interplanted with </p>

<p>coffee, a major crop in the area. Soil in the Apolo is not
suited very well </p>

<p>to coca; the longevity of a coca bush there is only from five
to eight years. </p>

<p>Coca plants in the Apolo are therefore constantly replaced. </p>

<p>Colombia </p>

<p>Colombia ranks third in worldwide coca leaf production with
all cultivation </p>

<p>being illicit. There is widespread cultivation in the eastern
plains region </p>

<p>of the Llanos which encompasses about one-half of Colombia.
The heaviest </p>

<p>areas of cultivation are located in the departments of
Putumayo, Caqueta, </p>

<p>Guaviare, and Vaupes. There is substantial expansion of the
coca crop in the </p>

<p>Bolivar department in the north-central area of Colombia as
well as areas of </p>

<p>cultivation in the south and southwest part of the country. </p>

<p>In the southern coca-growing region, the temperature averages
between 49.5 </p>

<p>and 52 degrees Fahrenheit and there is light rainfall. Coca is
normally grown </p>

<p>between 3,300 arid 6,600 feet above sea level. The soil in
this region is </p>

<p>iron rich; however, there is some erosion. </p>

<p>COCAINE PROCESSING </p>

<p>The conversion of coca leaves to coca paste, cocaine base, and
cocaine </p>

<p>hydrochloride occurs primarily in Bolivia, Colombia, and Peru.
Peru and </p>

<p>Bolivia are the primary locations for the conversion of leaf
to coca paste </p>

<p>and cocaine base, while Colombia is the primary location for
the final </p>

<p>conversion to cocaine hydrochloride. It is believed that both
Peruvian and </p>

<p>Bolivian traffickers have begun increasing their production of
HCI in the </p>

<p>last few years. </p>

<p>There are a number of chemicals and solvents which play vital
roles in the </p>

<p>processing of coca leaves to paste, base and HCI. Many of
these chemicals are </p>

<p>quite common; all are theoretically substitutable and all have
legitimate </p>

<p>uses making them difficult to control. </p>

<p>Coca processing can be broken down into three stages. The
first is the </p>

<p>conversion of the coca leaf into coca paste; this is almost
always done very </p>

<p>close to the coca fields to cut down on the transport of the
coca leaves. The </p>

<p>second phase is the conversion of coca paste into cocaine
base. This step is </p>

<p>usually omitted in Colombia and the process is taken straight
through from </p>

<p>paste to cocaine HCI. The final stage is conversion of base to
HCI. </p>

<p>Coca Leaves to Coca Paste </p>

<p>The conversion of coca leaf into coca paste is accomplished in
a coca paste </p>

<p>pit, or &quot;pozo. &quot; A typical coca paste pit is a very
crude structure located </p>

<p>near the harvesting site and consists of only a very few
items. Some paste </p>

<p>pits have even been reported in peasants' houses. The paste
pit is usually a </p>

<p>hole in the ground, lined with thick, heavy plastic, or may
even be a </p>

<p>55-gallon drum with the top cut out. Paste pits are often
located near </p>

<p>streams so that the processors will have a constant supply of
fresh water, </p>

<p>which is used in the first stage of processing. The process of
converting </p>

<p>leaves to paste usually takes a few days. Often, however, the
leaves will be </p>

<p>&quot;worked&quot; or &quot;stomped&quot; for only a few hours
rendering less paste than if </p>

<p>&quot;worked&quot; for several days. It is apparently
sometimes more desirable to move </p>

<p>the paste out than to get more paste per kilogram of coca
leaf. Depending on </p>

<p>the size of the pit and the amount of leaf, the whole process
will require </p>

<p>the energy of two to five workers. </p>

<p>The following recipe for coca paste is but one of many.
Recipes will differ </p>

<p>depending on where the laboratory is located. Some will opt
not to use water </p>

<p>in the first step and amounts and mixing times vary widely.
However, this </p>

<p>remains a good benchmark formula. </p>

<p>--Step 1 </p>

<p>The coca leaves are put in an above-ground container or in a
plastic lined </p>

<p>pit. An alkaline material (sodium carbonate) and water are
added to the </p>

<p>leaves. Here the alkaline material enables the cocaine
alkaloid present in </p>

<p>the leaf to be extracted into kerosene. </p>

<p>--Step 2 </p>

<p>A water immiscible solvent (kerosene) is added to water,
solution, and </p>

<p>leaves. The mixture is then agitated. Usually this is
accomplished by having </p>

<p>several people stomp on the leaves. The solvent acts to
extract water </p>

<p>insoluble cocaine alkaloids from the alkaline solution. </p>

<p>--Step 3 </p>

<p>Cocaine alkaloids and kerosene separate from water and leaves.
The water and </p>

<p>leaves are then drained off. </p>

<p>--Step 4 </p>

<p>Cocaine alkaloids are extracted from the kerosene into a
dilute acid </p>

<p>solution. Alkaline material (sodium carbonate) is added to the
remaining </p>

<p>solution which causes a precipitate to form . The acid and the
water are </p>

<p>drained off and the precipitate is filtered and dried to
produce coca paste, </p>

<p>a chunky, off-white to light brown, putty-like </p>

<p>substance. </p>

<p>Coca Paste to Cocaine Base </p>

<p>The processing of coca paste into cocaine base is more
complicated than paste </p>

<p>production, requiring more sophisticated equipment and added
skills. Cocaine </p>

<p>base can be processed at the paste facility, but base
laboratories may be </p>

<p>located away from the cultivation zones. Usually the base
laboratories are </p>

<p>located near rivers or have a clandestine airstrip located in
the vicinity to </p>

<p>facilitate both the movement of coca paste into the base
laboratory, but also </p>

<p>the movement of cocaine base to cocaine HCl laboratories. </p>

<p>As with the paste recipes, the base recipes have many
versions. This one is </p>

<p>one of the more common and a continuation of the paste recipe.
</p>

<p>--Step 1 </p>

<p>The coca paste is added to sulfuric acid or hydrochloric acid
and water. The </p>

<p>paste is dissolved into the acid solution. </p>

<p>--Step 2 </p>

<p>Potassium permanganate is combined with water. This mixture is
added to the </p>

<p>coca paste and acid solution. Potassium permanganate is used
in this step to </p>

<p>extract other alkaloids and material that is undesired in the
final product. </p>

<p>In particular, potassium permanganate is used to break down
the alkaloid </p>

<p>ciscinnamoylcocaine found in large concentrations in E.
novogranatense </p>

<p>varieties. If the coca paste has a high concentration of this
alkaloid and </p>

<p>potassium permanganate is not used, then crystallization of
cocaine HCl will </p>

<p>be very difficult. </p>

<p>--Step 3 </p>

<p>This mixture is allowed to stand for about six hours. </p>

<p>--Step 4 </p>

<p>The solution is filtered and the precipitate is discarded.
Ammonia water is </p>

<p>added to the filtered solution and another precipitate is
formed. </p>

<p>--Step 5 </p>

<p>The liquid is drained from the solution and the remaining
precipitate is </p>

<p>usually dried with heating lamps. The resulting powder is
cocaine base. </p>

<p>It is common in Colombia to skip the base stage of cocaine
processing and go </p>

<p>right from coca paste to cocaine HCl. This can be accomplished
by eliminating </p>

<p>the last part of step number four in coca paste processing and
skipping to </p>

<p>step number two of the cocaine base phase where the coca paste
is added to </p>

<p>the potassium permanganate solution. </p>

<p>Cocaine Base to Cocaine Hydrochloride (HCl) </p>

<p>The final stage of cocaine processing requires even more skill
and equipment, </p>

<p>and is much more dangerous than the previously mentioned
steps. Unlike paste </p>

<p>and base processing, cocaine HCl processing calls for
expensive chemicals </p>

<p>that are harder to find and often not manufactured in the
processing country. </p>

<p>The HCl laboratory usually consists of several buildings
including </p>

<p>dormitories, eating facilities, an office, storage facilities,
and the </p>

<p>laboratory itself. Also usually found at HCl laboratories are
communications </p>

<p>operations, generators, filtering and drying equipment, and,
more recently, </p>

<p>chemical recycling facilities. The HCl laboratory will
sometimes have direct </p>

<p>access to an airstrip. </p>

<p>The following recipe is a continuation of the above two. At
this point the </p>

<p>methods of processing vary only slightly. </p>

<p>--Step 1 </p>

<p>Acetone or ether is added to dissolve the cocaine base and the
solution is </p>

<p>filtered to remove undesired material. </p>

<p>--Step 2 </p>

<p>Hydrochloric acid diluted in acetone or ether is added to the
cocaine </p>

<p>solution. The addition of the hydrochloric acid causes the
cocaine to </p>

<p>precipitate (crystallize) out of the solution as cocaine
hydrochloride. </p>

<p>--Step 3 </p>

<p>The remaining acetone/ether solvent can be discarded or
reused. </p>

<p>--Step 4 </p>

<p>Cocaine HCl is dried under heat lamps, laid out to dry with
the aid of fans, </p>

<p>or dried in microwave ovens. </p>

<p>NATURAL ENEMIES AND ERADICATION EFFORTS </p>

<p>Although the coca bush is a very strong plant and will live
for many years </p>

<p>and produce many harvests of leaf, it will do better if taken
care of, </p>

<p>fertilized, and treated with herbicides and insecticides. </p>

<p>Occasionally, a coca field will become infested with one of
the plant's </p>

<p>natural enemies. The main pests and the effect that they are
known to have on </p>

<p>the plant are discussed below. </p>

<p>The larvae of the moth Eloria Noyesi presents the most serious
threat to the </p>

<p>coca plant. This moth lives through out the coca-growing
region of South </p>

<p>America and seems to feed almost exclusively on E. coca. It
has also been </p>

<p>recorded feeding on E. novogranatense in Colombia and northern
Peru. The </p>

<p>larva will develop in about a month and will eat up to 50
leaves in its </p>

<p>lifetime. The larva will also eat the shoots of the bush that
grow out after </p>

<p>harvest. If Eloria attacks a plant repeatedly, even a strong
plant will die. </p>

<p>The moth is usually only abundant from December to April. Coca
growers are </p>

<p>using insecticides to eradicate Eloria. </p>

<p>The larvae of Eucleodora Coca, a fly, seems to cause harm only
to Trujillo </p>

<p>coca. (There have been major infestations of this insect in
the past usually </p>

<p>occuring from April to August.) The larvae spend their entire
lives on the </p>

<p>plant, feeding on the leaves and shoots . As with the Eloria,
Eucleodora is </p>

<p>being controlled with insecticides. </p>

<p>Very little is known about the effect of the leaf-cutting ant,
Acromyrmex, on </p>

<p>coca. Growers in the Upper Huallaga Valley report that serious
damage in the </p>

<p>past has been done to their coca cultivation. The damage is
often controlled </p>

<p>with the use of insecticides and flooding. The beetle,
Aegoidus Pacificus, </p>

<p>also poses a threat to Trujillo coca. The adult beetle lays
her eggs in the </p>

<p>bark of the coca plant, and the larva later burrows into the
stem of the </p>

<p>plant. This usually results in an infestation of pathogenic
fungi which is </p>

<p>ultimately responsible for the death of the coca plant. As
with the other </p>

<p>pests, the beetle can also be controlled with insecticides. </p>

<p>Most of the other insects which attack coca only do so when
there are </p>

<p>shortages of their normal food supply. Some scientists believe
that cocaine </p>

<p>and other alkaloids may present some natural defense against
most pests. </p>

<p>Nevertheless, sometimes insects such as spider mites,
grasshoppers, </p>

<p>leafhoppers, and beetles find it necessary to eat coca. </p>

<p>The coca plant is also susceptible to numerous species of
pathogenic fungi. </p>

<p>Fungi seem to present the greatest threat to a plant during
the wet season. </p>

<p>The most serious threat seems to come from a fungus called
&quot;witches broom .&quot; </p>

<p>The exact effect of this fungus on the coca plant is not clear
because of the </p>

<p>limited amount of study which has been done on this fungus
infesting coca </p>

<p>plantations. </p>

<p>Natural enemies hold hope for control of the coca plant in the
future. At </p>

<p>present, however, the most successful methods in controlling
the growth of </p>

<p>coca are herbicides and manual eradication. </p>

<p>As of early 1990, all eradication of the coca plant in Bolivia
and Colombia </p>

<p>was being done manually. The usual method has been for a team
of eradication </p>

<p>workers to go into a field and pull up the bushes plant by
plant. In Peru, </p>

<p>manual eradication of coca is often suspended because of
security reasons. </p>

<p>Prior to that time, a number of gasoline-powered cutters had
been supplied to </p>

<p>the workers making it easier and much quicker to cut the coca.
The problem </p>

<p>with this method is that sometimes the coca bush will sprout
from the stump </p>

<p>within 12 to 18 months. As such, the cutting must be made very
close to the </p>

<p>ground to insure that the plant does not sprout again. </p>

<p>A number of herbicides have been tested for use in eradicating
the coca plant </p>

<p>including hexazinone and tebuthiuron (spike) . Application of
both has been </p>

<p>deemed successful in killing the plant as long as they are
applied in the </p>

<p>correct manner and amount. Within ten to twenty days after
application of </p>

<p>hexazinone or tebuthiuron the coca bush sheds all its leaves
and usually </p>

<p>within 60 to 90 days the coca plant will be completely dead. </p>

<p>The United States is working with some South American
governments to develop </p>

<p>an herbicidal eradication program; Bolivia, however, has
prohibited the use </p>

<p>of herbicides for this purpose. </p>

<p>[NOTE: the report from which this text was input contained
accompanying </p>

<p>illustrations.] <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_govpub_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications </a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61753" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>