
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-56</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B021-290</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/spast1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103721 text/html 11916
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:37:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:58:32 GMT
Content-length: 11698
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Treatment of Human Spasticity with Delta-9 THC</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/_private/schaffer_logo.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">TREATMENT OF HUMAN SPASTICITY WITH
DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Denis J. Petro, M.D., and Carl Ellenberger,
Jr., M.D. Bronx, NY</font></p>

<p><font size="3">J Clin Pharmacol. 1981; 21: 413S--416S</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Abstract: Spasticity is a common neurologic
condition in patients with multiple sclerosis, stroke, cerebral
palsy or an injured spinal cord. Animal studies suggest that THC
has an inhibitory effect on polysynaptic reflexes. Some spastic
patients claim improvement after inhaling cannabis. We tested
muscle tone, reflexes, strength and performed EMGs before and
after double-blinded oral administration of either 10 or 5 mg THC
or placebo. The blinded examiner correctly identified the trials
in which the patients received THC in seven of none cases. For
the group, 10 mg THC significantly reduced spasticity by clinical
measurement (P&lt;0.01). Quadriceps EMG interference pattern was
reduced in those four patients with primarily extensor
spasticity. THC was administered to eight other patients with
spasticity and other CNS lesions. Responses varied, but benefit
was seen in three of three patients with &quot;tonic
spasms.&quot; No benefit was noted in patients with cerebellar
disease. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Several patients with multiple sclerosis
reported to us that their spasticity improved after smoking
marihuana. Preliminary uncontrolled observations of these
patients before and after inhalation of the drug suggested to us
that the improvement in spasticity was a specific effect of the
marihuana and not merely a result of the well-recognized euphoria
or altered perception experienced by social users of the drug. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Methods</font></p>

<p><font size="3">We entered nine patients with spasticity,
presumably of spinal origin and related to multiple sclerosis,
into a double-blinded pilot study. The blinded observer examined
each patient on three separate days, before and at 1 1/2-hour
intervals after oral administration of a capsule containing
either 10 mg, 5 mg, or no synthetic delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC). Absorption of oral THC is variable, about 90 per cent, but
generally slower than that of inhaled THC. Blood levels and
psychologic effects peak at 3 hours after ingestion. Because
blood level determination is costly and may be unreliable, we did
not determine levels. The examiner rated deep tendon reflexes,
muscular resistance to stretch in the legs, and abnormal reflexes
each on a scale of 0 (absent) to 4 (abnormally increased) and
tabulated the total divided by the number of observations as the
&quot;spasticity score&quot; at 1 1/2 -hour intervals. For
example, if both knee jerks were 3+, both ankle jerks were 3+,
and both adductor jerks were 3+, the total was 18 and the
spasticity score was 18/6= 3.0. Babinski signs were rated as 4+,
their absence as 3+. The examiner viewed the EMG interference
pattern of the quadriceps muscle as the knee joint was flexed
from 0 to 90 degrees at varying velocities. The examiner also
assessed walking ability, inquired about the patient's subjective
response and side effects of the drug, and measured vital signs.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Results</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Three patients reported feeling
&quot;loose&quot; and better able to walk after receiving either
5 or 10 mg THC. The changes in spasticity scores for the treated
and placebo groups are illustrated in Fig. 1. Differences between
the groups at 180 minutes are significant (P&lt;0.01); summed
scores for the two treated groups differed significantly from
summed scores of the placebo group (P&lt;0.005). The spasticity
scores of four patients improved more than two standard
deviations from the mean after either 5 or 10 mg THC; one patient
improved after placebo. Only two of the three patients who felt
improved actually did so by objective criteria. On the basis of
the spasticity scores, the blinded examiner identified correctly
the placebo trials in seven of the nine patients. The EMG index
of spasticity proved to be impractical in five patients---in
three because resistance to stretch was too severe and in two
because electrical activity was too little to record. Among the
remaining four patients, the interference pattern, by visual
inspection, was reduced after treatment from the pretreatment
pattern at comparable velocity of stretch. Side effects of the 5-
or 10-mg oral dosage were minimal. One patient reported feeling
&quot;high&quot; after 10 mg, and another reported a
&quot;high&quot; after placebo. No other patients reported side
effects at the relatively low doses we used. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Discussion</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Our preliminary results suggest that THC or one
of its synthetic derivatives warrants further study as a
potential treatment for spasticity. Although many previous
investigators have studied the effects of marihuana on complex
motor tasks, we were not able to find previous studies of the
effects of marihuana on spasticity in the medical literature.
Experimental studies in animals suggest that THC has an
inhibitory effect on polysynaptic reflexes mediated through the
spinal cord. The results of differential sectioning of the
neuraxis in cats by Dagirmangian and Boyd (1) suggest that the
ability of several tetrahydrocannabinols to decrease polysynaptic
flexion reflexes relates to its action in the region between the
mesencephalon and first cervical segment. Kayaalp et al. (2)
postulate that THC has an effect on both nerve conduction and
skeletal muscle contraction. Sullivan (3) and colleagues found a
dose-dependent loss of reflexes and muscular weakness in dogs.
Although THC has proved to be clinically useful in the treatment
of nausea induced by cancer chemotherapy and in reducing
intraocular pressure in glaucoma, the results of these trials
have demonstrated several disadvantages of the drug. The first is
its potential for psychologic effects that limits usage in higher
doses than those we employed. The second drawback to regular
clinical use of the drug and of its many derivatives is the
observation that many of its therapeutic effects may diminish
after a relatively short period of regular usage. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">References</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1. Dagirmangian R, Boyd ES. Some
pharmacological effects of two tetrahydrocannabinols. J Pharmacol
Exp Therap. 1962; 135: 25-33.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2. Kayaalp SA, Kaymakcalan S, Verimer T, Ilhan
M, Onur R. In vitro neuro-muscular effects of
delta-9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Arch Int Pharmacodyn.
1974; 212: 67-75.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3. Sullivan MF, Willard DH. The beagle dog as
an animal model for marihuana smoking studies. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol. 1978; 45: 445-462.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Discussion of the Paper</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Nahas: Were the subjects that you studied
naive toward marijuana, and did you observe tolerance?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Petro: All of our patients were naive to
marijuana. Anecdotally, other patients claim that they have been
using marijuana for periods up to 15 years for control of
spasticity, but research needs to cover a larger and better
controlled sample before any definitive statement would be
possible. No chronic studies have been done to evaluate drug
tolerance in spasticity.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Ungerleider: Did you, as blinded examiner,
interview the patients and perform the tests?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Petro: I did all of the evaluations of
neurologic function.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Ungerleider: Did you know that they felt
better before you evaluated them objectively?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Petro: No; I used only objective measures,
the EMG criteria and the spasticity scores. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Lindblom: Have you considered the use of
patients other than those with multiple sclerosis (MS)? We
studied the effect of baclofen on spasticity, and found much
spontaneous variability in MS patients. In addition, some are
euphoric from the disease and cannabis might add to the euphoria
and confuse the results with unspecific effects. Furthermore,
there are several types of spasticity, and in the case of
baclofen, we found that gamma-spasticity was reduced but
alpha-spasticity was unaffected. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Petro: We had a population of MS patients
that was rather large and readily accessible. Certainly, in
subjects with significant cerebellar disease, marijuana (or its
derivatives) would appear to be contra-indicated because of
relaxant effects. We examined the patient population readily
available for study, which was MS patients, but as you suggest
this is not the ideal group to study. Dr. Gilbert: Poly-synaptic
reflexes in the dog are very sensitive to THC. In the
morphine-dependent animal during abstinence there is an increased
activity in the hind limbs. That activity can be blocked with
very low doses of THC, nantradol and nabilone, before we see any
other effects of the drugs (see Gilbert et al., this monograph).
Dr. Dow: Could you elaborate on your conclusion that THC is not
the ideal drug for spasticity?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Dr. Petro: Patients that report effects from
marijuana don't like taking THC; after smoking a marijuana
cigarette, they clearly have an improvement that is different
from that seen from THC. As other related substances with more
specific CNS effects become available, these should be studied
;in the treatment of spasticity.</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>