
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-90</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B022-318</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/oped6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123718 text/html 7846
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:37:07 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:19:47 GMT
Content-length: 7629
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Can the State Teach That Drugs Are Wrong and Harmful?</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<h3 align="center">CAN THE STATE TEACH THAT DRUGS ARE WRONG AND
HARMFUL? </h3>

<p align="center"><font size="2">by Thomas L. Wayburn, PhD</font>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2">Chemical engineering consultant
and writer</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Recently Congress enacted a law that requires
every public school in the nation to teach students that
&quot;the use of illicit drugs and the unlawful possession and
use of alcohol is (sic) wrong and harmful&quot;. This reminds me
of the story, whether true or false, that the Illinois State
Legislature once changed the value of pi, the ratio of the
circumference to the diameter of a circle in the Euclidean plane,
to 3.0. The difference this time is that only what may be taught
is mandated rather than what is true. What remains the same, if
we neglect the question of harmfulness for a moment, is that both
judgments are transcendental and may not be legislated by man.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">From a utilitarian viewpoint, &quot;wrong&quot;
and &quot;harmful&quot; amount to the same thing, but it is not
clear that the viewpoint of this law is entirely utilitarian. Nor
is it clear whether the law means that drugs are entirely
harmful, in which case no one would use them, or that the harm
merely outweighs the good. The question of harmfulness (unless
moral harmfulness is meant) presumably belongs to medicine, which
is an inexact science and cannot supply answers to all such
questions. One school of medical researchers claims to have
evidence that marijuana, for example, is harmful; another school
refutes this evidence and presents contrary evidence that
marijuana is exceptionally safe. When the truth has been
discovered scientifically, such disputes tend to disappear. It is
difficult to see how government or the schools can supply answers
that science cannot supply. How is this dilemma to be hidden from
inquisitive students?</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Regarding right and wrong, two important
questions are at stake here and neither of them is trivial: (1)
May the state legislate right and wrong in the absence of a
consensus? and (2) May the state legislate what is to be taught
concerning right and wrong? It is not clear whether the subject
of right and wrong belongs to ethics or to morality, if ethics
and morality are at all different. In my lexicon, ethics pertains
preponderantly to respect for truth and morality pertains to
behavior. Most moral decisions are religious decisions, therefore
the legislation of morality is usually a violation of separation
of church and state.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Many may object that the state legislates right
and wrong all the time. For example, the state forbids murder.
Without getting into all of the philosophical considerations that
obtain in the banning of murder, I may safely say that most
people who commit it allow that it is wrong. On the other hand,
we have about twenty-five million Americans who use illegal drugs
and a sizable percentage of them do not allow that it is wrong.
On the contrary, many insist that it is wrong for the state to
repress their natural inclinations and, in some cases, what they
claim are God-given rights and, yes, even duties.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Regarding teaching that using drugs is wrong
and harmful, one must distinguish between teaching both sides of
an open question, i.e., a question under dispute, and teaching
which side is correct. When the state legislates which side of an
open question is to be taught, either it is legislating what is
true, which is totalitarian, or it is denying the necessity of
teaching truth, which is unethical. Perhaps ethics may be
legislated without violating separation of church and state, but
the state may not legislate bad ethics, i.e., an ethic that does
violence to truth.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">If drugs are wrong independently of context,
teachers must show why they are wrong or students will ask
questions that cannot be answered without gross distortions of
truth. For example, if a brilliant artist used drugs to create a
masterpiece, the students must be told that the importance of
creating a masterpiece is overwhelmed by the importance of the
damage to the artist's health, however slight, and the importance
of the artist breaking a law. This will be especially difficult
to do if the artist, who may have been Picasso, lived a long life
or lived in a country where - or at a time when - the substances
were legal. If the students are discouraged from asking
questions, the schools will be reinforcing stupidity.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">If taking marijuana to treat glaucoma is legal,
then taking marijuana under other circumstances may be wrong only
because it is illegal. Also, the law seems to say that drinking
alcohol (in moderation?) is wrong only when it is unlawful.
Paraphrasing Bertrand Russell: To appeal to the law to invalidate
an act that otherwise would be good is to impute evil to the law.</font>
</p>

<p><font size="2">But, the law has proved to be evil on numerous
occasions. The law once required the return of runaway slaves.
Nowadays, the law requires an innocent family to be turned out of
its home if a visitor is found with illegal drugs. Therefore, to
ask a student to believe that the use of a drug is wrong simply
because it is illegal is asking too much.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Whether one desires a drug-free society or not,
one ought to deplore this law and take appropriate action to have
it repealed. It is guaranteed to have no effect on many, to
stultify the education of many more, to drive the astute further
into rebellion, to provide additional justification for taking
drugs, to discredit further the educational process, and to
diminish what little respect the law still enjoys.</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">Houston, Texas</font> </p>

<p><font size="2">November 27, 1990</font> <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>