
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-40</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B021-204</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1c.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123316 text/html 15678
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:33:05 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:22 GMT
Content-length: 15460
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>II. Biological Effects of Marihuana</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>II. Biological Effects of Marihuana</b> </p>

<h1>Botanical and Chemical Considerations<br>
<img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</h1>

<p> Cannabis sativa is one of man's oldest and most widely used
drugs. The substance has been used in various ways as long as
medical history has been recorded and is currently used as a
multipurpose drug throughout the world (Adams, 1942; Adams,
1941-1942; Grinspoon, 1969; Indian Hemp, 1969; Walton, 1938). </p>

<p> During the past few years, a resurgence of the use of
marihuana by western society, its increased importance as a
social issue and the development of more precise compounds and
analytic techniques have sparked dormant scientific interest in
the substance. However, this effort has added little to what was
already known about the clinical syndrome produced by cannabis
(Hollister, 1971) and described by investigators during the last
100 years (Hollister, 1971; Beaudelaire, 1861; Moreau, 1845;
Lewin, 1964; Indian Hemp, 1969; Mayor's Committee, 1944). </p>

<p> Strongly held, diametrically opposed opinions exist about
whether the ultimate effects of cannabis use are harmful,
harmless, or beneficial to human functioning (Pillard, 1970). </p>

<p> Despite these conflicting opinions, from a scientific
perspective, the literature on marihuana is as clear, if not
clearer, than for many other botanical substances consumed by
man. Most of the older reports suffer from multiple scientific
defects such as biased sampling, lack of adequate controls,
unsophisticated techniques, and use of unstandardized marihuana
of unknown potency. Nevertheless, much is known about the use of
cannabis by man. Marihuana has a unique position in the multitude
of pharmaceuticals in that human experimentation has been greater
than laboratory animal experimentation. </p>

<p> The crucial experiments about social effects from chronic use
will be settled by close observation of those who use the drug.
The issues of potential therapeutic utility; mechanisms of mental
function alteration; and the relationship to mental illness will
require more extensive laboratory experimentation (Hollister,
1971).<br>
</p>

<h2>Botanical and Chemical Considerations</h2>

<p> In the past several years considerable progress has been made
in adding to the understanding of marihuana as a complex drug
containing botanical substance. Much important information has
been obtained from intensive investigation of marihuana of
worldwide origin cultivated under Government contract by the
University of Mississippi (Doorenbos et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Marihuana is a preparation derived from the hemp plant,
Cannabis sativa. This plant is an annual which either is
cultivated or grows freely as a weed around the world, including
most of the United States. When cultivated in temperate climates,
plantings are made in May to June. The seeds germinate in less
than a week. in moist soil. After thinning, the plants grow as
rapidly as two feet a week during the peak growing season. They
can reach a height of up to 18 feet at maturity, approximately
three to five months after planting. Growth is greatly inhibited
by inadequate light, water or soil nutrients. </p>

<p> Marihuana is produced by cutting the stem beneath the lowest
branches, air drying, and stripping seeds, bracts, flowers,
leaves and small stems from these plants. Stems and seeds are
variably removed using a mesh screen producing manicured
marihuana. Hashish is produced by scraping the thick resinous
material secreted by the flowers (Doorenbos et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Many morphological variations in branching and leaf structure
are observed among plants produced by different seed types. The
characteristic leaf is palmately-compound and contains an odd
number of coarsely serrated leaflets. Plants of a given seed type
generally grow at similar rates and resemble each other. Thus,
botanists believe, Cannabis sativa represents a single species
which has not stabilized and has many variations (Doorenbos et
al., 1971). </p>

<p> Cannabis Sativa is a dioecious species with separate male and
female plants, both producing flowers. Some monoecious variants
are reported. Pollination appears to be accomplished by air
currents. Bees are attracted by male flowers but not by female
flowers. Sex cannot be established until flowering begins and the
structure of the male and female flower is distinct. Male plants
begin shedding leaves shortly after flowering, shied their pollen
and die. Female plants lose their older leaves as the seed
matures. After shedding their seed, they die. Contrary to popular
belief, there is no significant difference in drug content
between male and female plants at equivalent states of maturity
(Fetterman et al., 1970; Ohlsson et al., 1971). Male plants
mature earlier than the females, shed their pollen and die while
the female plant is continuing to mature. </p>

<p> The drug content of the plant parts is variable. Generally,
the, drug content decreases in the following order: bracts,
flowers, leaves. Practically no cannabinoids are found in the
stems, roots and seeds. Obviously, fluctuations in pharmacologic
activity of a sample of Marihuana, depend on the mixture of these
plant parts which is determined by the manicuring process
(Fetterman et al., 1970). </p>

<p> Different variants of the plant contain different amounts of
psychoactive drug. Variants of cannabis Sativa cover a spectrum
of drug contents. Generally, they can be classified as either
drug or fiber genotype. Drug type is high in THC and low in
cannabidiol and the fiber type is the converse. This type is
determined genetically and transmitted by the seed. </p>

<p> Thus, seeds from different geographical areas produce plants
with a wide range of drug content. For example, when grown under
similar conditions, plants grown from seeds from Mexico may
contain 15 times more psychoactive drug than those grown from
seeds from Iowa. Of course, individual plants of the same variant
often contain greatly different drug content (Fetterman, et al.,
1970). </p>

<p> Environmental factors are not as important as heredity in
determining type, but they influence to some degree the drug
content. However, environmental factors, including type of soil,
water, growing space, temperature and light do play an important
role in determining the size and vitality of the plant (Doorenbos
et al., 1971; Ohlsson et al., 1971; Phillips et al., 1970). </p>

<p> This notorious variability of cannabis preparations causes
many disadvantages for detailed and reproducible biological work.
Consequently, much effort has been expended to provide a firm
chemical basis in order to provide pure and well-defined
substances for research. </p>

<p> The major naturally occurring active component of cannabis,
1-delta 9-trans tetrahydrocannabinol, was not isolated in a pure
form and its structure illucidated until 1964 (Gaoni and
Mechoulam, 1964; Mechoulam and Gaoni, 1967; Mechoulam et al.,
1970). In addition, the A' isomer, which is usually present in
small quantities in the natural product representing less than
10% of the combined THC content, has a similar spectrum of
activity (Hively et al., 1966). These two chemicals, available by
industrial synthesis (Fahrenholtz et al., 1967; Petrzilka and
Sikemeier, 1967) or by extraction from the natural plant, can
apparently reproduce fully the effects of the crude drug in
animals and man. More than 20 natural cannabinoids have been
identified in the plant (Figure 1) (Mechoulam, 1970; Shani and
Mechoulam, 1970; Doorenbos et al., 1971). </p>

<p> All but Delta 11 and Delta 9 THC are inactive
psychopharmacologically and do not seem to exert potentiating or
other effects. However, new compounds, cannabinoids and
non-cannabinoids, are being isolated from the plant and require
further investigation. Several studies may indicate that some
material present in natural marihuana may act synergistically
with THC and potentiate its psychological effect Leniber (1972)
Paton and Pertwee (1971) suggest cannabidiol may play this role. </p>

<p> The chemical nomenclature of tetra-hydrocannabinols is in a
state of confusion due to the existence of two numbering systems.
The dibenzopyran or formal system treats the compound as
substituted dibenzopyrans ( Delta 9 THC) while the monoterpenoid
system considers them as substituted terpenes (Al THC). The
formal system will be used hereafter (Figure 2).<br>
</p>

<p> Many of the natural cannabinoids are present in the plant as
acids. These acids are believed to be psychopharmacologically
inactive. However, they are converted rapidly when heated, and
slowly when stored into their respective active neutral
components (Figure 3) (Waller, 1971). This conversion
(decarboxylation) does not apparently occur when the acids are
absorbed after oral consumption (Mechoulam, 1970). </p>

<p> The proposed biogenesis (Figure 4) of All THC appears to
proceed through cannabidiol (CBD). Cannabis variates of the fiber
type apparently do not perform this conversion. Thus, cannabidiol
is the cannabinoid present in the largest percentage in the
non-drug variety (Phillips et al., 1970). Marihuana appears to
lose its potency over time due to conversion of THC to cannabinol
(CBN) (Mechoulam, 1970) and this also apparently occurs more
quickly for hashish implying the presence of a stabilizing
substance in the whole plant (Figure 5). </p>

<p> Recently, the n-propyl homologue, of Delta 9 THC has been
isolated from crude marihuana. It has about 20% of the activity
of Delta THC in mice, and probably makes only a small
contribution to the total marihuana effect (Gill, 1971). Merkus
(1971) and Vree et al. (1971) have recently identified propyl and
methyl cannabinol homologues in hashish in extremely small
quantities. </p>

<p> In addition, numerous other non-cannabinoids have been
identified in the natural material. Most of these have little or
no psychoactivity (Gill et al., 1970; Bercht et al., 1971).
Recently, waxes. starches, oils, terpenes and simple nitrogenous
compounds including muscarine, choline and trigonelline as well
as volatile low-molecular weight piperdines have been isolated. </p>

<p> Additionally, four more complex nitrogenous containing
compounds of the generally-accepted alkaloid type have been
reported in marihuana leaves in minute concentrations (average
0.002%). These produced decreased activity but no acute toxicity
in mice (Klein et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Another laboratory has isolated two steroids and triterpenes
from. marihuana as well as tyramine amide derivatives from the
roots (Doorenbos et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Analysis of the smoke obtained from marihuana has been
investigated. As in the case of any combustible plant, a gas and
particulate phase is produced. Both these phases are delivered to
the lung. Both the gas and particulate phase consist of compounds
present in approximately the same percentages as other burned
cellulose containing materials except for the cannabinoid
fraction. This includes carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and
hydrogen cyanide gases. (Truitt et al. , 1970) </p>

<p> The remainder, the smoke condensate, consists of a complex
mixture of relatively non-volatile compounds. Included in this
mixture are the cannabinoids (16%), carbohydrates and alcohols
(8%), fatty and aromatic acids (11%), polybasic acids (7%),
aliphatic amines (1%), aromatic phenols (27%), aliphatic phenols
(6%), tannin (6%), unidentified compounds (18%) (Truitt et al.,
1970). </p>

<p> Another group of investigators (Magus and Harris, 1971)
compared the tar collected from combustion of marihuana
cigarettes with the tar yielded from tobacco cigarettes. They
reported that the total tar yield from marihuana was slightly
less than half that produced by an equal weight of tobacco. The
tar contained similar constituents based on typical changes
produced on skin of mice. </p>

<p> In addition, there a multitude of synthetic compounds related
to the naturally occurring Delta 9 THC derivatives and much more
potent (Figure 6). A large number of bomologues have been
prepared all with similar activity but differing widely in their
potency. </p>

<p> In general, the activity of these compounds increases
dramatically over that of A' THC by lengthening the 3 alkyl side
chain to 6 and 7 carbons, with additional branching in the alpha
and beta positions. The dimethylheptyl analogue (EA1476 or DMHP)
is the most active having 50 times the activity of A' THC. The
1-methyloctyl substitution (MOP, EA1465) is the next most potent,
compound. The 1,2-dimethylortyl substitution resulted in a 251
fold decreased activity from DMHP. (Domino et al., 1972; Sim and
Tucker, 1963) </p>

<p> Numerous variations of the basic structures in the
cyclohexene moeity of the molecule, as well as the replacement of
-both methyl groups-by-hydrogen resulted in partial and even
complete, loss of activity (Domino et al., 1972; Sim and Tucker,
1963). </p>

<p> Mechoulam. (1971) has summarized the investigations related
to the structure activity relationships of the cannabinoids as
follows: </p>

<p> (1) The pyran ring with a hydroxyl group at 1 position and an
alkyl group at the 3 position is an essential requirement for
psychotomimetic activity, eg., cannabidiol is inactive. </p>

<p> (2) The aromatic hydroxyl group has to be f reo or esterified
for activity. </p>

<p> (3) The presence of a carboxyl, acetyl or carbomethoxyl group
in position 2 or 4 renders the compound inactive. Substitution
with an alkyl ,group at position 2 retains activity. </p>

<p> (4) Dextrorotary (+) delta-9-THC is inactive whereas its
optical isomer levorotary (-) delta9-THC is active. </p>

<p> (5) Maximal activity is seen if the double bond is in the
delta-9 or delta-8 position. The delta,-6a, 10a-THC is relatively
inactive. 9 (6) The activity of the delta-6a, 10a-THC can be
increased by replacement of the pentyl side chain with a hexyl
side chain to form synhexyl which is an active compound.
Branching of the side chain may lead to considerable increase in
potency. The substitution of a dimethyllheptyl side chain for the
pentyl side chain in the delta-6a, 10a analogue of THC to form
DMHP or EA1476 results in a marked increase in pharmacologic
activity.<br>
</p>

<p> (7) Substituents at the 9 and 10 position have to be in the
plane of the ring (that is equatorial) in order that high
activity be retained. </p>

<p> More detailed information on materials, chemistry, bioassays,
analytical methods, and methodology for detecting THC or its
metabolites in biological fluids may be obtained from The
Metabolism of the Tetrahydrocannabinols (Lemberger, 1972) and The
Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare, 1972 Report on
Marihuana and Health.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>