
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-43</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B047-184</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/nc1f.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022634 text/html 23096
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:26:29 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:17 GMT
Content-length: 22878
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marijuana -- Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Effects of Short-Term or Subacute Use</h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p><b>ANIMAL STUDIES (PRECLINICAL)</b> </p>

<p>Studies have only begun in this area in the last 10 years.
Subacute toxicity studies in rats involving 30 daily
intraperitoneal injections of up to 30 mg/kg THC were recently
reported by Phillips et al. (1971). No fatalities were observed.
Total body and organ weight (rains were significantly retarded
over the period. However, no significant differences in organ
histology were detected although in a few animals there were
suggestions of change in liver and testicular cells. An
interesting phenomena also observed was a suggestion of increased
sensitivity to effects of Delta 9 THC occurring after two weeks
of daily treatment. </p>

<p>Thompson et al. (1971) under contract to NIMH studied the
toxicity in rats treated daily for seven, 28, 91 and then 119
days with oral Delta 9 THC, A&quot; THC and crude marihuana
extract at doses from 50 to 500 mg/kg. The findings were
generally similar for all three preparations although A&quot;
effect was greater than All THC which in turn was greater than
CME. </p>

<p>A bimodal pattern of behavorial toxicity was exhibited by the
cannabinoids for all time periods of dosing ranging from five to
119 days. Initially, a dose-related generalized central nervous
system depression was noted. This was characterized by huddled
posture, inactivity, drowsiness, slow movements, unkempt
appearance, loss of appetite, wide stance, constipation, weight
loss, depressed respiration and heart rate and fall in body
temperature. Tolerance gradually developed to the initial
depressant effects starting after two to five doses and continued
at different rates for different parameters. </p>

<p>Concomitant to the development of tolerance, rats exhibited
progressively more hyperactivity, manifesting increased
exploratory behavior, grooming and motor activity. The daily
duration of the altered behavior progressively shortened.
Tolerance to the hyperactivity was not seen in the rats. Later,
in the experimental period, the rats became hyper-irritable and
exhibited fighting behavior, especially at lower doses.
Additionally, tremors and later chronic convulsions occurred in
significant numbers of rats. </p>

<p>The onset and frequency of chronic convulsions were
dose-related and the severity increased as the duration of dosage
was extended. Cumulative toxicity, as evidenced by increased
mortality, was observed in the rats but most deaths and maximal
toxicity (central depression) occurred 36 to 72 hours following
first treatment. Drug dose-related histopathological changes in
all treated rats (in addition to decreased body and organ weight
gains) were hypocellularity of the spleen and bone marrow,
vacuolization of the adrenal gland and degeneration of the testes
(seminiferous tubules) or ovarian stronia. Extended doses from
five to119 days were not significantly more toxic except to the
adrenals. No evidence of abstinence syndromes were noted upon
abrupt cessation of these doses. </p>

<p>Similar behavorial and clinical findings were observed in
monkeys given 50-500 mg oral Delta 9 THC, All THC and equivalent
CME for up to 91 days. Cumulative toxicity was less severe and
all monkeys survived the initial moderately severe central
nervous system depression. Tolerance to the depression occurred
and the monkeys returned to their undrugged behavior. Mild
hyperactivity was noted only in several of the median dosed
animals. </p>

<p>Three of 28 monkeys studied became moribund on days 10, 14 and
16 respectively. These were sacrificed and the only
histopathology seen was severe hemorrhagic and probably
drug-related enterocolitis. The bone marrow and kidney changes
seen probably were due to severe electrolyte imbalance resulting
from the intestinal lesion. The thymus lesion is consistent with
stress due to this electrolyte imbalance. Pancreatic atrophy was
due to weight changes. Eight additional monkeys were sacrificed
at 28 days in fair-to-good condition and no histopathology was
demonstrable. Several other monkeys had bloody diarrhea, but
recovered spontaneously without demonstrable histopathology. </p>

<p>The remaining 17 monkeys were all in fair-to good condition at
28 days and hyperactivity was no longer observed. They were
treated at the same dose for an additional 63 days. Tolerance to
the central depression continued to develop so that the effects
lasted only one to two hours at 91 days. No additional monkey
fatalities were recorded -and the remaining 17 monkeys were
normal histopathological at autopsy. Urine and ophthalmological
examinations were all within normal limits. Hematological and
blood chemical changes after 28 and 91 days were minor and little
affected in the surviving monkeys. </p>

<p>Thus, a. minimal toxicity in monkeys, either physical or
behavorial, is evident after 91 daily doses orally of enormous
amounts of Delta 9 THC. However, significant cumulative toxicity,
primarily a generalized central nervous system depression, is
evident in the first few days but tolerance rapidly develops to
these effects. A dose-related hemorrhagic enterocolitis occurred
which may lead to electrolyte imbalance and death in a few
monkeys. This probably is a direct irritative phenomena. </p>

<p>Again, the enormous daily doses of THC that were administered
to these animals cannot, be compared to the daily doses used in
man even by the heaviest users. </p>

<p>The effects were observed of 28 daily administrations to
monkeys of intravenous Delta 9 THC in sesame oil-Tween 80-saline
vehicle at doses of 5, 15 and 45 mg/kg. Behavioral, clinical,
hematological and hemochemical changes were similar for monkeys
given single or repeated injections. However, the duration was
extended in the 28-day groups and tolerance gradually developed.
Delayed death indicative of cumulative toxicity occured on days
eight and 19 in two of four animals given the largest dose. </p>

<p>Histopathological changes, noted in the two animals which
succumbed and in one of the highdose monkeys, were acute
hemorrhagic pneumonia resembling the finding in the
single-intravenous studies at doses of 128 mg/kg or greater.
Additionally in the repeated dose study, edema, ulceration and
fibrosis at the injection sites probably contributed to minor
hematological and hemachemical alterations. </p>

<p>In summary, the 1972 Marihuana and Health Report to the
Congress from the Secretary of HEW noted that these doses were
employed in rodents and mammals to test the limits of toxicity.
The doses are much higher than those used by man and the routes
of administration substantially dif ferent. These studies have
shown that the margin of safety between the lethal dose and the
pharmacologically active doses of Delta 8 and All THC and crude
marihuana extract is large. Consequently, it has been determined
that these compounds could be safely administered to man for
Phase I and early Phase II clinical studies (Secretary of HEW,
Feb. 11, 1972, p. 158-160).<br>
</p>

<p><b>HUMAN EXPERIMENTS (CLINICAL)<br>
</b></p>

<p>Only a few investigators have studied the subacute
administration of marihuana to man. Marihuana cigarettes of
unknown potency were made available to 34 military prisoners in
Panama by Siler et al. (1933). The mean daily consumption was
five cigarettes (range one to 20). The usual behavior effects
associated with marihuana use were noted. No ill effects were
observed nor abstinence syndrome seen. </p>

<p>Williams et al. (1946) made available marihuana cigarettes of
unknown potency to six prisoner addicts who were experienced
marihuana users in the Public Health Service Lexington Hospital.
The subjects were permitted to freely consume the drug in any
quantity desired. The number of cigarettes consumed increased
only slightly over a 39-day period. The daily range was from nine
to 26 per day with a mean of 17. Only minimal evidence of
tolerance was seen. There was no evidence of physical dependence;
that is, no observable abstinence, syndrome was observed after
abrupt termination of the drug. </p>

<p>In general, the following observations were made on these
subjects: daily rectal temperature increased slightly; pulse,
rate increased for three weeks, then returned to normal; no
change was noted in respiratory rate, coordination, or rote
memory ; increase was noted in sleep and body weight while
caloric intake initially increased then progressively decreased;
mild confusion was observed; general intelligence tests were
slightly impaired while psychomotor tests were performed faster
but less accurately; EEG showed inconsistent changes but returned
to normal five days after cessation; and mood was euphoric for
several days followed by general lassisitude and indifference. </p>

<p>In a recent uncontrolled preliminary study (Personal
Communication, 1970), marihuana extract was administered daily to
eight terminal cancer patients from four to 13 days (mean 8.5
days). Daily doses were purposefully raised by the investigator
from 7.5 mg (mean daily dose 19.8 mg THC). The total dose per
individual patient averaged 168 mg with a range from 75-210 mgs. </p>

<p>Euphoria was experienced by all eight subjects and one had a
transient anxiety episode at a high dose. Three subjects
demonstrated decreased-opiate analgesic needs indicating an
analgesic-effect of the drug. Five subjects reported improved
appetite and five, of six tested, demonstrated objective
improvement in depression on Back scale. No new changes were seen
in physiological parameters, neurological status, blood cell and
chemistry values or urine examination. During the period of drug
effect, drowsiness was common but not lethargy, lassitude or
indifference. In fact, all became more active on the ward. No
evidence of abstinence symptoms were seen after abrupt
discontinuation of the drug.<br>
</p>

<p>Volavka et a]. (1971) in preliminary experiments administered
two marihuana cigarettes daily (13 mg Delta 9 THC) to four
detoxified heroin addicts. Pleasant effects peaked during the
second week and then leveled off. Prominent dysphoric effects and
depressive reactions with paranoid thoughts appeared during the
third to sixth days and persisted causing cessation of the study
by one subject after 10 days and after 17 days by another. The
other two subjects completed the entire planned 22 days. </p>

<p>Again no abstinence syndrome was seen and the dysphoric
symptoms disappeared within five days after the last dose.
Consistent electroencephalogram changes developed in three of
four subjects indicating increased synchronization. Their EEG
changes first appeared immediately after smoking.<br>
</p>

<p>In two of the f our subjects they were detectable, in the
presmoking records after days 12 and eight, and did not begin to
subside until 48 hours after the last dose in two subjects and
persisted for the entire 72 hours follow-up in a third subject. </p>

<p>Fink et al. (1971) subsequently studied five medical and
graduate students who had been almost daily marihuana smokers in
college and were currently weekend smokers. Each subject smoked
under laboratory conditions one marihuana cigarette containing 14
mg of THC each morning daily for 21 days. </p>

<p>No subject reported any adverse effects from smoking. The
subjects were generally able to conduct their usual daily
activities including jobs. However, they reported they did not
function completely up to par during the several hour duration of
the acute drug effect. There were no effects which persisted for
more than three to five hours and cumulative effects were not
noted day to day. No persistent decrements were seen in behavior,
mental status, EEG, heart, rate, short-term memory, or
psychomotor function tests. In sum, daily marihuana smoking for
21 days was well tolerated by well-adjusted graduate students. </p>

<p>Mendelson et al. (1972) performed a Commission-sponsored study
of the biological and behavioral concomitants of 21 days repeated
doses of marihuana. Subjects were individuals whose life style,
activities, values and attributes were more characteristic of the
unconventional youthful subculture than most of their peers in
the general population. Their mean age was 23. Based on I.Q.
testing they were superior intellectually although they had
completed, on the average, two-and-a half years of college. Their
job histories were rather erratic and characteristic of a pattern
of itinerant living. Their family background was a middle or
lower-middle socioeconomic status. In addition alcohol use was
infrequent while use of drugs, especially hallucinogens and
amphetamines, was significant. </p>

<p>Two groups of 10 subjects each were investigated over separate
31-day periods of confinement on a comfortably furnished research
ward equipped with an array of recreational materials. A large,
open yard was available for outdoor recreational activities. The
research period was divided into three periods: a pre-drug period
of five days during which the subjects were drug free; a,
subsequent 21-day period when marihuana, could be earned by
performing a, work-contingent operant task, then purchased and
smoked on a free-choice basis; and a five-day post-drug period
without access to marihuana. </p>

<p>All attempts were made to not interfere in any way with
performance of the operant task or free choice marihuana smoking
although the subjects were under constant observation. A vast
array of behavioral and biological assessments were made during
the experimental period to determine any effect of repeat doses
of marihuana over this time. </p>

<p>Two groups of subjects, studied separately, differed primarily
in the frequency of marihuana smoking over the past year. Both
groups had averaged about five years of marihuana use (range two
to 17 years). The first group studied, referred to as the
&quot;casual&quot; users by the authors, reported an average
frequency of marihuana use, of 7.7 occasions per month (range
three to 15 occasions). The second group studied, referred to as
the &quot;heavy&quot; users by the authors, reported almost daily
use of marihuana (average 33 sessions per month; range 20+ to 75,
including one substitute subject to fill the group who only
smoked about 10 times a month). <br>
</p>

<p>During the first 20 days of the smoking period, the casual
group's consumption averaged three cigarettes daily (individual
average was one-half to six) while that of the heavy users
averaged six-and-a-half cigarettes daily (individual average
three to eight-and-a-half). Both groups demonstrated a,
progressive trend toward increased daily consumption during the
experiment. Close examination of the consumption patterns for
individual subjects showed that the trend toward increased use
occurred in the subjects who were initially the heaviest users.
Several subjects who were initially the least frequent users did
not increase their use of marihuana over the course of the study.<br>
</p>

<p>Subjects in both groups tended to smoke practically all of
each cigarette including the butt. Each cigarette contained about
20 mg- Delta 9 THC. Therefore, the heavy users average daily
intake was 130 mg of THC or a total of almost, Joni- -grams of
THC over the 21-day period. The casual users average intake was
slightly less than half this amount.<br>
</p>

<p>No abstinence syndrome or physical dependence was observed
after abrupt termination of smoking. Signs of mild to moderate
psychological dependence. were possibly seen in the heavy group
but no evidence of psychological dependence was seen in the
casual users.<br>
</p>

<p>No consistent clinically significant physiological or
biochemical changes were demonstrated during or after the period
of repeated use of marihuana. </p>

<p>Urinalysis, complete blood counts, cell morphologies and
differentials, and blood chemistry determinations (calcium,
phosphorous, glucose, blood urea nitrogen, uric acid,
cholesterol, total protein, albumen, total bilirubin, alkaline
phosphatase, lactic dehydrogenase, and serum glutamic oxalacetic
transaminase) were unaffected. </p>

<p>Weight gain occurred in all but one subject. Maximal gain was
seen during the marihuana smoking period. The subjects were not
judged to be clinically malnourished prior to the experiment. </p>

<p>Normal body temperature was not altered. No significant
change, in pulmonary function (decreased. vital capacity or acute
broncho spasm) was observed during the marihuana smoking period.<br>
</p>

<p>Variable inconsistent changes in upright blood pressure were
noted. Effects on pulse rate were related only to acute drug
administration and were more pronounced during the initial
smoking phases. This suggests that tolerance developed to
drug-induced tachycardia. No significant electrocardiographic
changes were observed. Marihuana smoking had no apparent effect
on exercise related cardiac vascular function.<br>
</p>

<p>Physical examinations revealed only the development of
persistent conjunctival injection, lateral gaze nystagmus and
fine, finger tremors. These findings were believed to be acute
drug effects and of no clinical significance. No signs of
neurological abnormality were observed. No cumulative effect of
marihuana to cause, impairment of cognitive function was noted on
a battery of tests sensitive to organic brain function. </p>

<p>An increased amount of sleep in both shorter and longer blocks
of consecutive hours was observed. Also an increase in the number
of discrete episodes of sleep, especially one to three hour
episodes also occurred during the marihuana use period.
Reappearance of pre-drug pattern was seen during the post-drug
period. This reversion appeared to begin toward the end of the
drug period which may be indicative of tolerance, to the acute
depressant-like effects of marihuana. </p>

<p>Generally, performances on short-term memory, psychomotor
skills and time estimation suggests that repeated marihuana
smoking had no discernible effect on the ability to improve
performance with practice on these measures. Tolerance appeared
to develop to the acute decrement in performance on these
measures. On the time estimation task, a tendency appeared for
the subjects to increasingly overcompensate for the acute drug
effect with repeated testing in the nonintoxicated state.<br>
</p>

<p>Both casual and heavy users had a marked decrement in total
social interaction during the first portion of the marihuana
smoking period. Total interaction of the casual subjects
continued to diminish subsequently. Heavy users subsequently
tended to exceed presmoking levels of interaction indicating they
accommodated to the depressant effects of repeat doses of
marihuana. </p>

<p>Both groups became progressively more convivial and less
task-oriented in group discussions. They offered less suggestions
in problem-solving tasks but continued to efficiently solve the
problem. </p>

<p>Casual users reported general relative increases in negative
daily moods and decreases in positive daily moods during the
course of the study. The trend began with the onset of smoking
and persisted through the post-smoking period. This trend could
be a sequelae of repeated marihuana use or related to non-drug
variables (set and setting). </p>

<p>The heavy users did not evidence this trend toward relative
increases in dysphoric mood until the post-smoking period. Again
this may be related to repeated marihuana use, reflect
psychological dependence or be related to set and setting
variables, such as boredom and tension associated with the
prolonged study period. </p>

<p>Finally, repeated use of marihuana over the 21day period did
not decrease motivation to engage in a variety of social and
goal-directed behaviors. Almost without exception, every subject
earned the maximum number of points every day throughout all
non-drug and drug periods. No consistent alteration in pattern of
work could be related to repeated marihuana use. Subjects often
performed very high work output while they were smoking marihuana
and experiencing the maximum drug effects. </p>

<p>Repeated marihuana use, did not decrease subject's motivation
to complete the study. Nor was any noticeable effect observed on
interest and participation in a variety of personal activities,
such as, writing, reading literature, keeping up with current
national and world events, and participation in both athletic and
esthetic endeavors.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>