
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B015-191</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/mjtherpy.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051350 text/html 19045
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:13:39 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:49 GMT
Content-length: 18827
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Therapeutic Application of Marihuana, by Dr. Robert Walton</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<h1>THERAPEUTIC APPLICATION OF MARIHUANA </h1>

<p><b>Dr. Robert Walton <br>
</b></p>

<hr>

<p><b><br>
</b></p>

<p><b>Comments by David Solomon:</b> </p>

<p>In 1937 Dr. Walton, Professor of Pharmacology at the
University of Mississippi, prepared the following scholarly and
comprehensive essay on the medicinal uses of hemp preparations
for his book Marihuana. Sensing that the irrational attitudes
engendered by the marijuana panic then in high gear - might
inhibit legitimate scientific inquiry, he wrote: <br>
</p>

<p>The 1937 Federal legislative acts should be wholly effective
in making these preparations completely unavailable for any
further abuse. More stringent regulations making the drug
unavailable for medical and scientific purposes would be unwise,
since other uses may be developed for the drug which will
completely overshadow its disadvantages. The drug has certain
remarkable properties and if its chemical structure were
determined and synthetic variations developed, some of these
might prove to be particularly valuable, both as therapeutic
agents and as experimental tools. <br>
</p>

<p>Dr. Walton's fears were well grounded: immediately after the
Marihuana Tax Act of 1937t was passed, the Federal Bureau of
Narcotics issued and proceeded to implement 60odd pages of
&quot;more stringent regulations.&quot; These harsh, complex
administrative edicts rendered it virtually impossible - except
in limited instances, characterized by red tape and harassment -
to grow, import, buy, sell, use, prescribe, or experiment with
hemp products. <br>
</p>

<p>The therapeutic application of cannabis is more a matter of
history than of present-day practice. Synthetic analgesics and
hypnotics have almost entirely displaced these preparations from
their original field of application. The newer synthetics are
more effective and reliable and, in addition, have been more
intensely exploited by commercial interests. Cannabis
preparations have come to occupy so minor a place among modern
medicinals that it has been suggested that they be abandoned
altogether, this latter point of view being based on the
assumption that they represent a menace from the standpoint of
the hashish habit. Such an action would certainly be too drastic
in view of the circumstances. For one thing the therapeutic use
of cannabis and the hashish habit are almost entirely unrelated.
The drug has been readily available in this country for almost a
century without developing more than a very occasional, isolated
instance of hashish abuse. The marihuana habit came into this
country by other channels, although it is true that once
established as a practice, some few individuals have made use of
the &quot;drug store&quot; preparations. The 1937 Federal
legislative acts should be wholly effective in making these
preparations completely unavailable for any further abuse of this
sort. More stringent regulations making the drug unavailable for
medical and scientific purposes would be unwise, since other uses
may be developed for the drug which will completely overshadow
its disadvantages. The drug has certain remarkable properties and
if its chemical structure were determined and synthetic
variations developed, some of these might prove to be
particularly valuable, both as therapeutic agents and as
experimental tools. </p>

<p>Essentially the same general opinion has been expressed
recently by the committee on legislative activities of the
American Medical Association. They concluded that there is
positively no evidence to indicate the abuse of cannabis as a
medicinal agent or to show that its medicinal use is leading to
the development of cannabis addiction. Cannabis at the present
time is slightly used for medicinal purposes, but it would seem
worthwhile to maintain its status as a medicinal agent for such
purposes as it now has. There is a possibility that a re-study of
the drug by modern means may show other advantages to be derived
from its medicinal use. <br>
</p>

<p>Although hemp preparations may have been used by the ancients
to produce anesthesia, these drugs were not introduced generally
into medicine until about 1840. At this time O'Shaughnessy,
Aubert-Roche, and Moreau de Tours observed its use in India and
Egypt and proceeded to experiment with its therapeutic
possibilities. After using it in different sorts of conditions,
they were each enthusiastic in representing it as a valuable
therapeutic agent. Their activities resulted in a very widespread
and general use of the drug in both Europe and America. During
the period 1840-1900 there were something over 100 articles
published which recommended cannabis for one disorder or another.
</p>

<p>This popularity of the hemp drugs can be attributed partly to
the fact that they were introduced before the synthetic hypnotics
and analgesics. Chloral hydrate was not introduced until 1869 and
was followed in the next 30 years by paraldehyde, sulfonal, and
the barbitals. Antipyrine and acetanilide, the first of their
particular group of analgesics, were introduced about 1884. For
general sedative and analgesic purposes, the only drugs commonly
used at this time were the morphine derivatives and their
disadvantages were very well known. In fact, the most attractive
feature of the hemp narcotics was probably the fact that they did
not exhibit certain of the notorious disadvantages of the
opiates. The hemp narcotics do not constipate at all, they more
often increase rather than decrease appetite, they do not
particularly depress the respiratory center even in large doses,
they rarely or never cause pruritis or cutaneous eruptions and,
most important, the liability of developing addiction is very
much less than with the opiates. </p>

<p>These features were responsible for the rapid rise in
popularity of the drug. Several features can be recognized as
contributing to the gradual decline of popularity. Cannabis does
not usually produce analgesic or relax spastic conditions with
out producing cortical effects and, in fact, these cortical
effects usually predominate. The actual degree of analgesia
produced is much less than with the opiates. Most important, the
effects are irregular due to marked variations in individual
susceptibility and probably also to variable absorption of the
gummy resin. </p>

<p>The reported therapeutic successes and failures of these drugs
are briefly summarized below. </p>

<p>Among the miscellaneous conditions for which it has been used
and recommended may be mentioned cough, fatigue, rheumatism,
rheumatic neuralgia, asthma, and delirium tremens. <br>
</p>

<p><b>Spastic Conditions </b></p>

<p>Part of the early enthusiasm for cannabis was based on its
presumed value as an antagonist of spastic conditions. It was
used and highly recommended in the treatment of tetanus,
hydrophobia, puerperal convulsions, chorea, and strychnine
poisoning. </p>

<p>In the case of strychnine poisoning, at least, its value is
slight. The author, with the help of Horace Dozier, tested the
influence of cannabis insofar as it affected the minimal
convulsive dose of strychnine in dogs. Even large doses of
cannabis did not alter the strychnine effect enough to indicate
any significant antagonism. In tetanus and hydrophobia,
spasticity is more cerebral in origin and the cannabis antagonism
may have been more effective in such cases. <br>
</p>

<p><b>Analgesic Uses </b></p>

<p>In combatting pain of various causes, cannabis preparations
might be expected to be reasonably effective. See declared that
it &quot;gives relief from pain and increases the appetite in all
cases, no matter on what causes the pain and loss of appetite may
depend.&quot; </p>

<p>Hare says, &quot;. . . during the time that this remarkable
drug is relieving pain, a very curious physical condition
sometimes manifests itself; namely, that the diminution of pain
seems to be due to its fading away in the distance, so that the
pain becomes less and less.&quot; </p>

<p>Mercer says that it does not arrest pain but has a
&quot;special power over spasmodic pain.&quot; Wood says that
&quot;as an analgesic, it is very much inferior to opium but may
be tried when the latter is for any reason contra-indicated. In
full doses, in neuralgic pains, it certainly often gives
relief.&quot; </p>

<p>Aulde says that &quot;as a remedy for the relief of
supraorbital neuralgia no article perhaps affords better
prospects than cannabis.&quot; <br>
</p>

<p><b>Headache and Migraine </b></p>

<p>Farlow considered cannabis useful in &quot;nervous
headache.&quot; MacKenzie says that if continued for some time it
is the most valuable remedy he has met with in the treatment of
persistent headache. Marshall does not consider that cannabis is
generally useful but says however that it appears to be useful in
headache of a dull and continuous character. </p>

<p>Regarding migraine, Stevens say that Cannabis indica is
&quot;sometimes very useful.... Two drops of the fluid extract
may be given every half hour until the pain abates or until
slight dizziness or mental confusion appears. Even larger doses
may be used if necessary.&quot; </p>

<p>Osler and McCrea have said that for migraine, Cannabis indica
is probably the most satisfactory remedy. However, in the latest
edition of this text it is only suggested that &quot;a prolonged
course of Cannabis-indica may be tried.&quot; Solis-Cohen and
Githens consider that cannabis is of great service in certain
cases of migraine not dependent upon or aggravated by eyestrain.
Fantus recently recommended its use in migraine, prescribing
doses of 1 cc. of the fluid extract in iso-alcoholic elixir; N.
F. McConnell, Bastedo, Hare, Lewis, and Bragman have also
favorably mentioned its use in migraine. </p>

<p>Beckmann on the other hand says that whereas the drug was once
considered a specific for migraine it has more recently fallen
into &quot;a probably deserved disrepute.&quot; <br>
</p>

<p><b>Sedative and Hypnotic Action </b></p>

<p>One of the earlier experimenters with hashish declared that
&quot;in its hypnotic and soothing effects on the nervous system,
its resemblance to morphia is very great.&quot; </p>

<p>Fronmuller made about 1,000 observations on patients in which
the soporific effects were compared with other drugs,
particularly opium. He considered that the effect on the nervous
system was much less dangerous than with opium. In most instances
his patients are stated to have fallen asleep in about an hour
without any particular side effects. </p>

<p>Bastedo remarks that it may promote sleep in the presence of
pain. Poulsson and Dixon say that &quot;sleep has often been seen
to ensue without any, or with only slight excitement.&quot; </p>

<p>Miller, Berthier, McConnell, Shoemaker, Clendinning, Hiller,
and Florshinger have also described its usefulness-in procuring
sleep. Fantus and Cornbleet use it as a general sedative along
with sodium bromide in the treatment of pruritis. Lees was very
enthusiastic about the anodyne and soporific action of an aqueous
extract, which he considered did not produce any of the
excitement effects. </p>

<p>In current practice, the sedative effects are probably most
used in veterinary work. Milks and Eichhorn say that <br>
</p>

<p>cannabis is a distinct depressant to the brain and cord. In
man, this may be preceded by a brief period of stimulation but
this action is rarely seen in the horse. It is a distinct de
pressant and hypnotic and probably ranks ahead of opium for this
purpose in equine practice. After full doses the animals feel
drowsy, sleepy, have a disinclination to move and may finally
pass into a stage of narcosis, which may last from 12 to 24
hours, and then recover. <br>
</p>

<p>One half ounce of the solid extract is cited as being
sufficient to anesthetize a horse. This drug is relatively safe
if considered simply on the basis of its effects on the
circulation and respiratory center. It would seem however that a
very real source of danger exists in the possible development of
bronchopneumonia during the long period of semi-anesthesia. <br>
</p>

<p><b>Mental Conditions </b></p>

<p>Moreau de Tours was the first to advocate using the hashish
euphoria as a means of combatting mental conditions of a
depressive character. He reported a number of case histories of
manics and melancholies which were improved after such therapy.
His conclusions were immediately criticized by Rech. There have
been a few other observations agreeing in general with Moreau de
Tours and there have been some who reported adversely on such
treatment. Straub recently suggested that small doses of a
properly standardized preparation may possibly prove useful in
depressive melancholias. </p>

<p>Edes found it benefited patients who complained of unpleasant,
tiring dreams, and Birch used it in the treatment of chronic
chloral and chronic opium poisoning. <br>
</p>

<p><b>Uterine Dysfunction </b></p>

<p>Some have been particularly enthusiastic regarding the value
of cannabis in dysmenorrhea and menorrhagia. Batho says, &quot;.
. . considerable experience of its employment in menorrhagia,
more especially in India, has convinced me that it is, in that
country at all events, one of the most reliable means at our
disposal.&quot; Referring to the use of Indian hemp in
menorrhagia, Brown says, &quot;. . . there is no medicine which
has given such good results; for this reason it ought to take the
first place as a remedy in menorrhagia.&quot; <br>
</p>

<p><b>Effects During Labor </b></p>

<p>Willis recommended its use in &quot;tedious labour where the
patient is restless.&quot; Christison used the drug during
childbirth and advocated its use as an oxytocic. He believed it
stimulated uterine movements more quickly than ergot. Kobylanshi,
Grigor and Savignac also reported on its effects during
childbirth. These observations may be taken generally as evidence
that cannabis does not depress uterine movements. The drug is so
lacking in peripheral actions that any special stimulation or
depression would hardly be expected. </p>

<p>The question as to the effects of cannabis during labor was
recently discussed in the Journal of the American Medical
Association. <br>
</p>

<p>The sensation of pain is distinctly lessened or entirely
absent and the sense of touch is less acute than normally. Hence
a woman in labor may have a more or less painless labor. If a
sufficient amount of the drug is taken, the patient may fall into
a tranquil sleep from which she will awaken refreshed. . . . As
far as is known, a baby born of a mother intoxicated with
cannabis will not be abnormal in any way. <br>
</p>

<p>In South Africa the native women smoke cannabis to stupefy
themselves during childbirth. A requisite for the successful use
of this technic would seem to be a previous familiarity with the
effects of the drug. The African natives no doubt use the drug at
other times and accordingly are not as likely to be distressed by
the occasionally terrifying phases of the episode. Also some
experience is needed in order to regulate the dose when used in
this way. In such obstetric use, the drug has one important
advantage as contrasted with morphine, that is, the almost
connplete absence of any depressing effect on the respiratory
mechanism. <br>
</p>

<p><b>Diagnostic Usefulness </b></p>

<p>There have been numerous suggestions that the hashish delirium
may be used in psychiatric analysis as a means of removing the
barriers to the subconscious. This was one of the purportedly
useful features of the drug as declared in the recent legislative
deliberations. Although such an application is not unreasonable,
the few trials which have been made were not particularly
successful. In contrast with cocaine and amytal, the patient
usually becomes more absorbed and less communicative. Lindemann
and Malamud observed this while studying effects in
schizophrenics and psychoneurotic They reported that &quot;new
experiences are created which allow new presentations or new
fantasies and an increasing neglect of the outside world in favor
of experiences which are in keeping with the patient's
desires.&quot; They did note that with schizo phrenics there was
much less change in space and time perception than in
psychoneurotic and normal persons. </p>

<p>There is a fictional account of the use of the drug to obtain
confessions from suspected criminals. In general, however, the
usual effect of the drug is not such as to make it very useful
for such purposes. Von Schrenck described some rather
inconclusive experimentation involving the use of hashish in
hypnotism. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>