
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-47</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B018-196</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/cannabid.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052635 text/html 9217
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:26:28 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:05:00 GMT
Content-length: 9000
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Cannabidiol: The Wonder Drug of the 21st Century?</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="5">Cannabidiol: The Wonder Drug of the 21st
Century?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The traditional use of Cannabis as an
analgesic, anti-asthmatic, and anti-rheumatic drug is well
established. This British study also suggests that cultivation of
Cannabis plants rich in Cannabidiol (CBD) and other phenolic
substances would be useful not only as fiber producing plants but
also for medicinal purposes in the treatment of certain
inflammatory disorders. CBD was found to be more effective than
aspirin as an anti-inflammatory agent. &quot;Analgesic and
Anti-inflammatory Activity of Constituents of Cannabis Sativa
L.,&quot; E.A. Formukong, A.T. Evans, and F.J. Evans,
Inflammation, Vol. 4, 1988, pp. 361-371. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Cannabidiol, CBD, a non-psychoactive
cannabinoid of Marijuana, was given to 5 patients with dystonia
disorders. Improvement occurred in all 5 patients by 20-50%.
&quot;Open Label Evaluation of Cannabidiol in Dystonic Movement
Disorders,&quot; Consroe, et al, International Journal of
Neuroscience, 1986, Vol. 30, pp.277-282. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Three patients with Huntington's Disease who
had been previously unresponsive to therapy with neuroleptics,
were given Cannabidiol, (CBD), a non-psychoactive cannabinoid of
Marijuana. After the second week improvement in choreic movement
occurred by 20-40%. Except for transient, mild hypo-tension no
side effects were recorded.&quot;Effects of Cannabidiol in
Huntington's Disease,&quot; Sandyk, Consroe, Stern, and Snider,
Neurology, 36 (Suppl. 1) April, 1986, p.342. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In this Brazilian study of 8 Epileptic patients
receiving Cannabidiol, (CBD), 4 were free of convulsions, 3 had
partial improvement, and 1 was unchanged. No serious side effects
were found. This is quite important, as complex partial seizures
with secondary generalization are difficult to treat with
currently used drugs. The potential use of CBD as an
anti-epileptic drug and its possible potentiating effect on other
drugs are discussed. &quot;Chronic Administration of Cannabidiol
to Healthy Volunteers and Epileptic Patients,&quot; Pharmacology,
21: 1980, J.M. Cunha, et al, pp.175-185.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Subjects receiving 160 mg. Cannabidiol reported
having slept significantly more than those receiving placebo;
seven out of eight epileptics receiving Cannabidiol had
improvement of their disease state. (Brazil) &quot;Hypnotic and
Antiepileptic Effects of Cannabidiol,&quot; Carlini, E.A., and
Cunha, J.A., Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 1981: 21: pp.
417S-427S. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Three patients with TS who experienced
incomplete responses to conventional anti-TS drugs but noted a
significant amelioration of symptoms when smoking marijuana. The
effects of marijuana on TS may be related to its anxiety-reducing
properties, although a more specific antidyskinetic effect cannot
be excluded. Eliminating the psychoactive properties of marijuana
while retaining the antidyskinetic effects (Cannabidiol) could
prove beneficial. &quot;Marijuana and Tourette's Syndrome,&quot;
(letter), Sandyk and Awerbuch, Journal of Clinical
Psychopharmacology, Vol. 8, No. 6, Dec. 1988, pp.444-5.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;Anti-dyskinetic effects of
cannabidiol,&quot; Conti, L.H., Johannesen, J., Musty, R.E.,
Consroe, P., Proceedings of the International Congress on
Marijuana. 1987: 21. Melbourne, Australia. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This Brazilian study Investigates the possible
anti-psychotic activity of CBD by studying the effect of this
cannabinoid on animal models used in research with potential
anti-psychotic properties. CBD seems to compare favorably with
haloperidol as an anti-psychotic. &quot;Effects of CBD in animal
models predictive of anti-psychotic activity,&quot; Zuardi, A.W.,
Rodrigues, J.A., Cunha, J.M., Psychopharmacology 1991: 104: pp.
260-264. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">CBD blocks some of the effects of THC in mice
but potentiates some other effects. (Brazil)&quot;Pharmacological
Interaction between Cannabidiol and Tetrahydrocannabinol,&quot;
Karniol, I.G., Carlini, E.A., Psychopharmacologia 1973: 33: pp.
53-70. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">CBD was effective in blocking most of the
effects of THC, increased pulse rate, disturbed time tasks, and
psychological reactions. CBD also decreased the anxiety
components of THC. (Brazil) &quot;Cannabidiol Interferes with the
effects of Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,&quot; Karniol, I.G.,
Shirakawa, I., Kasinski, N., Pfeferman, A., Carlini, E.A.,
European Journal of Pharmacology 1974: 28: pp. 172-177. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">One of the first studies that clearly shows
that hemp grown for fiber is very low in THC, the psychoactive
component that gets people high. The drug-type marijuana is very
high in THC. Cannabidiol (CBD) which is not psychoactive, is very
high in fiber-type hemp but low in drug-type marijuana. This is
important as CBD is known to block the effects of THC. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">This makes the hemp doubly useless for drug
effects. &quot;Chemistry of Marijuana,&quot; Coy Waller.
Pharmacological Reviews, Vol. 23, No. 4, 1971. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Wild 'marijuana' growing in Riley County Kansas
was found to be very low in THC content. (Below the European
threshold for fiber hemp.) The leaves and flowering tops averaged
from 0.01-0.49% THC with a mean of 0.14% THC. CBD which blocks
the psychoactive effects of THC was as high as 1.7%.
&quot;Seasonal Fluctuations in Cannabinoid Content of Kansas
Marijuana,&quot; R.P. Latta, and B.J. Eaton. Economic Botany, 29:
April-June, 1975, pp. 153-163.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp; Researchers for the Canadian Department
of Agriculture tested over 350 varieties of Cannabis in Ottawa,
Ontario. They determined that there were two basic types of
Cannabis based on genetic characteristics: a drug-type which
originates in hot climates such as India and is high in THC but
low in CBD and a fiber-type which originates in temperate
climates and is low in THC but high in CBD and is used
industrially for fiber and food. This awareness of the
separateness of the two phenotypes has vast agronomic potential.
It means fiber hemp can be grown without the drug effect of
'marijuana.'&quot;The Evolution of Cannabinoid Phenotypes in
Cannabis,&quot; Ernest Small, H.D. Beckstead, and Allan Chan,
Economic Botany, 29: 1975, pp. 219-232. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Ten mg. of THC is required to get a
psychoactive effect from 'marijuana.' It would require 50-100
cigarettes of the French hemp cultivated for paper to get a
psychoactive high. &quot;Paper-making type of hemp (Cannabis
sativa L.) cultivated in France: Constituents compared to those
of marijuana,&quot; Fournier and Paris, (French) Plantes
Medicinales et Phytotherapie, Vol. 13(2) April, 1979, pp.
116-121.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;&nbsp;</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>