
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B030-156</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065251 text/html 14673
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:52:44 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:32 GMT
Content-length: 14454
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Chapter 3</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>3.&nbsp; &nbsp; Chemistry and mysticism</h2>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In its broadest sense, mysticism refers to direct
communion with the divine; to intuitive knowledge of ultimate
truth; to the soul's sense of union with the absolute reality
that is the Ground, or the source, of its Being. And apparently
it is impossible to distinguish this experience from the central
experience produced by LSD and other psychedelic agents. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The classic accounts of mystical experience read
like psychedelic Baedekers. In recent years, moreover, a number
of studies have compared the two experiences, and the results
have reinforced the idea that the experiences are in some way
connected. The best known of these studies was undertaken by
psychiatrist Walter Pahnke at Harvard University, where
psilocybin was administered in a religious setting to ten
theology students. Nine of the ten felt they had genuine
religious experiences, and Pahnke concluded that the phenomena
they reported were &quot;indistinguishable from, if not identical
with,&quot; a typology based on W. T. Stace's widely known
summary of mystical experience. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At Princeton, students were shown accounts of a
religious experience and a psychedelic experience, and two-thirds
of the students identified the drug-induced experience as the
religious one. In a book in which they summarize five separate
studies, including Pahnke's, R. E. L. Masters and Jean Houston
stated that &quot;religious-type&quot; experiences were reported
by 32 to 75 per cent of subjects who received psychedelics in
&quot;supportive&quot; settings, and by 75 to 90 per cent of
those who received them in settings that included religious
stimuli. And so on. The consensus of research seems to be that
the two experiences are at least phenomenologically the same.
This is a way of saying: &quot;Well, they certainly <i>look</i>
the same, and beyond that I'm not going to stick my neck
out.&quot; What this neatly avoids, of course, is the problem of
comparing the <i>sources</i> of the experiences. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Significant parallels to psychedelic experience are
to be found in William James's observations on religious
conversion, the faith-state, and mystical experience. Conversion
occurs, said James, when a formerly divided self becomes unified,
and &quot;a not infrequent consequence of the change operated in
the subject is a transfiguration of the face of nature in his
eyes. A new heaven seems to shine upon a new earth.&quot; James
made the point that &quot;self-surrender has been and always must
be regarded as the vital turning-point of the religious
life.&quot; And the total abnegation of self or ego is without
question the hallmark of psychedelic experience. &quot;Only when
I become as nothing,&quot; wrote James, &quot;can God enter in
and no difference between his life and mine remain
outstanding.&quot; Discussing the faith-state, James observed
that it too is characterized by an objective change in the
appearance of the world, which takes on a sweet and beautiful
newness. &quot;It was dead and is alive again. It is like the
difference between looking on a person without love, or upon the
same person with love.&quot; In addition, there is a loss of all
worry: &quot;the sense that all is ultimately well with one&quot;
and a &quot;willingness to be.&quot; Finally, there is &quot;the
sense of perceiving truths not known before,&quot; and these
&quot;more or less unutterable in words.&quot; As for mysticism,
James found that it also is marked by an ineffability requiring
direct experience, as well as a noetic quality which carries with
it &quot;a curious sense of authority for aftertime.&quot; Still
another aspect is passivity, in which &quot;the mystic feels as
if he were grasped and held by a superior power.&quot; And a
final factor is transiency. &quot;Mystical states cannot be
sustained for long. Except in rare instances, half an hour, or at
most an hour or two, seems to be the limit.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; One of those rare exceptions perhaps was Emanuel
Swedenborg, the so-called Swedish Aristotle, who was said to have
had a mystical experience which lasted, more or less
continuously, for almost three decades. LSD cannot match that
record, but it does seem to improve somewhat on the normal time
limits indicated by James. Except for duration, however, there is
obviously a remarkable similarity between James's typology and
psychedelic experience. And just incidentally, James noted that
mystical states are often accompanied by various photisms, or
luminous phenomena, which also are an aspect of psychedelic
experience (for example, Paul's blinding vision and Constantine's
cross in the sky). Finally, let us call attention to James's
observation: &quot;One may say truly, I think, that personal
religious experience has its roots and centre in mystical states
of consciousness.&quot; In other words, we are likening
psychedelic experience not just to mysticism but to religious
experience as a whole. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; From this background, then, emerges LSD's first
clear challenge to orthodox theology. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Did the saints owe their visions to some biological
short-circuit which caused them to experience spontaneously what
LSD cultists achieve with a chemical? Can their mystic raptures
be traced to a malfunction of the adrenal glands? Does the
faith-state have a neurological basis? Is the religious
experience as such nothing more than a fluke of body chemistry? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The materialists would like to think so, and do.
Dr. Sidney Cohen (who is no materialist) has suggested that
religious experience may one day be redefined as &quot;a
dys-synchrony of the reticular formation of the brain.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Some scholars have pushed even further. Not only do
psychedelics appear to duplicate religious experience, they say.
It is possible that religion itself is psychedelic in origin. One
of the major spokesmen for this viewpoint has been Gordon Wasson,
an authority on the psychedelic mushrooms of Mexico, who has
suggested that primitive men may have stumbled many times upon
innocent-looking plants which produce the same effects as LSD.
These theobotanicals, possibly mushrooms, might well have been a
&quot;mighty springboard&quot; which first put the idea of God
into men's heads. Wasson also has proposed a psychedelic
explanation of the ancient Greek cult that produced the
Eleusinian Mysteries, and he has advanced the idea that Plato's
pure Ideas might be the product of a psychedelic insight. (In
other words, Plato was an acidhead.) Following this line of
reasoning, it might seem logical to conclude that the Eden story
is actually a psychedelic parable&#151;and we would be happy to
propose that theory ourselves had we not already proposed another
theory with an antithetical conclusion. In any case, Wasson goes
on to suggest that psychedelic sacraments in the course of time
may have been replaced by more innocuous hosts, and that they
represent perhaps &quot;the original element in all the Holy
Suppers of the world.&quot; The whole idea, of course, is pure
speculation, and necessarily so, but at the same time it is very
interesting speculation and by no means implausible. It is
particularly tempting to apply Wasson's theory to the metaphysics
of India; according to Masters and Houston, an estimated 90 per
cent of the holy men in that country are currently on hemp and
various other drugs. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The point often is made that religious ascetics
traditionally have promoted their mystical states of
consciousness by employing techniques that rival LSD in their
probable impact on biochemical balance. These include fasting,
yogic breathing exercises, sleep deprivation, dervish dances,
self-flagellation, and monastic isolation. Even in the pews of
the pious, religious contemplation may be supported by such
trance-inducing aids as organ music, stained glass windows,
repetitive chants and prayers, incense, and flickering candles. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The question of religious chemistry has been
underscored recently by the wide attention given to the theories,
already mentioned, of Dr. Abram Hoffer and Humphry Osmond. Their
adrenochrome-adrenolutin hypothesis suggests that schizophrenia
may be caused at least in part by defective adrenal metabolism.
Very briefly, the adrenal gland secretes the hormone adrenaline,
which helps coordinate biological mechanisms in emergency
situations&#151;for example, a fist fight or a threatened traffic
accident. Heart rate is increased, the blood is sugared up and
pumped to the necessary muscles. Adrenaline also may affect the
emotions, contributing to anxiety and depression. In the body it
turns into a toxic hormone called adrenochrome, which in turn can
be converted into either of two other compounds: dihydroxyindole
or adrenolutin. It is possible that dihydroxyindole balances off
adrenaline to reduce tension and irritability; in schizophrenics,
however, adrenochrome is converted primarily into adrenolutin,
which also is toxic, and the combination of
adrenochrome-adrenolutin results in a poisonous disruption of the
brain's chemical processes. That is the theory. And the
prescribed antidotes are nicotinic acid (niacin) or nicotinamide
(Vitamin B-3). Discussing one of the villains in the piece, the
scientists write: &quot;There are few who doubt that adrenochrome
is active in animals or in man, and it is now included among the
family of compounds known as hallucinogens&#151;compounds like
mescaline and LSD-2 5 capable of producing psychological changes
in man.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Hoffer-Osmond studies are far from conclusive,
and similar theories have been advanced in the past. But the
studies hold promise, and they are receiving serious
consideration&#151;due in part, no doubt, to the significance
they have in other areas of current debate, including religion.
The line dividing insanity and mysticism has never been too
sharply drawn, and the biochemical theory of schizophrenia makes
it all the more tenuous. Vitamin B-3 actually has cured cases of
schizophrenia, according to Dr. Hoffer and Osmond. But Vitamin
B-3 also has proved effective in terminating LSD experiences, and
the implications of this must be obvious. As we asked earlier:
Are insanity, mysticism, and the psychedelic experience in some
way related? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Aldous Huxley has suggested they are. The
experience of absolute reality is awesome enough in small doses,
and the schizophrenic, drugged by his own body chemistry, is like
a man who is permanently under the influence of a psychedelic. He
is &quot;unable to shut off the experience of a reality which he
is not holy enough to live with.&quot; He cannot take refuge,
even for a moment, in &quot;the homemade universe of common
sense&#151;the strictly human world of useful notions, shared
symbols and socially acceptable conventions.&quot; The result is
a bad trip which never ends. But the psychedelic subject knows
that he can and will return to that limited but comforting world,
and he is therefore in a position to accept his experience: to
enjoy it and to learn from it. This in fact appears to be the
main basis for denying that psychedelics produce a model
psychosis. As Dr. Cohen and parapsychologist Gardner Murphy
expressed it: &quot;When the dissolution of the reasoning self
occurs in a chaotic manner, the result is called psychosis. When
the state is not accompanied by panic or anxiety, it is perceived
as mystical, and creative solutions of (or at least an armistice
with) life problems could result.&quot; Dr. Cohen has proposed
that the difference here makes logical a distinction between
insanity and unsanity, which he would place at polar ends of a
continuum; in the middle, somewhere, would lie sanity.
Nevertheless, it is a bit jarring to consider the possibility
that religious experience is an end-product of adrenochrome,
described as a dark crystalline material which can easily be made
in a laboratory. &quot;In its pure form,&quot; write Dr. Hoffer
and Osmond, &quot;it manifests itself as beautiful, sharp,
needle-like crystals which have a brilliant sheen. When the
crystals are powdered, it appears as a bright red powder, which
dissolves quickly in water to form a blood-red solution.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It would be interesting to see if a shot of
vitamins could terminate a spontaneous religious experience. But
what if it did? And what if LSD does in fact initiate such an
experience? Does this mean the experience is simply a
manifestation of the drug? </p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | <a
    href="braden4.htm">Chapter 4</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>