
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B027-29</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/histsum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095300 text/html 50558
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:52:50 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:05 GMT
Content-length: 50340
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Some Events in the History of Drugs</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<h2></h2>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="file:///d:/web/html/graphics/blueline.gif"
align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>A Summary of Historical Events </h2>

<p> <b>Some Events in the History of Drugs</b> </p>

<p> <img src="file:///d:/web/html/graphics/blueline.gif"
align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>5000 B.C.</b> The Sumerians use opium, suggested by the
fact that they have an ideogram for it which has been translated
as HUL, meaning &quot;joy&quot; or &quot;rejoicing.&quot; [Alfred
R. Lindesmith, *Addiction and Opiates.* p. 207] </p>

<p> <b>3500 B.C.</b> Earlist historical record of the production
of alcohol: the description of a brewery in an an Egyptian
papyrus. [Joel Fort, *The Pleasure Seekers*, p. 14] </p>

<p> <b>3000 B.C.</b> Approximate date of the supposed origin of
the use of tea in China. </p>

<p> <b>2500 B.C.</b> Earlist historical evidence of the eating of
poppy seeds among the Lake Dwellers on Switzerland. [Ashley
Montagu, The long search for euphoria, *Refelections*, 1:62-69
(May-June), 1966; p. 66] </p>

<p> <b>2000 B.C.</b> Earliest record of prohibitionist teaching,
by an Egyptian priest, who writes to his pupil: &quot;I, thy
superior, forbid thee to go to the taverns. Thou art degraded
like beasts.&quot; [W.F. Crafts *et al*., *Intoxicating Drinks
and Drugs*, p. 5] </p>

<p> <b>350 B.C.</b> Proverbs, 31:6-7: &quot;Give strong drink to
him who is perishing, and wine to those in bitter distress; let
them drink and forget their poverty, and remember their misery no
more.&quot; </p>

<p> <b>300 B.C</b>. Theophrastus (371-287 B.C.), Greek naturalist
and philosopher, records what has remained as the earlies
undisputed reference to the use of poppy juice. </p>

<p> <b>250 B.C</b>. Psalms, 104:14-15: &quot;Thou dost cause
grass to grow for the cattle and plants for man to cultivate,
that he may bring forth food from the earth, and wine to gladden
the heart of man. </p>

<p> <b>350 A.D.</b> Earliest mention of tea, in a Chinese
dictionary. </p>

<p> <b>4th century</b> St. John Chrysostom (345-407), Bishop of
Constantinople: &quot;I hear man cry, 'Would there be no wine! O
folly! O madness!' Is it wine that causes this abuse? No, for if
you say, 'Would there were no light!' because of the informers,
and would there were no women because of adultery.&quot; [Quoted
in Berton Roueche, *The Neutral Spirit*, pp. 150-151] </p>

<p> <b>450</b> Babylonian Talmud: &quot;Wine is at the head of
all medicines; where wine is lacking, drugs are necessary.&quot;
[Quoted in Burton Stevenson (Ed.), *The Macmillan Book of
Proverbs*, p. 21] </p>

<p> <b>c. 1000</b> Opium is widely used in China and the far
East. [Alfred A. Lindensmith, *The Addict and the Law*, p. 194] </p>

<p> <b>1493</b> The use of tobacco is introduced into Europe by
Columbus and his crew returning from America. </p>

<p> <b>c. 1500</b> According to J.D. Rolleston, a British medical
historian, a medieval Russian cure for drunkenness consisted in
&quot;taking a piece of pork, putting it secretly in a Jew's bed
for nine days, and then giving it to the drunkard in a pulverized
form, who will turn away from drinking as a Jew would from
pork.&quot; [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. p. 144] </p>

<p> <b>c. 1525</b> Paracelsus (1490-1541) introduces laudanum, or
tincture of opium, into the practice of medicine. </p>

<p> <b>1600</b> Shakespeare: &quot;Falstaff. . . . If I had a
thousand sons the / first human principle I would teach them
should / be, to foreswear thin portion and to addict themselves
to sack.&quot; (&quot;Sack&quot; is an obsolete term for
&quot;sweet wine&quot; like sherry). [William Shakespeare,
*Second Part of King Henry the Forth*, Act IV, Scene III, lines
133-136] </p>

<p> <b>17th century</b> The prince of the petty state of Waldeck
pays ten thalers to anyone who denounces a coffee drinker.
[Griffith Edwards, Psychoactive substances, *The Listener*, March
23, 1972, pp. 360-363; p.361] </p>

<p> <b>17th century</b> In Russia, Czar Michael Federovitch
executes anyone on whom tobacco is found. &quot;Czar Alexei
Mikhailovitch rules that anyone caught with tobacco should be
tortured until he gave up the name of the supplier.&quot; [Ibid.]
</p>

<p> <b>1613</b> John Rolf, the husband of the Indian princess
Pocahontas, sends the first shipment of Virginia tobacco from
Jamestown to England. </p>

<p> <b>c. 1650</b> The use of tobacco is prohibited in Bavaria,
Saxony, and in Zurich, but the prohibitions are ineffective.
Sultan Murad IV of the Ottoman Empire decrees the death penalty
for smoking tobacco: &quot;Whereever there Sultan went on his
travels or on a military expedition his halting-places were
always distinguished by a terrible rise in executions. Even on
the battlefield he was fond of surprising men in the act of
smoking, when he would punish them by beheading, hanging,
quartering or crushing their hands and feed. . . . Nevertheless,
in spite of all the horrors and persecution. . . the passion for
smoking still persisted.&quot; [Edward M. Brecher et al., *Licit
and Illicit Drugs*, p. 212] </p>

<p> <b>1680</b> Thomas Syndenham (1625-80): &quot;Among the
remedies which it has pleased the Almighty God to give to man to
relieve his sufferings, none is so universal and efficacious as
opium.&quot; [Quoted in Louis Goodman and Alfred Gilman, *The
Pharmacological Basis of Theraputics*, First Edition (1941), p.
186] </p>

<p> <b>1690</b> The &quot;Act for the Encouraging of the
Distillation of Brandy and Spirits from Corn&quot; is enacted in
England. [Roueche, op. cit. p. 27] </p>

<p> <b>1691</b> In Luneberg, Germany, the penalty for smoking
(tobacco) is death. </p>

<p> <b>1717</b> Liquor licenses in Middlesex (England) are
granted only to those who &quot;would take oaths of allegiance
and of belief in the King's supremacy over the Church&quot;
[G.E.G. Catlin, *Liquor Control*, p. 14] </p>

<p> <b>1736</b> The Gin Act (England) is enacted with the avowed
object of making spirits &quot;come so dear to the consumer that
the poor will not be able to launch into excessive use of
them.&quot; This effort results in general lawbreaking and fails
to halt the steady rise in the consumption of even legally
produced and sold liquor. [Ibid., p. 15] </p>

<p> <b>1745</b> The magistrates of one London division demanded
that &quot;publicans and wine-merchants should swear that they
anathematized the doctrine of Transubstantiation.&quot; [Ibid.,
p. 14] </p>

<p> <b>1762</b> Thomas Dover, and English physician, introduces
his prescription for a diaphoretic powder,&quot; which he
recommends mainly for the treatment of gout. Soon named
&quot;Dover's powder,&quot; this compound becomes the most widely
used opium preparation during the next 150 years. </p>

<p> <b>1785</b> Benjamin Rush publishes his *Inquiry into the
Effects of Ardent Spirits on the Human Body and Mind*; in it, he
calls the intemperate use of distilled spirits a
&quot;disease,&quot; and estimates the annual rate of death due
to alcoholism in the United States as &quot;not less than 4000
people&quot; in a population then of less than 6 million. [Quoted
in S. S. Rosenberg (Ed.), *Alcohol and Health*, p. 26] </p>

<p> <b>1789</b> The first American temperance society is formed
in Litchfield, Connecticut. [Crafts et. al., op. cit., p. 9] </p>

<p> <b>1790</b> Benjamin Rush persuades his associates at the
Philadelphia College of Physicians to send an appeal to Congress
to &quot;impose such heavy duties upon all distilled spirits as
shall be effective to restrain their intemperate use in the
country.&quot; [Quoted in ibid.] </p>

<p> <b>1792</b> The first prohibitory laws against opium in China
are promulgated. The punishment decreed for keepers of opium
shops is strangulation. </p>

<p> <b>1792</b> The Whisky Rebellion, a protest by farmers in
western Pennsylvania against a federal tax on liquor, breaks out
and is put down by overwhelming force sent to the area by George
Washington. Samuel Taylor Coleridge writes &quot;Kubla Khan&quot;
while under the influence of opium. </p>

<p> <b>1800</b> Napoleon's army, returning from Egypt, introduces
cannibis (hashish, marijuana) into France. Avante-garde artists
and writers in Paris develop their own cannabis ritual, leading,
in 1844, to the establishment of *Le Club de Haschischins.*
[William A. Emboden, Jr., Ritual Use of Cannabis Sativa L.: A
historical-ethnographic survey, in Peter T. Furst (Ed.), *Flesh
of the Gods*, pp. 214-236; pp. 227-228] </p>

<p> <b>1801</b> On Jefferson's recommendation, the federal duty
on liquor was abolished. [Catlin, op. cit., p. 113] </p>

<p> <b>1804</b> Thomas Trotter, an Edinburgh physician, publishes
*An Essay, Medical, Philosophical, and Chemical on Drunkenness
and Its Effects on the Human Body*: &quot;In medical language, I
consider drunkenness, strictly speaking, to be a disease,
produced by a remote cause, and giving birth to actions and
movements in the living body that disorder the functions of
health. . . The habit of drunkenness is a disease of the
mind.&quot; [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. pp. 87-88] </p>

<p> <b>1805</b> Friedrich Wilhelm Adam Serturner, a German
chemist, isolates and describes morphine. </p>

<p> <b>1822</b> Thomas De Quincey's *Confessions of an English
Opium Eater* is published. He notes that the opium habit, like
any other habit, must be learned: &quot;Making allowance for
constitutional differences, I should say that *in less that 120
days* no habit of opium-eating could be formed strong enough to
call for any extraordinary self-conquest in renouncing it, even
suddenly renouncing it. On Saturday you are an opium eater, on
Sunday no longer such.&quot; [Thomas De Quincey, *Confessions of
an English Opium Eater* (1822), p. 143] </p>

<p> <b>1826</b> The American Society for the Promotion of
Temperance is founded in Boston. By 1833, there are 6,000 local
Temperance societies, with more than one million members. </p>

<p> <b>1839-42</b> The first Opium War. The British force upon
China the trade in opium, a trade the Chinese had declared
illegal.. [Montagu, op. cit. p. 67] </p>

<p> <b>1840</b> Benjamin Parsons, and English clergyman,
declares: &quot;. . . alcohol stands preeminent as a destroyer. .
. . I never knew a person become insane who was not in the habit
of taking a portion of alcohol every day.&quot; Parsons lists
forty-two distinct diseases caused by alcohol, among them
inflammation of the brain, scrofula, mania, dropsy, nephritis,
and gout. [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit. pp. 87-88] </p>

<p> <b>1841</b> Dr. Jacques Joseph Moreau uses hashish in
treatment of mental patients at the Bicetre. </p>

<p> <b>1842</b> Abraham Lincoln: &quot;In my judgment, such of us
as have never fallen victims, have been spared more from the
absence of appetite, than from any mental or moral superiority
over those who have. Indeed, I believe, if we take habitual
drunkards as a class, their heads and their hearts will bear an
advantageous comparison with those of any other class.&quot;
[Abraham Lincoln, Temperance address, in Roy P. Basler Ed.), *The
Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln, Vol. 1, p. 258] </p>

<p> <b>1844</b> Cocaine is isolated in its pure form. </p>

<p> <b>1845</b> A law prohibiting the public sale of liquor is
enacted in New York State. It is repealed in 1847. </p>

<p> <b>1847</b> The American Medical Association is founded. </p>

<p> <b>1852</b> Susan B. Anthony establishes the Women's State
Temperance Society of New York, the first such society formed by
and for women. Many of the early feminists, such as Elizabeth
Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, and Abby Kelly, are also ardent
prohibitionists. [Andrew Sinclar, *Era of Excess*, p. 92] </p>

<p> <b>1852</b> The American Pharmaceutical Association is
founded. The Association's 1856 Constitution lists one of its
goals as: &quot;To as much as possible restrict the dispensing
and sale of medicines to regularly educated druggests and
apothecaries. [Quoted in David Musto, *The American Disease*, p.
258] </p>

<p> <b>1856</b> The Second Opium War. The British, with help from
the French, extend their powers to distribute opium in China. </p>

<p> <b>1862</b> Internal Revenue Act enacted imposing a license
fee of twenty dollars on retail liquor dealers, and a tax of one
dollar a barrel on beer and twenty cents a gallon on spirits.
[Sinclare, op. cit. p 152] </p>

<p> <b>1864</b> Adolf von Baeyer, a twenty-nine-year-old
assistant of Friedrich August Kekule (the discoverer of the
molecular structure of benzene) in Ghent, synthesizes barbituric
acid, the first barbiturate. </p>

<p> <b>1868</b> Dr. George Wood, a professor of the theory and
practice of medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, president
of the American Philosophical Society, and the author of a
leading American test, *Treatise on Therapeutics*, describes the
pharmacological effects of opium as follows: &quot;A sensation of
fullness is felt in the head, soon to be followed by a universal
feeling of delicious ease and comfort, with an elevation and
expansion of the whole moral and intellectual nature, which is, I
think, the most characteristic of its effects. . . . It seems to
make the individual, for the time, a better and greater man. . .
. The hallucinations, the delirious imaginations of alcoholic
intoxication, are, in general, quite wanting. Along with this
emotional and intellectual elevation, there is also increased
muscular energy; and the capacity to act, and to bear fatigue, is
greatly augmented. [Quoted in Musto, op. cit. pp. 71-72] </p>

<p> <b>1869</b> The Prohibition Party is formed. Gerrit Smith,
twice Abolitionist candidate for President, an associate of John
Brown, and a crusading prohibitionist, declares: &quot;Our
involuntary slaves are set free, but our millions of voluntary
slaves still clang their chains. The lot of the literal slave, of
him whom others have enslaved, is indeed a hard one;
nevertheless, it is a paradise compared with the lot of him who
has enslaved himself to alcohol.&quot; [Quoted in Sinclar, op.
cit. pp. 83-84] </p>

<p> <b>1874</b> The Woman's Christian Temperance Union is founded
in Cleveland. In 1883, Frances Willard a leader of the W.C.T.U.
forms the World's Woman's Christian Temperance Union. </p>

<p> <b>1882</b> The law in the United States, and the world,
making &quot;temperance education&quot; a part of the required
course in public schools is enacted. In 1886, Congress makes such
education mandatory in the District of Columbia, and in
territorial, military, and naval schools. By 1900, all the states
have similar laws. [Crafts et. al., op. cit. p. 72] </p>

<p> <b>1882</b> The Personal Liberty League of the United States
is founded to oppose the increasing momentum of movements for
compulsory abstinence from alcohol. [Catlin, op. cit. p. 114] </p>

<p> <b>1883</b> Dr. Theodor Aschenbrandt, a German army
physician, secures a supply of pure cocaine from the
pharmaceutical firm of Merck, issues it to Bavarian soldiers
during their maneuvers, and reports on the beneficial effects of
the drug in increasing the soldiers' ability to endure fatigue.
[Brecher et. al. op. cit. p. 272] </p>

<p> <b>1884</b> Sigmund Freud treats his depression with cocaine,
and reports feeling &quot;exhilaration and lasting euphoria,
which is in no way differs from the normal euphoria of the
healthy person. . . You perceive an increase in self-control and
possess more vitality and capacity for work. . . . In other
words, you are simply more normal, and it is soon hard to believe
that you are under the influence of a drug.&quot; [Quoted in
Ernest Jones, *The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 1, p. 82]
</p>

<p> <b>1884</b> Laws are enacted to make anti-alcohol teaching
compulsory in public schools in New York State. The following
year similar laws are passed in Pennsylvania, with other states
soon following suit. </p>

<p> <b>1885</b> The Report of the Royal Commission on Opium
concludes that opium is more like the Westerner's liquor than a
substance to be feared and abhorred. [Quoted in Musto, op. cit.
p. 29] </p>

<p> <b>1889</b> The John Hopkins Hospital, in Baltimore,
Maryland, is opened. One of its world-famous founders, Dr.
William Stewart Halsted, is a morphine addict. He continues to
use morphine in large doses throughout his phenomenally
successful surgical career lasting until his death in 1922. </p>

<p> <b>1894</b> The Report of the Indian Hemp Drug Comission,
running to over three thousand pages in seven volumes, is
published. This inquiry, commissioned by the British government,
concluded: &quot;There is no evidence of any weight regarding the
mental and moral injuries from the moderate use of these drugs.
.. . . Moderation does not lead to excess in hemp any more than
it does in alcohol. Regular, moderate use of ganja or bhang
produces the same effects as moderate and regular doses of
whiskey.&quot; The commission's proposal to tax bhang is never
put into effect, in part, perhaps, because one of the
commissioners, an Indian, cautions that Moslem law and Hindu
custom forbid &quot;taxing anything that gives pleasure to the
poor.&quot; [Quoted in Norman Taylor, The pleasant assassin: The
story of marihuana, in David Solomon (Ed.) *The Marijuana
Papers*, pp. 31-47, p. 41] </p>

<p> <b>1894</b> Norman Kerr, and English physician and president
of the British Society for the study of Inebriety, declares:
&quot;Drunkenness has generally been regarded as . . . a sin a
vice, or a crime. . . [But] there is now a consensus of
intelligent opinion that habitual and periodic drunkenness is
often either a symptom or sequel of disease . . . . The victim
can no more resist [alcohol] than an man with ague can resist
shivering. [Quoted in Roueche, op. cit., pp. 107-108] </p>

<p> <b>1898</b> Diacetylmorphine (heroin) is synthesized in
Germany. It is widely lauded as a &quot;safe preparation free
from addiction-forming properties.&quot; [Montagu, op. cit. p.
68] </p>

<p> <b>1900</b> In an address to the Ecumenical Missionary
Conference, Rev. Wilbur F. Crafts declares: &quot;No Christian
celebration of the completion of nineteen Christian centuries has
yet been arranged. Could there be a fitter one than the general
adoption, by separate and joint action of the great nations of
the world, of the new policy of civilization, in which Great
Britian is leading, the policy of prohibition for the native
races, in the interest of commerce as well as conscience, since
the liquor traffic among child races, even more manifestly than
in civilized lands, injures all other trades by producing
poverty, disease, and death. Our object, more profoundly viewed,
is to create a more favorable environment for the child races
that civilized nations are essaying to civilize and
Christianize.&quot; [Quoted in Crafts, et. al., op. cit., p. 14] </p>

<p> <b>1900</b> James R. L. Daly, writing in the *Boston Medical
and Surgical Journal*, declares: &quot;It [heroin] possesses many
advantages over morphine. . . . It is not hypnotic; and there is
no danger of acquiring the habit. . . .&quot; [Quoted in Henry H.
Lennard et. al. Methadone treatment (letters),*Science*,
179:1078-1079 (March 16), 1973; p. 1079] </p>

<p> <b>1901</b> The Senate adopts a resolution, introduced by
Henry Cabot Lodge, to forbid the sale by American traders of
opium and alcohol &quot;to aboriginal tribes and uncivilized
races.&quot; Theses provisions are later extended to include
&quot;uncivilized elements in America itself and in its
territories, such as Indians, Alaskans, the inhabitants of
Hawaii, railroad workers, and immigrants at ports of entry.&quot;
[Sinclar, op. cit. p. 33] </p>

<p> <b>1902</b> The Committee on the Acquirement of the Drug
Habit of the American Pharmaceutical Association declares:
&quot;If the Chinaman cannot get along without his 'dope,' we can
get along without him.&quot; [Quoted in ibid, p. 17] </p>

<p> <b>1902</b> George E. Petty, writing in the *Alabama Medical
Journal*, observes: &quot;Many articles have appeared in the
medical literature during the last two years lauding this new
agent . . . . When we consider the fact that heroin is a morphine
derivative . . . it does not seem reasonable that such a claim
could be well founded. It is strange that such a claim should
mislead anyone or that there should be found among the members of
our profession those who would reiterate and accentuate it
without first subjecting it to the most critical tests, but such
is the fact.&quot; [Quoted in Lennard et. al., op. cit. p. 1079] </p>

<p> <b>1903</b> The composition of Coca-Cola is changed, caffeine
replacing the cocaine it contained until this time. {Musto, op.
cit. p. 43] </p>

<p> <b>1904</b> Charles Lyman, president of the International
Reform Bureau, petitions the President of the United States
&quot;to induce Great Britain to release China from the enforced
opium traffic. . . .We need not recall in detail that China
prohibited the sale of opium except as a medicine, until the sale
was forced upon that country by Great Britian in the opium war of
1840.&quot; [Quoted in Crafts et al., op. cit. p. 230] </p>

<p> <b>1905</b> Senator Henry W. Blair, in a letter to Rev.
Wilbur F. Crafts, Superintendent of the International Reform
Bureau: &quot;The temperance movement must include all poisonous
substances which create unnatural appetite, and international
prohibition is the goal.&quot; [Quoted in ibid.] </p>

<p> <b>1906</b> The first Pure Food and Drug Act becomes law;
until its enactment, it was possible to buy, in stores or by mail
order medicines containing morphine, cocaine, or heroin, and
without their being so labeled. </p>

<p> <b>1906</b> *Squibb's Materia Medical* lists heroin as
&quot;a remedy of much value . . . is is also used as a mild
anodyne and as a substitute for morphine in combatting the
morphine habit. [Quoted in Lennard et al., op. cit. p. 1079] </p>

<p> <b>1909</b> The United States prohibits the importation of
smoking opium. [Lawrence Kolb, *Drug Addiction*, pp. 145-146] </p>

<p> <b>1910</b> Dr. Hamilton Wright, considered by some the
father of U.S. anti-narcotics laws, reports that American
contractors give cocaine to their Negro employees to get more
work out of them. [Musto, op. cit. p. 180] </p>

<p> <b>1912</b> A writer in *Century* magazine proclaims:
&quot;The relation of tobacco, especially in the form of
cigarettes, and alcohol and opium is a very close one. . . .
Morphine is the legitimate consequence of alcohol, and alcohol is
the legitimate consequence of tobacco. Cigarettes, drink, opium,
is the logical and regular series.&quot; And a physician warns:
&quot;[There is] no energy more destructive of soul, mind, and
body, or more subversive of good morals than the cigarette. The
fight against the cigarette is a fight for civilization.&quot;
[Sinclar, op. cit., p. 180] </p>

<p> <b>1912</b> The first international Opium Convention meets at
the Hague, and recommends various measures for the international
control of the trade in opium. Supsequent Opium Conventions are
held in 1913 and 1914. </p>

<p> <b>1912</b> Phenobarbital is introduced into therapeutics
under the trade name of Luminal. </p>

<p> <b>1913</b> The Sixteenth Amendment, creating the legal
authority for federal income tax, is enacted. Between 1870 and
1915, the tax on liquor provides from one-half to two-thirds of
the whole of the internal revenue of the United States,
amounting, after the turn of the century, to about $200 million
annually. The Sixteenth Amendment thus makes possible, just seven
years later, the Eighteenth Amendment. </p>

<p> <b>1914</b> Dr. Edward H Williams cites Dr. Christopher Kochs
&quot;Most of the attack upon white women of the South are the
direct result of the cocaine crazed Negro brain.&quot; Dr.
Williams concluded that &quot; . . Negro cocaine fiends are now a
known Southern menace.&quot; [New York Times, Feb. 8, 1914] </p>

<p> <b>1914</b> The Harrison Narcotic Act is enacted, controlling
the sale of opium and opium derivatives, and cocaine. </p>

<p> <b>1914</b> Congressman Richard P. Hobson of Alabama, urging
a prohibition amendment to the Constitution, asserts:
&quot;Liquor will actually make a brute out of a Negro, causing
him to commit unnatural crimes. The effect is the same on the
white man, though the white man being further evolved it takes
longer time to reduce him to the same level.&quot; Negro leaders
join the crusade against alcohol. [Ibid., p. 29] </p>

<p> <b>1916</b> The *Pharmacopoeia of the United States* drops
whiskey and brandy from its list of drugs. Four years later,
American physicians begin prescribing these &quot;drugs&quot; in
quantities never before prescribed by doctors. </p>

<p> <b>1917</b> The president of the American Medical Association
endorses national prohibition. The House of Delegates of the
Association passes a resolution stating: &quot;Resolved, The
American Medical Association opposes the use of alcohol as a
beverage; and be it further Resolved, That the use of alcohol as
a therapeutic agent should be discourages.&quot; By 1928,
physicians make an estimated $40,000,000 annually by writing
prescriptions for whiskey.&quot; [Ibid. p. 61] </p>

<p> <b>1917</b> The American Medical Association passes a
resolution declaring that &quot;sexual continence is compatible
with health and is the best prevention of venereal
infections,&quot; and one of the methods for controlling syphilis
is by controlling alcohol. Secretary of the Navy Josephus Daniels
prohibits the practice of distributing contraceptives to sailors
bound on shore leave, and Congress passes laws setting up
&quot;dry and decent zones&quot; around military camps.
&quot;Many barkeepers are fined for selling liquor to men in
uniform. Only at Coney Island could soldiers and sailors change
into the grateful anonymity of bathing suits and drink without
molestation from patriotic passers-by.&quot; [Ibid. pp. 117-118] </p>

<p> <b>1918</b> The Anti-Saloon League calls the &quot;liquor
traffic&quot; &quot;un-American,&quot; pro-German,
crime-producing, food-wasting, youth-corrupting, home-wrecking,
[and] treasonable.&quot; [Quoted in ibid. p. 121] </p>

<p> <b>1919</b> The Eighteenth (Prohibition) Amendment is added
to the U.S. Constitution. It is repealed in 1933. In the same
year, violent crime drops two-thirds and does not reach the same
levels again until after World War II. </p>

<p> <b>1920</b> The U.S. Department of Agriculture publishes a
pamphlet urging Americans to grow cannabis (marijuana) as a
profitable undertaking. [David F. Musto, An historical
perspective on legal and medical responses to substance abuse,
*Villanova Law Review*, 18:808-817 (May), 1973; p. 816] </p>

<p> <b>1920-1933</b> The use of alcohol is prohibited in the
United States. In 1932 alone, approximately 45,000 persons
receive jail sentences for alcohol offenses. During the first
eleven years of the Volstead Act, 17,971 persons are appointed to
the Prohibition Bureau. 11,982 are terminated &quot;without
prejudice,&quot; and 1,604 are dismissed for bribery, extortion,
theft, falsification of records, conspiracy, forgery, and
perjury. [Fort, op. cit. p. 69] </p>

<p> <b>1921</b> The U.S. Treasury Department issues regulations
outlining the treatment of addiction permitted under the Harrison
Act. In Syracuse, New York, the narcotics clinic doctors report
curing 90 per cent of their addicts. [Lindesmith, *The Addict and
the Law*, p. 141] </p>

<p> <b>1921</b> Thomas S. Blair, M.D., chief of the Bureau of
Drug Control of the Pennsylvania Department of Health, publishes
a paper in the *Journal of the American Medical Association* in
which he characterizes the Indian peyote religion a &quot;habit
indulgence in certain cactaceous plants,&quot; calls the belief
system &quot;superstition&quot; and those who sell peyote
&quot;dope vendors,&quot; and urges the passage of a bill in
Congress that would prohibit the use of peyote among the Indian
tribes of the Southwest. He concludes with this revealing plea
for abolition: &quot;The great difficulty in suppressing this
habit among the Indians arises from the fact that the commercial
interests involved in the peyote traffic are strongly entrenched,
and they exploit the Indian. . . . Added to this is the
superstition of the Indian who believes in the Peyote Church. As
soon as an effort is made to suppress peyote, the cry is raised
that it is unconstitutional to do so and is an invasion of
religious liberty. Suppose the Negros of the South had Cocaine
Church!&quot; [Thomas S. Blair, Habit indulgence in certain
cactaceous plants among the Indians, *Journal of the American
Medical Association*, 76:1033-1034 (April 9), 1921; p. 1034] </p>

<p> <b>1921</b> Cigarettes are illegal in fourteen states, and
ninety-two anti-cigarette bills are pending in twenty-eight
states. Young women are expelled from college for smoking
cigarettes. [Brecher et al., op. cit. p. 492] </p>

<p> <b>1921</b> The Council of the American Medical Association
refuses to confirm the Associations 1917 Resolution on alcohol.
In the first six months after the enactment of the Volstead Act,
more than 15,000 physicians and 57,000 druggests and drug
manufacturers apply for licenses to prescribe and sell liquor.
[Sinclair, op. cit., p. 492] </p>

<p> <b>1921</b> Alfred C. Prentice, M.D. a member of the
Committee on Narcotic Drugs of the American Medical Association,
declares &quot;Public opinion regarding the vice of drug
addiction has been deliberately and consistently corrupted
through propaganda in both the medical and lay press. . . . The
shallow pretense that drug addiction is a 'disease'. . . . has
been asserted and urged in volumes of 'literature' by self-styled
'specialists.'&quot; [Alfred C Prentice, The Problem of the
narcotic drug addict, *Journal of the American Medical
Association*, 76:1551-1556; p. 1553] </p>

<p> <b>1924</b> The manufacture of heroin is prohibited in the
United States. </p>

<p> <b>1925</b> Robert A. Schless: &quot;I believe that most drug
addiction today is due directly to the Harrison Anti-Narcotic
Act, which forbids the sale of narcotics without a physician's
prescription. . . . Addicts who are broke act as *agent
provocateurs* for the peddlers, being rewarded by gifts of heroin
or credit for supplies. The Harrison Act made the drug peddler,
and the drug peddler makes drug addicts.&quot; [Robert A.
Schless, The drug addict, *American Mercury*, 4:196-199 (Feb.),
1925; p. 198] </p>

<p> <b>1928</b> In a nationwide radio broadcast entitled
&quot;The Struggle of Mankind Against Its Deadlist Foe,&quot;
celebrating the second annual Narcotic Education Week, Richmond
P. Hobson, prohibition crusader and anti-narcotics propagandist,
declares: &quot;Suppose it were announced that there were more
than a million lepers among our people. Think what a shock the
announcement would produce! Yet drug addiction is far more
incurable than leprosy, far more tragic to its victims, and is
spreading like a moral and physical scourge. . . . Most of the
daylight robberies, daring holdups, cruel murders and similar
crimes of violence are now known to be committed chiefly by drug
addicts, who constitute the primary cause of our alarming crime
wave. Drug addiction is more communicable and less curable that
leprosy. . . . Upon the issue hangs the perpetuation of
civilization, the destiny of the world, and the future of the
human race.&quot; [Quoted in Musto, *The American Disease*, p.
191] </p>

<p> <b>1928</b> It is estimated that in Germany one out of every
hundred physicians is a morphine addict, consuming 0.1 grams of
the alkaloid or more per day. [Eric Hesse, *Narcotics and Drug
Addiction*, p. 41] </p>

<p> <b>1929</b> About one gallon of denatured industrial in ten
is diverted into bootleg liquor. About forty Americans per
million die each year from drinking illegal alcohol, mainly as a
result of methyl (wood) alcohol poisoning. [Sinclare, op. cit. p.
201] </p>

<p> <b>1930</b> The Federal Bureau of Narcotics is formed. Many
of its agents, including its first commissioner, Harry J.
Anslinger, are former prohibition agents. </p>

<p> <b>1935</b> The American Medical Association passes a
resolution declaring that &quot;alcoholics are valid
patients.&quot; [Quoted in Neil Kessel and Henry Walton,
*Alcoholism*, p. 21] </p>

<p> <b>1936</b> The Pan-American Coffee Burreau is organized to
promote coffee use in the U.S. Between 1938 and 1941 coffee
consumption increased 20%. From 1914 to 1938 consumption had
increased 20%. [Coffee, *Encyclopedia Britannica* (1949), Vol. 5,
p. 975A] </p>

<p> <b>1937</b> Shortly before the Marijuana Tax Act,
Commissioner Harry J. Anslinger writes: &quot;How many murders,
suicides, robberies, criminal assaults, hold-ups, burglaries, and
deeds of maniacal insanity it [marijuana] causes each year,
especially among the young, can only be conjectured.&quot;
[Quoted in John Kaplan, *Marijuana*, p. 92] </p>

<p> <b>1937</b> The Marijuana Tax Act is enacted. </p>

<p> <b>1938</b> Since the enactment of the Harrison Act in 1914,
25,000 physicians have been arraigned on narcotics charges, and
3,000 have served penitentiary sentences. [Kolb, op. cit. p. 146]
</p>

<p> <b>1938</b> Dr. Albert Hoffman, a chemist at Sandoz
Laboratories in Basle, Switzerland, synthesizes LSD. Five years
later he inadvertently ingests a small amount of it, and observes
and reports effects on himself. </p>

<p> <b>1941</b> Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek orders the complete
suppression of the poppy; laws are enacted providing the death
penalty for anyone guilty of cultivating the poppy, manufacturing
opium, or offering it for sale. [Lindesmith, *The Addict and the
Law*, 198] </p>

<p> <b>1943</b> Colonel J.M. Phalen, editor of the *Military
Surgeon*, declares in an editorial entitled &quot;The Marijuana
Bugaboo&quot;: &quot;The smoking of the leaves, flowers, and
seeds of Cannibis sativa is no more harmful than the smoking of
tobacco. . . . It is hoped that no witch hunt will be instituted
in the military service over a problem that does not exist.&quot;
[Quoted in ibid. p. 234] </p>

<p> <b>1946</b> According to some estimates there are 40,000,000
opium smokers in China. [Hesse, op. cit. p. 24] </p>

<p> <b>1949</b> Ludwig von Mises, leading modern free-market
economist and social philosopher: &quot;Opium and morphine are
certainly dangerous, habit-forming drugs. But once the principle
is admitted that is the duty of government to protect the
individual against his own foolishness, no serious objections can
be advanced against further encroachments. A good case could be
made out in favor of the prohibition of alcohol and nicotine. And
why limit the governments benevolent providence to the protection
of the individual's body only? Is is not the harm a man can
inflect on his mind and soul even more disastrous than any bodily
evils? Why not prevent him from reading bad books and seeing bad
plays, from looking at bad paintings and statues and listening to
bad music? The mischief done by bad ideologies, surely, is much
more pernicious, both for the individual and for the whole
society, than that done by narcotic drugs.&quot; [Ludwig von
Mises, *Human Action*, pp. 728-729] </p>

<p> <b>1951</b> According to United Nations estimates, there are
approximately 200 million marijuana users in the world, the major
places being India, Egypt, North Africa, Mexico, and the United
States. [Jock Young, *The Drug Takers*, p. 11] </p>

<p> <b>1951</b> Twenty thousand pound of opium, three hundred
pounds of heroin, and various opium-smoking devices are publicly
burned in Canton China. Thirty-seven opium addicts are executed
in the southwest of China. [Margulies, China has no drug
problem--why? *Parade*, 0ct. 15 1972, p. 22] </p>

<p> <b>1954</b> Four-fifths of the French people questioned about
wine assert that wine is &quot;good for one's health,&quot; and
one quarter hold that it is &quot;indispensable.&quot; It is
estimated that a third of the electorate in France receives all
or part of its income from the production or sale of alcoholic
beverages; and that there Is one outlet for every forty- five
inhabitants. [Kessel and Walton, op. cit. pp. 45, 73] </p>

<p> <b>1955</b> The Prasidium des Deutschen Arztetages declares:
&quot;Treatment of the drug addict should be effected in the
closed sector of a psychiatric institution. Ambulatory treatment
is useless and in conflict, moreover, with principles of medical
ethics.&quot; The view is quoted approvingly, as representative
of the opinion of &quot;most of the authors recommending
commitment to an institution,&quot; by the World Health
Organization in 1962. [World Health Organization, *The Treatment
of Drug Addicts*, p. 5] </p>

<p> <b>1955</b> The Shah of Iran prohibits the cultivation and
use of opium, used in the country for thousands of years; the
prohibition creates a flourishing illicit market in opium. In
1969 the prohibition is lifted, opium growing is resumed under
state inspection, and more than 110,000 persons receive opium
from physicians and pharmacies as &quot;registered addicts.&quot;
[Henry Kamm, They shoot opium smugglers in Iran, but . . .&quot;
*The New York Times Magazine*, Feb. 11, 1973, pp. 42-45] </p>

<p> <b>1956</b> The Narcotics Control Act in enacted; it provides
the death penalty, if recommended by the jury, for the sale of
heroin to a person under eighteen by one over eighteen.
[Lindesmith, *The Addict and the Law*, p. 26] </p>

<p> <b>1958</b> Ten percent of the arable land in Italy is under
viticulture; two million people earn their living wholly or
partly from the production or sale of wine. [Kessel and Walton,
op. cit., p. 46] </p>

<p> <b>1960</b> The United States report to the United Nations
Commission on Narcotic Drugs for 1960 states: &quot;There were
44,906 addicts in the United States on December 31, 1960 . .
.&quot; [Lindesmith, *The Addict and The Law*, p. 100] </p>

<p> <b>1961</b> The United Nations' &quot;Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs of 10 March 1961&quot; is ratified. Among the
obligations of the signatory states are the following: &quot;Art.
42. Know users of drugs and persons charges with an offense under
this Law may be committed by an examining magistrate to a nursing
home. . . . Rules shall be also laid down for the treatment in
such nursing homes of unconvicted drug addicts and dangerous
alcoholics.&quot; [Charles Vaille, A model law for the
application of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,
*United Nations Bulletin on Narcotics*, 21:1-12 (April-June),
1961] </p>

<p> <b>1963</b> Tobacco sales total $8.08 billion, of which $3.3
billion go to federal, state, and local taxes. A news release
from the tobacco industry proudly states: &quot;Tobacco products
pass across sales counters more frequently than anything
else--except money.&quot; [Tobacco: After publicity surge Surgeon
General's Report seems to have little enduring effect, *Science*,
145:1021-1022 (Sept. 4), 1964; p. 1021] </p>

<p> <b>1964</b> The British Medical Association, in a Memorandum
of Evidence to the Standing Medical Advisory Committee's Special
Sub- committee on Alcoholism, declares: &quot;We feel that in
some very bad cases, compulsory detention in hospital offer the
only hope of successful treatment. . . . We believe that some
alcoholics would welcome compulsory removal and detention in
hospital until treatment is completed.&quot; [Quoted in Kessel
and Walton, op. cit. p. 126] </p>

<p> <b>1964</b> An editorial in *The New York Times* calls
attention to the fact that &quot;the Government continues to be
the tobacco industry's biggest booster. The Department of
Agriculture lost $16 million in supporting the price of tobacco
in the last fiscal year, and stands to loose even more because it
has just raised the subsidy that tobacco growers will get on
their 1964 crop. At the same time, the Food for Peace program is
getting rid of surplus stocks of tobacco abroad.&quot;
[Editorial, Bigger agricultural subsidies. . .even more for
tobacco, *The New York Times*, Feb. 1, 1964, p. 22] </p>

<p> <b>1966</b> Sen. Warren G. Magnuson makes public a program,
sponsored by the Agriculture Department, to subsidize
&quot;attempts to increase cigarette consumption abroad. . . .
The Department is paying to stimulate cigarette smoking in a
travelogue for $210,000 to subsidize cigarette commercials in
Japan, Thailand, and Austria.&quot; An Agriculture Department
spokesman corroborates that &quot;the two programs were prepared
under a congressional authorization to expand overseas markets
for U.S. farm commodities.&quot; [Edwin B. Haakinsom, Senator
shocked at U.S. try to hike cigarette use abroad, *Syracuse
Herald-American*, Jan. 9, 1966, p. 2] </p>

<p> <b>1966</b> Congress enacts the &quot;Narcotics Addict
Rehabilitation Act, inaugurating a federal civil commitment
program for addicts. </p>

<p> <b>1966</b> C. W. Sandman, Jr. chairman of the New Jersey
Narcotic Drug Study Commission, declares that LSD is &quot;the
greatest threat facing the country today . . . more dangerous
than the Vietnam War.&quot; [Quoted in Brecher et al., op. cit.
p. 369] </p>

<p> <b>1967</b> New York State's &quot;Narcotics Addiction
Control Program&quot; goes into effect. It is estimated to cost
$400 million in three years, and is hailed by Government
Rockefeller as the &quot;start of an unending war . . .&quot;
Under the new law, judges are empowered to commit addicts for
compulsory treatment for up to five years. [Murray Schumach, Plan
for addicts will open today: Governor hails start, *The New York
Times*, April 1, 1967] </p>

<p> <b>1967</b> The tobacco industry in the United States spends
an estimated $250 million on advertising smoking. [Editorial, It
depends on you, *Health News* (New York State), 45:1 (March),
1968] </p>

<p> <b>1968</b> The U.S. tobacco industry has gross sales of $8
billion. Americans smoke 544 billion cigarettes. [Fort, op. cit.
p. 21] </p>

<p> <b>1968</b> Canadians buy almost 3 billion aspirin tablets
and approximately 56 million standard does of amphetamines. About
556 standard doses of barbituates are also produced or imported
for consumption in Canada. [Canadian Government's Commission of
Inquiry, *The Non-Medical Uses of Drugs*, p. 184 </p>

<p> <b>1968</b> Six to seven percent of all prescriptions written
under the British National Health Service are for barbituates; it
is estimated that about 500,000 British are regular users.
[Young, op. cit. p. 25] </p>

<p> <b>1968</b> Brooklyn councilman Julius S. Moskowitz charges
that the work of New York City's Addiction Services Agency, under
its retiring Commissioner, Dr. Efren Ramierez, was a
&quot;fraud,&quot; and that &quot;not a single addict has been
cured.&quot; [Charles G. Bennett, Addiction agency called a
&quot;fraud,&quot; *New York Times*, Dec. 11, 1968, p. 47] </p>

<p> <b>1969</b> U.S. production and value of some medical
chemicals: barbituates: 800,000 pounds, $2.5 million; aspirin
(exclusive of salicylic acid) 37 milliion pounds, value
&quot;withheld to avoid disclosing figures for individual
producers&quot;; salicylic acid: 13 million pounds, $13 million;
tranquilizers: 1.5 million pounds, $7 million. [*Statistical
Abstracts of the United States*, 1971 92nd Annual Edition, p. 75]
</p>

<p> <b>1969</b> The parents of 6,000 secondary-level students in
Clifton, New Jersey, are sent letters by the Board of Education
asking permission to conduct saliva tests on their children to
determine whether or not they use marijuana. [Saliva tests asked
for Jersey youths on marijuana use, *New York Times*, Apr. 11,
1969, p. 12] </p>

<p> <b>1970</b> Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, Nobel Laureate in
Medicine and Physiology, in reply to being asked what he would do
if he were twenty today: &quot;I would share with my classmates
rejection of the whole world as it is--all of it. Is there any
point in studying and work? Fornication--at least that is
something good. What else is there to do? Fornicate and take
drugs against the terrible strain of idiots who govern the
world.&quot; [Albert Szent-Gyorgyi, in *The New York Times*, Feb.
20, 1970, quoted in Mary Breastead, *Oh! Sex Education!*, p. 359]
</p>

<p> <b>1971</b> President Nixon declares that &quot;America's
Public Enemy No. 1 is drug abuse.&quot; In a message to Congress,
the President calls for the creation of a Special Action Office
of Drug Abuse Prevention. [The New Public Enemy No. 1, *Time*,
June 28, 1971, p. 18] </p>

<p> <b>1971</b> On June 30, 1971, President Cvedet Sunay of
Turkey decrees that all poppy cultivation and opium production
will be forbidden beginning in the fall of 1972. [Patricia M Wald
et al. (Eds.), *Dealing with Drug Abuse*, p. 257] </p>

<p> <b>1972</b> Myles J. Ambrose, Special Assistant Attorney
General of the United States: &quot;As of 1960, the Bureau of
Narcotics estimated that we had somewhere in the neighborhood of
55,000 addicts . . . they estimate now the figure is 560,000.
[Quoted in *U.S. News and World Report*, April 3, 1972, p. 38] </p>

<p> <b>1972</b> The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
proposes restricting the use of barbituates on the ground that
they &quot;are more dangerous than heroin.&quot; [Restrictions
proposed on barbituate sales, *Syracuse Herald-Journal*, Mar 16,
1972, p. 32] </p>

<p> <b>1972</b> The house votes 366 to 0 to authorize &quot;a $1
billion, three-year federal attack on drug abuse.&quot; [$1
billion voted for drug fight, *Syracuse Herald-Journal*, March
16, 1972, p. 32] </p>

<p> <b>1972</b> At the Bronx house of corrections, out of a total
of 780 inmates, approximately 400 are given tranquilizers such as
Valium, Elavil, Thorazine, and Librium. &quot;'I think they [the
inmates] would be doing better without some of the medication,'
said Capt. Robert Brown, a correctional officer. He said that in
a way the medications made his job harder . . . rather than
becoming calm, he said, an inmate who had become addicted to his
medication 'will do anything when he can't get it.'&quot; [Ronald
Smothers, Muslims: What's behind the violence, *The New York
Times*, Dec. 26, 1972, p. 18] </p>

<p> <b>1972</b> In England, the pharmacy cost of heroin is $.04
per grain (60 mg.), or $.00067 per mg. In the United States, the
street price is $30 to $90 per grain, or $.50 or $1.50 per mg.
[Wald et al. (Eds.) op. cit. p. 28] </p>

<p> <b>1973</b> A nationwide Gallop poll reveals that 67 percent
of the adults interviewed &quot;support the proposal of New York
Governor Nelson Rockefeller that all sellers of hard drugs be
given life imprisonment without possibility of parole.&quot;
[George Gallup, Life for pushers, *Syracuse Herald-American*,
Feb. 11, 1973] </p>

<p> <b>1973</b> Michael R. Sonnenreich, Executive Director of the
National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse, declares:
&quot;About our years ago we spent a total of $66.4 million for
the entire federal effort in the drug abuse area. . . . This year
we have spent $796.3 million and the budget estimates that have
been submitted indicate that we will exceed the $1 billion mark.
When we do so, we become, for want of a better term, a drug abuse
industrial complex.: [Michael R. Sonnenreich, Discussion of the
Final Report of the National Commission on Marijuana and Drug
Abuse, *Villanova Law Review*, 18:817-827 (May), 1973; p. 818] </p>

<p> <b>1972</b> Operation Intercept. All vehicles returning from
Mexico are checked by Nixon's order. Long lines occur and, as
usual no dent is made in drug traffic. </p>

<p> <b>1977</b> The Joint Committee of the New York Bar
Association concludes that the Rockefeller drug laws, the
toughest in the nation, have had no effect in reducing drug use
but have clogged the courts and the criminal justice system to
the point of gridlock. </p>

<p> <b>1981</b> Congress ammends the 1878 Posse Comitatus Act,
which forbids the armed forces to enforce civil law, so that the
military could provide surveillance planes and ships for
interdiction purposes. </p>

<p> <b>1984</b> U.S. busts 10,000 pounds of marijuana on farms in
Mexico. The seizures, made on five farms in an isolated section
of Chihuahua state, suggest a 70 percent increase in estimates
that total U.S. consumption was 13,000 to 14,000 tons in 1982.
Furthermore, the seizures add up to nearly eight times the 1300
tons that officials had calculated Mexico produced in 1983. [the
San Francisco Chronicle, Saturday, November 24, 1984] </p>

<p> <b>1985</b> Pentagon spends $40 million on interdiction. By
1990, the General Accounting Office will report that the
military's efforts have had no discernible impact on the flow of
drugs. </p>

<p> <b>1986</b> The Communist Party boss, Boris Yeltsin said that
the Moscow school system is rife with drug addiction, drunkenness
and principles that take bribes. He said that drug addiction has
become such a problem that there are 3700 registered addicts in
Moscow. [The San Francisco Chronicle, Sept. 22, 1986, p. 12] </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Main Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>