
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B20-255</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B007-379</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lincoln.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034503 text/html 7827
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:44:57 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:29:08 GMT
Content-length: 7610
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Lincoln Quote</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<h1>The Lincoln Quote </h1>

<h2>Is This Quote for Real? </h2>

<hr>

<p> <center><img align="left" border="0" img src="linc4.gif"
align="TOP">&quot;Prohibition will work great injury to the cause
of temperance. It is a species of intemperance within itself, for
it goes beyond the bounds of reason in that it attempts to
control a man's appetite by legislation, and makes a crime out of
things that are not crimes. A Prohibition law strikes a blow at
the very principles upon which our government was founded.&quot;</center>
</p>

<p> <center><b>-Abraham Lincoln (1809-65) U.S. President. </b></center>
</p>

<p> <center><b>Speech, 18 Dec. 1840, to Illinois House of
Representatives</b></center> </p>

<hr>

<h2>The Story </h2>

<p> The above quote, widely attributed to Abraham Lincoln, has
been quoted and referred to by a number of sources over the
decades, since the early part of the 20<sup>th</sup> Century, at
least. I featured it on my web page because it is a succinct and
persuasive statement about prohibition. But, the question
remains: Did Lincoln really say it? So far, based on the
evidence, it is my opinion he probably did not - that it was made
up after he died and wrongly attributed to him. The evidence is
not conclusive either way at this point, but the opinions and
information listed below might interest you. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>From my good friend, Bob Ramsey:</b> </p>

<p> It appears on page 544 of the Congressional Record-House for
December 22, 1914. Linclon was quoted by Rep. Robert L. Henry of
Texas. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>Another friend, Brian Huff, found it in the Columbia
Dictionary of Quotations:</b> </p>

<p> The Columbia Dictionary of Quotations is licensed from
Columbia University Press. Copyright 1993 by Columbia University
Press. All rights reserved. Caedmon recordings reproduced by
arrangement with Harper Collins Publishers. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>Dr. Mark Kleiman, a professor at Harvard University,
contributed the following:</b> </p>

<p> I tried to verify the purported Lincoln anti-prohibition
quote. Yes, we have no bananas. </p>

<p> The standard reference is The Collected Works of Abraham
Lincoln, (8 vols.) Roy P. Basler, Ed., Rutgers University Press,
1953. It gives reports (though not verbatim texts) of several of
Lincoln's speeches in the legislature, including remarks on
December 14 1840 on &quot;Payment of Interest on the Public
Debt&quot; and on December 19 &quot;Concerning Expenditures for
Public Printing,&quot; but nothing on December 18, and nothing at
all about alcohol or temperance (according to the index) during
Lincoln's entire period of service in the legislature except the
great and unduly neglected speech to the Washington Temperance
Society of Springfield on February 22 1942. The index also gives
no reference to the Maine Liquor Law of 1846, the first
prohibition act, or to the word &quot;prohibition.&quot; </p>

<p> A more recent source is Abraham Lincoln: Speeches and
Writings, (2 vols.) Library of America, 1989. Again, nothing on
that date, and nothing on &quot;alcohol&quot;
&quot;temperence&quot; &quot;prohibition&quot; or &quot;Maine
Liquor Law&quot; in the entire period, except for the Washington
Temperance address (which I hope someone with a scanner will post
here). </p>

<p> While it's impossible to be sure that Lincoln didn't say
something, I will give fifty to one that there is no authentic
record of any such speech anytime in Lincoln's career. That's
based on the results of my search, but also on three other
observations: </p>

<p> 1. The term &quot;prohibition&quot; does not appear to have
been in the contemporary political vocabulary with respect to
alcohol control laws. </p>

<p> 2. Lincoln stood well enough with the temperance movement to
be invited to give the Washington's Birthday address to the
Washington Temperance Society of Springfield in 1842. It's hard
to believe that this would have been true if prohibition had been
a live issue and Lincoln on the pro-liquor side of it. </p>

<p> 3. Temperance, along with abolition, nativism, the protective
tariff, and women's rights, was among the movements that
constituted the original Republican party. Lincoln was bold in
attacking the nativist (American or &quot;Know-nothing&quot;)
wing, but if he had picked a quarrel with the temperance faction
there would surely be some record of it. In his campaign against
Douglass in 1858, he was forced to deny Douglass's charge that in
his youth he had kept a &quot;grocery&quot; (package-goods store
and tavern), but his supposed anti-prohibition views never became
an issue. </p>

<p> After a little more research (to his credit) Dr. Kleiman came
back with the following: </p>

<p> I have to take back what I said about there being no evidence
of Lincoln's supporting a prohibition law in Illinois. </p>

<p> The Basler collection has a letter from Lincoln to Henry
Whitney on June 7, 1855, lamenting the electoral defeat of
Lincoln's friend Logan -- &quot;worse beaten than any man ever
was since elections were invented&quot; -- and adding &quot;It is
conceded on all hands that the prohibitory law is also
beaten.&quot; The &quot;also&quot; suggests that Lincoln was a
supporter of the law.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <b>From Dale Gieringer, head of California NORML:</b> </p>

<p> I believe Mark K. is right that the Lincoln quote is
apocryphal. </p>

<p> It was investigated by a Lincoln scholar at the request of
Ollie Steinberg of the Minnesota Grassroots party. Like Mark, he
found no record of any speech by Lincoln on the alleged date (Dec
18, 1840). </p>

<p> I've been told that according to the Home Book of Quotations
(16<sup>th</sup> edition), it was fabricated in the 1880s -
apparently by anti-Prohibitionists in Atlanta courting the Negro
vote. Lincoln was well-known for his temperance sympathies.
According to Herbert Asbury's &quot;The Great Illusion,&quot; he
authored a dry law modeled on the Maine law, which was rejected
by Illinois voters in a special referendum on June 4, 1855. He
was also alleged to have authored and signed a total abstinence
pledge in 1846. According to temperance authorities, Lincoln was
reluctant to sign the 1862 whiskey tax that helped fund the Civil
War, on grounds it would condone the liquor trade. According to a
temperance leader who spoke with him on the day of his
assassination, Lincoln predicted that the next great question
after slavery would be abolition of the traffic in legalized
liquor. </p>

<p> I'm sorry to say that the Lincoln quote seems bogus, since I
had it printed on California NORML's matchbooks. It's so good, I
feel tempted to quote it as &quot;attributed to Lincoln.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>Peter Webster contributed the following:</b> </p>

<p> From the Columbia Dictionary of Quotations: A.L. speech 22
Feb 1842, Washingtonian Temperance Society </p>

<p> &quot;Whether or not the world would be vastly benefited by a
total banishment from it of all intoxicating drinks seems not now
an open question. Three-fourths of mankind confess the
affirmative with their tongues, and I believe all the rest
acknowledge it in their hearts.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>