
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B033-39</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/afterwrd.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122063453 text/html 23242
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:34:39 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:23:45 GMT
Content-length: 23023
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Psychedelic Reflections Afterword</title>
</head>

<body>

<hr>
<center>

<h2>AFTERWORD<br>
<i>PSYCHEDELIC REFLECTIONS </i></h2>

<h3>By Lester Grinspoon and James B. Bakalar</h3>

<p>Copyright Human Sciences Press 1983</center></p>

<hr>

<p> One of the people we asked to write for this book replied
that after long thought he had to decline, because he feared the
effect on his ability to support himself and his family if he
said what he really thought about psychedelic drugs. This may be
an unusually strong expression of a feeling that is more common
in milder forms. Anyone, whatever his views on the drugs
themselves, ought to recognize that it is an unhealthy situation
in a free society. Even if this kind of fear is not
common&#151;even if it is not justified&#151; the fact that it
exists at all suggests something seriously wrong in our social
response to psychedelic drugs. They were once regarded by some as
the great liberating force of our time, the destined sacrament of
the Aquarian Age, and by others as a threat to sanity and
civilized society. In the last 10 years, since the end of the
psychedelic craze, they have been neglected almost entirely. All
these attitudes, as the essays in this anthology suggest, are
wrong, but apparently they can still affect people's actions to
the point of self-censorship. </p>

<p> It is hard to achieve balance in our thinking about
psychedelic drugs because the response to them is intimately
bound up with a whole set of attitudes about everything from
drugs in general to mysticism in general. As a drug abuse
problem, LSD and its relatives are no longer a very serious
issue. There has probably been a moderate decline in illicit use
of psychedelic drugs, and there has certainly been a substantial
decline in publicity about it. We are not ever likely to face an
epidemic of psychedelic drug abuse again. The question now is not
how to get these drugs off the streets&#151;which is probably
impossible anyway&#151;but how to get them back into
laboratories, hospitals, and other supervised settings. The irony
becomes obvious in rereading the public debates of the sixties.
The most determined opponents of the drug culture and advocates
of restrictive legislation continually warn against allowing the
concern about abuse of psychedelic drugs to prevent legitimate
research. But that is in effect what we have done. Uncontrolled
use continues, probably at the same level it would have reached
even without the laws, while controlled legal use has become
impossible. We should arrange ways for people to take psychedelic
drugs responsibly under appropriate guidance within the law, and
a way for those who want to administer them to volunteers for
therapeutic and general research to do so. This is not the place
to go into details about informed consent and selection,
preparation, and training of subjects and guides. But it is
important to keep in mind that from 1950 to 1962, when LSD and
mescaline were more freely available within the law than they are
ever likely to be again, there were very few reports of adverse
reactions. </p>

<p> To discuss how to handle the problem of psychedelic drugs
within the present system of rules and institutions, however, is
to suggest what a restricted and historically peculiar system it
is. LSD and its relatives are treated for research purposes very
much like a new antibiotic, as medicines to be tested for
specific, concrete, limited efficacy and safety and accepted or
rejected on that basis. In other words, the model is Western
physical medicine of the last 50 years. Compare the great variety
of more or less successful alternatives: Huichol peyote
ceremonies, Mazatec curing rites vision quests, psycholytic
therapy sessions, the Native American Church. These are the
arrangements that arise naturally in any culture where the drugs
are not suppressed, and analogues of them were developing among
us even when the LSD abuse problem was at its height. They still
exist, but they have been driven underground, and we have
effectively foreclosed our choices. For us anything called a drug
must be either a simple medicine or a &quot;drug of abuse.&quot;
Evaluating psychedelic drugs in the same way that we evaluate
aspirin will always be enormously to their disadvantage, since
they do not bring guaranteed relief for any simply defined
problem. The Mexican Indian who said, &quot;Aspirin is a drug,
peyote is sacred,&quot; was making a distinction that our laws do
not permit. </p>

<p> Using different analogies makes the anomalies in our laws and
attitudes obvious. For example, as a voyage and an adventure,
taking LSD might be compared to flying a plane or climbing a
mountain. Psychedelic drug use as a form of spiritual or
psychological exploration might be compared with methods like
kundalina yoga, Tantra, or the more emotionally intense forms of
psychotherapy, all of which induce drastic changes in
consciousness that may occasionally endanger emotional stability
for the sake of some alleged insight, awakening, or realization.
Even psychoanalysis can produce psychotic reactions. Yet no one
considers outlawing any of these practices. To many people
familiar with psychedelic drugs, such comparisons seem more
appropriate than an analogy with antibiotics or aspirin, or even
with drugs used mainly for pleasure or because of addiction . </p>

<p> Consider another analogy. Imagine that no one has ever
remembered his dreams before, except a few widely ignored
mystics, primitives, and madmen. Then someone invents an
electrical gadget that permits them to be recalled. At first,
dreams come as a revelation. People who use the machine are
overwhelmed by their depth of emotion and symbolic significance.
They rush out to look up the obscure literature about this
neglected state of awareness. Psychologists discover that dreams
are the royal road to the unconscious. Others examine them for
prophecies, philosophies, and religions, clues to personal
salvation and social revolution. Meanwhile, there are the many
who have never remembered their dreams and do not understand why
anyone considers them important or useful; they declare it all
mental illness and social decadence, and demand that the machines
be outlawed. Ultimately the dreamers too become somewhat
disillusioned. Remembering and interpreting dreams provides no
sure cure for any illness and no obvious alternative view of the
world. Their meaning for art, philosophy, and religion is
ambiguous. Many dreams are unpleasant or frightening. People
sometimes act foolishly in following the commands of their
dreams. Some dream interpretation is superstitious, some of the
popular dream interpreters are of dubious character, and some of
the dream cults have repellent practices. Dreams are not the
answer. </p>

<p> One possible outcome is that we decide to record and study
dreams, relate them to other states of consciousness and to
neurophysiology, find out their possible scientific, therapeutic,
and creative uses, and so on, while cautioning against
overvaluation of them. Another possibility is withdrawing in
fear, declaring that we were meant to forget our dreams and that
remembering them is pathological and socially debilitating, and
finally suppressing the means by which they are remembered. We
have removed a source of disturbance, at the price of denying
part of our own potential. Psychedelic drugs resemble this
imaginary machine. They sometimes allow people to see things
about themselves that they did not know before, without telling
them how to interpret and act on what they see. We have the
choice of ignoring and suppressing this knowledge or finding ways
to make use of it. </p>

<p> One of the main problems is that we have no appropriate
classification for psychedelic drugs. We cannot regard them as
divine: should we then treat them like aspirin or heroin? Are
they outlawed because we fear drugs, or because we fear the
social effects of altered states of awareness, religious
intensity, and mysticism? LSD use may be conceived as part of a
drug problem that also includes something as utterly different as
heroin addiction; it may also be seen as part of a social trend
toward irrationalist religious enthusiasm combined with scorn for
gainful labor and political participation; and these fears are in
practice inextricably entangled. </p>

<p> In modern society we are uneasy about experiences we cannot
quickly classify. We are unwilling to tolerate much ambiguity,
for example, about whether an activity is religious ritual,
medicinal, or recreation, and our legal arrangements depend on
these classifications. Use of psychoactive drugs in general and
of psychedelic drugs in particular crosses these lines and
muddies these distinctions, and that appears as a threat to
control and rationality, a problem for the law and society. We
have chosen, in effect, to divide psychoactive drugs into three
categories: first, medicines, second, drugs that may be used for
pleasure (alcohol is the main example) and third, so-called drugs
of abuse, a few of which also have medical uses. Psychedelic
drugs have been classified as drugs of abuse without medical
uses, and our legal and social attitudes toward them follow from
that. Some of the hostility to psychedelic drugs, especially
among people who are unsophisticated about them, is based on the
assumption that they are just another exotic vice providing
enviable but dangerous thrills, which like all such stereotypical
vices can also drive the user into addiction, madness, and
despair . </p>

<p> But at a deeper level the social response to psychedelic
drugs is also connected with their users' tendency to revert to
religious language and interpretations in talking about them. The
idea of drug use as a religious practice&#151;in fact, of any
connection between drugs and religion&#151;is one we are willing
to indulge in preindustrial cultures but violently reject for
ourselves. Orthodox religion in the West long ago abandoned the
sacramental use of drugs, so during the psychedelic era this
field was appropriated by sects, eclectic or syncretic, which
challenged the hegemony of established medical and police rules.
The &quot;LSD priest&quot; (Timothy Leary's term) who led a
&quot;drug cult&quot; was in effect a rival of the physician in
importing and applying expertise on drugs. The old calling of
priesthood or shamanism invaded territory claimed by modern
medical professionals. Modern medicine was even likened to a
state religion, with imposing organized strength, an
intellectually powerful ideology, an ability to create and
sustain faith, and the all-important support of civil authority;
it was said to treat unorthodox healing practices as heresy or
pagan superstition to be eliminated by a mixture of official
coercion and missionary activity. A religious war in which
medicine served as the ideological arm of cultural orthodoxy was
said to be disguised by scientific terminology and talk about
health hazards. </p>

<p> These quasi-religious disputes suggest that our attitudes
toward psychedelic drugs involve response to certain kinds of
experience as well as certain substances. We have a mysticism
problem as well as a drug problem, and its historical causes are
older and more complicated than the causes of the drug
controversy. Mystical, messianic, and shamanistic religion always
comes into conflict with established authority after social
evolution has reached the stage of hierarchical state systems.
Any contact with divinity not subject to priestly mediation and
formulation in terms of traditional doctrines appears as a threat
to the political and social order, and may be classified as
madness or vice. It is feared that all accepted standards will be
abandoned in a frenzied search for some individual or communal
self-realization. </p>

<p> The potential challenge to social order in all forms of
religious intoxication, drug-induced or not, is augmented by
special characteristics of modern Western society. Max Weber
discovered a cultural foundation of modernity in the Protestant
ethic of inner-worldly asceticism, which developed at about the
same time as the scientific revolution. The Protestant ethic
demands the attainment of salvation by work and activity
according to rational norms within this world. In identifying
religious duty with rule-governed mastery of everyday life, it
opposes all forms of otherworldliness in religion, including the
other-worldly asceticism of desert saints; it also opposes all
mysticism, for in mysticism the highest virtue is to be possessed
rather than active, a vessel rather than an instrument of
divinity. Both conservatives and radicals in a society devoted to
the extension of rule-governed control over the external world
are likely to see great dangers in mystical and messianic
religion, either because it is too passive and socially quietist,
or simply because it may tend to devaluate everyday life and
economic activity. </p>

<p> This mistrust of religious virtuosity, whether it takes the
generic or the specifically modern form, should not be regarded
as mere cowardice, intellectual rigidity, or defense of
established privilege. As the sadder aspects of hippie culture
showed, all standards of truth and social responsibility may be
abandoned in the search for spiritual revitalization by means of
magic, myth, and mystery. Mysticism claiming ineffability is a
common form of rebellion in rationalistic ages like our own; it
can be useful in moderating the excessive pretensions of
intellect, but the danger is that it will turn into a mere plea
of impotence: a denial of reason and an admission of incapacity
to cope with social problems that takes the form of quietism or
messianic fanaticism </p>

<p> So the belief that psychedelic religiosity may cause a
breakdown of social order (as conservatives fear) or abandonment
of the struggle for social change (as radicals fear) is no more
and no less reasonable than the fear of a breakdown of individual
mental stability during a drug trip; in some circumstances it
could be justified. But for the most part these circumstances do
not now exist. As the essays in this book prove, the vision
achieved in ecstatic states usually depends for its social
content on the intellectual set that is brought to it; once it
recedes it can serve as a backdrop for action as well as
passivity, and for moderate as well as extreme action. </p>

<p> If the self-image of modern Western society cannot easily
accommodate virtuoso religion and mysticism, it also precludes
the suppression of virtuoso religion and mysticism. Liberal
principles demand free speech, freedom of worship, and the right
of privacy. The government does not claim to know what sorts of
experiences and thoughts its subjects should and should not
cultivate. But drugs are a special case. We do not admit, even to
ourselves, that outlawing psychedelic drugs could be in part an
attempt to eliminate certain kinds of experience and thinking. By
regarding them as merely exotic vice, dangerous instruments, or
poisonous substances, we avoid the issue. Therefore, in the case
of drugs, the liberal principles that prevent expression of the
typical modern distrust of enthusiastic and mystical religion by
legally suppressing it do not operate. </p>

<p> Psychedelic drugs are a borderline case in many
ways&#151;therapeutically, intellectually, and socially. The
components of research, therapy, religion, and recreation in
their use are hard to separate (the awkward term
&quot;consciousness-expansion&quot; is an attempt to define a
role for them by avoiding all these familiar categories). Since
we do not know where to place them, they become an easy target
for confused fears about drugs in general or matters unrelated to
drugs. For example, the idea has been suggested that centers
should be established where people could go to take psychedelic
drugs in a safe environment. But are these centers conceived as
analogous to resorts, amusement parks, psychiatric clinics,
religious retreats, Outward Bound expeditions, or scientific
research institutions? Without any further examination, the very
ambiguity of purpose is enough to create hostility and suspicion.
And in this field liberal governments feel justified in asserting
themselves with the kind of confidence that only despotic
governments display with respect to other social questions. </p>

<p> Our legal and political institutions, like our natural
science and psychiatry, are failing to supply the complex
response these complex drugs demand. We should show more
confidence in our capacity to tolerate and make use of them. That
demands, first, a more consistent application of liberal
principles. We need to produce a suitable balance between
individual choice and protective authority, and in doing this it
is probably useless to try to find replacements for the existing
inadequate conceptual categories. We simply have to tolerate some
openly recognized ambiguity in dealing with psychedelic drugs.
The old forms of religious justification, for example, are
obviously no longer plausible. Except for a few isolated
individuals and groups like the peyote church, intoxication can
no longer be sacred in the primitive and ancient sense, no matter
how intensely religious it may seem as pure experience. Too much
has been changed by the intellectual and social revolutions of
the modern age; there is no point in mourning the loss, if it is
one. </p>

<p> But we have something to learn from religious forms of drug
use, especially about the protective and assimilative function of
ceremony. Preindustrial societies might also have something to
teach us about the proper balance between democracy and authority
in managing psychedelic drugs. When primary religious experience
is no longer restricted to specially qualified charismatic
individuals, the resulting democratization presents special
dangers and opportunities. The danger is that everyone will think
himself qualified to start his own religion, as Timothy Leary
once half-facetiously recommended, and some sort of authority and
tradition is needed to avoid this parody of liberal
individualism. </p>

<p> For example, in his last novel, <i>Island,</i> Aldous Huxley
tried to salvage a communal significance for the drug experience
by imagining a utopia in which psychedelic drugs play an integral
part. On his fictitious island in the Indian Ocean, a
decentralized political system and a Western science and
technology stripped of their excesses are guided by a Buddhist
philosophical/religious tradition, with the help of a psychedelic
drug called moksha medicine that is used on carefully defined
occasions, especially by the dying and in initiation rites.
Huxley's utopia avoids the danger of excessive individualism by
an emphasis on community, discipline, and tradition in the use of
psychedelic drugs. The usefulness of the drug depends on the
quality of the social system and not the other way around. He
also avoids the cultural limitations of primitive mythologies and
communities by incorporating the most tolerant and ecumenical of
the great world religions and the most universally applicable
body of human intellectual achievement. </p>

<p> Unfortunately, Huxley is pessimistic about his own solution,
at least for the short run. His utopia survives only because it
is an island that has been fortunately isolated for generations
from the malevolent forces of the modern world. In the moving and
horrifying final chapter, it is destroyed in a coup d'etat by a
neighboring ruler who represents Oil, Progress, Spiritual Values
(Huxley's ironic capital letters), military force, lying
propaganda, and demagogic tyranny in a combination with all the
worst features of capitalism, communism, and third-world
nationalism. If the fate of Huxley's island turns out to be the
fate of the world, there will certainly be no place in it for
psychedelic drugs. Whatever their dangers and potential for
abuse, they are worse than useless to a modern despotism. Unlike
Huxley's earlier invention,<i>soma</i>, they do not reconcile the
user to a routine or keep the fires of the intellect and passion
burning low. On the other hand, the hippie idea of drugging
ourselves into individual and social salvation is obviously
illusory, and Huxley certainly did not mean to promote that
illusion. </p>

<p> Something in the nature of our society and of the drug trip
itself tends to make us fall into attitudes of worshipful awe or
frightened contempt when thinking about psychedelic drugs. It is
as though they had to be either absolutely central or beyond the
periphery of normal human experience. But in primitive shamanism
that is not what happens; instead, at least ideally, &quot;the
otherwise unfettered power of the world beyond human society is
harnessed purposefully and applied to minister to the needs of
the community.&quot; (Lewis, 1971, p. 189). That is just what
technology, including drug technology, is supposed to do in our
society. We should find a modest role for psychedelic drugs, not
deifying or demonizing or ignoring them, and distinguishing
rational from irrational fears. The metaphysical hunger that
provides one reason for the interest in these drugs is a
permanent human condition, not an aberration that is created by
the drugs nor one that can be eliminated by suppressing them.
Huxley's <i>Island</i> expresses not faith in psychedelic drugs,
which would be a form of idolatry, but hope for mankind. It
dramatizes the conviction that the drugs can be used, rather than
condemned and neglected, and that finding a way to use them well
is a test for humanity. We should use our resources of
intelligence, imagination, and moral discernment to face that
test.</p>

<hr>

<h4>REFERENCES</h4>

<p> Clark, W., Lieff, J., Lieff, C., &amp; Sussman, R.
Psychedelic research: Obstacles and values . <i>Journal of
Humanistic Psychology</i>, 1975, 15: 5-17 . </p>

<p> Huxley, A. <i>Island</i>. New York: Harper &amp; Row, 1972
(orig. 1962). </p>

<p> Lewis, I.M. <i>Ecstatic Religion.</i> Baltimore: Penguin
Books, 1971. </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/persmenu.htm"><p>Psychedelics
    and Personal Growth Menu Page</a></p>
    <p> <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm">LSD
    and the Psychedelics Menu Page</a></p>
    <p> <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
    Schaffer's Home Page</a></p>
</blockquote>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>