
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-66</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B028-344</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/eleuch3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064849 text/html 34186
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:48:40 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:21:39 GMT
Content-length: 33967
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Road to Eleusis - Chapter 3</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
</head>

<body>

<hr>

<h6>CHAPTER THREE</h6>

<h3>SOLVING THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERY</h3>

<hr>

<p> We are told that there once was a young Athenian who was much
taken with the beauty of a courtesan in one of the brothels of
Corinth. His attempts to repay her favors in some special way
were continually frustrated by the madam, who insisted upon
confiscating all private gifts. To give the girl something that
would be hers alone, he hit upon the idea of offering her an
immaterial, and thereby inalienable, benefit: he would pay the
expenses for her introduction into the blessed community of those
who had witnessed the secret religious ceremony practiced at the
village of Eleusis. That sight was generally considered the
culminating experience of a lifetime. And so she was allowed to
travel to Athens, together with the madam and a younger girl from
the brothel. The lover lodged them all with a friend while they
prepared themselves by the preliminary rites. The full sequence
would require more than half a year's residence in Athens. Then
at last, amidst the throng of thousands who each autumn for the
first and only time made the pilgrimage, they too walked the
Sacred Road, crossing the narrow bridge that still today can be
seen, now submerged in the brackish waters of the swamp that once
divided Athens from the territory of its neighboring village,
some fourteen miles distant, a region sacred for its special
affinity with the realm of departed spirits, who were thought to
insure the fertility of the adjacent plain of grain. The
procession of pilgrims symbolically passed the frontier between
worlds, a momentous journey characterized by its difficulty, for
the bridge was expressly constructed too narrow for vehicular
traffic and ahead, just as they arrived at the village itself, it
was traditional that they would be obscenely insulted by masked
men, who lined the bridge across the final boundary of water. </p>

<p> Each year new candidates for initiation would walk that
Sacred Road, people of all classes, emperors and prostitutes,
slaves and freemen, an annual celebration that was to last for
upwards of a millennium and a half, until the pagan religion
finally succumbed to the intense hatred and rivalry of a newer
sect, the recently legitimized Christians in the fourth century
of our era. The only requirement, beyond a knowledge of the Greek
language, was the price of the sacrificial pig and the fees of
the various priests and guides, a little more than a month's
wages, plus the expense of the stay in Athens. </p>

<p> Every step of the way recalled some aspect of an ancient myth
that told how the Earth Mother, the goddess Demeter, had lost her
only daughter, the maiden Persephone, abducted as she gathered
flowers by her bridegroom, who was Hades or the lord of death.
The pilgrims called upon Iakchos as they walked. It was he who
was thought to lead them on their way: through him, they would
summon back the queen Persephone into the realm of the living.
When at last they arrived at Eleusis, they danced far into the
night beside the well where originally the mother had mourned for
her lost Persephone. As they danced in honor of those sacred two
goddesses and of their mysterious consort Dionysus, the god of
inebriants, the stars and the moon and the daughters of Ocean
would seem to join in their exultation. Then they passed through
the gates of the fortress walls, beyond which, shielded from
profane view, was enacted the great Mystery of Eleusis. </p>

<p> It was called a mystery because no one, under pain of death,
could reveal what happened within the sanctuary. My colleagues
and I, working from hints in numerous sources, have ventured to
go beyond that forbidden gate. </p>

<p> Ancient writers unanimously indicate that something was seen
in the great <i>telesterion</i> or initiation hall within the
sanctuary. To say so much was not prohibited. The experience was
a vision whereby the pilgrim became someone who saw, an <i>epoptes.</i>
The hall, however, as can now be reconstructed from
archaeological remains, was totally unsuited for theatrical
performances; nor do the epigraphically extant account books for
the sanctuary record any expenditures for actors or stage
apparatus. What was witnessed there was no play by actors, but <i>phasmata</i>,
ghostly apparitions, in particular, the spirit of Persephone
herself, returned from the dead with her new- born son, conceived
in the land of death. The Greeks were sophisticated about drama
and it is highly unlikely that they could have been duped by some
kind of theatrical trick, especially since it is people as
intelligent as the poet Pindar and the tragedian Sophocles who
have testified to the overwhelming value of what was seen at
Eleusis. </p>

<p> There were physical symptoms, moreover, that accompanied the
vision: fear and a trembling in the limbs, vertigo, nausea, and a
cold sweat. Then there came the vision, a sight amidst an aura of
brilliant light that suddenly flickered through the darkened
chamber. Eyes had never before seen the like, and apart from the
formal prohibition against telling of what had happened, the
experience itself was incommunicable, for there are no words
adequate to the task. Even a poet could only say that he had seen
the beginning and the end of life and known that they were one,
something given by god. The division between earth and sky melted
into a pillar of light. </p>

<p> These are the symptomatic reactions not to a drama or
ceremony, but to a mystical vision; and since the sight could be
offered to thousands of initiates each year dependably upon
schedule, it seems obvious that an hallucinogen must have induced
it. We are confirmed in this conclusion by two further
observations: a special potion, as we know, was drunk prior to
the visual experience; and secondly, a notorious scandal was
uncovered in the classical age, when it was discovered that
numerous aristocratic Athenians had begun celebrating the Mystery
at home with groups of drunken guests at dinner parties. </p>

<p> To identify the Eleusinian drug, we must first find the
pattern of meaning that underlies the Mystery. The sacred myth
that narrates the events involved in the founding of the Mystery
is recorded in the so-called Homeric hymn to Demeter, an
anonymous poem dating from the seventh century B. C., seven
centuries later than the probable date of the first performance
of the ceremony. In it we are told how the goddess Persephone was
abducted by her bridegroom Hades to the realm of the dead when
she picked a special hundred-headed <i>narkissos</i> while
gathering flowers with the daughters of Ocean in a place called
Nysa. All Greek words ending in <i>-issos</i> derive from the
language spoken by the agrarian cultures dwelling in the Greek
lands before the coming of the migrating Indo-European Greeks.
The Greeks themselves, however, thought that the <i>narkissos</i>
was so-named because of its narcotic properties, obviously
because that was the essential nature or symbolism of
Persephone's flower. The marital abduction or seizure of maidens
while gathering flowers is, moreover, a common theme in Greek
myths and Plato records a rationalized version of such stories in
which the companion of the seized maiden is named Pharmaceia or,
as the name means, the &quot;use of drugs&quot;. The particular
myth that Plato is rationalizing is in fact one that traced the
descent of the priesthood at Eleusis. There can be no doubt that
Persephone's abduction was a drug-induced seizure. </p>

<p> That fact has never been noticed by Classicists, despite its
absolute expectability in terms of what we know about the
religions of the agrarian peoples who preceded the Greeks. Those
religions centered upon the female's procreativity and the
cyclical rebirth and death of both plants and mankind. She was
the Great Mother and the entire world was her Child. The
essential event in those religions was the Sacred Marriage, in
which the priestess periodically communed with the realm of
spirits within the earth to renew the agricultural year and the
civilized life that grew upon the earth. Her male consort was a
vegetative spirit, both her son who grew from the earth and the
mate who would abduct her to the fecundating other realm as he
possessed her upon his death. When the roving Indo-Europeans
settled in the Greek lands, their immortal Father God of the sky,
who was Zeus, became assimilated to the pattern of the dying and
reborn vegetative consort of the Great Mother. There are
indications of this assimilation in the traditions about the Zeus
who was born and died in Crete. Furthermore, archaeological
remains from the Minoan-Mycenaean period of Greek culture
frequently depict visionary experience encountered by women
engaged in rituals involving flowers. The priestesses or
goddesses themselves occur as idols decorated with vegetative
motifs, accompanied by their serpent consort or crowned with a
diadem of opium capsules. Moreover, the myths that narrate the
founding of the various Mycenean citadels show, as we might
expect, recurrent variations upon the Sacred Marriage enacted
between the immigrant founder and the autochthonous female in
ecstatic contexts. Most interesting among these are the
traditions about Mykenai (Mycenae) itself, for it was said to
have been founded when the female of that place lost her head to
the male of the new dynasty, who had picked a mushroom. The
etymology of Mykenai, which was recognized in antiquity but has
been repeatedly rejected by modern scholars, is correctly derived
from Mykene, the bride of the <i>mykes</i> or mushroom. Fungoid
manifestations of the vegetative consort in the Sacred Marriage
can also be detected in the symbolism of the founding fathers at
other Mycenaean sites, perhaps because that particular wave of
immigrants brought knowledge of the wild and untameable mushroom
with them on their movement south into the Greek lands. At Athens
in the classical period, the ancient Sacred Marriage was still
celebrated annually by the wife of the sacral head of state: in
the month of February, she would unite with the god Dionysus. </p>

<p> It was as Dionysus that the Zeus who had been assimilated as
consort to the Mother Goddess survived into the classical period.
His name designates him as the Zeus of Nysa, for Dios is a form
of the word Zeus. Nysa was not only, as we have seen, the place
where Persephone was abducted, but also the name for wherever was
enacted that same nuptial encounter involving the passion of
Dionysus&quot; birth and death. When he possessed his women
devotees, the maenads or bacchants, he was synonymous with Hades,
the lord of death and bridegroom to the goddess Persephone. The
maenads, like Persephone, also gathered flowers. We know this
because their emblem was the <i>thyrsos</i>, a fennel stalk
stuffed with ivy leaves; such hollow stalks were customarily used
by herb gatherers as receptacles for their cuttings, and the ivy
that was stuffed into the maenads&quot; stalks was sacred to
Dionysus and reputed to be a psychotropic plant. </p>

<p> Dionysus, however, could possess his ecstatic brides through
the agency of other plants as well, for he was the vegetative
consort residing in all manner of inebriants, including
apparently certain of the fungi. The stipe, by analogy to the
maenads&quot; emblem, was also called a <i>thyrsos,</i> with the
mushroom's cap substituted for the psychotropic herbs. Dionysus
himself was born prematurely in the mystical seventh month during
a winter snowfall when his celestial father struck his earth
bride Semele at Thebes with a bolt of lightning; in the same
manner mushrooms were thought to be engendered wherever lightning
struck the earth. The father of Dionysus was another Dionysus, as
would be expected in a Sacred Marriage, for the child born at the
time of the earth's renewal is identical with the ingested
consort who will reunite his mother-bride with the awesome nether
realm from which life must forever be reborn. Thus not
surprisingly we are told that Semele also conceived Dionysus when
she drank a potion compounded of her own son's heart. So too was
Dionysus like his father also called the thunderer, for despite
the gentleness of his infancy and his sometimes effeminate
appearance, he could suddenly metamorphose into the virulence of
his full manhood, in which form he was a bull, rending the earth,
as at his birth, announced by a bellowing, the mykema that
signified the presence of the <i>mykes</i> or mushroom. His
symbol was the phallos itself, by a common metaphor also called
the <i>mykes.</i> </p>

<p> It was with the vine, however, and its fermented juice that
Dionysus was chiefly associated. Mushrooms themselves in fact
were considered a fermentation of the earth, a perfect symbol of
rebirth from the cold realm of putrefaction that was the mouldy
other world. A similar process was sensed in the frothing turmoil
whereby the fungal yeast converted grapes into wine. In wine the
god had found his greatest blessing for mankind; here his
untameable, wild nature had succumbed to domestication. He
himself was said to have first discovered the properties of this
plant that had grown from the spilled blood of the gods when he
noticed a serpent drinking its toxin from the fruit, for serpents
were thought to derive their poisons from the herbs they ate,
just as conversely it was said that serpents could transfer their
toxins to plants in their vicinity. Dionysus taught man the way
to calm this gift's violent nature by diluting it with water. And
customarily it was mixed with water that the Greeks drank their
wines. </p>

<p> This custom of diluting wine deserves our attention since the
Greeks did not know the art of distillation and hence the
alcoholic content of their wines could not have exceeded about
fourteen per cent, at which concentration the alcohol from
natural fermentation becomes fatal to the fungus that produced
it, thereby terminating the process. Simple evaporation without
distillation could not increase the alcoholic content since
alcohol, which has a lower boiling point than water, will merely
escape to the air, leaving the final product weaker instead of
more concentrated. Alcohol in fact was never isolated as the
toxin in wine and there is no word for it in ancient Greek. Hence
the dilution of wine, usually with at least three parts of water,
could be expected to produce a drink of slight inebriating
properties. </p>

<p> That, however, was not the case. The word for drunkenness in
Greek designates a state of raving madness. We hear of some wines
so strong that they could be diluted with twenty parts of water
and that required at least eight parts water to be drunk safely,
for, according to report, the drinking of certain wines straight
actually caused permanent brain damage and in some cases even
death. Just three small cups of diluted wine were enough in fact
to bring the drinker to the threshold of madness. Obviously the
alcohol could not have been the cause of these extreme reactions.
We can also document the fact that different wines were capable
of inducing different physical symptoms, ranging from slumber to
insomnia and hallucinations. </p>

<p> The solution to this apparent contradiction is simply that
ancient wine, like the wine of most early peoples, did not
contain alcohol as its sole inebriant but was ordinarily a
variable infusion of herbal toxins in a vinous liquid. Unguents,
spices, and herbs, all with recognized psychotropic properties,
could be added to the wine at the ceremony of its dilution with
water. A description of such a ceremony occurs in Homer's <i>Odyssey,</i>
where Helen prepares a special wine by adding the euphoric <i>nepenthes</i>
to the wine that she serves her husband and his guest. The fact
is that the Greeks had devised a spectrum of ingredients for
their drinks, each with is own properties. </p>

<p> Thus the wine of Dionysus was the principle medium whereby
the classical Greeks continued to partake of the ancient ecstasy
resident in all the vegetative forms that were the Earth's child.
In social situations, the drinking was regulated by a leader, who
determined the degree of inebriation that he would impose upon
the revelers as they ceremonially drank a measured sequence of
toasts. At sacral events, the wine would be more potent and the
express purpose of the drinking was to induce that deeper
drunkenness in which the presence of the deity could be felt. </p>

<p> The herbal inebriants that figured in these Dionysian rites
of drinking required magical procedures when the herbs were
gathered. As wild beings whose spirits were akin to their
particular guardian animals, the plants were the objects of a
hunt. And the ecstatic rapture they might induce in religious
contexts inevitably identified them as sexual forces. </p>

<p> Thus the female devotees of the god Dionysus appropriately
bore the <i>thyrsos</i> as their emblem as they roamed the winter
mountainsides in search of the so-called vine that grew suddenly
with earth-rending thunder and the bellowing of bulls amidst
their night-long dancing; that beloved child, the age-old serpent
consort, was the object of their hunt, who was suckled, then like
a beast torn to pieces and eaten raw; his own mothers, as was
often claimed, were guilty of cannibalism eating his flesh, for
like mothers the women would have brought the drug into being,
harvesting and compounding it with the help of the god's
so-called nurses, in whose loving care he would grow to manhood,
eventually to possess them as his brides. Such ceremonies enacted
the sacred nuptials of the city's women, who thereby entered the
awesome alliance with the nether lord, upon whose realm depended
the growth of all this world's fertility of plants and man. </p>

<p> Persephone's abduction at Nysa was prototypic of that first
nuptial between the realms, the primal experience of death. In
the hunting place called Agrai, in the month of February, which
was called the time of flowers, the candidates for the coming
initiation at Eleusis experienced in some way the death of
Persephone through the ritual mimeses of those Dionysian events.
That occurrence was termed the Lesser Mystery and it was
considered a preliminary for the vision of the Greater Mystery
that would take place at the time of the autumn sowing in
September. </p>

<p> The Greater Mystery was the complement of the Lesser, for it
centered upon redemption instead of death, the triumphant return
of Persephone from Hades with the infant son she had conceived
during her sojourn in communion with the spiritual realm. The
Homeric hymn, after its account of Persephone's fatal nuptial
encounter, goes on to tell how Demeter came to establish the
Greater Mystery. In grief for her lost daughter, she went to
Eleusis. Her journey there is a sympathetic imitation of
Persephone's entrance into the citadel of Hades, for Eleusis was
a simulacrum of the other word, where Demeter too would
experience the ominous chthonic phase of her womanhood, not as
sacred queen to the lord of death, but as witch and wet-nurse in
his house, for when Persephone progresses beyond maidenhood, her
mother must make way, relinquishing her former role and moving on
to the third stage, when a woman's aging womb brings her once
again into proximity with the powers of death. These chthonic or
earth-oriented phases of womanhood were symbolized in the goddess
Hecate, whose triform body expressed the female's totality as
bride, wife, and aged nurse in Hades&quot; realm. </p>

<p> At Eleusis, Demeter first attempts to assuage her grief by
negating the possibility of the world of death to which she has
lost her daughter. She does this by nourishing the royal prince
with immortality. His mother, however, objects, for she cannot
understand or accept a system that would inevitably alienate the
son from his own mother's realm as irredeemably as Persephone
from Demeter. </p>

<p> Demeter again attempts a solution, this time an eternity of
death, in which she and the maiden would stay forever in their
chthonic phase. She causes a plague of sterility so that no life
can emerge from the earth. This solution, however, leaves no role
for the immortal deities of the sky, whose delicate balance with
the forces of the earth is dependent upon the continuing worship
of mortal men, who share with them the fruits of life. </p>

<p> The final solution is to heal the universe into which death
has now intruded by admitting also the possibility of return into
life. Rebirth from death was the secret of Eleusis. In Hades,
Persephone, like the earth itself, takes seed into her body and
thereby eternally comes back to her ecstatic mother with her new
son, only to die as eternally in his fecundating embrace. The
sign of the redemption was an ear of barley, the risen grain,
that following the Mystery would be committed once again to the
cold earth in the sowing of the sacred plain adjacent to Eleusis.
</p>

<p> This was the final mediation that Demeter taught to a second
of the royal princes in the citadel of Eleusis. His name was
Triptolemus, the trifold warrior, and he becomes the apostle of
the new faith, traveling throughout the world on a serpent
chariot spreading the gospel of the cultivation of grain. His
exact identity was part of the secret of the Mystery, for the
various traditions about his parentage suggest that the initiates
learned that, like the grain that was his emblem, he was actually
the son of the trifold females who were the queens in the house
of the lord of death. He was, therefore, another form of
Dionysus, who in a similar fashion also was an apostle, traveling
in the same manner of cart on his journey teaching man the
cultivation of the vine. The pattern indicated in these
Eleusinian apostleships clearly signifies the transition from
wild botanic growth to the arts of cultivation upon which
civilized life must depend. </p>

<p> In the various Eleusinian mythical traditions, several other
male figures symbolize a similar transmutation of the wild horror
and loss that is death into the ravishingly handsome young man
who is born from Hades&quot; realm in pledge of the coming
redemption. In one such tradition, he is Iakchos (Iacchus), the
joyous Dionysian male who led the initiates toward their vision
of salvation; in another, Eubuleus, the serene personification of
the cosmological plan wherein the celestial immortals
collaborated with the forces of death to show humankind its
proper role; in a third, Zagreus, the enigmatic hunting companion
of his ecstatic brides. The fourth and most perfect of these
transmuted figures is Ploutos, the personification of the wealth
that stems from the fertility of man and field. The initiate
could expect that this beneficent representative of death would
thereafter become welcome in his house as his constant guest,
joined by ties of friendship. This Ploutos was originally the
vegetative son of Demeter in her more ancient days as Great
Mother on Crete, where she conceived him in a thrice plowed field
when she united with her intoxicating mate whose name was Iasion,
which means &quot;the man of the drug&quot;. </p>

<p> Triptolemus, however, was the paramount transmutation,
Demeter's special response to the problem of death. It was his
sacred barley, solemnly grown in the Rarian plain and threshed on
his floor, that was the principle ingredient in the potion drunk
by the initiates in preparation for the culminating vision. The
formula for that potion is recorded in the Homeric hymn. In
addition to the barley, it contained water and a fragrant mint
called blechon. The mint initially would seem the most likely
candidate for the psychoactive agent in the potion, except that
all our evidence about this particular mint indicates that it was
unsuitable, being neither sufficiently psychotropic to warrant
the danger of profane usage nor appropriately revered as the
secret drug. Rather, it was openly despised as a sign of the
illicit union of man and woman in lustful concubinage without the
sacrament of marriage. To just such an unsanctified abduction
Demeter had lost her daughter at Nysa and accordingly we are told
that the mother vented her displeasure by changing the prostitute
of Hades into mint, thereupon grinding and bruising her botanic
body. The final Eleusinian solution, on the other hand, will
reconcile the mother to the daughter's loss through
legitimatizing the nuptial abduction in the rite of matrimony,
whereby an heir can accede to the dynastic house. Barley and not
mint is the revelation at Eleusis, and it is to it that we must
look for the sacred drug. </p>

<p> With the cultivation of grain, man had left his wild, nomadic
ways and settled in cities, giving to the earth in order to
receive back its harvest. All civilized institutions derived from
this delicate accord struck with the dark, cold forces of death.
Grain itself was thought to be a hybrid, carefully evolved from
more primitive grasses. If not tended with proper care, it could
be expected to revert to its worthless, inedible avatar. That
primitive sibling to grain was thought to be the plant called <i>aira</i>
in Greek, <i>Lolium temulentum</i> in botanical nomenclature, or
commonly in English &quot;wild ryes, darned cockle, ivray, or
finally &quot;tares&quot; in the Bible. This weed is usually
infested with a fungoid growth, <i>Claviceps purpurea,</i> ergot
or rust, a reddening corruption to which barley was thought to be
particularly susceptible. <i>Aira,</i> therefore, doubly
endangered the cultivated staff of life, first as the renascent
primordial grass and secondly as the host for the encroaching
ergot infection. The revertive tendency of the infected grain,
furthermore, was all too obvious, for when the sclerotia fell to
the ground there grew from them not grain but tiny purple
mushrooms, the fruiting bodies of the ergot fungus, clearly a
return to the species of the unregenerate, wild Dionysian
abductor. </p>

<p> Unlike the seedless mushroom, however, ergot would have
seemed akin to the kernels of grain that were its host. As well
as grain, therefore, it too was Demeter's plant, for she could
wear its distinctive color as her robe or on her feet or be named
with its epithet, Erysibe. The hallucinogenic properties of
Claviceps were recognized in antiquity, and thus we may surmise
that the parallel apostleships of the barley and the vine would
have signified analogous transmutations wherein the chthonic
spirits submitted to cultivation. Wine, however, was
Dionysus&quot; realm, the liquid that gave sleep like death and
forgetfulness, whereas Demeter was the earth, dry with the
harvest upon which man fed to live. Grain was her sacrament. Upon
first coming to Eleusis, Demeter had refused the cup of wine and
the initiates thereafter imitated her abstention in deference to
the superior symbolism of the potion of barley. </p>

<p> Clearly ergot of barley is the likely psychotropic ingredient
in the Eleusinian potion. Its seeming symbiotic relationship to
the barley signified an appropriate expropriation and
transmutation of the Dionysian spirit to which the grain,
Demeter's daughter, was lost in the nuptial embrace with earth.
Grain and ergot together, moreover, were joined in a bisexual
union as siblings, bearing at the time of the maiden's loss
already the potential for her own return and for the birth of the
phalloid son that would grow from her body. A similar
hermaphroditism occurs in the mythical traditions about the
grotesquely fertile woman whose obscene jests were said to have
cheered Demeter from her grief just before she drank the potion. </p>

<p> This solution to the Mystery of Eleusis is made still more
probable by a papyrus fragment that was brought to my attention
by our translator of the Homeric hymn. The fragment preserves a
portion of the <i>Demes,</i> a comedy by Eupolis written shortly
after the scandal of the profanation of the Mystery in the fifth
century B. C. It confirms that the profanation did indeed entail
the drinking of the sacred <i>kykeon</i> and suggests that our
identification of the drug it contained is correct. In the
comedy, an informer explains to a judge how he had come upon
someone who had obviously been drinking the potion since he had
barley groats on his moustache. The accused had bribed the
informer to say that it was simply porridge and not the potion
that he had drunk. By a possible pun, the comedian may even
indicate that the incriminating &quot;crumbs of barley&quot; were
&quot;purples of barley&quot;. </p>

<p> Thus we may now venture past the forbidden gates and
reconstruct the scene within the great initiation hall at
Eleusis. The preparation of the potion was the central event.
With elaborate pageantry, the hierophant, the priest who traced
his descent back to the first performance of the Mystery, removed
the sclerotia of ergot from the free-standing room constructed
inside the <i>telesterion</i> over the remains of the original
temple that had stood there in Mycenaean times. As he performed
the service, he intoned ancient chants in a falsetto voice, for
his role in the Mystery was asexual, a male who had sacrificed
his gender to the Great Goddess. He conveyed the grain in
chalices to the priestesses, who then danced throughout the hall,
balancing the vessels and lamps upon their heads. The grain was
next mixed with mint and water in urns, from which the sacred
potion was then ladled into the special cups for the initiates to
drink their share. Finally, in acknowledgment of their readiness,
they all chanted that they had drunk the potion and had handled
the secret objects that had come with them on the Sacred Road in
sealed baskets. Then, seated on the tiers of steps that lined the
walls of the cavernous hall, in darkness they waited. From the
potion they gradually entered into ecstasy. You must remember
that this potion --- an hallucinogen --- under the right set and
setting, disturbs man's inner ear and trips astonishing
ventriloquistic effects. We can rest assured that the
hierophants, with generations of experience, knew all the secrets
of set and setting. I am sure that there was music, probably both
vocal and instrumental, not loud but with authority, coming from
hither and yon, now from the depths of the earth, now from
outside, now a mere whisper infiltrating the ear, flitting from
place to place unaccountably. The hierophants may well have known
the art of releasing into the air various perfumes in succession,
and they must have contrived the music for a crescendo of
expectation, until suddenly the inner chamber was flung open and
spirits of light entered the room, subdued lights I think, not
blinding, and among them the spirit of Persephone with her
new-born son just returned from Hades. She would arrive just as
the hierophant raised his voice in ancient measures reserved for
the Mystery: &quot;The Terrible Queen has given birth to her son,
the Terrible One&quot;. This divine birth of the Lord of the
Nether World was accompanied by the bellowing roar of a gong-
like instrument that outdid, for the ecstatic audience, the
mightiest thunderclap, coming from the bowels of the earth. </p>

<p> Some Christian bishops, in the last days of the Mystery,
thought they had discovered and could reveal the secret of
Eleusis. One said that in this pagan rite there was materialized
a stalk of barley. How true according to his limited lights, yet
how utterly false. The Bishop had not known the night of nights
at Eleusis. He was like one who has not known LSD or the
mushrooms of Mexico or the morning-glory seeds. For close on to
two thousand years a few of the ancient Greeks passed each year
through the portals of Eleusis. There they celebrated the divine
gift to mankind of the cultivated grain and they were also
initiated into the awe some powers of the nether world through
the purple dark of the grain's sibling that Dr Hofmann has once
again made accessible to our generation. The myths of Demeter and
Persephone and all their company fit our explanation in every
respect. Nothing in any of them is incompatible with our thesis. </p>

<p> Until yesterday we knew of Eleusis only what little a few of
the initiates told us but the spell of their words had held
generations of mankind enthralled. Now, thanks to Dr Hofmann and
Gordon Wasson, those of us who have experienced the superior
hallucinogens may join the fellowship of the ancient initiates in
a lasting bond of friendship, a friendship born of a shared
experience of a reality deeper far than we had known before. </p>

<p> CARL A. P. RUCK</p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/eleucont.htm"><p>The
    Road to Eleusis Contents Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm"><p>LSD
    and the Psychedelics Menu Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm"><p>Cliff
    Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>