
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B020-100</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/misintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122122952 text/html 7777
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:29:41 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:21 GMT
Content-length: 7560
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding -- Introduction</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse</b> </p>

<h2>Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding </h2>

<h1>Introduction </h1>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>This is the first of two Reports by the National Commission on
and Drug Abuse. Public Law 91-513 requires that we report to the
President, Congress and the public initially on marihuana and
then on the broader issue of drug abuse in the United The second
Report will include a review of the marihuana issue with
particular attention to studies which have been conducted in the
interim. </p>

<p>In large measure, the marihuana issue is a child of the
sixties, the visual and somewhat pungent symbol of dramatic
changes which have permanently affected our nation in the last
decade. Some have that our mandate has placed the cart before the
horse, and that we should have focused first on the wider social
issue and assessed marihuana's impact on society within that
context. much thought and investigation, we now believe that
Congress was wise in focusing this Commission's attention first
on marihuana. separating it from the rest of the drug
controversy, we have been better able to analyze the unique
position marihuana occupies in our society. </p>

<p>Our mandate was a broad one, covering, for example, the nature
and scope of use, the effects of the drug, the relationship of
marihuana use to other behavior and the efficacy of existing law.
Realizing that marihuana had never before in the American
experience been the subject of a concentrated, authoritative
governmental study, we launched a comprehensive research and
fact-finding effort. We sought.. to evaluate and supplement
existing material, to fill knowledge voids. and to assess the
so-called truths commonly posed in the marihuana debate. </p>

<p>Soon after funds became available on March 22, 1971, we
commissioned more than 50 projects, ranging from a study of the
effects of marihuana on man to a field survey of enforcement of
the marihuana laws in six metropolitan jurisdictions. Of
particular importance in our fact-finding effort were the
opinions and attitudes of all groups in our society. </p>

<p>Through formal and informal hearings, recorded in thousands of
pages of transcripts, we solicited all points of view, including
those of public officials, community leaders, professional
experts and students. We commissioned a nationwide survey of
public beliefs, information and experience referred to in this
Report as the National Survey. In addition, we conducted separate
surveys of opinion among', district attorneys, judges, probation
officers, clinicians, university health officials and free clinic
personnel. </p>

<p>This inquiry focused on the American experience. However, we
have been well aware from the outset that the scope of marihuana
use in the United States differs considerably from that in other
countries where the drug has been used for centuries.
Accordingly, the Commission sought to put the American experience
in perspective by seeing the situation first hand in India,
Greece, North Africa, Jamaica, Afghanistan, and other countries. </p>

<p>Because of our initial concentration on marihuana, certain
issues common to marihuana and other drugs have been deferred for
more complete coverage in the second Report. For example, a
detailed analysis of educational programs about marihuana and its
use will be considered when we evaluate drug education programs
in general. </p>

<p>Further, we do not discuss the rehabilitation of the problem
marihuana user since no such specialized programs exist; we found
the subject is best approached from a broader perspective of
rehabilitation programs for problem users of all non-narcotic
drugs. An examination of federal and state organizational
response to the drug issue, as well as an in-depth study of
general law enforcement strategies, have both been undertaken and
will continue, but will not be reported fully until the second
year. </p>

<p>Officers of the Federal Government have set a high priority on
fuller understanding of the marihuana issue and appropriate
governmental action. President Nixon has frequently expressed his
personal and official commitment to providing a rational and
equitable public response to the use and misuse of drugs.
Similarly, Congress has shown its concern in passing the
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. In
appointing this Commission, both the President and Congress have
recognized the need for an independent, nonpartisan appraisal of
the nature of marihuana and the consequences of its use, for a
similar appraisal of the abuse of all drugs, and for appropriate
recommendations for public policy as a result of both studies. </p>

<p>The Commission decided early in its deliberations to write a
Report that was complete but not overly technical so that the
reader could understand the points discussed without analyzing
detailed studies. Some. studies and supporting data are included
in an Appendix to the Report, which is published separately. For
the researcher and others interested in greater detail, the
Appendix provides the necessary technical data. </p>

<p>This Report focuses on marihuana, the popular name for a
mixture of stems, leaves and flowering tops of the Indian hemp
plant, Cannabis Sativa L. This Report presents the most
significant information gathered to date about the drug and its
users, concluding with the Commission's recommendations
concerning the most appropriate public response to marihuana
usage in our society.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>