
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B28-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA030-000641-B020-19</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/ledain/nonmed2d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122135159 text/html 27740
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:51:47 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:00:26 GMT
Content-length: 27522
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Canadian Government Commission - Amphetamines</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->

<p>AMPHETAMINES </p>

<p> </p>

<p>87. Amphetamines are synthetic amines which are in many ways
similar to the body's own adrenaline (epinephrine). These drugs
generally evoke an arousal or activating response not unlike
one's normal reaction to emergency or stress. Amphetamines were
first synthesized in the early part of the century and entered
medical use by the 1930s. Although a variety of related drugs and
mixtures currently exist, the most common amphetamine substances
are amphetamine (Benzedrine*), dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine*),
and methamphetamine (Methedrine* or Desoxyn*), with Benzedrine*
being the least potent. Generally, if the dose is adjusted, the
psychological effects of these various drugs are similar and,
consequently, they will be discussed as a group. Other drugs with
somewhat similar pharmacological properties are phenmetrazine
(Preludin*), methylphenidate (Ritalin*) and pipradol (Meratran*).
Common slang terms for amphetamines include: 'speed', 'crystal',
'meth', 'bennies', 'dexies', 'A', 'uppers', 'pep pills', 'diet
pills', 'jolly beans', 'truck drivers', 'co-pilots', 'eye
openers', 'wake-ups', 'hearts' and 'footballs'. </p>

<p>The stimulating effects of the amphetamines were widely used
by soldiers during World War II to counteract fatigue. Since
then, they have been commonly used both medically and
non-medically by vehicle drivers on long trips, night-shift
workers, fatigued housewives, students studying for exams and
others who must meet deadlines, athletes for increasing
performance, and others for general stimulation, pleasure or fun.
</p>

<p>88. In the 1940s, much of the wartime stockpile was dumped on
the world market and in many countries amphetamines were
available on a non-prescription 'over the counter' basis.
Widespread use followed in most industrialized areas with
numerous unpleasant consequences. Use reached epidemic
proportions, for example, in Japan in the 1950s - a country which
had never had a previous serious drug problem.34 Since this time,
amphetamines have been quite uniformly put under governmental
control and<b> </b>in some countries (e.g., Sweden) are currently
prohibited from medical and non medical applications. Although
the popularity of both medical and non-medical rise of these
drugs spread rapidly in all age groups and social classes in
North America after the war, heavy use was apparently largely
confined to delinquents and to members of the criminal-addict
population of a few decades ago. The drug was usually taken
orally, sometimes injected by heroin addicts, or sniffed. In many
instances it was used interchangeably with cocaine (a shortacting
but powerful stimulant). Frequent use was made of 'dismantled'
Denzedrine inhalers, which were on the unrestricted legal market
at that time. </p>

<p>More recently, major concern has developed in many circles for
a relatively new amphetamine phenomenon - that of massive doses
used intravenously by persons often referred to as ,speed
freaks'. Although this practice has been most frequently noted
among youthful multi-drug-taking individuals, considerable
opposition to such use of amphetamines has developed within the
'hip' community. The 'speed trip' is in many respects the
antithesis of the experience sought with the psychedelic drugs.
Instead of the orientation towards the 'consciousness expansion',
personal insight, and aesthetic and religious awareness often
attributed to the psychedelic drug experience by users, the speed
phenomenon is usually characterized by action, power, arrogance
and physical pleasure ('kicks'), and regularly leads to
suspicion, paranoia, hostility and often aggression. In addition
to these undesirable personality changes, which render 'speed
freaks' highly unpopular in the community, such individuals
generally present a picture of chronic ill-health unparalleled
among youthful drug users. </p>

<p>89. The message received by the Commission at public and
private hearings, and in written communications with youthful
drug users has been mostly negative towards 'speed'. Many
experienced illicit drug users consider amphetamines extremely
dangerous and undesirable, and have expressed surprisingly
hostile attitudes towards these drugs in no uncertain terms.
Recently, numerous persons well known to youth, who have had
considerable influence on drug attitudes during the past decade
(e.g.,, John Lennon and the Beatles, Frank Zappa and the Mothers
of Invention, Timothy Leary, and Donovan), have made public
statements against the use of 'speed' and related drugs. </p>

<p>Many physicians have suggested that the supply of amphetamines
legitimately imported and manufactured in Canada greatly exceeds
medical need. As with other prescription drugs which are widely
used, such as the barbiturates and tranquillizers, the
distinction between medical and non-medical use is not always
easily made. </p>

<h3>Medical Use </h3>

<p>90. As early as 1935, amphetamines (in doses from 20-200 mg)
were found to be a specific treatment for narcolepsy, an uncommon
illness which is characterized by sudden attacks of sleep and
weakness. Since the 1940s, amphetamines (in doses of 10-50<i> </i>mg)
have been used in the treatment of overactive children who showed
disorders of attention and impairment of learning capacity. In
the last few years, several investigators have again published
results of clinical trials which revealed that amphetamines and
methylphenidate were among the most effective treatments for
these childhood disorders. </p>

<p>Psychiatrists have frequently used intravenous injections of
methedrine (in doses of 15-30mg) for diagnostic purposes.
Administered in this fashion, the drug induces a state of
excitation, elation and increased talkativeness, during which a
previously inhibited patient might reveal information and
symptoms which may be considered important for the understanding
of his disorder. He might also express, more freely, previously
suppressed emotions. It has been observed that some patients with
a borderline psychosis show typical psychotic symptoms more
clearly following an injection of amphetamines. </p>

<p>At one time, these drugs were used in the treatment of
alcoholism and opiate narcotic dependency, but this practice was
abandoned because amphetamines often produce dependency when
taken for longer than two or three weeks. Since alcoholism is a
chronic condition, some alcoholics who took this treatment for
long periods of time became dependent on amphetamines and
alcohol. </p>

<p>91. Early hopes that amphetamines would prove to be an
effective general treatment for severe depression were soon
disappointed. Although these drugs are powerful stimulants and
increase a depressed person's activity, they may also make him
more anxious and agitated, deprive him of sleep, and may fail to
elevate his mood or to reverse the fundamental depressive
process. In some individuals, these drugs have been effective in
relieving mild depression and chronic fatigue, however. </p>

<p>Amphetamines, and some related drugs, have a strong
suppressive effect on appetite. Most so-called 'diet pills'
contain amphetamines or similar preparations. However, the
appetite suppressing action of amphetamines usually disappears
after about two weeks, together with the pleasant stimulating
effects, unless the dose is<b> </b>continuously increased. </p>

<p>Amphetamines have also been occasionally used to treat petit
mal epilepsy, parkinsonism, pregnancy nausea, asthma, nasal
congestion and sedative poisoning. Many observers feel that
because of the risk of dependency and undesirable personality
change with amphetamines, even the medical use of these
substances should be severely restricted. </p>

<h3>Administration, Absorption, Distribution and Physiological
Fate </h3>

<p>92. Amphetamines are available in a variety of tablets,
capsules (both in immediate and delayed release forms), elixirs,
injections and, until recently, inhalers. These drugs also appear
in powder ('crystal') form on the black market. Amphetamines are
available commercially combined with such drugs as barbiturates
(e.g., Dexamyl*) and other sedatives, atropine, caffeine,
vitamins and minerals,<b> </b>thyroid extract, and, on the
illicit market, amphetamines are reportedly sometimes added to
LSD. One of the most esoteric pharmaceutical combinations has
been described as follows:133 'This is a multi-coated tablet of
pentobarbital on the outside to induce sleep rapidly,
phenobarbital under a delayed dissolving coating to extend the
sleep, and under another coating, an amphetamine to awaken the
patient in the morning.' </p>

<p>Amphetamines are usually administered orally and are readily
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Occasionally both
intramuscular and intravenous injections are used medically. In
the past, an amphetamine-base inhaler was also available.
Non-medical users may employ any of these administration routes,
including sniffing 'crystal', although chronic 'speed freaks'
prefer intravenous injections. </p>

<p>About half of the amphetamine which enters the body is
excreted unchanged in the urine, the remainder being previously
deactivated or chemically altered in the liver prior to
elimination. Although excretion is generally rather rapid, traces
of the drug can be found in the urine up to a week after
withdrawal. Because of the considerable proportion excreted
unchanged, certain individuals have been known to extract and
reuse crystals obtained from the urine. (This general practice of
'reclaiming' excreted drugs is not new and such procedures have
been recorded for centuries.) </p>

<h3>Effects </h3>

<p>93. Both the psychological and physiological response to
amphetamines vary profoundly with dose, and the effects of
intravenous<b> </b>injections of massive quantities may differ
greatly in character from, and bear little resemblance to,
responses to low doses administered orally. These effects vary
continuously over the full dosage range, but for clarification in
the following discussions, the use of moderate quantities of
amphetamines will be separated from the discussion of the
practice of high-dose intravenous injection. </p>

<p>94.<i> Moderate dose effects. </i>At typical therapeutic doses
(e.g., 5-30 mg), amphetamines produce electrophysiological signs
of central nervous system (CNS) activation along with a variety
of adrenaline-like peripheral (sympathomimetic) effects such as
increased blood pressure, pulse-rate and blood sugar, slight
dilation of some blood vessels and constriction of others,
widening of the pupils, increased respiration rate, depression of
appetite and some relaxation of smooth muscle. Such effects might
last 3-4 hours. </p>

<p>The psychological response varies considerably among
individuals, but might typically include increased wakefulness,
alertness, and vigilance, improvement in concentration and a
feeling of clearer thinking, greater responsiveness to
environmental stimuli, decreased fatigue and boredom, elevation
of mood, mild euphoria, a feeling of sociability, increased
initiative and energy, and increased verbal and other behavioural
activity. There may be an improvement in some simple mental
tasks, and athletic performance may be increased. In general,
improved functioning is most likely to occur when prior
performance was at a subnormal state due to drowsiness, fatigue
or boredom. </p>

<p>On the other hand, a moderate dose of amphetamines in
different individuals (or perhaps even in the same individual at
different times) might produce irritation, restlessness,
insomnia, blurred vision, tremor, nausea, headache, inability to
concentrate, dizziness, heart palpitation, confusion, anxiety,
chest pains, chilliness, diarrhoea or constipation, and other
adverse symptoms. In cases of higher dose or hypersensitivity,
delirium, panic, aggression, psychosis, hallucinations and
cardiovascular abnormalities may occur in some individuals.
Although deaths are rare, some have been reported among
athletes.15 </p>

<p>95. After continued administration of moderate doses, recovery
may be associated with fatigue, drowsiness and, not infrequently,
emotional depression. The increased energy and alertness elicited
by the drug merely postpones the need for rest and clearly
provides no long-term substitute for it. Many regular users of
stimulants rely on the drug for energy when fatigued and often do
not get proper rest for long periods of time. </p>

<p>The amphetamine toxic psychosis may be indistinguishable from
schizophrenia.56 While this syndrome is generally associated with
high-dose use, many of the symptoms have been observed with the
use of more moderate amounts. There does not appear to be any
irreversible physiological damage associated with long-term use
of moderate doses of amphetamines although temporary disorders do
occur. </p>

<p>96.<i> Tolerance and dependence with moderate doses. </i>Tolerance
to the various drug effects develops at different rates and to
different degrees - some responses 'drop out' in chronic use
sooner than others. The tendency to increase dose depends upon
which of the potential drug effects is rewarding or reinforcing
drug use. Many individuals, for instance, who use amphetamines to
control narcolepsy, may reach a stabilized dose and show very
little need for increased quantity over a period of years. On the
other hand, those using the drug to control appetite generally
increase their dose. Many psychological effects, such as the
mood-elevating response, may show a considerable sensitivity to
tolerance, and individuals who either began using the drug to
obtain these effects, or who acquired the taste for them after
initially using amphetamines for other<b> </b>purposes, generally
show a marked tendency to increase dose over time. Tolerance to
some of the toxic properties occurs, and certain chronic users
administer thousands of milligrams intravenously in a day, while
even a fraction of that quantity would be extremely toxic in a
non-tolerant user. As with other drugs, the rate of development
of tolerance to the different pharmacological effects depends on
the doses used, the frequency of administration and various
individual factors. No suggestion of physiological dependence on
amphetamines occurs with moderate doses; but psychological
dependence on even low doses is frequently reported, and is
considered a major hazard in both medical and non-medical
amphetamine use. </p>

<p>97.<i> High-dose effects. </i>The chronic high-dose
intravenous amphetamine syndrome has recently been described by
several authors.124, 71 The cycle or pattern of use usually
begins with several days of repeated injections (usually of
Methedrine*), gradually increasing in magnitude and frequency.
Some users<b> </b>may 'shoot' or 'crank' up to several thousand
milligrams in a single day. Initially the user may feel
energetic, talkative, enthusiastic, happy, confident and
powerful, and may initiate and complete highly ambitious tasks.
He does not sleep and usually<b> </b>eats very little. After the
first few days, however, toxic unpleasant symptoms become
stronger, especially as the dose is increased. These toxic
effects may be similar to those described earlier for lower
doses, but appear in amplified form. Some symptoms commonly
reported at this stage are: confused and disorganized patterns of
thought and behaviour, compulsive repetition of meaningless acts,
irritability, self-consciousness, suspiciousness, fear, and
hallucinations and delusions which may take on the
characteristics of a paranoid psychosis. Aggressive and
anti-social behaviour may occur at this time. Severe chest pains,
abdominal pain mimicking appendicitis and fainting have also been
reported .207 </p>

<p>Towards the end of the 'run' (usually less than a week), the
toxic symptoms<b> </b>dominate; the drug is discontinued, fatigue
sets in, and prolonged sleep follows, sometimes lasting several
days. Upon awakening, the user is usually lethargic, often
emotionally<b> </b>depressed and ravenously hungry. The user may<b>
</b>overcome these effects with another injection - thus
initiating the cycle anew. Runs are often separated by days or
weeks, however, at a<b> </b>time. In certain instances, 'down'
drugs, such as barbiturates or tranquillizers, or even opiate
narcotics may be used to 'crash' or terminate a run which has
become intolerable or otherwise unpleasant. </p>

<p>98. The immediate effects of the intravenous injection of
amphetamines are a sudden, overwhelming pleasurable 'rush' or
'flash' which has been described by users as 'an instant total
body orgasm'. This effect is qualitatively different from the
warm, drifting sensation associated with the opiate narcotics,
but is reported to be initially similar to the 'splash' produced
by intravenous cocaine.124 Some users claim that the immediate
pleasure of the injection is the prime motivation for the drug
use and that other effects are secondary. </p>

<p>Some individuals report that sexual activity is prolonged, and
may continue for hours. When orgasm finally comes it may be more
pleasurable than normal, although, on the other hand, some
describe an inability to reach a climax. While only a minority of
users report increased sexual activity, some people give this
reason as a primary one for taking the drug. 124,23 </p>

<p>Some investigators have reported that many users claim that
they take the drug for euphoria or 'kicks', or because it enables
them to be more confident and active. In addition, there are
reports of 'needle freaks', in whom the use of the hypodermic
syringe has special rewarding connotations. </p>

<p>99. The clinical picture of the chronic 'speed freak', is a
distressing one indeed. Continued use of massive doses of
amphetamines often leads to considerable weight loss, sores and
non-healing ulcers, brittle fingernails, tooth grinding, chronic
chest infections, liver disease, a variety of hypertensive
disorders, and in some cases, cerebral haemorrhage. 124<b> </b>The
extent to which these effects are the direct result of the drug
or the secondary consequences of poor eating habits, over
exertion and improper rest is unclear. Further complications may
be caused by unsterile injections, including hepatitis and a
variety of other infections.47 Although some users feel that
certain of their mental abilities have been impaired by
amphetamine use, no clear picture of permanent brain damage has
been demonstrated. </p>

<p>100. Heavy use of amphetamines frequently precipitates a
psychosis which is indistinguishable from paranoid schizophrenia.
In addition, several investigators contend that schizophrenics,
and others with borderline psychotic conditions, are more likely
to use the drug intravenously than are other individuals. In one
study, 41 % of those requiring hospital admission for treatment
of amphetamine disorders were thought to be schizophrenic before
taking the drug.100 However, there is still no reliable
information on what proportion of users develop psychoses and
what the predisposing factors actually are. The majority of acute
psychotic reactions occur towards the end of a run, and such
symptoms are usually dissipated by a few days rest. </p>

<p>'Speed freaks' are generally unpopular within the multi-drug
taking community and are often shunned. Consequently, these
individuals may live together in 'flash houses' totally occupied
by amphetamine users. Frequent 'hassles', aggression and violence
have been reported in such dwellings. Heavy users are generally
unable to hold a steady job because of the drug habit and often
have a parasitic relationship with the rest of the illicit
drug-using community. There are reports that many users support
themselves through petty crime.184, 23 </p>

<p>101<i>. High-dose dependency. </i>The question of physical
dependence on amphetamines depends on the definition of the
withdrawal symptoms necessary to meet the criterion. While it is
clear that withdrawing amphetamine from chronic users does not
produce the dramatic, physically painful and often dangerous
abstinence syndrome associated with alcohol, barbiturates, or
opiate narcotics, many investigators feel that the fatigue,
prolonged sleep, brain wave (EEG) changes, voracious appetite,
cardiovascular abnormalities, occasional gastrointestinal cramps,
lethargy and, often, severe emotional depression following the
'speed binge' constitute a physiological reaction analogous to
the more dramatic withdrawal seen with depressant drugs. 56,207 </p>

<p>The tendency for tolerance-producing drugs to manifest a
'rebound' type of physiological and psychological pattern upon
withdrawal has been given considerable attention; amphetamine
abstinence in chronic users is generally characterized by a
profound sedation, and depression of mood and physiological
function, while drugs such as the sedatives and the opiate
narcotics (all of which produce sleep in high doses) generally
exhibit a withdrawal syndrome of severe and toxic overstimulation
(in some instances to the point of convulsions). </p>

<p>The fact that amphetamines have, it any, a physically rather
benign withdrawal syndrome, clearly indicates that a profound
physical dependence is not a necessary component in an overall
severe drug dependency situation. Subjective psychological
factors seem to have considerably greater motivational importance
in many instances - especially with chronic high-dose amphetamine
use. </p>

<p>102.<i> 'Speed Kills'. </i>In recent years, the slogan 'Speed
Kills' has received much attention, and the idea appears to play
a significant role in the attitude that some users and non-users
have towards the drug. One commonly hears the view that once
you're 'on speed' you<b> </b>have only two to five years left to
live. Some chronic 'speed freaks' incorporate this notion into
the identity they present to others and the image they entertain
of themselves. Many observers contend that the chronic use of
intravenous amphetamines reflects a thinly disguised suicidal
tendency, as well as an attention and sympathy gaining device.
'Hello, I'm Philbert Desanex; I'm a speed freak and I'm going to
be dead by fall', is only a slightly exaggerated caricature of
the image purposefully projected by some of these individuals. </p>

<p>103. What is the evidence, in fact, that 'Speed Kills' in the
literal direct physical sense? Fatalities due to acute overdose
are rarely reported. We have no reliable knowledge of the extent
of intravenous amphetamine use, and although we hear many dire
predictions, there is no good information on the long-term
prognosis or outcome of such use. It would certainly appear,
however, that chronic adherence to this practice is most
detrimental to the individual and, often, to those with whom he
interacts. </p>

<p>Although there is no clear evidence that the life expectancy
of 'speed freaks' is lower than others living under similar
circumstances, many investigators suspect this to be so. While
there are few cases in the literature of death directly
attributed to chronic amphetamine use, Clement, Solursh and Van
Ast47 '... have recently become aware of a number of cases of
death on the streets (of Toronto) apparently related to high-dose
amphetamine abuse. At autopsy, however, pathological evidence of
death directly due to amphetamines is rare in such cases'. After
a thorough review of the literature, Cox and Smart of the
Addiction Research Foundation reported: 'Currently there is no
evidence available on mortality rates among speed users and it is
not certain that speed itself is a lethal drug. There is no
evidence to support or deny that &quot;Speed Kills&quot;.60 </p>

<p>The slogan was originally borrowed from a highway traffic
campaign of the last decade and it has been suggested that,
originally, in adopting this phrase, drug users were referring to
the 'death' of the personality, the 'spirit', or the freedom of
the individual when he becomes dependent on amphetamines, rather
than to physical mortality. </p>

<h3>Amphetamines and Other Drugs </h3>

<ol>
    <li>As noted earlier, amphetamines are frequently used in
        conjunction, or in alternation, with a variety of
        depressant drugs such as barbiturates, alcohol and even
        heroin. The barbiturate and amphetamine up-down cycle has
        been described in both youthful and 'respectable' adult
        users at a variety of doses. Amphetamines intensify,
        prolong or otherwise alter the effects of LSD and it is
        reported that the two drugs are sometimes mixed. In
        addition, it would appear that the majority of youthful
        speed users have also had experience with a variety of
        psychedelic and other illicit drugs. Persons dependent on
        the opiate narcotics also frequently make use of
        stimulants such as cocaine and amphetamine - either as
        mixtures of drugs or used separately on different
        occasions. It is interesting to note that STP (DOM) and
        the newer MDA, both extremely potent
        psychedelic-hallucinogenic drugs, are chemically closely
        related to amphetamine. </li>
</ol>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_ledain_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="NONMED1.HTM">Canadian Government Commission of
Inquiry</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3653" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>