
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B013-193</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/apha.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050720 text/html 11781
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:07:15 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:03:48 GMT
Content-length: 11563
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Resolution on Medical Marijuana - American Public Health
Associa </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<h1>Resolution on Medical Marijuana</h1>

<p> <b>by the American Public Health Association</b> </p>

<p> <b>November, 1995</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> Attached is the full text of last November's resolution by
the American Public Health Association, an organization with
50,000 members nationwide. This resolution was approved much more
quickly than most and by a wider majority than typical. </p>

<p> The address is: </p>

<p> American Public Health Association </p>

<p> 1015 Fifteenth Street, NW --- Suite 300 </p>

<p> Washington, DC 20005 </p>

<p> Phone: 202-789-5600 </p>

<p> Fax: 202-789-5661 or 5681 </p>

<p> My contact has been Jeff Jacobs of the Government
Affairs/Affiliate Relations unit. His direct number is
202-789-5645. </p>

<p> Note: The underbars (_) are used to bracket boldface or
italicized text. Within the references, they represent italics;
in the titles, they represent boldface. Also, items in brackets
[] are reference numbers, which are superscripted in the original
text. <br>
</p>

<p> _<b>9513: Access to Therapeutic Marijuana/Cannabis</b>_<br>
</p>

<p> The American Public Health Association, </p>

<p> Being aware that cannabis/marijuana has been used medicinally
for centuries and that cannabis products were widely prescribed
by physicians in the United States until 1937 [1,2]; and </p>

<p> Being aware that &quot;marijuana&quot; prohibition began with
the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 under false claims despite
disagreeing testimony from the AMA's representative [3,4]; and </p>

<p> Being further aware that the Controlled Substances Act of
1970 completely prohibited all medicinal use of marijuana by
placing it in the most restrictive category of Schedule I,
whereby drugs must meet three criteria for placement in this
category: 1) have no therapeutic value, 2) are not safe for
medical use, and 3) have a high abuse potential [5]; and </p>

<p> Being cognizant that the Drug Enforcement Administration's
own administrative law judge ruled in 1988 that marijuana must be
removed from Schedule I and made available for physicians to
prescribe [6-8]; and </p>

<p> Knowing that 36 states have passed legislation recognizing
marijuana's therapeutic value [9,10]; and </p>

<p> Also knowing that the only available access to legal
marijuana which was through the Food and Drug Administration's
Investigational New Drug Program has been closed by the Secretary
of Health and Human Services since 1992 [11]; and </p>

<p> Understanding that while synthetic Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
is available in pill form, it is only one of approximately 60
cannabinoids which may have medicinal value individually or in
some combination; and </p>

<p> Understanding that marijuana has an extremely wide acute
margin of safety for use under medical supervision and cannot
cause lethal reactions [6,32,34]; and </p>

<p> Understanding that marijuana has been reported to be
effective in: a) reducing intraocular pressure in glaucoma
[12,13]; b) reducing nausea and vomiting associated with
chemotherapy [14-16]; c) stimulating the appetite for patients
living with AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) and
suffering from the wasting syndrome [17-19]; d) controlling
spasticity associated with spinal cord injury and multiple
sclerosis [20-25]; e) decreasing the suffering from chronic pain
[26-28]; and f) controlling seizures associated with seizure
disorders [29-31]; and </p>

<p> Understanding that marijuana seems to work differently from
many conventional medications for the above problems, making it a
possible option for persons resistant to the conventional
medications [32,33]; and </p>

<p> Being concerned that desperate patients and their families
are choosing to break the law to obtain this medicine when
conventional medicines or treatments have not been effective for
them or are too toxic [34,35]; and </p>

<p> Realizing that this places ill persons at risk for criminal
charges and at risk for obtaining contaminated medicine because
of the lack of quality control; and </p>

<p> Realizing that thousands of patients not helped by
conventional medications and treatments may find relief from
their suffering with the use of marijuana if their primary care
providers were able to prescribe this medicine; and </p>

<p> Concluding that cannabis/marijuana was wrongfully placed in
Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act depriving patients of
its therapeutic potential; and </p>

<p> Recognizing that APHA adopted a resolution (7014) on
Marijuana and the Law which urged federal and state drug laws to
exclude marijuana from classification as a narcotic drug [36];
and </p>

<p> Concluding that greater harm is caused by the legal
consequences of its prohibition than possible risks of medicinal
use; therefore </p>

<p> 1. Encourages research of the therapeutic properties of
various cannabinoids and combinations of cannabinoids; </p>

<p> 2. Encourages research on alternative methods of
administration to decrease the harmful effects related to
smoking; </p>

<p> 3. Urges the Administration and Congress to move
expeditiously to make cannabis available as a legal medicine
where shown to be safe and effective and to immediately allow
access to therapeutic cannabis through the Investigational New
Drug Program. </p>

<p> <u><b>References:<br>
</b></u> </p>

<p> 1. Abel EA. _Marijuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years_. New
York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1982. </p>

<p> 2. Mikuriya TH, ed. _<a href="medpaper.htm">Marijuana:
Medical Papers</a> 1839-1972_. Oakland, CA: Medi-Comp Press,
1973. </p>

<p> 3. Bonnie RJ, Whitebread II CH. _The Marijuana Conviction: A
History of Marijuana Prohibition in the United States_.
Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia, 1974. </p>

<p> 4. <a href="../../library/studies/nc/ncmenu.htm">National
Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse </a>(RP Shafer, Chairman).
_Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding_. New York: The New
American Library, Inc., 1972. </p>

<p> 5. Controlled Substances Act of 1970 (Pub.L. 91-513, October
27, 1970, 21USC801 et seq.). </p>

<p> 6. <a
href="http://www.calyx.net/~olsen/MEDICAL/YOUNG/young.html">In
the Matter of Marihuana Rescheduling Petition, Docket 86-22</a>,
Opinion, Recommended Ruling, Findings of Fact, Conclusions of
Law, and Decision of Administrative Law Judge, September 6, 1988.
Washington, DC: Drug Enforcement Agency, 1988. </p>

<p> 7. Randall RC. _Marijuana, Medicine and the Law_. Washington,
DC: Galen Press, 1988. </p>

<p> 8. Randall RC. _Marijuana Medicine and the Law, Vol. II_.
Washington, DC: Galen Press, 1989. </p>

<p> 9. Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics. No accepted medical
value?? _ACT News_. Spring, 1995;4. </p>

<p> 10. Grinspoon L, Bakalar JB. Marihuana as medicine: A plea
for reconsideration. _JAMA_. 1995;273(23):1875-1876. </p>

<p> 11. Government extinguishes marijuana access, advocates smell
politics. _JAMA_. May 20, 1992;267(19):2673-2674. </p>

<p> 12. Colasanti BK. Review: Ocular hypotensive effect of
marihuana cannabinoids: Correlate of central action or separate
phenomenon. _J Ocular Pharmacol_. 1986;2(3):295-304. </p>

<p> 13. Hepler RS, Frank IM. Marihuana smoking and intraocular
pressure. _JAMA_. 1971;217:1392. </p>

<p> 14. Sallan SE, Zinberg NE, Frei III E. Antiemetic effect of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in patients receiving cancer
chemotherapy. _New Engl J Med_. 1975:293(16):795-797. </p>

<p> 15. Sallan SE, Cronin C, Zelen M, Zinberg NE. Antiemetics in
patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer. _New Engl J Med_.
1980;302:135-138. </p>

<p> 16. Vinciguerra V, Moore T, Brennan E. Inhalation marijuana
as an antiemetic for cancer chemotherapy. _NY State J Med_.
1988;88:525-527. </p>

<p> 17. Nelson K, Walsh D, Deeter P, et al. A phase II study of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol for appetite stimulation in cancer-
associated anorexia. _J Palliative Care_. 1994;10(1):14-18. </p>

<p> 18. Regelson W, Butler JR, Schultz J, et al. Delta-9-THC as
an effective antidepressant and appetite stimulating agent in
advanced cancer patents. In _Int Conf Pharmacol Cannabis_, S
Szara, MC Braude, eds. Savannah: Raven, 1975. </p>

<ol>
    <li>Foltin RW, Fischman MW, Byrne MF. Effects of smoked
        marijuana on food intake and body weight of humans living
        in a residential laboratory. _Appetite_. 1988;11:1-14. </li>
    <li>Clifford DB. Tetrahydrocannabinol for tremor in multiple
        sclerosis. _Ann Neurol_. 1983;13:669-671. </li>
    <li> Malec J, Harvey RF, Cayner JJ. Cannabis effect on
        spasticity in spinal cord injury. _Arch Phys Med Rehab_.
        1982;35:198. </li>
</ol>

<p> 22. Meinek H, Schonle PW, Conrad B. Effect of cannabinoids on
spasticity and ataxia in multiple sclerosis. _J Neurol_.
1989;230:120-122. </p>

<p> 23. Petro D. Marihuana as a therapeutic agent for muscle
spasm or spasticity. _Psychosomatics_. 1980;21:81-85. </p>

<p> 24. Petro D, Ellenberger C. Treatment of human spasticity
with delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol. _J Clin Pharmacol_.
1981;21:413S-416S. </p>

<p> 25. Ungerleider JT, Andyrsiak T, Fairbanks L, et al.
Delta-9-THC in the treatment of spasticity associated with
multiple sclerosis. </p>

<p> 26. Johnson MR, Melvin LS, Althius TH, et al. Selective and
potent analgesics derived from cannabinoids. _J Clin Pharmacol_.
1981;21:271S-282S. </p>

<p> 27. Maurer M, Henn V, Dittrich A, et al.
Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol shows antispastic and analgesic
effects in a single case double-blind trial. _Eur Arch Psychiatry
Clin Neurosci_. 1990;240:1-4. </p>

<ol>
    <li>Noyes Jr. R, Brunk SF, Avery DH, et al. The analgesic
        properties of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and codeine.
        _Clin Pharmacol Ther_. 1975;18(1):84-89. </li>
    <li>29. Cunha JM, Carlini EA, Pereira AE, et al. Chronic
        administration of cannabidiol to healthy volunteers and
        epileptic patients. _Pharmacology_. 1980;21:175-185. </li>
</ol>

<p> 30. Feeney D. Marijuana use among epileptics. _JAMA_.
1976;235:1105. </p>

<p> 31. Karler R, Turkanis SA. The cannabinoids as potential
antiepileptics. _J Clin Pharmacol_. 1981;21:437S-448S. </p>

<p> 32. Institute of Medicine. _Marijuana and Health_.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1982. </p>

<p> 33. Mechoulam R, ed. _Cannabinoids as Therapeutic Agents_.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1986. </p>

<p> 34. Cannabis clubs open for medicinal business. _USA Today_.
October 1, 1993:B1, B5. </p>

<p> 35. Berger J. Mother's homemade marijuana: A plan to aid her
son leads to arrest and push for change. _The New York Times_,
October 11, 1993. </p>

<ol>
    <li>American Public Health Association, Resolution No. 7014:
        Marijuana and the Law. APHA Public Policy Statements,
        1948- present, cumulative. Washington, DC: APHA, current
        volume. </li>
</ol>

<p> </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>