
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-26</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B014-139</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/econ1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101614 text/html 33381
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:16:05 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:01 GMT
Content-length: 33163
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Three articles on the Drug Problem from The Economist</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#f2f2f2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h1>Three articles on the Drug Problem </h1>

<p><b>From the Economist May 15 -21, 1993</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>In 1883, Benjamin Ward Richardson, a distinguished British
doctor, denounced the evils of drinking tea. He said it caused an
&quot;extremely nervous semi-hysterical condition&quot;. In 1936,
an article in the American Journal of Nursing claimed that a
marijuana taker &quot;will suddenly turn with murderous violence
upon whomever is nearest to him&quot;. Tea and marijuana have
three things in common: they alter the moods of those who take
them, they are regarded as tolerable safe, and they are
addictive. </p>

<p>Attitudes to addiction are complicated and often
contradictory. Tea and marijuana are in themselves fairly
harmless, yet tea is generally legal and marijuana is not.
Tobacco and cocaine are harmful but, again, tobacco is almost
universally allowed, whereas most readers of The Economist live
in countries which may imprison you for possessing cocaine. </p>

<p>Throw in the joker of addictions which come not in syringes or
cigarettes, but in casinos and computer cartridges, and you have
a fine arena for combat between libertarians and puritans. </p>

<p>This battle, always lively, has just become hotter. On April
28th Bill Clinton appointed Lee Brown, a former policeman, as
America's new &quot;drug tsar&quot;, and thus leader of the
worlds toughest prohibition programme. Ten days before, Italians
had voted to move in the other direction by scrapping the
harshest measures of their drug laws. </p>

<p>Such boldness is rare. The attitude of most electorates and
governments is to deplore the problems that the illegal drug
trade brings, view the whole matter with distaste, and sit on the
status quo--a policy of sweeping prohibition. Yet the problems
cannot be ignored. The crime to which some addicts resort to
finance their habits, and in which the suppliers of illegal drugs
habitually engage, exacts its price in victims' lives, not just
money. The illegal trade in drugs supports organised crime the
world over. It pulls drug-takers into a world of filthy needles,
poisoned doses and pushers bent upon selling them more addictive
and dangerous fixes. </p>

<p>Yet most people still balk at exploring ways in which a legal
regime might undermine such effects. Their refusal owes something
to a distaste for addiction in itself. This is an argument shot
through with inconsistency. The strongest disapproval often comes
from those who scream about liberties if their own particular
indulgences--for assault rifles, say--are attacked. Addiction to
cigarettes is reckoned to be the chief avoidable cause of death
in the world. Alcohol deprives boozers of their livers and their
memories, and ends the lives of all too many innocents who get
smashed on the roads by the inebriated. Yet here the idea of
dissuasion within the law is broadly accepted. </p>

<p>A much sounder basis for doubt is the worry that legalisation
would increase drug-taking, and that rising consumption and
addiction would overwhelm the gains to be had from getting drugs
within the law. Yet legalisation should not be taken to mean a
lawless free-for-all, with no restraint on the supply or use of
drugs. Done properly, it would allow governments to take control
of the distribution and quality of these substances away from the
criminals. Quality control is decisive, because much of the
damage done by drugs bought on street corners is caused by
adulterated products; in much the same way, carelessly distilled
hooch can cause blindness. </p>

<p>Supply would be regulated by a system of government licences
analogous to those already in force for tobacco and alcohol (and
which would serve, among other things, to keep drugs out of the
hands of children), backed by strict policing and heavy
penalties. The toughness of the regime would rise with the
addictiveness of the drug in question--a light touch for
marijuana, an extremely dissuasive one for heroin.Such
legalisation would not magically dispense with the need for
policemen, but it would make the needed policing more manageable.
</p>

<p>Particularly in the business of softer drugs, where the taxes
can be lower and the restrictions less onerous, and where the
first trial steps towards legalisation should take place, it
would undermine the &quot;risk premium&quot; that provides drug
cartels with their profits. Taxes raised on what is reckoned to
be the world's largest untaxed industry would help governments
spend money on treatment and education, which would do more good
than the billions currently spent on attempting to throttle the
criminal supply of drugs of all sorts. </p>

<p>The Quest for Soma </p>

<p>There is another consideration, one for the future. The
illegality of drugs, coupled with distaste for pleasurable
addiction, is skewing research. Progress is being made by
scientists in understanding both what causes the pleasure of
drugs and what makes the pleasure so hard to give up. Currently
such research is obliged to have only one aim--unhooking existing
addicts. </p>

<p>It might have another. In many areas of pharmacology,
researchers are exploring the idea of &quot;designer drugs&quot;,
chemicals tailored to fit harmlessly into human biochemistry.
Addiction research should be encouraged to do the same: to move
beyond devising better therapies for those who wish to kick the
drug habit, into the invention of safer, more effective and less
habit-forming highs. At the moment it cannot, for a safe drug
equals a &quot;substance abuse&quot; equals a crime. </p>

<p>The fact remains that any legal regime which lowers the
economic incentive for drugs-crime will surely boost drug
consumption. The question is by how much. One possible pointer is
that, when asked, people say it will not rise a lot. In opinion
polls, Americans generally insist that they would not be
persuaded by legalisation to try drugs they are not taking now.
There is some reason to believe them, despite the first instinct
to be sceptical, since they already have access to plenty of
mindbending substances, from alcohol and tobacco to diet pills. </p>

<p>Then there is reassurance from experiments. The American
states that decriminalised marijuana during the 1970s saw no
divergence in the consumption of the drug from that in
neighbouring states which continued to prohibit it. Extensive
experience with decriminalisation in Holland shows that not only
is there no accompanying surge in consumption--allowing for the
inrush of addicts from more restrictive countries--but related
crime falls when drugs are legalised. </p>

<p>One further argument is used by defenders of the status quo.
They say that, even if the case for exploring legalisation were
conceded by governments, public resistance would doom the idea.
This is hardly surprising, given the way governments the would
over have for decades hammered home the dogma of prohibition. A
more rational discussion could do much to change public opinion.
Only a few years before alcohol prohibition was repealed in the
United States in 1933, public sentiment was similarly dominated
by the opinions of the country's prohibitionist leaders. </p>

<p>There are signs that public instincts are changing. In recent
months a growing number of federal judges and lawyers have voiced
their exasperation with America's approach to drugs. Their
objections led politicians in Washington to hold a meeting
earlier this month to rethink the country's failed drugs
policies. Janet Reno, the attorney-general, started the day be
describing her doubts about America's current approach. It ended,
significantly, with a discussion of the merits of legalisation.
Neither Mr. Brown nor Ms. Reno, and certainly not their boss Mr.
Clinton, has so far supported legalisation. But they have done
what no American administration has dared do in living
memory--set the scene for a proper debate. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<h2>Drugs policy: The enemy within </h2>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<p>A quiet revolt has been taking place in courtrooms across
America. It has been led by judges disillusioned with the
country's war on drugs. On April 29th Harold Greene, a prominent
federal judge in Washington, ruled that important elements of the
mandatory sentencing laws for drugs offenders were
unconstitutional. Less than two weeks earlier, two senior federal
judges, Jack Weinstein, and Whitman Knapp, of New York, had
announced that they would no longer preside over drugs cases. In
recent months, a number of federal judges have taken such a
stance. It might be a sign, much further down the road, of a
change in policy. Lee Brown, the former New York police chief who
was appointed as &quot;drug tsar&quot; by Bill Clinton on April
28th, is thought to be a good appointment. Apart from that, Mr
Clinton has not done much with drugs policy. Granted, he has been
in office a short while, and has had much to occupy him. But his
drug-policy staff has been cut, and the budget request he has
sent to Congress looks just like the one sent by George Bush. He
has asked for much the same amount of money, divided up in the
same way: two-thirds of the money to criminal-enforcement
efforts, one-third to treatment. </p>

<p>Some had hoped for a change of emphasis. Although the
&quot;war on drugs&quot; was first promoted by Richard Nixon in
1972, it was not until George Bush's term that the war began in
earnest. Mr Bush appointed though-talking drug tsars and spent
$40 billion to attack traffickers abroad and punish pushers and
users at home. The result has been disappointing. cocaine is
available about as freely and cheaply today as in 1989.
Drug-related violence in the cities is still high.The most
praiseworthy part of the Bush policy was a drop in overall
cocaine-taking. But hard-core addicts, who account for
four-fifths of all consumption, are taking as much as ever. Mark
Kleiman, of Harvard University, argues that Mr Bush's policies,
put in place soon after the peak in cocaine's popularity, did
little to affect a decline already under way. Changing fashion
(including the recent surge in heroin-taking) probably deserves
the credit for that. </p>

<p>If casual consumption of cocaine is down, it may well be the
result of education and treatment programmes rather than criminal
enforcement. But enforcement has been, and remains, the core of
American policy. Presidents, naturally, do not want to be seen to
condone the taking of drugs; the public temper is for stiff
penalties and the locking up of offenders, not tender care. But
the effect of the policy, as the American Bar Association pointed
out in a recent report, is that the country's prisons are filled
not only with drug-handlers but also with drug-takers, and cannot
cope with the numbers. Neal Sonnett, the head of the ABA's
criminal-justice section, notes with particular alarm the sharp
rise in incarceration of low-level drug offenders, which has
hindered efforts to fight more serious, and violent, crime. He
thinks the criminal-justice system may be &quot;on the point of
collapse&quot;. If it is, it will be for reasons to do with
overall levels of sentencing for many sorts of crimes, not merely
those related to drugs. But such arguments livened up a drugs
meeting held in Washington on May 7th to rethink America's
policies. At the start of the day Janet Reno, the
attorney-general, admitted dissatisfaction with the present
emphasis on enforcement efforts, and suggested the mandatory
sentencing guidelines might be reviewed. The speech confirmed
hints from Mr. Clinton that, despite his status-quo budget, he
plants to cut back on enforcement efforts, especially overseas,
in favour of trying to reduce demand at home. Another significant
aspect of the meeting was the openness of debate. Prohibition was
not unquestioningly supported. Ethan Nadelmann, a drugs expert
who heads the Princeton Working Group, which is developing
alternative ideas to prohibition, notes that legalisation of
drugs was given a serious hearing. The way forward, he believes,
is towards &quot;harm reduction&quot;. Such efforts, like the one
supported by Kurt Schmoke, the mayor of Baltimore, build on
programmes from parts of Europe and Australia which treat
drug-taking not as a criminal matter, but more as an issue of
personal choice and public health. </p>

<p>A small chorus has applauded such a shift in resources,
arguing that prohibition of drugs will always fail so long as
Americans remain so determined to get hold of them. Mr. Clinton,
who got himself in plenty of trouble during the campaign for not
inhaling marijuana, is unlikely to go that far. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<h2>High and hooked </h2>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<p><b>A better understanding of how addictions work could provide
benefits for science, for medicine and for recreation </b></p>

<p>In 1964 Aryeh Routtenberg stuck electrodes into the brains of
his experimental rats. The electrodes were so positioned that
current flowing though them caused a particular pleasure. For one
hour a day, each rat could control this current by means of a
lever in its cage. Another lever, which also worked for just that
one hour, controlled the food supply. There was no contest
between the levers. The rats, too busy mainlining current to stop
for food, wasted away to ecstatic death. </p>

<p>The link between pleasure and addiction is not always so
extreme, but more mundane addictions have brought about millions
of less dramatic deaths outside the laboratory, and caused untold
misery and pain. The substances to which people get addicted,
though, also bring great pleasure to billions--some addicted,
some not. They are the basis of several multi-billion dollar
industries around the world. Some 60m Americans smoke tobacco;
three-quarters of West European adults drink alcohol; no one
knows how many people around the world consume caffeine in tea,
coffee or cola. Figures for illegal drugs are harder to come by,
but around 2m Americans are thought to take cocaine, and many
more than that have smokes marijuana. </p>

<p>Not all the people who indulge in these tastes are
addicts--that is, they do not depend on their habit in a way that
seems clearly abnormal to the bulk of people who do not share
their tastes. Though almost everyone who smokes tobacco is
hooked, drinkers are not necessarily alcoholics and not all
heroin users are hopeless junkies. Pleasure and the addiction
need not come together--either can be present without the other.
yet the two are obviously connected. Neuroscientists are now
using the tools of molecular biology to find the links between
them, deep in the recesses of the brain. </p>

<p><b>The kick from cocaine</b> </p>

<p>The cerebral nooks and crannies of interest are those between
nerve cells--synapses. To jump over the gap between two cells, a
nerve impulse has to be translated from electricity to chemicals
and back. The first cell releases a chemical called a
neurotransmitter into the synaptic gap. These molecules are then
picked up by receptor proteins on the surface of the second cell.
The neurotransmitter fits the receptor as a key fits a lock. The
unlocking of the receptor leads to the creation or suppression of
a nerve impulse in the second cell. </p>

<p>There are many different types of neurotransmitter, and thus
of synapse; different pathways in the brain need their different
properties. It is by subverting some of these synapses, and thus
some of the brain's pathways, that drugs produce pleasure. it is
through changing them in a more fundamental way that the drugs
cause addiction. </p>

<p>The first evidence for this is almost 20 years old. Recently
it has started to pile up quite quickly. In 1975 Solomon Snyder,
at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Hans Kosterlitz of the
University of Aberdeen in Scotland and John Hughes of
Parke-Davis, and English pharmaceuticals company, found out how
heroin, then drug-du-jour for worried policy-makers, works. Dr.
Snyder discovered there was a receptor protein in mammalian
brains which heroin would stick to. Dr. Kosterlitz and Dr. Hughes
reasoned that nature was unlikely to have produced such a lock
without also evolving a key. </p>

<p>Working independently, they found a chemical in the body that
fitted into the same receptor as heroin; Dr. Kosterlitz named it
&quot;endorphin&quot;. This type of neurotransmitter (there are,
it turns out, at least three different endorphins) damps down
pain by suppressing the signals which transmit it; it also
provides feelings of well-being. heroin acts as an ill-fitting
key which can open the lock but cannot then be withdrawn. The
synapse is over-stimulated. Unusually pleasurable sensations
result. </p>

<p>If you replace heroin and endorphins with nicotine and the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine, or with caffeine and adenosine,
or Valium and gamma-amino butyric acid, or marijuana and
anadamide, the same story can be told. Other drugs work in
slightly more subtle ways. Alcohol does not mimic a
neurotransmitter, but at least some of its effects come from
messing up the same synapses that heroin works on. Cocaine, which
has replaced heroin as the drug of concern in America, and has
thus been extensively researched, works on nerves that use the
neurotransmitter dopamine. These nerves are found in, among other
places, the mesolimbic system--the part of the brain which seems
to generate emotion. Cocaine subverts the pathway not by binding
to dopamine receptors, but by sticking to a molecule called,
inelegantly, the dopamine re-uptake transporter. </p>

<p>Nerve cells, canny little things, recycle their
neurtransmitters. Receptor molecules spit out their
neurotransmitters once they have served their purpose, and the
cell whence they came mops them up for reuse. Block this
re-uptake, and the transmitters will just sit in the synaptic
gap, stimulating the receptors again and again and again. Another
strategy is to jam the re-uptake system open, so that dopamine
flows though it the wrong way all the time, keeping the gap
suffused with the neurotransmitter. That is what amphetamines do.
</p>

<p>The fact that amphetamines and cocaine work in similar ways
will come as no surprise to anyone who has tried both. The nature
of the high a drug provides depends on the type of
neurotransmitter it interferes with. but the brain is a complex
place; the separate systems within it that use different
neurotransmitters all interact. A drug acting on one set of
synapses can have secondary and tertiary effects all over the
place. That is why drug experiences are so varied. The range of
things that can be addictive, though, is wider even than the
range of available drugs. Foreign bodies in the synapses are not
an absolute prerequisite for an addiction. Something as
straightforward as healthy exercise can, in the extreme, hook. In
the case of exercise it appears that the body becomes addicted to
the endorphins it produces to ameliorate the pain and stress. </p>

<p>Other behaviours that carry an intensity with them--and thus
presumable overstimulate some parts of the brain's wiring--can
produce similar effects, though the synapses involved have yet to
be charted. Gambling has many of the characteristics of drug
taking--a euphoric high, and a craving in the addict. Some people
believe themselves addicted to sex; lawyers in England recently
convinced a jury that a teenage hacker was addicted to computing.
</p>

<p>It is easy to see some such &quot;addictions&quot; as excuses,
especially as the term resists strict definition. But addiction
to chemicals is clearly real, and there seems no reason to
believe that compulsive chemical-taking is necessarily in a
different class from other acquired compulsive habits. Anyway,
chemical dependency is easier to study than other sorts. That is
why it has been possible to locate the roots of pleasure in the
synapses--and why it has been possible to find the roots of
withdrawal there, too. </p>

<p><b>Cold turkey </b></p>

<p>Clinically, addiction can be characterised by two things:
craving and withdrawal. Craving is still the subject of a certain
amount of scientific handwaving. The best the psychologists can
do is describe the process as one of positive
reinforcement--which means that if you like something, you will
tend to do it again. Having their receptors overstimulated is
something people tend to like a lot. How this &quot;liking&quot;
translates into neural circuitry is not yet clear. </p>

<p>Withdrawal, the physical and mental turmoil that follows when
an addiction is interrupted, is proving more tractable to
experimental analysis. A suggestive picture of how it works can
be pieced together, as long as you do not mind taking the pieces
from different studies of different drugs: work on cocaine by
Nora Volcow at Brookhaven National Laboratory, among others; on
cocaine and amphetamines by Bruce Cohen of McLean Hospital in
Boston; on heroin by Zvi Vogel at the Weizmann Institute in
Rehovot in Israel and Antol Shofelmeer at the Free University in
Amsterdam; an on benzodiazepines (such as Valium) by Erick Sigel
at the University of Berne. </p>

<p>Again, the synapse is the scene of the action. Most biological
systems have feedback mechanisms that help smooth out the little
fluctuations that life throws at them. Synapses are no exception.
The receiving cell can adjust itself to changes in the behaviour
of the transmitting cell in two ways. It can finetune the signal
the receptors pass on, and it can change the number of receptors.
The receptor molecules are conduits for information, with one end
outside the cell and the other inside. When a neurotransmitter
attaches itself outside, the part on the inside changes its
shape. In this new shape, it can accommodate molecules called
G-proteins, which hang around inside the cell. These G-proteins
are, themselves, also shape-changers. Interacting with the
receptor activates the G-proteins; these then head off to spread
the word via yet more molecules, called second messengers. </p>

<p>the second messengers tell the cell about the signal from the
neurotransmitters. One part of the cell that listens is the
system which sends out and suppresses nerve impulses. Another
avid audience is made up of the enzymes which add phosphate
groups to proteins, some of which help in the production of
impulses. More messages make them more active, and more likely to
add phosphate to receptor molecules. A phosphorylated receptor is
an unhappy receptor. It is reluctant to accommodate G-proteins
and thus to bring information in from the outside. The nucleus,
which controls the production of proteins, and also listens to
the second messengers. Lots of chatter from them suggests to the
nucleus that there are too many receptors at the synapse, so it
brings their manufacture to a halt. Insert an addictive drug into
the system and the din from the second messengers becomes
deafening. The result is fewer receptor molecules. Both the
phosphorylation of receptors and their absence means that it
takes more of the drug to obtain the same effect. Those high
doses, in turn, lead to even less sensitive synapses. And they
also lead to synapses that can no longer function without the
drug. The cell gets used to damming the flood of drug-induced
noise in order to be able to deal with the faint whispers of
reality that float on top of it. Remove the drug, and the normal
signals can no longer get over the barrier that has been erected.
The system goes from getting too much of the neurotransmitter's
effects to not enough; heaven turns to hell. </p>

<p>Put this way, the molecular picture seems obvious. It fits
with a common experience of addiction, that of needing to do more
and more of the drug just to keep from feeling bad. Of course, it
cannot be that simple--after all drugs that work on the same
neurotransmitter may vary in their addictiveness. And people
vary, too, in their susceptibility to addiction. Then again,
addictions to substances that affect different types of synapse
can be quite similar--and some people seem to be prone to
addiction per se, rather than just to have a weakness for a
particular substance. And the fact that addiction remains after
withdrawal has ended--a fact attested to at Alcoholics Anonymous
every day--suggests there is a more general problem to look at. </p>

<p><b>Dopamine heads</b> </p>

<p>For more evidence that addictions have something in common in
the way they act on the brain as a whole, no matter which
pathways they stimulate, look at the pictures on this page. </p>

<p>Edythe London, who works at America's National Institute on
Drug Abuse, studies glucose metabolism in the brains of people
with addictions. Glucose is the body's principal fuel, so its use
is a good index of how active an area is. Dr London's pictures
show that, in certain parts of the brain, addicts use less
glucose than non-addicts do. The difference applies regardless of
what drug is being used, and it is still visible when they are
not under the influence. </p>

<p>Other clues to a general theory of addiction have led
researchers to focus on the dopamine system--even when looking at
drugs which do not affect dopamine receptors. There is evidence
that many, and possibly all, addictions affect the dopamine cells
in the brain's mesolimbic system. In the case of cocaine this
effect is direct, which may account for the drug's peculiar
potency. for other drugs it seems to be indirect, brought about
by connections between the dopamine system and the other
neurotransmitter systems. </p>

<p>Inside the dopamine system, the researchers' attention has
lighted on D2. it should come as no surprise by now to hear that
D2 is a protein found in synapses, one of the three different
receptor proteins for dopamine. The detailed make-up of these
proteins can vary from person to person--variation that comes
from differences in the gene which describes the protein. So the
different variants of D2 are inherited. </p>

<p>It was inheritance that led the researchers to D2. In the
1970s a series of Danish studies compared the children and
step-children of alcoholic fathers. The former proved more likely
to succumb to the same addiction. This, and the evidence that
identical twins are more likely to share an alcoholic fate than
are non-identical twins, suggested that genes were playing a
role. In 1990, to great excitement, Kenneth Blum of the
University of Texas at San Antonio, and Ernest Noble of the
University of California, Los Angeles, announced that they had
found a gene peculiarly common among alcoholics. It described a
form of the D2 receptor known as A1. </p>

<p>This was challenged by several researchers, most notably
Kenneth Kidd, of Yale. Dr. Kidd points out that different ethnic
groups have different frequencies of A1, which could confuse the
statistics. Others, convinced by Dr. Blum, Dr. Noble and
subsequent work, have suggested that A1 frequencies may actually
explain differences in alcoholism between ethnic groups, though
this is far from certain. In 1992 George Uhl, of Johns Hopkins,
found that a second variant of D2, known as B1, seemed peculiarly
common in people addicted to tobacco, cocaine, heroin,
tranquillizers, marijuana and amphetamines as well as
alcohol--almost the whole list of commonly addictive substances.
This is at least as controversial as the original finding; its
meaning is not clear, nor is the nature of the difference between
the different D2s. </p>

<p>To link small variations in a single protein with the
existence of an all-purpose &quot;addictive personality&quot; is
to go a long way too far. But there is evidence in one case for a
link between personality and withdrawal symptoms--and to link
withdrawal symptoms to specific molecules is not too farfetched.
About 40% of people prescribed courses of benzodiazepines to
treat anxiety or insomnia can suffer some withdrawal
symptoms--souped-up versions of the symptoms the drugs are used
to treat--after the course of medication is finished. Peter
Tyrer, who worked at St. Charles' Hospital in London, has found
that the people who suffer withdrawal share not a specific
protein, but rather specific personality traits: insecurity,
inability to make decisions, an over-reliance on the opinions of
others. Spot them, and you can save people from withdrawal. </p>

<p><b>Better living through chemistry</b> </p>

<p>The links between proteins, the lowly building blocks of the
brain, and personalities, the high abstractions of the mind, are
undoubtedly going to be convoluted--but evidence from both ends
suggests they are there to be found. What are the pharmaceutical
companies, to which this should be of interest, doing about it? </p>

<p>Some work is going into drugs to treat drug addiction.
Naltrexone keeps heroin from activating endorphin receptors,
without activating them itself. Methadone works in the same way
as heroin, but less effectively; it thus provides a way off
heroin that minimises withdrawal symptoms. Similar approaches to
cocaine are being tried. Drugs which act on dopamine pathways in
general may have widespread effects on addiction. </p>

<p>but drugs to defeat dependence are not the only possibilities.
Some of the damage that comes from drug addiction, especially the
physical damage, comes from secondary aspects of the drug. Lung
cancer, for examples, is caused by the substances that accompany
nicotine in tobacco smoke, not by nicotine itself. It might be
possible to get rid of some of these problems without getting rid
of the pleasure, even if it is not possible to get rid of the
addictions. Another option is to develop tests which could tell
people if they were at risk of falling under a particular spell
so that they could choose their pleasures wisely. </p>

<p>Eventually, an understanding of neurotransmitters, receptors,
G-proteins, and second messengers might allow pleasure and
addiction to be decoupled--or at least allow withdrawal to be
suppressed. Though, on the face of it, the effects that cause
pleasure in the short term are those that cause addiction in the
long term, there is a lot of variability in the system that might
be exploited. Techniques like those used to target specific
dopamine receptors in the treatment of Parkinson's disease,
might, at least in principle, be used to fine tune a drug's
effects at the synapse and produce low-addiction highs. And pure
substances tailored to neurotransmitter sites would have a good
chance of being free of unpleasant side effects elsewhere in the
body. That would not create a brave new world; it might, perhaps,
create a slightly happier one. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>