
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B041-220</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/symp.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130723 text/html 13070
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:07:02 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:41 GMT
Content-length: 12852
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LaGuardia Committee Report on Marijuana -- Symptoms and
Behavior</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana</b> </p>

<p><b>Medical Aspects</b> </p>

<h1>SYMPTOMS AND BEHAVIOR</h1>

<p><b>Samuel Allentuck, MD</b> </p>

<hr>

<p><b>IN PRELIMINARY GROUP</b> </p>

<p>The preliminary study of the 5 volunteer subjects had for its
purpose the establishment of methods of procedures to be followed
for the main group, and the obtaining of a general picture of the
physical and mental effects induced by the drug. Having no
knowledge of the safe limits of marihuana dosage, the dosage
given to this group was restricted to from 1 to 4 cc. of the
concentrate, and for smoking from 1 to 3 cigarettes. </p>

<p>When ingested, 1 cc. of marihuana was slightly effective, the
multiples of this more so. There was noted in all subjects some
increase in pulse rate and in blood pressure, dilated and
sluggish pupils, dryness of the mouth and throat, ataxia, and
some clumsiness and incoordination of movement. Symptoms
distinctly disagreeable were dizziness in 3 subjects, a sense of
heaviness of the extremities in 2, nausea in 2 and faintness in
2. Three showed motor restlessness. A state classed as euphoria,
characterized by laughter, witticisms, loquaciousness, and
lowering of inhibitions occurred in 3 subjects. This was not
sustained but alternated with periods during which disagreeable
symptoms were dominant. In one of the subjects (V.C.) there was
no euphoric state, but a feeling of discomfort and depression
throughout. Finally in one of the 5 (A.V.) with 2 cc. There was a
state of depression with anxiety and with 4 cc. a psychotic
episode with fear of death. </p>

<p>With the exception of the one individual during his psychotic
episode, the subjects gave no evidence of abnormal mental content
at any stage of the drug action, the only change noted being a
delay in focusing attention on questions asked and difficulty in
sustaining mental concentration. While there was objection at
times to carrying out repetitious tests, there was no definite
refusal. There was no sexual stimulation giving rise to overt
expression. </p>

<p>With the cigarette smoking, ataxia and charges in the pulse
rate, blood pressure, and pupils corresponded to those following
oral administration. In only one of the subjects, however, was
there definite euphoria. The common symptoms were dizziness and
drowsiness. Two of the subjects found it difficult to
concentrate. </p>

<p>The duration of the effects of marihuana was variable. When it
was ingested, the effects usually passed off in from two to four
hours, but in one instance persisted for seven hours and in
another for fourteen hours. After smoking, the duration of
effects was from one to three hours. </p>

<p><b>IN MAIN GROUP</b> </p>

<p>The evidence of the effects of marihuana was obtained by the
subject's statement of symptoms and sensations, by the nurses'
reports and by the examiner's observations and interpretation of
changes in the subject's mental state and behavior. </p>

<p>The dosage of the marihuana concentrate ranged from 2 to 22
cc. and in each subject the effects of more than one dose were
studied. Dosage ranging from 2 to 5 cc. was used for the largest
number of subjects, and that from 14 to 21 cc. on only seven
occasions. It is known that marihuana intoxication may bring
about a comatose state, but no attempt was made to determine the
dosage required for this. The number receiving each of the
selected doses is shown in Table 2. </p>

<p>(TABLE 2) </p>

<p>While the duration of action and its intensity tended to
increase with dosage, this was not always the case and equal
doses did not bring about uniform effects in all those receiving
them. Thus, 3 cc. produced a striking effect in one individual,
much less in another in still another, 10 cc. produced less
effect than S cc. Such variations are to be explained by
differences in the mental make-up of the subject, and the
particular state of his responsiveness at the time when marihuana
is taken. </p>

<p>The number of cigarettes smoked ranged from one to eleven. The
smoking of a single cigarette took about ten minutes and up to
eight could be smoked in an hour. In smoking, increasing the
number of cigarettes usually increased the sensation described as
&quot;high,&quot; but here also there was no uniformity in
individuals or groups. </p>

<p>When marihuana was ingested, in dosages from 2 cc. up, its
actions became evident in from one half to one hour. The maximum
effects were seen in from two to three hours. These subsided
gradually, but the time of disappearance was variable, usually
three to five hours, in some instances twelve hours or more. </p>

<p>When marihuana cigarettes were used the effects appeared
almost immediately. After one cigarette, these had usually
disappeared in an hour. After several cigarettes had been smoked
the effects increased progressively in intensity and reached a
maximum in about an hour. In most instances they disappeared in
from three or four hours. </p>

<p><b>The Concentrate</b> </p>

<p><u>Behavior Symptoms.</u> </p>

<p>The effects on the general behavior of the subjects taking the
concentrate were variable. If left undisturbed some remained
quietly sitting or lying, showing little interest in their
surroundings. Others were restless and talkative. Under the
heading &quot;Euphoria&quot; there are listed those marihuana
effects which give rise to pleasurable sensations or experiences.
These are a sense of well-being and contentment cheerfulness and
gaiety, talkativeness, bursts of singing and dancing,
daydreaming, a pleasant drowsiness, joking, and performing
amusing antics. The drowsiness, daydreaming and unawareness of
surroundings were present when the subject was left alone. Other
euphoric expressions required an audience and there was much
contagiousness of laughing and joking where several of the
subjects under marihuana were congregated. The occurrence of a
euphoric state, in one or another form, was noted in most of the
subjects. But except for those who were allowed to pass the time
undisturbed, the pleasurable effects were interrupted from time
to time by disagreeable sensations. </p>

<p>Quite commonly seen, as with the preliminary group, was a
difficulty in focusing and sustaining mental concentration. Thus,
there would occur a delay in the subject's answers to questions
and at times some confusion as to their meaning. There was,
however, except in a few isolated instances, no abnormal mental
content evident and the responses brought out by the examiner
were not different from those in the pre-marihuana state. </p>

<p>Altered mental behavior which would give rise to more concern
was seen in a relatively small number of subjects. In some this
took the form of irritation at questioning, refusal to comply
with simple requests and antagonism to certain of the examiners.
There was, however, only verbal and no active opposition in any
of these behaviors, caused by the subject's desire to be left
undisturbed and his disinclination to carry out certain tests
which in his pre-marihuana period he had considered tiresome and
meaningless. With this came antipathy to those conducting the
tests. </p>

<p>The occurrence of the disagreeable physical symptoms
accompanying marihuana action would naturally lead to a feeling
of disquietude and some alarm as to significance and
consequences. </p>

<p>This, however, was a prominent feature in relatively few
instances. A pronounced state of anxiety reaching a panic stage,
associated usually with fear of death or of insanity, was
observed only in those subjects experiencing psychotic episodes
and here the anxiety state led to pleas for escape and not to
acts of aggression. Even in the psychotic states there were no
uncontrollable outbursts of rage or acts of violence. </p>

<p>Some evidence of eroticism was reported in about 10 per cent
of the 150 instances in which marihuana was administered to the
group. The presence of nurses, attendants and other women
associated with the study gave opportunity for frank expression
of sexual stimulation, had this been marked. There was no such
expression even during the psychotic episodes. </p>

<p>In some isolated instances there was evidence of marked
lowering of inhibitions such as loud discharge of flatus,
urinating on the floor instead of in the vessels supplied, and in
one instance frank exhibitionism. In the last instance the
subject, who was not a regular marihuana user, had been arrested
on three occasions for indecent exposure. </p>

<p>The frequency with which significant changes in behavior
occurred is indicated in Table 3 </p>

<p>(TABLE. 3) </p>

<p>As used in Table 3, anxiety means the subject's expressed
worry concerning what might happen to him. Excitement, shown by
physical restlessness, muscular twitchings and jerky movements,
and loud talking, and some degree of antagonism are known to be
expressions of an &quot;alarm&quot; or &quot;fear&quot; state. </p>

<p>It is seen from this table that, except for euphoria, the
effect of marihuana was definitely more pronounced on the
nonusers. This might be taken as evidence of a persisting
tolerance to the drug in the user group, but, on the other hand,
it may have as its basis a feeling of greater apprehension in the
nonusers. Such a feeling would undoubtedly arise among those who
have had no previous experience with marihuana and are in a state
of uncertainty as to its possible harmful effects. </p>

<p><u>Physical Symptoms.</u> </p>

<p>Of the subjective symptoms, a feeling described as lightness,
heaviness, or pressure in the head, often with dizziness, was one
of the earliest and occurred in practically all subjects,
irrespective of dose. Dryness of the mouth and throat were
reported by over half of the subjects as was also a floating
sensation. Unsteadiness in movement and a feeling of heaviness in
the extremities were commonly experienced as was a feeling of
hunger and a desire for sweets especially. Less commonly noted
were nausea, vomiting, sensations of warmth of the head or body,
burning of the eyes and blurring of vision, tightness of the
chest, cardiac palpitation, ringing or pressure in the ears, and
an urge to urinate or defecate. </p>

<p>From observation by the examiner, tremor and ataxia were
present in varying degrees in practically all instances and in
all dosages used, as were also dilatation of the pupils and
sluggish response to light. </p>

<p>These effects were often present on the day following
marihuana administration. </p>

<p>The frequency of the more common subjective symptoms and their
relation to dosage is shown in Table 4. The figures are taken
from the subject's reports. </p>

<p>There is a tendency for the symptoms to be more frequent in
the non-users than in the users but the differences are variable
and in general not striking.</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>