
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-54</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B007-174</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034332 text/html 10494
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:43:18 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:40:43 GMT
Content-length: 10276
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Opium Monopoly - Shanghai</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM MONOPOLY </h1>

<p><b>BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE</b> </p>

<h2>IX -- SHANGHAI<br>
</h2>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"
width="562" height="19"><br>
</p>

<p>IN the New York Library there is an interesting little book,
about a quarter of an inch thick, and easy reading. It is
entitled: &quot;Municipal Ethics: Some Facts and Figures from the
Municipal Gazette, 1907-1914. An Examination of the Opium License
policy of the Shanghai Municipality. In an Open Letter to the
Chairman of the Council, by Arnold Foster, Wuchang. For 42 years
Missionary to the Chinese.&quot; </p>

<p>Shanghai, being a Treaty Port, is of two parts. The native or
Shanghai city, under the control and administration of the
Chinese. And the foreign concessions, that part of the city under
the control and administration of foreigners. This is generally
known as the International Settlement (also called the model
settlement), and the Shanghai Municipal Council is the
administrative body. Over this part the Chinese have no control.
In 1907, when China began her latest fight against the opium
evil, she enacted and enforced drastic laws prohibiting opium
smoking and opium selling on Chinese soil, but was powerless to
enforce these laws on &quot;foreign&quot; soil. In the foreign
concessions, the Chinese were able to buy as much opium as they
pleased, merely by stepping over an imaginary line, into a
portion of the town where the rigid anti-opium laws of China did
not apply. </p>

<p>Says Mr. Arnold, in his Open Letter: &quot;It will be seen
that the title of the pamphlet, Municipal Ethics, describes a
situation which is a complex one. It concerns first the actual
attitude of the Shanghai Municipal Council towards the Chinese
national movement for the suppression of the use of opium. This,
we are assured by successive Chairmen of the Council, has been
one of &quot;sincere sympathy...... the greatest sympathy,&quot;
and more to the same effect. Certainly no one would have guessed
this from the facts and figures reproduced in this pamphlet from
the columns of the &quot; Municipal Gazette.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;The second element in the ethical situation is the
actual attitude of the Council not only towards the Chinese
national movement, but also towards its own official assurances,
protestations and promises. </p>

<p>&quot;It is on this second branch of the subject before us
that I specially desire to focus attention, and for the facts
here stated that I would bespeak the most searching examination.
The protestations of the Council as to its own virtuous attitude
in regard to opium reform in China are made the more emphatic,
and also the more open to criticism, by being coupled with some
very severe insinuations made at the time, as to the insincerity
and unreliability of the Chinese authorities in what they were
professing, and in what they were planning to do in the same
matter of opium reform. It so happens, as the event proves, that
these sneers and insinuations were not only quite uncalled for,
but were absolutely and utterly unjust. When a comparison is
instituted between (a) 'official pronouncements' made two years
ago by the Chinese authorities as to what they then intended to
do for the suppression of the opium habit, and (b) the 'actual
administrative results' that in the meanwhile have been
accomplished, the Chinese have no cause to be ashamed of the
verdict of impartial judges. What they have done may not always
have been wise, it may sometimes have been very stern, but the
outcome has been to awaken the astonishment and admiration of the
whole civilized world! When, on the other hand, a comparison is
instituted between (a) the fine professions and assurances of the
Shanghai Municipal Council made six or seven years ago as to its
own attitude towards the 'eradication of the opium evil' and (b)
the 'actual administrative results' of the Council's own
proceedings, the feelings awakened are of very different order.
Here, not to mention any other consideration, two hard facts
stare one in the face: First, in October, 1907, there were
eighty-seven licensed opium shops in the International
Settlement. In May, 1914, there were six hundred and sixty-three.
In 1907 the average monthly revenue from opium licenses, dens and
shops combined, was Taels 5,450- In May, 1914, the revenue from
licenses and opium shops alone was Taels 10,995. The Council will
not dispute these figures.&quot; </p>

<p>At the beginning of the anti-opium campaign in 1907, there
were 700 dens (for smoking) in the Native City, and 1600 in the
International Settlement. The Chinese closed their dens and shops
at once. In the Settlement, the dens were not all closed until
two years later, and the number of shops in the Settlement
increased by leaps and bounds. Table I shows an outline of the
Municipal opium-shop profits concurrent with the closing of the
opium houses-and subsequently: </p>

<p>Year Month Dens Shops Monthly revenue, shops only </p>

<p>1908 Jan. 1436 87 Taels, 338 </p>

<p>Oct. 1005 131 623 </p>

<p>1909 Jan. 599 166 1,887 </p>

<p>Oct. 297 231 2,276 </p>

<p>1910 Oct. Closed 306 5,071 </p>

<p>1911 Oct. 348 5,415 </p>

<p>1912 Nov. 402 5,881 </p>

<p>1913 Dec. 560 8,953 </p>

<p>1914 March 628 10,111 </p>

<p>April 654 10,772 </p>

<p>Mr. Arnold quotes part of a speech made by the Chairman of the
Municipal Council, in March, 1908. The Chairman says in part:
&quot;The advice which we have received from the British
Government is, in brief, that we should do more than keep pace
with the native authorities, we should be in advance of them, and
where possible, encourage them to follow us.&quot; It must have
been most disheartening to the native authorities, suppressing
the opium traffic with the utmost rigor, to see their efforts
defied and nullified by the increased opportunities for obtaining
opium in that part of Shanghai over which the Chinese have no
control. A letter from a Chinese to a London paper, gives the
Chinese point of view: &quot;China . . . is obliged to submit to
the ruthless and heartless manner in which British merchants,
under the protection of the Shanghai 'Model Settlement' are
exploiting her to the fullest extent of their ability.&quot; </p>

<p>There is lots of money in opium, however. The following tables
compiled by Mr. Arnold show the comparison between the amount
derived from opium licenses as compared with the amount derived
from other sorts of licenses. </p>

<p>1913. Wheelbarrows Taels, 38,670 </p>

<p>Carts 22,944 </p>

<p>Motor cars 12,376 </p>

<p>Cargo boats.... . . .. 5,471 </p>

<p>Chinese boats 4,798 </p>

<p>Steam launches.... . 2,221 </p>

<p>Total, 86,480 </p>

<p>Opium shops 86,386 Opium, 86,3 86 </p>

<p>Another table shows the licensed institutions in Shanghai
representing normal social life (chiefly of the Chinese) as
compared with revenue from opium shops: </p>

<p>1913. Tavern Taels, 16,573 </p>

<p>Foreign liquor seller.. 19,483 </p>

<p>Chinese wine shop.... 28,583 </p>

<p>&quot;&quot; tea shop.... 9,484 </p>

<p>&quot;&quot; theater. . . . . 8,74 </p>

<p>&quot;&quot; club 3,146 </p>

<p>Total.. 85,983 </p>

<p>Opium shops 86,386 </p>

<p>Treaty Ports are those cities in China, in which the foreign
powers have extra-territorial holdings, not subject to Chinese
jurisdiction. Shanghai is one of them, the largest and most
important. The Statistical Abstract Relating to British India for
I903-4 to I912-I3 shows the exports of British opium into these
Treaty Ports. </p>

<p>1903-4 1,610,296 pounds sterling </p>

<p>1904-5 1,504,604 </p>

<p>1905-6 1,130,372 </p>

<p>1906-7 1,031,065 </p>

<p>1907-8 1,215,142 </p>

<p>1908-9 2,703,871 </p>

<p>1909-10 1,234,432 </p>

<p>1910-11 2,203,670 </p>

<p>1911-12 3,64,887 </p>

<p>1912-13 3,242,902 </p>

<p>It was in 1907 that China began her great fight against the
opium evil, and enacted stringent laws for its prohibition on
Chinese soil. On page 15 of his little book, Mr. Arnold quotes
from Commissioner Carl, of Canton: &quot;The 1912 figure (for the
importation of foreign opium) is the largest on record since
1895. The great influx of Chinese into the foreign concessions,
where the antiopium smoking regulations cannot be enforced by the
Chinese authorities, and where smoking can be indulged in without
fear of punishment, no doubt accounts for the unusual increase
under foreign opium.&quot; <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>