
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-11</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-48</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf91_100.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043639 text/html 41240
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:36:26 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:12 GMT
Content-length: 41022
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp facts 91 - 100</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>Hemp FACT #91-Sacrament-7 </p>

<p>Date: 95-04-22 09:55:50 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>I haven't read this many Bible verses since Sunday school. For
those that attend church, synagogue, temple, etc-- Are you going
to cut-n-paste this article and give it to your pastors, rabbis,
shaman and the like? ;-) </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT-- Part 7.</b> </p>

<p>The fact that modern Christendom has no sense of union with
God has led to numerous churches without the understanding for
building a Christian culture and kingdom to replace the confusion
of modern politics. This lack of understanding was not lacking in
the ancient church and was a major source of enthusiasm for the
prophets of old. In fact, the power of the early church was
manifested due to this understanding of the spirit of God
dwelling in man, the temple of God. To the ancient prophets it
was not a God above, nor a God over yonder, but a God within.
&quot;Be still and know that I am God&quot; for the visionaries
and mystics of every time and place, this has been the first and
greatest of the commandments. </p>

<p>In 1 Corinthians 11:28 Christ said, &quot;Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of the
cup.&quot; Probably the most relevant study to date about what
might be considered typical marijuana experience concludes that
marijuana gives spontaneous insights into self (Dr. Charles Tart,
&quot;On Being Stoned: A Psychological Study of Marijuana
Intoxication&quot;, Science and Behavior, 1971). </p>

<p>The sacramentality of marijuana is declared by Christ himself
and can be understood only when a person partakes of the natural
divine herb. The fact is communion of Jesus cannot be disputed or
be destroyed. Marijuana is the new wine divine and cannot be
compared to the old wine, which is alcohol. Jesus rejected the
old wine and glorified the &quot;new wine&quot; at the wedding
feast of Cana. Cana is a linguistic derivation of the present day
cannabis and so it is. (Some Biblical scholars and there is a
certain amount of support in early tradition of the view have
looked upon the miracle of Cana as a sign of the Eucharist.) </p>

<p>Note the references to new wine in the Bible: </p>

<p>Isaiah 65:8 &quot;Thus saith the Lord, As the new wine is
found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for a
blessing is in it; so will I do for my servant's sake&quot; </p>

<p>Acts 2:13 &quot;Others mocking said, &quot;These men are full
of new wine.&quot; </p>

<p>Isaiah 65:8 declares that the new wine is found in the cluster
and that a blessing is in it. When one mentions clusters, one
thinks of clusters of grapes. Webster's New Riverside Dictionary,
Office Edition, defines marijuana: 1. Hemp 2. The dried flower
clusters and leaves of the hemp plant, esp. when taken to induce
euphoria. </p>

<p>The Encyclopedia Britannica says the following about hemp: </p>

<p>Seed producing flowers form elongate, spike like clusters
growing on the pistillate, or female plants; pollen producing
flowers form many branched clusters or staminate, on male plants.
Here and in Webster's, marijuana fits the description of the new
wine and as history has shown a blessing is in it. </p>

<p>Baudelaire said the following about the effects of hashish: </p>

<p>&quot;This marvelous experience often occurs as if it were the
effect of superior and invisible power acting on the person from
without...This delightful and singular state...gives no advance
warning. It is as unexpected as a ghost, an intermittent haunting
from which we must draw, if we are wise, the certainty of a
better existence. This acuteness of thought, this enthusiasm of
the senses and the spirit must have appeared to man through the
ages as the first blessing.&quot; </p>

<p>In the books of Acts the apostles were accused of being full
of new wine. Acts 2:13 was the time of pentecost when the Holy
Spirit descended upon the apostles. Numerous outpourings of the
Spirit are mentioned in the Acts of the apostles in which
healing, prophesy, and the expelling of demons are particularly
associated with the activity of the Spirit. Incense (marijuana)
was used by the ancients for healing, prophesy, and the expelling
of demons. </p>

<p>Part 8. Tomorrow, pass it on :-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #92-Sacrament-8 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-23 09:55:59 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Now this is ridiculous. It's late April and the wind chill
here in Dallas is in the upper 20's this morning. :-o O.K. you
northerners, quit laughing, we're spoiled down here. </p>

<p>A SPECIAL NOTE-- There is a 60 Minutes program on tonight that
is supposed to be critical of DEA/FBI. Don't know any details. </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT--Part 8.</b> </p>

<p>When Christ ascended into heaven in the cloud (Acts 1:9-11) he
sent his disciples the Holy Spirit with the &quot;gift of
tongues&quot; (Acts 2:3) and there appeared unto them cloven
tongues like as a fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they
were filled with the Holy Spirit and were given the power to
prophesy or witness. (Marijuana has been credited with speech
giving and inspiration of mental powers.) </p>

<p>The first two gifts of the Holy Spirit are traditionally said
to be wisdom and understanding, which no doubt are the two things
most needed by the human race. In Jamaica today marijuana is
referred to as the &quot;weed of wisdom&quot; and is reputed to
be the plant that grew on Solomon's grave, a man known for his
great wisdom. Marijuana expands consciousness and enhances the
capacity for mystical and creative inspiration. In Acts 2:3 Fire
speaks figuratively of the Holy Spirit. Fire was also a means
which to transport a saint to heaven. </p>

<p>2 Kings 2:11 &quot;And it came to pass, as they still went on,
and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and
horses of fire, and parted asunder; and Elijah went up by a
whirlwind into heaven.&quot; </p>

<p>Recent writers have speculated that this passage was in
reference to flying saucers. That is because they look at this
passage physically. This ascension of Elijah like the ascension
of Christ in the cloud into heaven is the &quot;withdrawal&quot;
from the external or physical world, to be the inmost reality of
all. This can be referred to as ecstasy, rapture, or transport
and is a result of the Holy Spirit. Ecstasy, rapture, or
transport therefor agree in designating a feeling or state of
intense, often extreme mental and emotional exaltation. Rapture
is defined as ecstatic joy or delight; joyful ecstasy. Some of
the synonyms of rapture are bliss, beatitude, transport, and
exultation. The true rapture is therefore one in which one is
spiritually transported to the heavens. Don't expect to float up
into the sky. </p>

<p>Marijuana as history has shown is the catalyst used to achieve
the spiritual journey into the heavens. That is why in India it
was referred to as the Heavenly-Guide, the Poor Man's Heaven, and
the Sky-flier. That is why Professor Mircea Eliade, perhaps the
foremost authority on the history of religion, suggested that
Zoroaster may have caused hemp to bridge the metaphysical gap
between heaven and earth. </p>

<p>One dictionary defines marijuana as the leaves and flowering
tops when taken to induce euphoria. Euphoria is defined by the
same dictionary as great happiness or bliss. (In India, marijuana
has been referred to as the joy-giver and the soother of grief.)
Bliss is defined as the ecstasy of salvation, spiritual joy. Some
of the synonyms of bliss are beatitude, transport, rapture,
ecstasy, paradise, heaven. </p>

<p>Throughout the ancient world there is mention of &quot;magical
flight&quot;, &quot;ascent to heaven&quot;, and &quot;mystical
journey&quot;. All these mythological and folklore traditions
have their point of departure in an ideology and technique of
ecstasy that imply &quot;journey in spirit&quot;. </p>

<p>Part 9. Tomorrow..Pass it on :-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #93-Sacrament-9 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-24 10:10:01 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT--Part 9.</b> </p>

<p>The pilgrimage from earth to heaven is not a journey to some
other place or some other time, but is a journey within. One must
realize that &quot;death&quot; through which we must pass before
God can be seen does not lie ahead of us in time. Rather it is
now that we have a man of sin within us that must be killed and a
new man free from sin that must be born. This is actualized in
baptism and the sacramental life in the church. For as many of
you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ
(Galatians 3:27). The effect of baptism is spiritual regeneration
or rebirth, whereby one is &quot;enChristened&quot;, involving
both union with Christ and remission of sins. In Titus 3:5
baptism is the &quot;bath of regeneration&quot; accompanying
renewal by the Spirit. Some of the synonyms of regeneration are
beatification, conversion, sanctification, salvation,
inspiration, bread of life, Body and Blood of Christ. </p>

<p>Sara Benetowa of the Institute of Anthropological Sciences in
Warsaw is quoted in the Book of Grass as saying: </p>

<p>&quot;By comparing the old Slavic word 'Kepati' and the
Russian 'Kupati' with the Scythian 'cannabis' Shrader developed
and justified Meringer's supposition that there is a link between
the Scythian baths and Russian vapor baths. </p>

<p>&quot;In the entire Orient even today to 'go to the bath'
means not only to accomplish an act of purification and enjoy a
pleasure, but also to fulfill the divine law. Vambery calls
'bath' any club in which the members play checkers, drink coffee,
and smoke hashish or tobacco.&quot; </p>

<p>St. Matthew's account of the institution of the Eucharist
attaches to the Eucharist cup these words: &quot;Drink of it, all
of, for this is the blood of the covenant, which is poured out
for many for the remission of sins (st. Matthew 26:27). Drinking
the sacramental cup therefor serves like baptism (Acts 2:38)
where Peter said unto them, &quot;Repent, and be baptized
everyone of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. We of the
Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare a three-part doctrine of the
Holy Herb, the Holy Word, and the Holy Man (Woman). </p>

<p>The present and future benefits to the individual communicant
have their importance given them by Jesus, who said, &quot;He who
eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will
raise them up at the last day.&quot; (John 6:54) As such we must
see that the divine person who is active in creation, in renewal,
and in human rebirth and resurrection, is also active in the
Eucharist. </p>

<p>There was a profound change in America when marijuana smoking
started on a large scale in the late 1960's. A large number of
people resisted the draft, resisted the war ... started letting
their hair and beards grow ... became interested in natural
foods... the ecology and the environment. What we really saw was
the awakening of our generation to the beginning of Christian
mentality through marijuana smoking. The earmarks of this
mentality are: I don't want to go to war; I really don't want to
be part of the political-military-economic fiasco you call
society. </p>

<p>Like the Indians Hemp Drug Commission three quarters of a
century earlier, the Canadian Le Dain Commission conducted an
inquiry into the use of marijuana. On page 156 of the report is
the following: </p>

<p>Part 10. Tomorrow--Pass it on :-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #94-Sacrament-10 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-25 10:16:13 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Didn't mean to leave a cliffhanger yesterday or am I the only
one that </p>

<p>noticed it. </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT--Part 10.</b> </p>

<p>&quot;In the case of cannabis, the positive points which are
claimed for it include the following: It is a relaxant; it is
disinhibiting; it increases self-confidence and the feeling of
creativity (whether justified by creative </p>

<p>results or not); it increases sensual awareness and
appreciation; it facilitates self acceptance and in this way
makes it easier to accept others; it serves a sacramental
function in promoting a sense of spiritual community among users;
it is a shared pleasure; because it is illicit and the object of
strong disapproval from those who are, by and large, opposed to
social change, it is a symbol of protest and a means of
strengthening the sense of identity among those who are strongly
critical of certain aspects of our society and value structure
today.&quot; </p>

<p>On page 144 of the Report, marijuana is associated with peace.
</p>

<p>&quot;In our conversation with (students and young people)
they have frequently contrasted marijuana and alcohol effects to
describe the former as a drug of peace, a drug that reduces
tendencies to aggression while suggesting that the latter drug
produces hostile, aggressive behavior. Thus marijuana is seen as
particularly appropriate to a generation that emphasizes peace
and is, in many ways, anticompetitive.&quot; </p>

<p>In a magazine article by G. S. Chopra entitled &quot;Man and
Marijuana&quot; on page 235 is a section dealing with Human
Experiments. One hundred persons with an established marijuana
smoking habit smoked marijuana. They described the symptoms as
follows: &quot;I have done things today which I usually dislike
but which I rather enjoyed doing today.&quot; &quot;Nothing
seemed impossible to accomplish.&quot; &quot;I assumed a cool and
composed attitude and forgot all mental worries.&quot; &quot;I
behaved in a childish and foolish manner.&quot; &quot;It relieves
sense of fatigue and gives rise to feelings of happiness.&quot;
&quot;I feel like laughing.&quot; &quot;My head is dizzy.&quot;
&quot;I feel like taking more food.&quot; &quot;The world is gay
around me.&quot; &quot;I feel inclined to work.&quot; &quot;I am
a friend to all and have no enemy in the world.&quot; </p>

<p>According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, in the section on
&quot;Roman Catholicism&quot;: </p>

<p>&quot;To understand the meaning and use of the Eucharist we
must see it as an act of universal worship, of cooperation, of
association else it loses the greater part of its significance.
Neither in Roman Catholic nor in Protestant Eucharistic practice
does the sacrament retain much of the symbolism of Christian
unity, which clearly it has. Originally, the symbolism was that
of a community meal, an accepted social symbol of community
throughout the whole of human culture.&quot; </p>

<p>Marijuana has been used as sacrifice, a sacrament, a ritual
fumigant (incense), a good-will offering, and as a means of
communing with the divine spirit. It has been used to seal
treaties, friendships, solemn binding agreements and to
legitimize covenants. It has been used as a traditional defense
against evil and in purification. It has been used in divinations
(1. the art or practice that seeks to foresee or foretell future
events or discover hidden knowledge; 2. unusual insight;
intuitive perception.) It has been used in remembrance of the
dead and praised for its medicinal properties. </p>

<p>Most Christians agree that participation in the Eucharist is
supposed to enhance and deepen communion of believers not only
with Christ but also with one another. We must therefor ask the
question, &quot;What substance did the ancients use as a
community meal to facilitate communion with the Lord?&quot; The
answer to that question is marijuana. Hemp as originally used in
religious ritual, temple activities, and tribal rites, involved
groups of worshippers rather than the solitary individual. The
pleasurable psychoactive effects were then, as now, communal
experiences. </p>

<p>Part 11.--The Final Part of Sacrament Tomorrow--Pass it on :-)
</p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #95-Sacrament-11 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-26 10:11:03 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>I was wondering how this series of posts on the sacrament
would be viewed. I have received more request for the complete
text of this article than I have of any other. When I first read
it, I thought it was going to be boring. I personally do not
subscribe to organized religion because it all seems so
hypocritical. After reading this, it looks like the roots of
religion are in the right place. Inner peace, respecting others
and all that stuff. </p>

<p>Well, here's the final part of: </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT-Part 11</b>. </p>

<p>(I didn't realize there was this little left when I posted
yesterday) </p>

<p>Practically every major religion and culture of the ancient
world utilized marijuana as part of their religious observance.
Marijuana was the ambrosia of the ancient world. It was the food,
drink, and perfume of the gods. It was used by the Africans, the
Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Asians, the Europeans, and possibly
the Indians of the Americas. Would it be too much to suggest that
the ancient Israelites also utilized marijuana? </p>

<p>The following information was taken from the most
authoritative books dealing with the history of marijuana. They
are mentioned at the end of this work. </p>

<p>-- </p>

<p>This article came from, but was NOT written by: </p>

<p>The University of Massachusetts at Amherst </p>

<p>Cannabis Reform Coalition </p>

<p>S.A.O. Box #2 </p>

<p>415 Student Union Building </p>

<p>UMASS, Amherst MA 01003 </p>

<p>Now I'm off to the WWW to find more relevant info. See you
tomorrow. Pass it on :-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #96-Reefer Madness-1 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-27 11:23:45 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>The following post was taken from: </p>

<p>Newsgroups: alt.hemp </p>

<p>Subject: Reefer Madness??? </p>

<p>Date: 9 Jun 1994 04:27:08 -0400 </p>

<p><b>Part 1.</b> </p>

<p><b>Essay:</b> </p>

<p><b>Reefer Madness?</b> </p>

<p><b>By</b> </p>

<p><b>Dune Hartsell</b> </p>

<p>For thousands of years, Hemp (Cannabis Sativa) has been one of
the most useful plants known to man. It's strong, stringy fibers
make durable rope and can be woven into anything from sails to
shirts; it's pithy centers, or &quot;Hurds,&quot; make excellent
paper; it's seeds, high in protein and oil, have been pressed
into lighting or lubricating oils and pulped into animal feed;
and extracts of it's leaves have provided a wide range of
medicines and tonics. </p>

<p>Hemp also has a notable place in American history: </p>

<p>-Washington and Jefferson grew it. </p>

<p>-Our first flags were likely made of hemp cloth. </p>

<p>-The first and second drafts of the Declaration of
Independence were written on paper made from Dutch Hemp. </p>

<p>-When the pioneers went west, their wagons were covered with
hemp canvas (the word &quot;canvas&quot; comes from canabacius ,
hemp cloth). </p>

<p>-The first &quot;Levis&quot; sold to prospectors were sturdy
hemp coveralls. </p>

<p>-Abraham Lincoln's wife, Mary Todd, came from the richest hemp
growing family in Kentucky. </p>

<p>After the Civil War, however, hemp production in the States
declined steeply. Without slave labor, hemp became too expensive
to process. Besides, cotton ginned by machines was cheaper.
Still, hemp fabric remained the second most common cloth in
America. </p>

<p>The plant's by-products remained popular well into this
century. Maple Sugar combined with Hashish (a resin from hemp
leaves) was sold over the counter and in Sears Roebuck catalogs
as a harmless candy. </p>

<p>Hemp rope was a mainstay of the Navy. Two thousand tons of
hemp seed were sold annually as birdfeed. The pharmaceutical
industry used hemp extracts in hundreds of potions and vigorously
fought attempts to restrict hemp production. And virtually all
good paints and varnishes were made from hemp-seed oil and/or
linseed oil. </p>

<p>In the 1920's and '30s the American public became increasingly
concerned about drug addiction-----especially to Morphine and a
&quot;miracle drug&quot; that had been introduced by the Bayer
Company in 1898 under the brand name &quot;Heroin.&quot; By the
mid-1920's, there were 20,000 heroin addicts in the U.S. alone. </p>

<p>Most Americans were unaware that smoking hemp was
intoxicating; however, until William Randolph Hearst launched a
campaign of sensational stories that linked &quot;the killer
weed&quot; to everything from Jazz to &quot;Crazed
minorities,&quot; and even unspeakable crimes. Hearst's papers
featured headlines like: </p>

<p>MARIJUANA MAKES FIENDS OF BOYS IN 30 DAYS: </p>

<p>HASIESH GOADS USERS TO BLOOD LUST </p>

<p>and </p>

<p>NEW DOPE LURE, MARIJUANA, HAS MANY VICTIMS </p>

<p>In 1930 Hearst was joined in his crusade against hemp by Harry
J. Anslinger, commissioner of the newly organized Federal Bureau
of Narcotics (FBN). Hearst often quoted Anslinger in his
newspaper stories, printing sensational comments like: &quot;If
the hideous monster Frankenstein came face to face with the
monster marijuana he would drop dead of fright.&quot; </p>

<p>Not everyone shared their opinion. In 1930, the US government
formed the Siler Commission to study marijuana smoking by
off-duty servicemen in Panama. The Commission found no lasting
effects and recommended that no criminal penalties apply to it's
use. </p>

<p>Nonetheless, Hearst's and Anslinger's anti-hemp campaign had
results. By 1931, twenty-nine states had prohibited marijuana use
for nonmedical purposes. In 1937, after two years of secret
hearings and based largely on Anslinger's testimony, Congress
passed the Marijuana Tax Act, which essentially outlawed
marijuana in America. </p>

<p>Because Congress was not sure it was constitutional to ban
hemp outright, it taxed the plant prohibitively instead. Hemp
growers had to register with the government; sellers and buyers
had to fill out cumbersome paperwork; and, of course, it was a
federal crime not to comply. </p>

<p>Part 2. Tomorrow--Pass it on :-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #97-Reefer Mdnss-2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-28 10:31:09 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>The following post was taken from: </p>

<p>Newsgroups: alt.hemp </p>

<p>Subject: Reefer Madness??? </p>

<p>Date: 9 Jun 1994 04:27:08 -0400 </p>

<p><b>Part Duex.</b> </p>

<p><b>Essay:</b> </p>

<p><b>Reefer Madness?</b> </p>

<p><b>By</b> </p>

<p><b>Dune Hartsell</b> </p>

<p>For selling an ounce or less of marijuana to an unregistered
person, the federal tax was 100 dollars. (To give some sense on
how prohibitive the tax was, &quot;legitimate&quot; marijuana was
selling for $2 a pound at the time. In 1994 dollars, the federal
tax would be roughly 2,000 dollars an ounce.) </p>

<p>The Marijuana Tax Act effectively destroyed all legitimate
commercial cultivation of hemp. Limited medical use was
permitted, but as hemp derivatives became prohibitively expensive
for doctors and pharmacists, they turned to chemically derived
drugs instead. All other nonmedical uses, from rope to industrial
lubricants, were taxed out of existence. </p>

<p>With most of their markets gone, farmers stopped growing hemp,
and the legitimate industry disappeared. Ironically, though, hemp
continued to grow wild all over the country, and its
&quot;illegitimate&quot; use was little affected by Congress. </p>

<p>Was a viable hemp industry forced out of existence because it
was a threat to people's health or because it was a threat to a
few large businesses that would profit from banning it? </p>

<p>Here are some facts, hemp was outlawed just as a new
technology would have made hemp paper far cheaper than wood-pulp
paper. </p>

<p>Traditionally, hemp fiber had to be separated from the stalk
by hand, and the cost of labor made this method uncompetitive.
But in 1937, the year that hemp was outlawed, the decoricator
machine was invented; it could process as much as three tons of
hemp an hour and produced higher quality fibers with less loss of
fiber than wood-based pulp. According to some scientists, hemp
would have been able to undercut competing products overnight.
Enthusiastic about the new technology, Popular Mechanics
predicted that hemp would become America's first &quot;billion
dollar crop.&quot; The magazine pointed out that &quot;10,000
acres devoted to hemp will produce as much paper as 40,000 acres
of average [forest] pulp land.&quot; </p>

<p>According to Jack Herer, an expert on the &quot;hemp
conspiracy,&quot; Hearst, the Du Ponts and other &quot;industrial
barons and financiers knew that machinery to cut, bale,
decoriticate (separate fiber from the stalk) and process hemp
into paper was becoming available in the mid 1930's.&quot; (The
Emperor Wears No </p>

<p>Clothes ) </p>

<p>Hearst, one of the promoters of the anti-hemp hysteria, had a
vested interest in protecting the pulp industry. Hearst owned
enormous timber acreage; competition from hemp paper might have
driven the Hearst paper-manufacturing division out of business
and cause the value of his acreage to plummet. (ibid) </p>

<p>Herer says that Hearst was even responsible for popularizing
the term &quot;marijuana&quot; in American culture. In fact, he
suggests, popularizing the word was a key strategy of Hearst's
efforts: &quot;The first step in creating hysteria was to
introduce the element of fear of the unknown by using a word that
no one had ever heard of before...'marijuana.'&quot; (ibid) </p>

<p>The DuPont Company also had an interest in the pulp industry.
At this time, it was in the process of patenting a new sulfuric
acid process for producing wood-pulp paper. According to the
company's own records, wood-pulp products ultimately accounted
for more than 80% of all of DuPont's railroad car loadings for
the next 50 years. (ibid) </p>

<p>But DuPont had even more reasons to be concerned about hemp.
In the 1930's, the company was making drastic changes in its
business strategy.Traditionally a manufacturer of military
explosives, DuPont realized after the end of World War I that
developing peacetime uses for artificial fibers and plastics
would be more profitable in the long run. So it began pouring
millions of dollars into research, Which resulted in the
development of such synthetic fibers as rayon and nylon. </p>

<p>Part 3 Final Part of this article tomorrow. Pass it on :-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #98-Reefer Mdnss-3 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-29 10:34:26 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>The following was taken from: </p>

<p>Newsgroups: alt.hemp </p>

<p>Subject: Reefer Madness??? </p>

<p>Date: 9 Jun 1994 04:27:08 -0400 </p>

<p><b>Final Part.</b> </p>

<p><b>Essay:</b> </p>

<p><b>Reefer Madness?</b> </p>

<p><b>By</b> </p>

<p><b>Dune Hartsell</b> </p>

<p>-Two years before the prohibitive hemp tax, DuPont developed a
new synthetic fiber, nylon, which was an ideal substitute for
hemp rope. </p>

<p>-The year after the hemp tax, DuPont was able to bring another
&quot;miracle&quot; synthetic fabric onto the market, rayon.
Rayon, which became widely used for clothing, was a direct
competitor to hemp cloth. </p>

<p>-&quot;Congress and the Treasury Department were assured,
through secret testimony given by DuPont, that Hemp-seed oil
could be replaced with synthetic petrochemical oils made
principally by DuPont.&quot; These oils were used in paints and
other products.(ibid) </p>

<p>The millions spent on these products, as well as the hundreds
of millions in expected profits from them, could have been wiped
out if the newly affordable hemp products were allowed on the
market. So, according to Herer, DuPont worked with Hearst to
eliminate hemp. </p>

<p>DuPont's point man was none other than Harry Anslinger, the
commissioner of the FBN. Anslinger was appointed to the FBN by
Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon, who was also chairman of the
Mellon Bank, DuPont's chief financial backer. But Anslinger's
relationship to Mellon wasn't just political; he was also married
to Mellon's niece. </p>

<p>Anslinger apparently used his political clout to sway
congressional opinion on the hemp tax. According to Herer, the
American Medical Association (AMA) tried to argue for the medical
benefits of hemp. But after the AMA officials testified to
Congress, &quot;they were quickly denounced by Anslinger and the
entire congressional committee, and curtly excused.&quot; </p>

<p>Five years after the hemp tax was imposed, when Japanese
seizure of Philippine hemp caused a wartime shortage of rope, the
government reversed itself. Overnight, the U.S. government urged
hemp cultivation once again and created a stirring movie called
&quot;Hemp for Victory&quot; then, just as quickly, it
recriminalized hemp after the shortage had passed. </p>

<p>While U.S. hemp was temporarily legal, however, it saved the
life of a young pilot named George Bush, who was forced to bail
out of his burning airplane after a battle over the Pacific. At
the time he didn't know that: </p>

<p>-Parts of his aircraft engine were lubricated with hemp-seed
oil. </p>

<p>-100% of his life-saving parachute webbing was made from U.S.
grown hemp. </p>

<p>-Virtually all of the rigging and lines of the ship that
rescued him were made of hemp. </p>

<p>-The flightsuit on his back was a rubberized hemp-cloth. </p>

<p>-The fire hoses on the ship were woven from hemp Ironically,
President Bush consistently opposed decriminalizing hemp grown in
the United States. </p>

<p>Does the hemp conspiracy continue? in March 1992, Robert
Bonner, the chief of the Drug Enforcement Agency, effectively
rejected a petition to permit doctors to prescribe marijuana for
patients as medication for chronic pain. Bonner said:
&quot;Beyond doubt the claims that marijuana is medicine are
false, dangerous and cruel.&quot; But, according to a federal
administrative law judge, Francis Young, &quot;The record clearly
shows that marijuana has been accepted as capable of relieving
the distress of great numbers of very ill people and doing so
with safety under medical supervision.&quot; ( The New York
Times) </p>

<p>There WILL be a Sunday post, now that I have a new computer at
the house. Can't believe I'm almost to FACT 100. I hope those of
you that read my daily post are sharing the information with
others. I have no clue as to how many people read this post, but
I've heard it's quite a few. </p>

<p>See ya manana.. Pass it on :-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #99-Organizations </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-30 11:28:45 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Just in case anyone is interested in joining the fight for
Truth, Justice and </p>

<p>The American Way :-). </p>

<p>RELEGALIZE IT!!! </p>

<p>REGIONAL, NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS DEDICATED
TO PERSONAL FREEDOM, SOCIAL CHANGE AND DRUG LAW REFORM </p>

<p>NATIONAL GROUPS </p>

<p>To call or write a NORML chapter, contact the national office:
</p>

<p>NORML </p>

<p>1001 Connecticut Ave., NW </p>

<p>Suite 1010 </p>

<p>Washington, DC 20036 </p>

<p>Alabama TEACH </p>

<p>3103 Susan Moore Road </p>

<p>Blountsville, AL 35031 </p>

<p>Alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics and Marijuana-AIDS </p>

<p>Research </p>

<p>PO Box 21210 </p>

<p>Kalorama Station </p>

<p>Washington, DC 20009 </p>

<p>(202) 483-8595 </p>

<p>American </p>

<p>Anti-Prohibition League </p>

<p>4017 Southeast Belmont St., Box 103 </p>

<p>Portland, OR 97214 </p>

<p>(503) 235-4524 </p>

<p>Fax (503) 234-1330 </p>

<p>American Cannabis Society </p>

<p>PO Box 9208 </p>

<p>Madison, WI 53715 </p>

<p>(800) 256-7424 </p>

<p>American Civil Liberties Union </p>

<p>132 W. 43rd St. </p>

<p>New York, NY 10036 </p>

<p>(212) 944-9800 </p>

<p>Business Alliance for Commerce in Hemp (BACH) </p>

<p>PO Box 71093 </p>

<p>Los Angeles, CA 90071-0093 </p>

<p>(310) 288-4152 </p>

<p>Cannabis Action Network (CAN) </p>

<p>4428 South Carrollton </p>

<p>New Orleans, LA 70119 </p>

<p>(504) 482-4094 </p>

<p>Cannabis Research Institute </p>

<p>PO Box 11008 </p>

<p>Portland, OR 97211 </p>

<p>(503) 282-9388 </p>

<p>Cannabis Action Network </p>

<p>(CAN) </p>

<p>2560 Bancroft Way, #46 </p>

<p>Berkeley, CA 94704 </p>

<p>(510) 486-8083 </p>

<p>Clergy for Enlightened Drug Policy </p>

<p>St. Luke's Methodist Church </p>

<p>Wisconsin Avenue and Calvert St., N.W. </p>

<p>Washington, DC 20007 </p>

<p>Drug Policy Foundation (DPF) </p>

<p>4455 Connecticut Ave., N.W. </p>

<p>Suite B-500 </p>

<p>Washington, DC 20008-2302 </p>

<p>(202) 537-5005 </p>

<p>Emergency Coalition for Medical Cannabis </p>

<p>1001 Connecticut Ave., N.W. </p>

<p>Suite B-500 </p>

<p>Washington, DC 20036 </p>

<p>Families Against Mandatory </p>

<p>Minimums (FAMM) </p>

<p>1001 Pennsylvania Ave., N.W. </p>

<p>Washington, DC 20004 </p>

<p>(202) 457-5790 </p>

<p>The Future of Freedom Foundation </p>

<p>PO Box 9752 </p>

<p>Denver, CO 80209 </p>

<p>Green Panthers! </p>

<p>PO Box 31231 </p>

<p>Cincinnati, OH 45231-0231 </p>

<p>(513) 522-6264 </p>

<p>Help End Marijuana Prohibition (HEMP) </p>

<p>Box 42, Student Organization </p>

<p>Southeast Missouri State Univ. </p>

<p>I University Plaza </p>

<p>Cape Girardeau, MO 63701 </p>

<p>Help End Marijuana Prohibition (HEMP) </p>

<p>5632 Van Nuys Blvd., #210 </p>

<p>Van Nuys, CA 91401 </p>

<p>(310) 392-1806 </p>

<p>Hemp Advocates </p>

<p>PO Box 10176 </p>

<p>South Bend, IN 46680 </p>

<p>Illinois Marijuana Initiative </p>

<p>PO Box 2242 </p>

<p>Darien, IL 60559 </p>

<p>Institute for HEMP </p>

<p>PO Box 65130 </p>

<p>St. Paul, MN 55165 </p>

<p>(612) 222-2628 </p>

<p>Libertarian Party </p>

<p>1528 Pennsylvania Ave., S.E. </p>

<p>Washington, DC 20003 </p>

<p>(202) 543-1988 </p>

<p>Maine Vocals </p>

<p>PO Box 189 </p>

<p>Anson, ME 04911 </p>

<p>Massachusetts Cannabis Reform Coalition </p>

<p>(MASS CAN) </p>

<p>One Homestead Rd. </p>

<p>Marblehead, MA 01945 </p>

<p>(617) 944-CANN </p>

<p>Medical Hemp University </p>

<p>Box 1322 </p>

<p>Buda, TX 78610 </p>

<p>Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies, Inc. </p>

<p>1801 Tippah Avenue </p>

<p>Charlotte, NC 28205 </p>

<p>(704) 358-9830 </p>

<p>National Coalition Against Prohibition </p>

<p>187 Acalanes Drive, Apt. 14 </p>

<p>Sunnyvale, CA 94086-5520 </p>

<p>(415) 964-3655 </p>

<p>National Drug Strategy Network </p>

<p>1899 L St., Suite 500 </p>

<p>Washington, DC 20036 </p>

<p>(202) 835-9075 </p>

<p>New Yorkers for Drug Policy Reform, Inc. </p>

<p>226 West 4th St., Suite 4 </p>

<p>New York, NY 10014 </p>

<p>(718) 392-5036 </p>

<p>North Idaho TEACH </p>

<p>PO Box 155 </p>

<p>Sagle, ID 83860 </p>

<p>Partnership for Responsible Drug Information, Inc. </p>

<p>226 West 4th St., Suite 4 </p>

<p>New York, NY 10014 </p>

<p>(718) 392-5036 </p>

<p>Progressive Action Alliance! </p>

<p>PO Box 4935 </p>

<p>East Lansing, MI 48826-4935 </p>

<p>TEACH </p>

<p>PO Box 1297 </p>

<p>Youngstown, FL 32466 </p>

<p>Texas Hemp Campaign </p>

<p>PO Box 13549 </p>

<p>Austin, TX 78711 </p>

<p>(512) 837-4674 </p>

<p>U-Mass at Amherst </p>

<p>Cannabis Reform Coalition </p>

<p>S.A.O. Mailbox #2 </p>

<p>Student Union Bldg., UMASS </p>

<p>Amherst, MA 01003 </p>

<p>Vermont Civil Coalition Against Prohibition </p>

<p>63 George St. </p>

<p>Burlington, VT 05401 </p>

<p>(802) 864-7107 </p>

<p>Vermonters for Pot Peace </p>

<p>PO Box 237 </p>

<p>Underhill, VT 05489 </p>

<p>Vermont Grassroots Party </p>

<p>PO Box 537 </p>

<p>Waitsfield, VT 05673 </p>

<p>(802) 496-2387 </p>

<p>Vermont Vocals </p>

<p>RFD 1, Box 148 </p>

<p>Newport, VT 05855 </p>

<p>Virginia BACH </p>

<p>Route 1, Box 2142 </p>

<p>Crewe, VA 23930 </p>

<p>(804) 645-1038 </p>

<p>Washington Cannabis Movement </p>

<p>7219 120th Street </p>

<p>Seattle, WA 98178 </p>

<p>(206) 548-8043 </p>

<p>Tomorrow--Hemp FACT 100--Review and Preview--Pass it on :-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #100-Personal Views </h3>

<p>Date: 95-05-01 09:27:12 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>HEMP FACT OF THE DAY #100 (fireworks, cheers, etc. ;-) --
My Personal Feelings.</b> </p>

<p>What an education I have had since I started these posts. I
knew many of the FACTS, but I didn't know all of them especially
all of the medical and industrial uses for hemp. </p>

<p>I realize there are many under age 18 on AOL. I DO NOT
ADVOCATE THE USE OF ANY SUBSTANCE THAT MIGHT BE HARMFUL TO ANYONE
UNDER THE AGE OF 18. (Wait until you're in college to experiment.
I did. It'll give you something to look forward too ;-) </p>

<p>I would like to thank those of you that have been reading Hemp
FACTS over the past few months. I can't believe this is #100. I
still have no idea how many of you are reading this information.
I have tried to get the numbers from AOL, but was told they are
not available. The best guess I have is anywhere from 100-200 on
the low side to maybe a few thousand. </p>

<p>The information posted here is meant to be shared with others.
Make copies of the documents and post them to other boards
(something other than AOL) or email them to people that NEED to
read them. One of the things I would like to see from the ones of
you that frequent the &quot;chat areas&quot;, is to engage people
in meaningful discussion on how the WOD has failed miserably.
Then direct them to this or any of the other areas where the WOD
is discussed. The more people that become familiar with the
FACTS, the better chance we have of ending the WOD. </p>

<p>My company writes software for insurance companies and agents,
and I will engage the &quot;ties&quot; on this subject. I have
never had ONE disagree with me after I laid out the FACTS. Of
course I don't talk to every single one of them about it, but any
time I can manipulate the conversation in that direction, I make
my point. </p>

<p>Many people fear to publically speak of ending the WOD for
fear of being labeled as a drug user. One of the things I tell
the insurance people, is that is people want to go knock
themselves out on drugs, that's their problem. For those
addicted, it's a medical problem. When someone says that if drugs
are legal, there will be rampant drug use, ask them if they are
going to be 1st in line at the cocaine counter. They will usually
get your point. Another thing to point out is the mandatory
sentences for drug offenders. This is why our jails are
overcrowded. It pushes the violent offenders back on the streets,
'cause there's no room for them in prison. </p>

<p>Remember, &quot;Send a druggie to jail, set a rapist
free.&quot; <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>