
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-58</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B012-61</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/general/bruin.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050117 text/html 30431
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:01:08 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:08:52 GMT
Content-length: 30213
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Marijuana (Cannabis) Fact Sheet</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38171" -->

<h1>MARIJUANA (CANNABIS) FACT SHEET </h1>

<h3>ISSUES STUDY COMMITTEE OF THE BRUIN HUMANIST FORUM </h3>

<p>Copyrighted by the Bruin Humanist Forum 1967 </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Marijuana is not a narcotic. Although California law calls it
a narcotic, it is pharmacologically distinct from the family of
opium derivatives and synthetic narcotics. (Wolstenholme, 1965;
Watt, 1965; Garattini, 1965; 1 Crim 5351 Calif. District Court of
Appeal, 1st Appel. Dist.) </p>

<p>Marijuana is not addicting. The use does not develop any
physical dependence (see below). (Mayor's Committee on Marihuana,
New York City, 1944; Allentuck &amp; Bowman, 1942; Freedman &amp;
Rockmore, 1946; Fort, 1965a, 1965b; Panama Canal Zone Governor's
Committee, 1933; Phalen, 1943; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission, 1894;
Watt, 1965; I Crim 5351 Calif. District Court of Appeal, 1st
Appel. Dist.; United Nations, 1964a, 1964b) </p>

<p>In a small percentage of individuals, a &quot;psychological
dependence&quot; can develop, but a predisposition must be
present. In his paper, &quot;Dependence of the Hashish
Type,&quot; Watt (1965, p. 65) concludes: The habit is gregarious
and is easily abandoned. Personality defect and incipient or
existing psychotic disorder are the essential factors underlying
the formation of the habit. </p>

<p>Marijuana is not detrimental to the user's health. Even when
used over long periods of time, it does not appear to cause
physical or psychological impairment. (Mayor's Committee on
Marihuana, New York City, 1944; Freedman &amp; Rockmore, 1946;
Fort, 1965a, 1965b; Panama Canal Zone Governor's Committee, 1933;
Phalen, 1943; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission, 1894; Becker, 1963) </p>

<p>Marijuana does not tend to release &quot;aggressive
behavior.&quot; On the contrary, its use inhibits aggressive
behavior; it acts as a &quot;tranquilizer.&quot; (Mayor's
Committee on Marihuana, New York City, 1944; Fort, 1965a, 1965b;
Panama Canal Zone Governor's Committee, 1933; Phalen, 1943;
Garattini, 1965) Marijuana does not &quot;lead to&quot; or
&quot;promote&quot; the use of addicting drugs.
&quot;Ninety-eight percent of heroin users started by smoking
tobacco and drinking alcohol firsts&quot; (Mayor's Committee on
Marihuana, New York City, 1944; Fort, 1965a, 1965b; Panama Canal
Zone Governor's Committee, 1933; Phalen, 1943; Garattini, 1965)
Marijuana comes from the Indian hemp plant, which was formerly
grown widely in the United States for the making of rope, and
which still grows wild in many areas. Up until a few years ago it
was a main ingredient in commercial bird-seed. Leaves and
flowering tops provide the cannabis (commonly known in the
Western Hemisphere as marijuana, grass, or pot); the resin and
pollen, in which the active ingredients are highly concentrated,
are the source of &quot;hashish.&quot; (Wolstenholme, 1965) </p>

<p>The effects of smoking marijuana have been described as
follows: &quot;euphoria, reduction of fatigue, and relief of
tension . . . [It will] also increase appetite, distort the time
sense, increase self-confidence, and, like alcohol, can relax
some inhibitions.&quot; (Fort, 1965) A heightened awareness of
color and of esthetic beauty, and the production of rich and
novel mental associations are also commonly reported effects.
Some users report that the marijuana experience is
&quot;psychedelic&quot;: can result in heightened awareness, or
in a consciousness-expanding change in perspective, ideas about
the self, life, etc. Marijuana is not, however, like LSD---a very
powerful psychedelic. Whereas LSD drastically alters thoughts and
perspective, often &quot;jarring&quot; the user into heightened
awareness, marijuana &quot;suggests&quot; or points the way to a
moderately deepened awareness. The user is free to follow these
potentials or not, as they present themselves. (Mayor's Committee
on Marihuana, New York City, 1944; Fort, 1965a, 1965b ; Panama
Canal Zone Governor's Committee, 1933; Goldstein, 1966; Becker,
1963; De Ropp, 1957; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission, 1894)
Pharmacological studies of marijuana and tetrahydrocannabinol
(the major active ingredient) are as yet inconclusive, both
because of insufficient research and because of the subtlety and
complexity of its effect on the human mind. Garattini (1965)
tested maze-learning in rats and found that marijuana caused no
change or very slight impairment; Carlini and Kramer (1965) found
that maze-learning was significantly improved by an injection of
a marijuana extract. Multiple active ingredients are present in
the marijuana plant, and these could vary in concentration (e.g.,
one of the components is sedative, and another is
euphoric/psychedelic). (Wolstenholme, 1965; Watt, 1965; Carlini
&amp; Kramer, 1965) </p>

<p>As with other psychedelics, the effects of marijuana depend in
part on how one interprets, uses, and learns to develop them. As
pointed out by many researchers in the area of
philosophical/psychological effects, the environment
(&quot;setting&quot;) is of great importance. Many people have no
effects whatever the first time they smoke a marijuana cigarette,
but do the second or third time---and thereafter. Everyone has to
learn the effects before he can use them to his own benefit.
(Becker, 1963; Fort, 1965a, 1965b; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission,
1894) </p>

<p>Some years ago it was estimated that marijuana users numbered
&quot;several hundred thousand people in the United States,
including many from the middle-class.&quot; (Fort, 1965a, 1965b)
During the 1960's, however, there has been a rapid increase in
the use of marijuana, particularly among &quot;respectable&quot;
people: those in the professions, non-bohemian high school and
college students, artists, writers, intellectuals, etc. One
report on campus use (Goldstein, 1966) estimates that
approximately 15% of college students have used or are using
marijuana, with the percentage at some large, metropolitan
campuses as high as 30-60%. This same report also held that
marijuana use is now becoming &quot;respectable,&quot; and
indulged in by members of student government, campus groups, and
fraternities and sororities. (Fort,1965a, 1965b; Irwin, 1966;
Goldstein, 1966) </p>

<p>Marijuana smoking does not constitute a social hazard. Four
separate official studies have been conducted on this question,
as a part of a larger study: New York City Mayor's Committee in
1944; a committee of the health department of the U. S. Army;
another U. S. Army committee, concerned with discipline effects;
and a very thorough study by a committee established by the
British Government to study the effects in India where it is-and
was-in as widespread use as is alcohol here. All of these studies
came to the conclusion: marijuana is not damaging to the user or
to society, and therefore should not be outlawed. Political and
economic pressures prevented authorities in New York from
carrying out the recommendations of the Mayor's Committee---the
greatest part of the political pressure from Harry J. Anslinger,
former U. S. Commissioner of Narcotics. (Mayor's Committee on
Marihuana, New York City, 1944; Panama Canal Zone Governor's
Committee, 1933; Phalen, 1943 ; Indian Hemp-Drug Commission,
1894) </p>

<p>On the grounds that marijuana is safer and more beneficial
than tobacco or alcohol (both of which are physically toxic; both
of which are addicting), and that there is no basis for
legalizing these two dangerous drugs while outlawing one which is
not dangerous, attorneys are challenging the present laws. In the
wording of one such legal brief: &quot;The appellant contends
that the classification of marijuana as a narcotic in Section
1101 (d) of Health and Safety Code and the marijuana prohibition
law is based upon an arbitrary and unreasonable classification
having no reasonable relation to the public health, safety,
welfare, and morals.... The classification of marijuana as a
narcotic is unconstitutional and void in violation of the Eighth
Amendment provision against cruel and unusual punishment, and the
Due Process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the
Constitution of the United States.&quot; (1 Crim 5351 Calif.
District Court of Appeal, First Appel. Dist., pp. 61-62 and
Appendix 1, p. 6) </p>

<p>Among the authorities favoring legalization of marijuana,
there have been medical doctors, lawyers, psychologists,
sociologists, and even some religious leaders. Bishop Pike, for
example, supports re-legalization. <i>Lancet</i> (1963), the
British journal of medicine, in an editorial in 1963, found no
good reason for marijuana being prohibited, but good reason why
it should be legal. (Irwin, 1966) </p>

<p>Many authorities, however, remain opposed to the
re-legalization of marijuana. Predominantly, these are law
enforcement&quot; authorities, or politicians (e.g., Attorney
General Lynch of California). Although these authorities rarely
give verifiable reasons for their insistence that marijuana be
illegal, the ones which have been offered prove to be either
unsubstantiated &quot;opinions&quot; or out-and-out mistaken
data. In this same area, there was a time when
law-breakers---taking their cue from the law-enforcement
officials---claimed marijuana use as an excuse for their crimes.
The fiction of a marijuana-crime relationship has been thoroughly
detailed (if there is any correlation at all, it is in a negative
direction---crimes of violence are drastically lower than would
be statistically expected among marijuana users). (Fort, 1965a,
1965b; Phalen, 1943; Anslinger, 1932; 1 Crim 5351 Calif. District
Court of Appeal, First Appel. Dist.; Irwin, 1966; Blum &amp;
Wahl, 1965; Boyko, Rotberg, &amp; Disco, 1967; Laurie, 1967) See
also below, pages 337 and 339. </p>

<p>Harry J. Anslinger, not one to be daunted by mere facts,
included the following comments---both of which are in diametric
contradiction to statements by him before committees of the U. S.
Congress: &quot;The section noting that many criminals coming
before the courts who allege that they were under the influence
of marijuana when a crime was committed, and that this defense is
usually without foundation and is used with the idea of obtaining
lenient treatment by the courts, recommends that a defense of
being under the influence of marijuana during the commission of a
crime should not mitigate the penalty for a criminal act.&quot;
(Anslinger, 1932) &quot;The Narcotic Section recognizes the great
danger of marijuana due to its definite impairment of the mental
and the fact that its continuous use leads direct [sic] to the
insane asylum.&quot; Even without the aid of Anslinger, arguments
opposed to free marijuana use are contradictory, confused, and
grossly innocent of verifiable facts. (Fort, 1965a, 1965b;
Phalen, 1943; Anslinger, 1932; 1 Crim 5351 Calif. District Court
of Appeal, First Appel. Dist.; Irwin, 1966; Blum &amp; Wahl,
1965; <i>Washington Bulletin</i>, 1963) In a study of police
attitudes and reasoning on &quot;drugs,&quot; Blum and Wahl
(1965) found much disagreement as to reasons why marijuana should
be suppressed. Some officers simply felt that, although marijuana
was less dangerous than alcohol, society (and the law)
disapproved of marijuana. Reasons given for suppressing marijuana
ran from claims that it caused criminal behavior [which is, ex
post facto, correct-so long as marijuana use is
&quot;criminal&quot;], to the claim that it is more dangerous
than alcohol because it isn't as disruptive of behavior and is
therefore harder to detect. </p>

<p>Many &quot;expert&quot; groups such as WHO Expert Committee on
Addiction Producing Drugs have tended to perpetuate
misinformation on marijuana because of poor data [Anslinger was
the U.S. spokesman for many, many years at the U.N.], and a
conservative reluctance toward &quot;softening&quot; or changing
previous policies. In the last few years, however, the World
Health Organization has progressively modified its view on
marijuana. In 1964 the Expert Committee proposed revised
definitions of types of drug dependence, which were subsequently
adopted. The new definition of &quot;dependence of the Cannabis
type&quot; was as follows: &quot;(1) a desire (or need) for
repeated administrations of the drug on account of its subjective
effects, including the feeling of enhanced capabilities; (2)
little or no tendency to increase the dose, since there is little
or no development of tolerance; (3) a psychic dependence on the
effects of the drug related to subjective and individual
appreciation of those effects; (4) absence of physical dependence
so that there is no definite and characteristic abstinence
syndrome when the drug is discontinued.&quot; (United Nations,
1964b) The Committee actually is saying that there is no reason
to keep marijuana on its list: Its definition of dependence of
the marijuana type would easily satisfy for a definition of
&quot;liking&quot; (i.e., the natural tendency to repeat a
pleasant and rewarding, non-harmful experience). Actual
dependence on marijuana is extremely rare, and depends entirely
on a pre- existing psychological problem-and even this is not
&quot;addicting.&quot; [See above, p. 333] (Watt, 1965; United
Nations, 1964b) </p>

<p>As has been noted by many researchers, scientific as well as
governmental groups which have seriously investigated the effects
of marijuana on the individual and on society have consistently
refused to condemn it or support legislation aimed at suppressing
it; law enforcement-oriented groups, on the other hand, including
the Narcotics Experts, are very slow indeed to admit any of this
evidence into the debate. In spite of this, the Proceedings of
the White House Conference on Narcotic and Drug Abuse, 27-28
September I962, states: &quot;It is the opinion of the Panel that
the hazards of marijuana per se have been exaggerated, and the
long criminal sentences imposed on an occasional user or
possessor of the drug are in poor social perspective. Although
marijuana has long held the reputation of inciting individuals to
commit sexual offenses and other antisocial acts, the evidence is
inadequate to substantiate this. Tolerance and physical
dependence do not develop, and withdrawal does not produce an
abstinence syndrome.&quot; (United Nations, 1965; United States,
1963) </p>

<p>The following, from an editorial in the <i>Washington Bulletin</i>,
is given here both for the illuminating facts uncovered, and as
an example of the more modem approach to the &quot;problem&quot;
of marijuana. &quot;Seventy years of institutional documentation
indicate that this vision [of marijuana's &quot;dangers&quot;]
was a big American fib. Latest such document is the New York
County Medical Society Narcotics Sub-committee Report of May 5,
1966: 'There is no evidence that marijuana use is associated with
crimes of violence in the United States . . . marijuana is not a
narcotic, nor is it addicting . . . New York State should take
the lead in attempting to mitigate the stringent federal laws in
regard to marijuana possession.' Well, everybody knew that 10
years ago. [U.S.] House Marijuana Hearings, Ways and Means
Committee, 1937, page 24, Rep. John Dingall: 'I'm just wondering
whether the marijuana addict [sic] graduates into a heroin, an
opium, or a cocaine user}' Anslinger: 'No sir. I have not heard
of a case of that kind. I think it's an entirely different class.
The marijuana addict [sic] does not go in that direction.'
Nowadays the Narcotics Bureau [headed during this entire period
by Anslinger] propagandizes the idea that marijuana leads
directly to heroin, which is obviously silly, as millions of
college boys can inform their parents. But the Narcotics Bureau
has raised such an unscientific scream on this point that nothing
will suffice to prove the obvious except a giant survey of
comparative statistics showing that millions of pot smokers are
not junkies. When such documents are at hand, timid but
sympathetic medical authorities in key places have declared
themselves ready to move toward legislation, licensing or
reduction of punishment for marijuana possession to the status of
a parking violation.&quot; (<i>Washington Bulletin</i>, I966) </p>

<p>The UCLA Law Review, in March of 1967, published an article on
California's anti-marijuana laws, from which the following is
quoted. &quot;. . . the purpose of this article is to outline the
defects in one area of both federal and state criminal law: the
control of marijuana-specifically, treatment of possession of the
drug, without more, as criminal. The pattern in California,
perhaps more than in any other state, has been one of legislative
intransigence and increasingly harsh penalties for possession and
use of marijuana. The authors take the position that at least a
portion of the existing legislation in California against
marijuana---Health and Safety Code section 11530, imposing
stringent penalties for possession of the drug irrespective of
abuse---is an unwelcome disruption of the delicate balance
between reason and emotion in the state's drug control laws....
Although the United States Supreme Court normally has given the
state legislatures an extended opportunity to clean their own
houses, judicial finger-tapping where marijuana is concerned has
all the signs of continuing indefinitely. But, unbridled
legislative and police suppression of all uses of marijuana,
together with savage sentences for even the most innocent uses,
might prove to be the source of earlier constitutional review....
The characteristics attributed to marijuana by law enforcement
agencies, legislative reports and the communications media are
markedly different from, or not supported by, available
scientific information.... In this country, the only
comprehensive publication at a local or state level
scientifically describing the effects of marijuana is the
so-called 'LaGuardia Report' . . . reactions which are natively
alien to the individual cannot be induced by the ingestion or
smoking of the drug.... An even more subtle claim, asserted
primarily by law enforcement agencies, is that marijuana is a
'stepping stone' to addictive and disabling drugs. Not only is
the alleged causal relationship unsupported in fact, but even the
California Attorney General's Office has suggested that the
evidence leads to a contrary conclusion.... In addition to the
'stepping stone' thesis, the widely promoted claim that marijuana
use causes crime is also lacking in factual support. The
LaGuardia researchers, in direct conflict with the routine alarms
from law enforcement officials, found that the alleged causal
connection does not exist. . . . Indeed, in several subsequent
studies it has been shown that there is a negative correlation
between crime and the use of marijuana. . . . Unlike 'plain
drunk' reckless driving and drunk driving statutes, protecting
only against the abuses of alcohol, section 11530 [marijuana]
declares a crime even when there is no abuse or victim.
Ironically, although it is unlawful to drive under the influence
of any narcotic or any drug within the separate statutory
classification of 'restricted dangerous drugs' (barbiturates,
amphetamine and LSD), these driving offenses are alternatively
punishable as misdemeanors, and the penalties are less severe
than for possession, without use, of marijuana. And it is only a
misdemeanor to 'use' or 'be under the influence of'
marijuana.&quot; (Boyko et al., 1967) </p>

<p>&quot;These 'new' drugs, however, were neither physically
addicting nor illegal; the dangers were considered moderate. In
fact, this moderate element of danger might have added an
intriguing dimension to the undertaking. The increased use of
marihuana on college campuses appears to have a similar
background with one added factor: the legal penalties are quite
severe, even though, like LSD, the drug is not physically
addicting. Students, therefore, rationalize that it is a 'bad'
law which they are not obligated to obey (an attitude somewhat
similar to the reaction to Prohibition).&quot; (Kleber, 1967) </p>

<p>R. D. Laing, M.D., writing in Sigma (Vol. 6), states: &quot;I
would be far happier if my own teenage children would, <i>without
breaking the law</i>, smoke marijuana when they wished, rather
than start on the road of so many of their elders to nicotine and
ethyl alcohol addiction.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Summary of conclusions regarding effects. The Commission
have now examined all the evidence before them regarding the
effects attributed to hemp drugs. It will be well to summarize
briefly the conclusions to which they come. It has been clearly
established that the occasional use of hemp [marijuana] in
moderate doses may be beneficial; but this use may be regarded as
medicinal in character. It is rather to the popular and common
use of the drugs that the Commission will now confine their
attention. It is convenient to consider the effects separately as
affecting the physical, mental or moral nature. In regard to the
physical effects, the Commission have come to the conclusion that
the moderate use of hemp drugs is practically attended by no evil
results at all. There may be exceptional cases in which, owing to
idiosyncracies of constitution, the drugs in even moderate use
may be injurious. There is probably nothing the use of which may
not possibly be injurious in cases of exceptional intolerance....
In respect to the alleged mental effects of the drugs, the
Commission have come to the conclusion that the moderate use of
hemp drugs produces no injurious effects on the mind.... In
regard to the moral effects of the drugs, the Commission are of
the opinion that their moderate use produces no moral injury
whatever. There is no adequate ground for believing that it
injuriously affects the character of the consumer . . . for all
practical purposes it may be laid down that there is little or no
connection between the use of hemp drugs and crime. Viewing the
subject generally, it may be added that the moderate use of these
drugs is the rule, and that excessive use is comparatively
exceptional.&quot; (Indian Hemp-Drug Commission, 1894) </p>

<p>&quot;The psychic habituation to marihuana is not so strong as
to tobacco or alcohol.... There is no evidence to suggest that
the continued use of marihuana is a stepping stone to the use of
opiates. Prolonged use of the drug does not lead to mental,
physical, or moral degeneration, nor have we observed any
permanent deleterious effects from its continued use.&quot;
(Allentuck &amp; Bowman, 1942) </p>

<p>&quot;There are no apparent reasons for cannabis' status as a
Dangerous Drug. It is not addictive, its use does not in Western
society cause crime or unacceptable sexuality, and it does not
lead to addiction to the hard drugs. The major problem with this
drug is that it is illegal. This has three undesirable effects:
first, an underground, cannabis-using sub- culture is created and
maintained that puts the potential heroin addict one step nearer
access to the hard drugs; second, it lessens respect for D.D.A.
[Dangerous Drug Act] drugs in the thousands of young people who
have tried marihuana or hashish and know from personal experience
how harmless the drug is; third, it causes considerable waste of
man-power, either through creative and educated people being sent
to prison for possession of the drug-a Glasgow doctor was
sentenced to six months recently-or through the use of policemen
who would be better otherwise employed, to track down the drug
and its users.&quot; (Laurie, I967) </p>

<p>&quot;The smoking of the leaves, flowers and seeds of Cannabis
sativa [marijuana] is no more harmful than the smoking of tobacco
or mullein or sumac leaves.... The legislation in relation to
marihuana was ill-advised . . . it branded as a menace and a
crime a matter of trivial importance.... It is hoped that no
witch-hunt will be instituted in the military service over a
problem that does not exist.&quot; (Phalen, 1943) &quot;The
controls over marihuana under federal [law] and state laws are
dissimilar. Under the federal law, marihuana is not considered a
narcotic drug. On the other hand, many states have covered
marihuana by including it within the definition of 'narcotic
drug' since adoption of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act in 1932.
Marihuana is equated in many state laws with the narcotic drugs
because the abuse characteristics [under current laws, all use is
'abuse'] of the two types of drugs, the methods of illicit
trafficking [all exchange of pot is 'illicit'], and the types of
traffickers have a great deal in common.... Because marihuana
does not result in physical dependence, the physician need not
apply himself to physical complications of withdrawal.... No
physical dependence or tolerance has been demonstrated. Neither
has it been demonstrated that cannabis causes any lasting mental
or physical changes.&quot; (A.M.A. Committee on Alcoholism and
Drug Dependence, 1967) </p>

<p>&quot;Two of the most common and widely used psychic modifiers
are cannabis and alcohol.... First, marijuana is most often used
in a social setting, in a group of users who mutually enjoy the
effects of the drug. Second, the intent is to heighten enjoyment
of outer experiences, e.g., conversation, listening to or
performing music, dancing, joking. Unlike the Brahman priest,
whose vocabulary during his intoxication is limited to repeating
one of the names of his God, the marijuana devotee laughs,
giggles, eats without restraint, tells jokes, participates in
sexual relationships, and takes pleasure in the company of both
men and women, especially if they are also using marijuana.
Third, the effects are interpreted by a marijuana-user as
analogous to those of alcohol. He prefers marijuana because the
effects are more rapid and 'neater'; there is no hangover, and no
debilitating physical consequences of chronic use. Thus, the use
of cannabis in our society is to attain an experience which, far
from renouncing the active life in favor of contemplative,
ascetic ideal, affirms the pleasures of sex, music, food,
laughter, and human companionship.&quot; (Chein et al., 1964) </p>

<p>&quot;A characteristic marihuana psychosis does not exist.
Marihuana will not produce a psychosis de nova . . .&quot;
&quot;But even excessive marijuana use is less likely to lead to
aggressive or anti-social conduct than immoderate consumption of
alcohol.&quot; (Allentuck &amp; Bowman, 1942; Boyko et al., 1967;
Murphy, 1963) </p>

<p>The following excerpt is from a letter to The Princetonian,
Princeton University, by the Director of Counseling Services at
Princeton. &quot;If and when the severe laws governing marijuana
are to receive the review they probably deserve, this will come
about only after a significant level of public interest and
influential desire has been achieved. . . . In the meantime the
underground tide of illegal use will continue to swell and
'lamentable affairs' [arrests] will occur. In judging the
reasonableness of current laws, and indeed current clandestine
marijuana use, the individual should probe the facts, rather than
merely harbor widespread and misinformed assumptions which often
yield a sort of sociological hysteria whenever the subject is
raised. In the confidential settings of the Counseling Services
and the Health Services, whenever the subject of marijuana is
discussed we are pleased to find that factual information usually
helps clear away much of the undue anxiety stemming from the
popular myths surrounding this subject in our society at-large.
Recognizing the reality of existing laws, and recognizing the
fact that every individual must come to terms with such realities
in his own way, we hope we may find ways to be helpful to
students currently faced with such quandaries.&quot;
(MacNaughton, 1967) <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38171" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>