
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-31</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B042-41</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/compare.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130837 text/html 17806
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:08:28 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:41 GMT
Content-length: 17588
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>La Guardia Committee Report - Comparison Between Users and
Non-Users </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana</b> </p>

<h1>Comparison Between Users and Non-Users from the Standpoint of
Mental and Physical Deterioration </h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>A careful testing of the motor and sensory functions of the
nervous system was included in the general physical examination
of each subject. Of motor functions, reflex activity and muscular
response and coordination were determined; of sensory functions,
perception of touch, pain and temperature stimuli; of specialized
functions, taste, hearing and vision. In the eye, the corneal and
light reflexes were tested and a retinal examination was made. In
this neurological examination no pathological conditions were
found in any of the subjects. </p>

<p>In the psychiatric examination attention was paid to general
intelligence and knowledge in relation to the subject's
background, to relevancy of talk in conversation, to orientation
as to time, place and situation, to memory of past and recent
events, to ability in simple arithmetic, to judgment in reaching
decisions, and to the presence of abnormal mental content shown
by delusions, hallucinations, obsessions, and ideas of
persecution. There was no evidence of disordered cerebral
functioning in any of the group. </p>

<p>As would be expected, differences in grades of intelligence
and in orderliness in thinking and reasoning were noticeable. The
Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test was administered to a total of
60 male subjects, 40 marihuana users and 20 nonusers. The average
I.Q. for the user group was 96.7, range 70 to 124, and for the
non-user group the average I.Q. was 104.5, range 93 to 114. Both
groups may therefore be classified as of average intelligence. </p>

<p>When analyzed according to racial distribution the two groups
were even better equated intellectually than the total results
indicate. For the 28 white subjects examined (13 users and 15
non-users) the average I.Q. for the users was 106.1 range 77 to
124, and for the non-users the average I.Q. was 106.3, range 96
to 114. There were 24 Negro subjects, 19 users and 5 non-users.
The average I.Q. for the users was 92.6, range 70 to 112, while
for the non-users the average I.Q. was 98.8, range 93 to 101.
Although the non-users averaged 6.2 points higher than the users,
it must be taken into account that the number of Negro non-users
tested was small. In any event, the disparity in results would
not be considered significant.. The average I.Q. of the 2 Puerto
Rican users was 91.0, range 72 to 100. </p>

<p>Reports on mental deterioration due to toxic, organic or
psychotic factors as given in the literature reveal that in such
cases the individual scores on the Bellevue Adult Intelligence
Test show marked irregularity, depending upon the functions
involved in the deteriorative process. As a group, the marihuana
users tested in this study showed very even functioning, and what
little irregularity occurred can be explained on the basis of
language and racial factors. </p>

<p>The physical and psychiatric examinations were of a
qualitative rather than a quantitative nature. In the special
examinations and tests of organ and system function, quantitative
measurements were obtained for 17 marihuana users. These subjects
were selected for the reason that they had smoked marihuana for
the longest period of time. The figures for years of usage and
number of cigarettes smoked daily were taken from each subject's
statement. </p>

<p>Marihuana users accustomed to daily smoking for a period of
from two and a half to sixteen years showed no abnormal system
functioning which would differentiate them from the non-users. </p>

<p>There is definite evidence in this study that the marihuana
users were not inferior in intelligence to the general population
and that they had suffered no mental or physical deterioration as
a result of their use of the drug. Addiction and Tolerance </p>

<p>A drug addiction is characterized by a compelling urge to use
the drug for the prevention or relief of distressing mental and
physical disturbances which occur when the necessary dose is
delayed or omitted. A drug habit is also characterized by an urge
to use the drug, but this is not compelling. The abstinence
symptoms, which are expressions of nervous states, are not
particularly distressing and do not occur as long as the person's
attention is placed on other matters. </p>

<p>Drug tolerance in the narrower sense used here means that
larger doses than those originally used are required to bring
about the effects desired by the subject. In the case of
morphine, tolerance develops because of addiction, but in other
instances tolerance may be present without addiction and
addiction without tolerance. When both are present the matter
takes on greater importance because of the extremes to which the
addict goes to obtain the drug constantly and in increasing
quantities. </p>

<p>As our group of subjects included 48 users of marihuana,
opportunity was afforded for some conclusions concerning
marihuana addiction and tolerance. Practically all of our group
of users stated that they could and often did voluntarily stop
the smoking for a time without any undue disturbance from the
deprivation. In the sociologic study reported by Dr. Schoenfeld
it was found that smokers had no compelling urge for marihuana.
If &quot;reefers&quot; were not readily available there was no
special effort made to obtain them from known sources of supply.
Dr. Walter Bromberg, Psychiatrist-in-Charge, Psychiatric Clinic,
Court of General Sessions in New York, states: &quot;The fact
that offenders brought up on marihuana charges do not request
medical treatment on their incarceration (with its cessation of
drug supply) argues for the absence of with drawal symptoms.''(1)
From interviews with several hundred marihuana users he concludes
that true addiction was absent. </p>

<p>(1) Bromberg, W. &quot;Marihuana: a psychiatric study.&quot;
J.A.MA. 113:4, 1939.=20 </p>

<p>The evidence submitted here warrants the conclusion that as
far as New York City is concerned true addiction to marihuana
does not occur. </p>

<p>The evidence concerning acquired tolerance is less clear-cut
Tolerance develops during the periods when the drug is being
taken and accounts for the necessity of increasing the dosage to
bring about the desired effects. How long the tolerance persists
after the drug administration is stopped has not been definitely
established in any instance. </p>

<p>The statements of marihuana usage and time since stoppage
given by eight of our subjects are summarized in Table 26. (TABLE
26) </p>

<p>On one or more of the numerous occasions on which marihuana
was administered each of these subjects received what was
considered a minimal effective dose. One (J.B.) was given 1 cc.,
another (A.B.) 3 cc., the others 2 cc. In all instances the
customary physical effects, conjunctival injection, dilated and
sluggishly reacting pupils, tremors and ataxia, were observed.
With these doses the subjects also experienced the sensation
described as &quot;high.&quot; The only conclusion warranted here
is that if acquired tolerance does occur it persists for a
limited period only. </p>

<p>Further evidence, though indirect, was brought out by Dr.
Shoenfeld's investigation and by personal interviews with our 48
users. There is agreement in the statements that among users the
smoking of one or two cigarettes is sufficient to bring on the
effect known as &quot;high.&quot; When this state is reached the
user will not continue smoking for fear of becoming &quot;too
high.&quot; When the desired effects have passed off and the
smoker has &quot;come down,&quot; smoking one cigarette brings
the &quot;high&quot; effect on again. This could not be the case
had a steadily increasing tolerance developed. </p>

<p>The evidence available then=AD-the absence of any compelling
urge to use the drug, the absence of any distressing abstinence
symptoms, the statements that no increase in dosage is required
to repeat the desired effect in users-=ADjustifies the conclusion
that neither true addiction nor tolerance is found in marihuana
users. The continuation and the frequency of usage of marihuana,
as in the case of many other habit-forming substances, depend on
the easily controlled desires for its pleasurable effects.
Possible Therapeutic Applications </p>

<p>If a drug has well-marked pharmacological actions and low
toxicity, as appears to be the case with marihuana, a
consideration of special interest is its possible therapeutic
application. In the older clinical literature marihuana was
recommended for use in a wide variety of disorders, but in recent
years it has almost disappeared from the materia medica and it
was dropped from the United States Pharmacopeia twenty years ago.
</p>

<p>In view of the laboratory and clinical findings obtained in
this study the question of the therapeutic possibilities of the
drug was considered. Marihuana possesses two qualities which
suggest that it might have useful actions in man. The first is
the typical euphoria- producing action which might be applicable
in the treatment of various types of mental depression- the
second is the rather unique property which results in the
stimulation of appetite. In the light of this evidence and in
view of the fact that there is a lack of any substantial
indication of dependence on the drug, it was reasoned that
marihuana might be useful in alleviating the withdrawal symptoms
in drug addicts. </p>

<p>At the Riker's Island Penitentiary observations were made on
56 inmates who were addicted to morphine or heroin. Two groups
were selected, the addicts in each being matched with those in
the other group as to age, physical condition, duration and
intensity of habit, and number of previous attempts at cure. The
subjects in one group received no treatment or were given
Magendie's solution according to the usual hospital regimen while
those in the other group were treated with 15 mg. of
tetrahydrocannabinol three times daily with or without placebo
(subcutaneous water injection). An attempt was made to evaluate
the severity of the withdrawal signs and symptoms. The impression
was gained that those who received tetrahydrocannabinol had less
severe withdrawal symptoms and left the hospital at the end of
the treatment period in better condition than those who received
no treatment or who were treated with Magendie's solution. The
ones in the former group maintained their appetite and in some
cases actually gained weight during the withdrawal period. </p>

<p>Since psychological factors play a large part in the
withdrawal symptoms of at least a certain proportion of morphine
addicts, there are grounds for the assumption that a drug having
the properties of marihuana might be of aid in alleviating mental
distress during the withdrawal period. However, the studies here
described were not sufficiently complete to establish the value
of such treatment, and before conclusions can be drawn the
problem must be investigated under completely controlled
conditions. PHARMACOLOGICAL STUDY (1) S. Loewe, MD (2) (1) From
the Department of Pharrnacology, CorneU University Medical
College. (2) Part of the experimental work here reported was
conducted in collaboration with W. Modell SUMMARY </p>

<p>1. This review of the pharmacology of marihuana is centered
around the chemical and pharmacological identification of the
active principles of hemp. Coordination of chemical and
pharmacological investigations as a prerequisite to success in
the search for unknown principles and of the analysis of the
structure-activity relationship of these compounds is discussed. </p>

<p>2. In a survey of the sources of preparations with marihuana
activity, hemp seeds are disclosed as a heretofore unknown source
of active substances. </p>

<p>3. Varieties of hemp can be distinguished according to
genotypic differences of the content of active principles which
persist over generations independently of soil and climate. </p>

<p>4. The pharmacological actions of marihuana are analyzed with
regard to their specificity and their usefulness as indicators of
specific components. </p>

<p>5. Sixty-five substances from the new class of cannabinols and
related classes are reviewed, among which are the essential
components of the marihuana-active hemp oils. The discovery of
this class, the synthesis of these representatives, and their
structural elucidation led the way to the discovery of the active
substances. </p>

<p>6. Quantitative assay procedures are described for the most
important marihuana effects that are observed in the animal
experiment. The assay of the ataxia effect in the dog and of the
synergistic hypnotic effect in the mouse with refined procedures
are shown to be reliable expedients for measuring these two
marihuana actions, whereas the areflexia effect in rabbits failed
to show the reproducibility required for quantitative purposes. </p>

<p>7. With the aid of these methods the natural
tetrahydrocannabinols are shown to be active principles
responsible for ataxia in dogs and psychic action in man. They
are intermediate products between the two ineffective substances
which compose the bulk of hemp oil: a labile excretion product of
the plant, cannabidiol, and a stable end- product, cannabinol.
The conversion of cannabidol into active tetrahydrocannabinol by
a natural environmental influence has been paralleled by
ultraviolet irradiation in vitro. </p>

<p>8. Numerous isomers, homologs and analogs of tetra- and
hexahydrocannabinol are shown to possess the specific marihuana
action. The potency varies enormously and is highest in natural,
optically active=ADlaevogyrous=ADtetrahydrocannabinols. </p>

<p>9. The significance of many of the structural details of the
tetrahydrocannabinol molecule for marihuana activity is
elucidated by quantitative determinations of relative potency.
Special attention was devoted to a study of the importance of
variations in the length of the 3- alkyl side chain of
tetrahydrocannabinols. In studying methyl to nonyl homologs of
the original amyl derivative occurring in nature, it was found
that the maximum potency is not at the amyl, but at the hexyl
homolog, and in two out of four homologous series at the
representatives with still longer side chains. </p>

<p>10. In addition to the ataxia and the psychic action, other
pharmacological attributes of the tetrahydrocannabinols are a
decrease in the respiratory and an increase in the pulse rates in
the non-narcotized dog. </p>

<p>11. The synergistic hypnotic action of marihuana in the mouse
is to be attributed to the otherwise inert cannabidiol. </p>

<p>12. The corneal areflexia action in the rabbit was much
stronger in impure distillate oils than in pure tetrahydrocan
nabinols, which leads to the conclusion that this action is
either poorly reproducible or must be attributed to a different,
as yet unknown, principle. </p>

<p>13. Only one among the numerous cannabinol derivatives, 7-
methyltetrahydrocannabinol, was found to produce a motor
stimulant=AD-convulsant=AD-action concomitant with ataxia action.
A cannabidiol derivative, tetrahydrocannabidiol, was found to
have specific convulsant action in the dog. </p>

<ol>
    <li>A central stimulant (benzedrine) considerably increased
        the ataxia action of marihuana, whereas a hypnotic
        (amytal) had no influence. </li>
</ol>

<p><br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>