
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B04-284</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA035-000697-B042-145</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://lars.nrel.gov:80/background.html 192.174.52.126 19970111000835 text/html 14161
HTTP/1.0 200 Request fulfilled
Server: WN/1.02
Date: Saturday, 11-Jan-97 00:08:39 GMT
Last-Modified: Wednesday, 17-May-95 23:47:40 GMT
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 13892
Title:  Tour de Sol Background
Link: <mailto:wlord@lars.nrel.gov>; rev="Made"
</DOCHDR>
<title> Tour de Sol Background</title>

                             <H1>  Insider's Guide
                             to the<br>
                          1995 American Tour de Sol</H1>

                             <H3>   by Jack Groh</H3>

<img src="graphics/line.gif" width=98%><p>
Whether you're new to the American Tour de Sol or a seasoned participant,
you'll have a lot to see and do at this championship road rally for
alternative vehicles. You'll feel part of an exciting chapter in American
automobile history and learn all about new technologies that will make our
lives and environment healthier and better. The event has grown from a small
private "club" with a half dozen members into a world-class event which
attracts over four dozen electric, solar electric, and hybrid electric
vehicles built by designers pushing the limits of pollution-free vehicle
technology.<p>

<IMG ALIGN=left HSPACE=3 SRC="graphics/photo2.GIF" WIDTH=277 HEIGHT=217>"The American Tour de Sol has reflected and influenced the rapid
        changes in electric vehicle development over the past six years,"
explained Nancy Hazard, director of the ATdS. "We started with solar racing
cars to promote solar energy, then moved on to practical electric vehicles
and now we're focusing more on production vehicles - those already available
on the market." In 1991, Governor Cuomo of New York waved the flag on 26
vehicles. that race began in Albany and ended up at historic Plymouth Rock.
Times have changed and the fleet, now numbering 50, will be the largest ever
as it races from Waterbury, Connecticut to Portland, Maine.<p>

What makes this race so exciting each year is the variety of vehicles which
compete and the stunning improvements in performance that take place from
one year to the next. Just a few years ago, electric vehicle designers were
scratching their heads trying to find a way to beat the 100 mile barrier
without recharging. Last year, eight vehicles consistently beat the 100 mile
mark while a Solectria Corporation-built vehicle topped 214 miles without
stopping to recharge. If history is any indicator, even better performances
will be seen in this year's event.<P>

A large number of vehicles come from the Northeast but entries are also
coming from California, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Germany and Japan.
While vehicles compete in five different categories, all of the vehicles in
the American Tour de Sol fall into one of two basic types: high-tech,
solar-powered vehicles designed strictly for competition or practical
electric-powered vehicles designed for everyday use. Vehicles will travel a
total of 300-600 miles over the course of the week as they race from
Waterbury, Connecticut to Portland, Maine. The race is a road rally-type
event which means vehicles are required to travel a specific distance each
day - roughly 50-70 miles, but are also given an opportunity to drive extra
laps to demonstrate range capabilities and improve their score. All required
miles will be driven on public, secondary roads at normal driving speeds,
while extra laps are often driven on interstate highways. The scoring system
makes efficiency and driving range (the distance traveled without
recharging) the keys to winning.<P>

In addition to the solar racing vehicles and the practical electric-powered
conversions, which are cars using the body of an existing gasoline powered
car, there are also electric-powered motorcycles and scooters,
electric-powered buses, small one-person electric vehicles, and a number of
"hybrid" vehicles. These hybrids combine other types of power with electric
propulsion. For the first time, the rally will feature a pre-production
prototype sedan, designed by an electric vehicle (EV) manufacturer.<P>


<H3>WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW ABOUT THE VEHICLE CATEGORIES</H3>

<IMG ALIGN=right HSPACE=3 SRC="graphics/photo3.GIF" WIDTH=288 HEIGHT=202>The production category was created two years ago to showcase the   
electric vehicles already on the market and available for purchase.
Only vehicles that have actually been sold can enter this category. Entries
this year include a Ford Ecostar, Solectria Corporation vehicles from the
Vermont and Connecticut EV (electric vehicle) demonstration projects, and a
U. S. Electricar bus. The Connecticut and Vermont projects are
public/private partnerships conducting on-the-road evaluations of EVs and
sponsoring entries in the 1995 ATdS. What makes these vehicles unique is
that they are all vehicles currently in regular use on the roads. "We have
about 400 people test driving a Solectria Force," says Harold Garabedian of
the Connecticut EV project. "We are constantly collecting data and surveying
users. Out of the hundreds of users so far, the reaction has been
universally positive. The one concern people had was about the vehicles'
range but in nearly ten thousand miles of driving not one person has had any
problems related to vehicle range."<P>

The Ford-built Ecostar entry is similar to the vehicle that won the
production category championship last year. Connecticut-based Northeast
Utilities is sponsoring this entry and organizing the race team.<P>

The production category is also expected to contain the first ever mass
transit vehicle to compete in an electric vehicle competition. The bus,
manufactured by U.S. Electricar of Santa Rosa, CA, holds 22 passengers and
is actually in service right now at the University of Massachusetts-Lowell
shuttling passengers from the local train station to the university campus.
Sponsored by New England Electric System and UMass-Lowell, the team plans to demonstrate the practicality of swapping battery packs to extend driving
range.<P>

<H3>TEENS COMPETE IN THE COMMUTER CATEGORY</H3>

<IMG ALIGN=left HSPACE=3 SRC="graphics/photo1.GIF" WIDTH=286 HEIGHT=228>The Discover Channel cable television network is sponsoring the
commuter category this year. This category features 20 vehicles -
the largest number of entries in any category. A high school-built entry
from Bolton (Conn.) High School is returning for its third year in the ATdS.
In last year's event, this race team traveled more than 140 miles on
standard lead-acid batteries without recharging - an ATdS record for
vehicles using that type of battery. "We've been working on the car since
then," according to Chris Laughman, a senior student at the school and
veteran EV racer. "Some minor improvements in aero dynamics and suspension
should increase our efficiency. We expect to beat our own range record."<P>

Other top competitors this year are being sponsored by Boston (Mass.) Edison
Company which is heavily involved in helping to create both a market and a
product for the electric vehicle industry. Boston Edison plans to enter two
Solectria Corporation-built vehicles. (Solectria is the defending champion
in this category.) One of those vehicles is an exciting new pre-production
prototype vehicle called the Sunrise. Given this car's anticipated
performance, sleek design and expected sales price, the folks at Boston
Edison believe the Sunrise may be the electric vehicle the American car
buyer has been waiting for. "The American Tour de Sol is an important part
of our road testing," says Jim Hogarth of Boston Edison. "We really expect
this vehicle to take the world by storm."<P>

<H3>SOLAR RACING CATEGORY PROVIDES GLIMPSE OF THE FUTURE</H3>

If you want to move away from the "practical" type of vehicle for a moment
and get a look at some wilder, high-tech vehicles, you will want to pay
close attention to the solar racing category. The designers of these
vehicles toss aside the needs of the average motorist and try to push the
limits of what can be done by using only the sun's power. Built primarily by
student teams, these vehicles are small, lightweight, and have large "wings"
made up of photovoltaic cells that convert sunlight to electricity. They
need a lot of flat area to collect enough solar energy.<P>

Some teams to watch are the Salisbury School team which returns as defending champion and the ConVal High School team, veteran solar racers who are
entering a two person vehicle this year. The team that will surely travel
the farthest to enter the race this year is Team Soffix from Nagoya, Japan.
They are planning to bring a vehicle which competed in Australia last year
at the World Solar Challenge. Another interesting team comes from a high
school in Grand Rapids. Michigan. A dozen youngsters from Ottawa Hills High
School are entering the American Tour de Sol for the third consecutive year.
Their electric vehicle project is an integral part of the curriculum at
their school. Students not only design and build the vehicle, they also
handle all the logistics necessary to racing the vehicle and even raise the
money needed to finance the project. Last year, this student-built entry
demonstrated a range of 80 miles, despite some serious technical problems.
This year, their faculty adviser predicts the team will more than double
last year's range performance. "This program is not just about electric
vehicles, though," says teacher Bob George. "Our students are all selected
because they are having difficulty succeeding in school. Yet last year, 76
percent of our kids went on to post-secondary schools. That 's what this
program is really about for us."<P>

<H3>HYBRID VEHICLES EARN SEPARATE CATEGORY</H3>

One of the newest additions to the American Tour de Sol this year will be
the competition between hybrid-powered vehicles. Many people believe that
the hybrid vehicle is the most likely to succeed in the near-term on the
American market. A hybrid vehicle is an electric vehicle that also uses a
small on-board gas-powered generator to recharge its batteries and extend
driving range. Although there have been hybrid entries in past years, this
is the first time that four hybrid powered vehicles will compete against
each other. One of these hybrids is being entered by a team from Cornell
University. Their team has more than 50 members and has been working on
alternative vehicles for three years. This year's vehicle uses electric
power for the motors and a compressed natural gas (CNG) generator to
recharge the batteries. "The public consistently mentions limited range as a
concern with EVs," says Robert Thomas, an engineering professor and
coordinator of the Cornell team. "We believe hybrid vehicles address that
problem and provide a good transition to fully electric or even
hydrogen-powered vehicles in the future." The Cornell students come from a
variety of academic disciplines and are all divided into various project
teams. For instance, one team specifically handles all the "business" issues
including raising the 50-70 thousand dollars that is needed each year to
finance this project.<P>

Another hybrid vehicle is being entered and sponsored by noted actor and
environmental activist Dennis Weaver. The vehicle, dubbed Surge 1, is
designed and built by Weaver's cousin, Troy Reed, an automotive engineer
working in Tulsa, Oklahoma. "Electric vehicles are one important way to
address the degradation of air quality," said Weaver. "The road rally
competition is an entertaining way to help spread a serious message - that
there are practical solutions to environmental problems already available to
us."<P>

<H3>OPEN CATEGORY ADDS DIVERSITY</H3>

The final category in the 1995 American Tour de Sol is the Open category. As
its name suggests, this category allows vehicles to compete even though they
do not fit the specifications of any of the other categories. For example,
there are four 2-wheeled vehicles and an equal number of one-person EVs
competing this year. Attracted by the huge audience provided by the American
Tour de Sol, German designer, Helmut Schiller, is traveling from Europe to
demonstrate his pre-production prototype of an electric powered motor
scooter. He expects to manufacture the vehicle for sale in Europe and the
United States in 1996. "This race is the best way to introduce this new
vehicle to the American public," according to Schiller.<P>

<H3>ENJOY FESTIVITIES AT THE START AND FINISH</H3>

The race will be enhanced this year by a couple of companion events at the
start and finish of the race route. Waterbury and Portland have organized
festivals to coincide with the beginning and end of the ATdS. Both
communities have also been involved in actively promoting and sponsoring the
race this year to help draw a large local audience. Attending the America
Tour de Sol is sure to be an unforgettable experience. Whether you are
competing in the race, working as a volunteer on the event, bringing the
family to get a close look at the vehicles or lining up for the "ride and
drive" demonstrations, you're sure to come away with a new understanding of
the future of transportation. Cleaner air, less dependence on foreign oil,
better use of energy and more jobs here at home - these are just some of the
possibilities linked to these new vehicle technologies. There are still
obstacles in the road but, after all, that's what makes the road
interesting.<P>
<hr width=40%>
<p>

Email to NESEA, care of: <I><a
href=mailto:GrohPR@aol.com>GrohPR@aol.com</a></I>
<p>

<I>Jack Groh, of Groh Associates in Warwick, R.I., has handled public information for the American Tour de Sol for five years. Groh Associates specializes in national publicity for environmentally- oriented events and products.</I><p>
<hr>
<p>
<center>
<table border=2>
<tr><td><A HREF="nesea_index.html">Homepage</A></td><td><A HREF="background.html">Background</A></td><td><A HREF="rules.html">Rules</A></td><td><A HREF="routemap.html">Route & Events</A></td><td><A HREF="entries.html">Entries</A></td><td><A HREF="results.html">Results</A></td><td><A HREF="nesea.html">Fact Sheets</A></td><td><A HREF="weather.html">Weather</A></td><td><A HREF="extra.html">Extra!</A></td>
</tr>
</table>
</center>


 
</DOC>