
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-67</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B029-12</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/eleuch4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064901 text/html 18412
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:48:52 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:21:31 GMT
Content-length: 18193
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Road to Eleusis - Chapter 4</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
</head>

<body>

<hr>

<h6>CHAPTER FOUR</h6>

<h3>ANCILLARY DATA</h3>

<hr>

<p> A Greek scholar, writing just half a century ago, did not
hesitate to dismiss the worship of Demeter at Eleusis as
&quot;trivial and absurd; but,&quot; he added, &quot;there can be
no doubt that it did much to satisfy the emotional side of the
religious instincts of the Greeks. Its modern analogue is perhaps
the Salvation Army.&quot; We trust that our own comparisons will
be less bizarre than his. In our generation we enjoy the
advantage of having rediscovered the hallucinogenic experience.
Moreover, the value of interdisciplinary collaboration is that it
gives us access to knowledge otherwise apt to be beyond the reach
of scholars. Our joint effort has yielded a radical answer to our
problem: it sets the stage for much reexamination of traditional
opinions about the classical Greeks and their tragic literature
in celebration of the god Dionysus. </p>

<p> The ancient testimony about Eleusis is unanimous and
unambiguous. Eleusis was the supreme experience in an initiate's
life. It was both physical and mystical: trembling, vertigo, cold
sweat, and then a sight that made all previous seeing seem like
blindness, a sense of awe and wonder at a brilliance that caused
a profound silence since what had just been seen and felt could
never be communicated: words are unequal to the task. Those
symptoms are unmistakably the experience induced by an
hallucinogen. To reach that conclusion, we have only to show that
the rational Greeks, and indeed some of the most famous and
intelligent amongst them, could experience and enter fully into
such irrationality. </p>

<p> Eleusis was different from the convivial inebriation of
friends at a <i>symposion</i> or the drunken <i>komos</i> revel
at the festivals of drama. Eleusis was something for which even
the maenadic ecstasy of the mountain women was only partial
preparation. In their various ways, other Greek cults too enacted
aspects of the ancient communion practiced between gods and men,
between the living and the dead, but it was at Eleusis alone that
the experience occurred with overwhelming finality: here alone
was the grand design fulfilled of the maiden resurrected with her
son conceived in death, and of the ear of barley that like her
had sprouted beneath the earth. By this resurrection was
validated the continuance of all that a Greek held most dear, the
civilized way of life that, beyond each city's constitution, was
the Greek heritage, evolved out of aboriginal primitivism just as
all life too came from the beneficent accord with the lord of
death. Here indeed is a rich full-bodied myth, filled with
contradictions like all the myths of an unlettered age, one
saying this and another saying that and a third saying something
else, but somehow in the end harmonizing into one whole, a myth
that for the Greeks explained the beginning and the end of
things. </p>

<p> Months of learning and rituals preceded the revelation on the
Mystery night, each action programming in further detail the
meaning and substance, the full ramifications of the vision that
lay ahead. At last the initiates would sit on the steps in the
initiation hall. It was all done now except for the finale. They
had learned the secret version of the sacred myth, they had
bathed in the sea, abstained from various tabu foods and drinks,
sacrificed a pig, taken the long walk along the Sacred Way from
Athens, and made the perilous crossing of the final division of
water before their arrival at the city of their Eleusinian hosts.
Outside the sanctuary walls, there was the night- long dance
beside the Maiden's Well on the very ground that the goddess had
visited. Then there was the fast and the momentous entrance into
the forbidden territory past the cave that was an entrance to
Hades and the rock where Demeter had sat in grief. In the
initiation hall, there was the final ceremonial dance of the
priestesses carrying the chalice of grain upon their heads as
they mixed and distributed the sacred potion: fragrant <i>blechon</i>,
the despised herb associated with the illicit nature of the
abduction, immersed in water to which was added a sprinkling of
flour from barley grown in the Rarian plain. The barley's
potential as the foodstuff for mankind depended upon keeping at
bay the encroachment of the reddening corruption that would draw
it back to its worthless avatar, the rust-infested weed. Like the
<i>blechon</i>, the weed too was thus associated with primitivism
and the ways of life before the institutions of society brought
man to a higher mode of existence. Of these two plants the
initiates drank and then paused expectant for redemption while
the hierophant chanted the ancient words. Then, suddenly, there
was light and the boundaries on this world burst their bounds as
spiritual presences were felt in their midst and the hall was
flooded with glowing mystery. </p>

<p> From beginning to end here there was a reenactment of a
sacred drama in which the initiates as well as the officiants had
their role to play, until at last they experienced as actors the
ineffable, all of their senses and emotions being shot through
with what would thereafter be forever the unspeakable. </p>

<p> As the initiates passed through the lengthy proceedings, they
were admitted to many secrets, but the hierophants may well have
withheld from them the Secret of Secrets: the sacred water of the
potion had already soaked up in the right dosage from the
immersed ergot what it contained of ergine and ergonovine, as we
call them today. But the hierophants were certainly, through the
centuries, seeking ways to improve their technique, their
formulae. In the course of those two millennia may they not have
discovered a kind of ergot that contains solely the
hallucinogenic alkaloids such as has been found in modern times
in ergot of <i>Paspalum distichum</i>? Indeed herbalists other
than the hierophantic families may have shared in this discovery
and it may have been their knowledge that prompted the rash of
profanations in B. C. 415. The inside story of those events will
never be known but that there was a story to tell is certain. </p>

<p> In unlettered cultures the knowledge of the herbalist --- the
knowledge of the properties of plants and their use --- was
everywhere a body of secret lore passed on by word of mouth from
herbalist to apprentice and sometimes from one herbalist to
another. The apprenticeship took years before one practiced on
one's own, and one never stopped learning. There were questions
of dosage, of side effects, of proper plant ingredients that
became poisons when taken to excess. In Mexico Bernardino de
Sahagun and Francisco Hernandez were gifted Spaniards and they
spent endless effort and time to take down from the Indians the
virtues of various Mexican plants. But they were Europeans who
knew not the American plant world, and in their European world
they were certainly not what we would call botanists or
herbalists. Their intentions were good but their ignorance was
complete. What they have to tell us about the hallucinogens is
childish. They could have tried the hallucinogens but elected not
to do so, spurned the chance. What a different story they would
have told us if they had lived for a number of years as
apprentices of the Indian <i>sabios</i>. </p>

<p> In the Homeric hymn to Demeter, on arriving at Eleusis, tired
and disconsolate over the loss of her daughter Persephone,
Demeter was offered a drink of wine, which she declined. Since
every act in this narrative had mythic meaning, it seems that
drinking the alcoholic beverage did not go with the drinking of
the divine potion called kykeon. The two kinds of inebriation
were incompatible. In Mexico those who will take the mushrooms
know that they must refrain from drinking alcoholic beverages for
four days before the <i>velada,</i> as the mushroom celebration
is called. Alcoholic inebriation would profane, would defile, the
divine draught, alike in Mexico and Greece. </p>

<p> The Eleusinian Mysteries were in the exclusive hands of the
Eumolpus and Kerykes families. For close to two thousand years,
these hierophants governed with autocratic authority the rites at
Eleusis. By contrast, in the sacred mushroom country of Mexico
every village has its <i>sabios</i> (&quot;wisemen&quot;) who are
the custodians of the rite. (In some remote Mixe villages the
individual families take the mushrooms when they feel the need,
without the guidance of a sabio. Whether this informal practice
in the Mixe country marks a breakdown in the rite or the survival
of an earlier archaic procedure, we do not know.) In Greece the
&quot;initiate&quot; took the potion only once in his life, and
thus he could not compare successive experiencies. In Mexico one
may consult the mushroom whenever a grave family problem presents
itself. Some Indians choose never to take the mushroom, others
only once, yet others intermittently. The newcomer to the
experience is constantly warned that ingesting the hallucinogen
is in the highest degree <i>delicado,</i> &quot;delicate&quot;
with a connotation of grave danger. </p>

<p> At Eleusis and in Mexico certain items of food were
proscribed for some time before the big night. It is impossible
to compare the dietary exclusions, so different are the foods,
except that in both cases eggs are tabu. Fasting was practiced in
Greece and also in Mexico, from the morning throughout the day:
in both cases one faced the night on an empty stomach. In Mexico
before the Conquest it was the practice in aristocratic circles
to drink nourishing chocolate spiked with the inebriating
mushrooms, in this way breaking the fast as the events of the
night were launched on their course. Owing to the silence
enjoined on everyone who had taken part in the Mystery, there are
scarcely any hints as to what happened in the writers of the
flourishing period of Eleusis, but in the early centuries of the
Christian era, with Eleusis breaking down, we discover a few
references, obscure, inhibited, that may permit us some uncertain
glimpses. We find mention of a collation served to the initiates
when a large cake called the <i>pelanos,</i> made of barley and
wheat harvested in the adjacent sacred Rarian plain, was broken
into pieces and the portions served to all. In the sources one
hears of a bond of alliance and friendship that sprang up among
the initiates, and some have suggested that this sprang from the
collation they had shared together. It is not incompatible with
the Greek texts to suppose that the collation paralleled the
breaking of the fast in Mexico, the <i>pelanos</i> taking the
place of the chocolate. But surely the bond of alliance and
friendship had nothing to do with the collation: nothing so
jejune would have sufficed. The overwhelming effect of the night
under the influence of an hallucinogen gives natural birth to a
feeling of shared supernatural experience never to be forgotten,
a feeling of <i>cofradia,</i> of brotherhood. Two of us have
known this personally in Mexico: those who pass through a <i>velada</i>,
in the right set and setting, live through an awesome experience,
and feel welling up within them a tie that unites them with their
companions of that night of nights that will last for as long as
they live. Here we think is the bond of alliance and friendship
of which the Greek sources speak obscurely. </p>

<p> Then there is the matter of secrecy. In Mexico nothing had
been heard of the sacred mushrooms in sophisticated circles since
the early friars mentioned them briefly in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. It has been said that the mushrooms were a
'secret&quot; of the Indians living in the highlands of southern
Mexico. Our own little group flushed them out into the open. But
we think this 'secret&quot; was never really a secret. In the
Indian communities everyone knew about them and also about the
morning-glory seeds. Every villager could, if he wished, learn
the art of recognizing the sacred mushrooms and many did so.
There was a small trade in the mushrooms, supplying the demand
among the natives who had moved to the cities and who still
wished to &quot;consult&quot; them. The Church had originally
opposed them and the Holy Office of the Inquisition in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries tried to stamp out the native
use of them by vigorous persecutions. They failed, of course, but
the natural mycophobia of the Spanish population, their contempt
for peculiar native practices, and the similar attitude of the
French, the Germans, and the English who later came to know
Mexico led naturally to an absence of communication between the
natives and the occupying races on matters that lay closest to
the Indians&quot; hearts. It is small wonder that the sacred
mushrooms, after an abortive spate of notices, hopelessly
inadequate, in the writings of the early friars, have remained
unknown to the world to our own times. The Indians would not take
the initiative in speaking about them. The 'secrecy&quot; was not
a conspiracy of silence: it was imposed on the Indians by the
White Man, owing to the lack of intelligent and sympathetic
curiosity in the elite of the White circles. </p>

<p> The secrecy in the ancient Greek world about the Eleusinian
Mysteries was somewhat different. The laws of Athens made it a
crime to speak about what went on at Eleusis in the telesterion.
Toward the end of the Homeric hymn to Demeter, this silence is
expressly enjoined on all initiates. In B. C. 415 there was a
spate of deliberate profanations of the Mysteries by the jet set
in Athens and a crackdown followed, harsh penalties being
inflicted. But the secrecy ran far beyond the reach of the laws
of Athens. That secrecy ruled everywhere in the Greek world and
was never seriously violated. It too was self-enforcing. Those
who knew the superior hallucinogens through personal experience
were not inclined to discuss with outsiders what was revealed to
them: words could not convey to strangers the wonders of that
night and there would always be the danger that the effort to
explain would be met with incredulity, with the scoffing and
mockery that would seem to the initiate sacrilegious, would wound
him in the very core of his being. One who has known the
ineffable is loath to embark on explanations: words are useless. </p>

<p> So far as we can say, at every point what happened at Eleusis
fits in with the hallucinogenic experience in Mexico but in one
major respect the Mexican rite outdistances Eleusis. They both
share in the great Vision (&quot;Vision&quot; embracing all the
senses and the emotions), but in Mexico the sacred mushrooms (and
the other superior hallucinogens) serve also as oracles. The
hierophants of Eleusis saw a new crop of initiates every year and
there were many initiates. With the limitations that this
procedure imposed, they could not serve as consultants either to
individuals or the State on grave problems where these would be
needing advice. In Mexico, on the other hand, the hallucinogen is
consulted from time to time on all kinds of serious matters. The
questions put to the mushrooms must be serious: if they are
unworthy or frivolous, the suppliant is in for a sharp rebuff.
Faith in the mushrooms among the Indians where traditional
beliefs still prevail is absolute. When the suppliant has
observed all the tabus, when the <i>velada</i> takes place under
the right circumstances of darkness and silence, and when he
poses his questions with a pure heart, the mushrooms will not
lie. So say the Indians. And such meager evidence as one of us
has suggests that they may be right. </p>

<p> Toward the end of the last century the world learned of
peyotl and early in the middle of this century the hallucinogenic
morning-glory seeds were identified by Richard Evans Schultes. A
little later the sacred mushrooms of Mexico received their full
meed of public attention, located and written up by Roger Heim
and one of us. They were shown the way by a botanist, Blas Pablo
Reko, and an anthropologist, Robert J. Weitlaner. Now the three
of us are submitting to the modern world what well may be the key
to the mystery of the Eleusinian Mysteries. The tie that binds
the grain of Triptolemus to the supernal experience of Eleusis,
easily and safely attainable from ergot, is so close and natural
and poetically satisfying, complying point by point with the myth
of Demeter and Persephone, that are we not virtually compelled to
accept this solution? </p>

<p> Further avenues of inquiry open up. For example, the pregnant
empresses of Byzantium lived in a porphyry-lined chamber so that
their progeny would be born &quot;in the purple&quot;
(&quot;porphyry&quot; = purple). Was this &quot;purple&quot; the
color of <i>Claviceps purpurea</i> and do we have here a
posthumous outcropping of the purple-robed Demeter and
Hades-of-the-purple-hair? The earliest codices were written on
purple vellum. Was this because only the most exalted color would
be fitting, eg, for St. Augustine's <i>De Civitate Dei</i>? By a
knee-jerk reflex the values of the Pagan world would thus live on
under the Christian Dispensation. </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/eleucont.htm"><p>The
    Road to Eleusis Contents Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm"><p>LSD
    and the Psychedelics Menu Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm"><p>Cliff
    Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>