
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B32-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B046-114</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/aus/can_ch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131809 text/html 5560
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:18:00 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:15:47 GMT
Content-length: 5343
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Australian Report on Cannabis - Chapter 1 Introduction </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.GIF"> </p>

<p> <b>Chapter 1. </b> </p>

<h1>INTRODUCTION </h1>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.GIF"><br>
</p>

<p> Australia's National Drug Strategy is widely acclaimed, both
in this country and internationally, as a world leader. It
features a balance between action addressing the demand for and
supply of drugs. It involves a partnership between the government
and non-government sectors. It addresses all drugs, both
currently licit and illicit. Above all, its overarching goal is
to minimise the harmful effects of drugs and drug use in
Australian society (MCDS 1993). It does not have the
impossible-to-achieve goal of eliminating drug use nor the
simplistic approach of addressing just one class of drugs (the
currently illicit ones), the approaches taken by some other
nations. </p>

<p> The project to which this paper contributes is part of
Australia's National Drug Strategy. Under the auspices of the
[1]Commonwealth/State Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy, a
National Task Force on Cannabis was formed, to prepare a paper
summarising current knowledge about cannabis use; the paper will
be used by the Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy to assist it
in developing a national statement on cannabis. As part of this
process, the Australian Institute of Criminology has been
commissioned by the National Task Force on Cannabis to prepare
this paper addressing the legislative options available for
cannabis in Australia. </p>

<p> We have approached the project with an interdisciplinary
orientation, drawing on legal, criminal justice and social
science perspectives. Much of the material presented is factual
information that we believe will assist policy makers and the
community at large to think systematically about cannabis policy
and legislation in Australia; where we have expressed our
opinions on legislative options, this has been made clear. The
paper is structured as follows. </p>

<p> After these introductory remarks, in [2]Chapter 2 we discuss
the issue of policy goals regarding cannabis, arguing that
legislation should not be seen independently from the policies it
implements. We seek to clarify the key issues which underpin
cannabis policy, focusing on the goals of those policies, since
much of the confusion about cannabis policy options and their
effects reflects confusion concerning the policy goals. [3] </p>

<p> Chapter 3 places cannabis in context. A brief overview of the
history of cannabis in Australia and elsewhere is presented. We
then describe the legislative context of Australia's cannabis
policies: domestic legislation and international treaty
obligations are discussed. [4] </p>

<p> Chapter 4 addresses the range of legislative options
available. It describes the options, discusses their rationales,
presents information on the impacts of those options and reviews
them in terms of the goals which they seek to achieve. Five
distinct options are dealt with. At the specific request of the
National Task Force on Cannabis we include, as [5] </p>

<p> Chapter 5, a discussion of the diversion, from the criminal
justice system, of cannabis offenders, and the related topic of
the compulsory treatment of cannabis users. This chapter, like
the previous ones, draws upon both Australian and overseas
experience in these areas. The focus of [6] </p>

<p> Chapter 6 is the process for evaluating legislative options
for cannabis. We discuss both policy evaluation and program
evaluation, as they are usefully dealt with separately. [7] </p>

<p> Chapter 7 concludes the main part of the paper. There we
revisit the central issues of the preceding chapters and make
recommendations regarding the legislative options for cannabis
which we consider most appropriate for contemporary Australia.
Consistent with our consultancy brief, we do not make detailed
recommendations along these lines. Rather, being researchers and
not policy makers, the approach that we have taken is to indicate
those legislative options that we consider to be inappropriate,
and to indicate the dimensions of the policy making task for
dealing with the remaining options. </p>

<p> Three appendixes (touching upon the medical and
horticultural/industrial uses of cannabis, and information about
the authors) are included, along with a listing of source
material that the authors found particularly useful. </p>

<p> We are conscious of the fact that this paper is one of four
being prepared for the National Task Force on Cannabis. The
others address the health impacts of cannabis use, consumption
patterns in Australia and public opinion concerning cannabis. The
findings of the other research teams in their respective areas
should be considered concurrently with the information set out in
the following chapters. Reference Ministerial Council on Drug
Strategy 1993, National Drug Strategic Plan 1993-97, AGPS,
Canberra. </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>