
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-17</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B041-68</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/socintro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130555 text/html 19224
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:05:44 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:54 GMT
Content-length: 19006
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>La Guardia Committee Report, The Sociological Study</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>The LaGuardia Committee Report,</b> </p>

<p><b>THE SOCIOLOGICAL STUDY</b> </p>

<p><b>Dudley D. Shoenfeld, MD<br>
</b></p>

<h1>INTRODUCTION</h1>

<hr>

<p>In order to understand fully the purpose and scope of this
particular part of the survey conducted by the Mayor's Committee
on Marihuana, a brief digest of the history of the growth and
usage of this drug is essential. </p>

<p>Indian hemp, from which marihuana (the American synonym for
hashish) is obtained, has been known to man for more than three
thousand years. This plant, although originally indigenous to
Central Asia, is now found in practically every section of the
world, growing either wild or cultivated, legally or illegally. </p>

<p>When originally discovered, the use to which this plant was
principally put was the conversion of its fiber for commerical
purposes in the production of cord, twine and textiles. Shortly
thereafter its pharmaceutical properties were employed in the
practice of medicine and surgery. Authoritative proof is
available that the Chinese found it valuable as an effective
anesthetic in surgery as far back as two thousand years. It was
not until approximately the tenth century that the peoples of
Africa and Asia began to use it in a rather indiscriminate manner
for its intoxicating effects. </p>

<p>Very shortly after its usage became popular, this drug engaged
the attention of the various African and Asian governments, as
well as of lay persons interested in medical, religious and
sociological problems. Some of these very early investigators
propounded the theory that physical and mental deterioration was
the direct result of smoking hashish. Others extolled its
benefits, deeming it actually essential to life, and urged people
to indulge in it. </p>

<p>During this early period, the peoples of Europe were aware of
the use of hashish in Africa and Asia, and considered it a vice
particularly common to the peoples of those continents. In the
nineteenth century their interest was raised to a high pitch
because of the fictional reports of the smoking of hashish given
by the romanticists of that period. These individuals, who had
the power of the pen, experimentally indulged in the smoking of
hashish, and described in an expansive, subjective manner the
effects the drug had upon them. A review of the fanciful
literature reveals that in most instances these writings referred
to the authors' experiences with toxic doses. Summed up, the
conclusions were that hashish could cause psychotic episodes and
even death and that prolonged use would result in physical and
mental deterioration. The exalted position held by these
romanticists tended to influence the Europeans to accept their
conclusions as scientific monographs on the subject of hashish,
so that the smoking of hashish did not become popular with them.
However, in recent years there has been a fairly wide
participation on the part of Europeans in smoking hashish or
marihuana, but it is referred to as an American vice. This allows
one to infer that whereas the knowledge pertaining to this habit
was very early recognized in Europe, at the present time
participation in it is from their point of view the direct result
of its introduction into Europe not from Africa and Asia, but
from America. </p>

<p>In America, Indian hemp was planted in the New England
colonies, solely for commercial purposes, as early as the
seventeenth century. At the present time it can be found growing
either wild or cultivated, legally or illegally, in practically
all our states. Lawful cultivation is confined principally to the
states of Kentucky, Illinois, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. It has
been estimated that not more than ten thousand acres are devoted
to its legal production. It is of value commercially in the
manufacture of rope, twine, and textiles. The seed is used for
bird- food, and the oil extracted from the seed is occasionally
used as a substitute for linseed oil in the preparation of
artists' paints. A rosin extracted from the plant is used in the
production of pharmaceutical preparations. </p>

<p>Since the history of hemp cultivation in America dates back to
the seventeenth century, it is exceedingly interesting, but
difficult to explain, that the smoking of marihuana did not
become a problem in our country until approximately twenty years
ago, and that it has become an acute problem associated with a
great deal of publicity only in the past ten years. </p>

<p>The origin of the word &quot;marihuana&quot; is in doubt. Some
authorities are of the opinion that it is derived from the
Portuguese word &quot;mariguano,&quot; meaning intoxicant. Others
are of the opinion that it has its derivation in the Mexican
words for &quot;Mary and Jane.&quot; The introduction into the
United States of the practice of smoking marihuana has been the
subject of a great deal of speculation. The most tenable
hypothesis at the present time is that it was introduced by
Mexicans entering our country. </p>

<p>It is accepted that in Mexico marihuana smoking is an old,
established practice. Therefore, it would appear logical to
assume that Mexican laborers crossing our border into the
Southwest carried this practice with them. Having used marihuana
in their native land, they found it natural to continue smoking
it in the new country, and planted it for personal consumption.
Once available, it was soon made use of by our citizens. At the
present time, the smoking of marihuana is widespread in this
nation. </p>

<p>Believing that marihuana smoking might be deleterious, and
knowing it to be widespread, federal and municipal governments,
private individuals, and such agencies as the Opium Advisory
Association, the International Narcotic Education Association,
and others investigated the subject. These investigative
organizations have contributed a great deal of data and pertinent
information to the knowledge of the use of marihuana. The mass of
information so obtained when untangled can be summed up with the
general statement that a majority of investigators are of the
opinion that marihuana smoking is deleterious, although a
minority maintain that it is innocuous. The majority believe that
marihuana smoking is widespread among school children; that the
dispensers of the drug are organized to such an extent that they
encourage the use of marihuana in order to create an ever-
increasing market; that juvenile delinquency is directly related
to the effects of the drug; that it is a causative factor in a
large percentage of our major crimes and sexual offenses; and
that physical and mental deterioration are the direct result of
the prolonged habit of smoking marihuana. </p>

<p>As a result of these official and semi-official conclusions in
regard to the disastrous effects produced by this habit, the
newspapers and magazines of our country have given it wide
publicity. At this point it may be profitable to give the
conclusions of some of the investigators and quote the publicity
associated with it. In a pamphlet &quot;Marihuana or Indian Hemp
and Its Preparations&quot; issued by the International Narcotic
Education Association, one finds: </p>

<p><b>(quotation)</b> </p>

<p>Marihuana is a most virile and powerful stimulant. The
physiological effect of this drug produces a peculiar psychic
exaltation and derangement of the central nervous system. The
stage of exaltation and confusion, more marked in some addicts
than in others, is generally followed by a stage of depression.
Sometimes the subject passes into a semi- conscious state,
experiencing vivid and extravagant dreams which vary according to
the individual character and mentality. In some the stage is one
of self-satisfaction and well-being. In others, it is alarming,
presenting the fear of some imminent and indefinite danger or of
impending death. Later the dreams are sometimes followed by a
state of complete unconsciousness. Sometimes convulsive attacks
and acute mania are developed. </p>

<p>The narcotic content in marihuana decreases the rate of heart
beat and causes irregularity of the pulse. Death may result from
the effect upon the heart. Prolonged use of marihuana frequently
develops a delirious rage which sometimes leads to high crimes,
such as assault and murder. Hence marihuana has been called the
&quot;killer drug.&quot; The habitual use of this narcotic poison
always causes a very marked mental deterioration and sometimes
produces insanity. Hence marihuana is frequently called
&quot;loco weed.&quot; (Loco is the Spanish word for crazy.) </p>

<p>While the marihuana habit leads to physical wreckage and
mental decay, its effects upon character and morality are even
more devastating. The victim frequently undergoes such degeneracy
that he will lie and steal without scruple; he becomes utterly
untrustworthy and often drifts into the underworld where, with
his degenerate companions, he commits high crimes and
misdemeanors. Marihuana sometimes gives man the lust to kill
unreasonably and without motive. Many cases of assault, rape,
robbery, and murder are traced to the use of maribuana.(1) </p>

<p><b>(end quotation)<br>
</b></p>

<p>(1) International Narcotic Education Association.
&quot;Marihuana or Indian Hemp and Its Preparations.&quot; Los
Angeles, 1936. <br>
</p>

<p>In an article published in the New York Daily Worker, New
York, Saturday, December 28, 1940, there appeared under the
column headed &quot;HEALTH ADVICE&quot;:<br>
</p>

<p><b>(start quoted article)</b> </p>

<p><b>A DRUG AND INSANITY.</b> </p>

<p>Bill Wilson was strolling by his favorite soda joint on the
way home from high school when he heard a familiar voice whisper
loudly, &quot;Hey, Bill, c'mere.&quot; Behind the Texaco
billboard, he found his side-kick Jim, who said excitedly,
&quot;I got some reefers!&quot; &quot;Reefers, what're
they?&quot; </p>

<p>Mysteriously, Jim reached into his pocket and pulled out two
large cigarettes. &quot;Marihuana!&quot; Jim's pupils dilated.
&quot;Come on over to the club and we'll smoke 'em. Boy, that's
fun!&quot; Bill is only one of thousands of new marihuana smokers
created yearly among boys and girls of high school age. </p>

<p>What is this drug? It is a narcotic in the same class as opium
and is derived from a plant, which grows wild, extensively in
some parts. For this reason, it is hard to control and the drug
is easy to obtain at very little cost. Smoking of the weed is
habit-forming. It destroys the willpower, releases restraints,
and promotes insane reactions. Continued use causes the face to
become bloated, the eyes bloodshot, the limbs weak and trembling,
and the mind sinks into insanity. Robberies, thrill murders, sex
crimes and other offenses result. </p>

<p>When the habit is first started, the symptoms are milder, yet
powerful enough. The smoker loses all sense of time and space so
that he can't judge distances, he loses his self-control, and his
imagination receives considerable stimulation. </p>

<p>The habit can be cured only by the most severe methods. The
addict must be put into an institution, where the drug is
gradually withdrawn, his general health is built up, and he is
kept there until he has enough willpower to withstand the
temptation to again take to the weed. </p>

<p>The spread of this terrible fad can be stopped only when the
unscrupulous criminals trafficking In the drug are rooted out. </p>

<p><b>(end quoted article)<br>
</b></p>

<p>Dr. Robert P. Walton, Professor of Pharmacology of the School
of Medicine of the University of Mississippi, has written a most
comprehensive book on the subject of marihuana, embodying in
detail pharmacological and social studies.(2) A chapter on the
&quot;Present Status of the Marihuana Vice in the United
States&quot; was prepared by Dr. Frank R. Gomila, Commissioner of
Public Safety of New Orleans, and C. G. Lambou, Assistant City
Chemist. They refer to New Orleans as being possibly the first
large city in the United States where the drug habit became
widely established among the native population, and they
therefore believe that the authorities in this city had a decided
opportunity to observe the progress of the smoking of marihuana
as a social problem. Referring specifically to the use of
marihuana among school children, they state that reporters in New
Orleans not only heard about but observed large numbers of boys
of school age actually buying and smoking marihuana cigarettes.
One peddler was so brazen as to keep his stock under the street
stairs to a girls' high school. </p>

<p>Inquiries further revealed that school children of forty-four
schools in New Orleans (only a few of these were high schools)
smoked marihuana. As a result of exposure and widespread
agitation, </p>

<p><b>(start quotation)</b> </p>

<p>Verifications came in by the hundreds from harassed parents,
teachers, neighborhood pastors, priests, welfare workers and club
women. Warrington House for boys was full of children who had
become habituated to the use of cannabis. The superintendent of
the Children's Bureau reported that there were many problem
children there who had come under the influence and two who had
run away because they couldn't get their &quot;muggles&quot; at
the Bureau. The Director of Kingsley House for boys received many
pleas from fathers of boys who had come under the influence and
were charged with petty crimes. </p>

<p>After personally seeing these boys in an hysterical condition
or on the well-known &quot;laughing jags,&quot; the director
termed the situation decidedly grave. The Waif's Home, at this
time, was reputedly full of children, both white and colored, who
had been brought in under the influence of the drug. Marihuana
cigarettes could be bought almost as readily as sandwiches. Their
cost was two for a quarter. The children solved the problem of
cost by pooling pennies among the members of a group and then
passing the cigarettes from one to another, all the puffs being
carefully counted.... </p>

<p>The result of these investigations ended in a wholesale arrest
of more than 150 persons. Approximately one hundred underworld
dives, soft-drink establishments, night clubs, grocery stores,
and private homes were searched in the police raid. Addicts,
hardened criminals, gangsters, women of the streets sailors of
all nationalities, bootleggers, boys and girls, -- many flashily
dressed in silks and furs, others in working clothes -- all were
rounded up in the net which Captain Smith and his squad had set. </p>

<p>. . . Notwithstanding the thoroughness with which this police
roundup was carried out, it did not entirely eradicate in one
stroke a vice which had already become so well established.
During the next few years New Orleans experienced a crime wave
which unquestionably was greatly aggravated by the influence of
this drug habit. Payroll and bank guards were doubled, but this
did not prevent some of the most spectacular holdups in the
history of the city. Youngsters known to be
&quot;muggle-heads&quot; fortified themselves with the narcotic
and proceeded to shoot down police, bank clerks and casual
bystanders. Mr. Eugene Stanley, at that time District Attorney,
declared that many of the crimes in New Orleans and the South
were thus committed by criminals who relied on the drug to give
them a false courage and freedom from restraint. Dr. George
Roeling, Coroner, reported that of 450 prisoners investigated,
125 were confirmed users of marihuana. Dr. W. B. Graham, State
Narcotic Officer, declared in 1936 that 60 per cent of the crimes
committed in New Orleans were by marihuana users.(3) </p>

<p><b>(end quote)<br>
</b></p>

<p>The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana decided to confine its
investigations to a limited area. For a number of reasons the
Borough of Manhattan seemed to be the most profitable section of
the city in which to concentrate. In order to crystallize our
particular project we deemed it advisable to direct our efforts
to finding answers to the following questions: </p>

<p>1. To what extent is marihuana used? </p>

<p>2. What is the method of retail distribution? </p>

<p>3. What is the general attitude of the marihuana smoker toward
society and toward the use of the drug? </p>

<p>4. What is the relationship between marihuana and eroticism? </p>

<p>5. What is the relationship between marihuana and crime? </p>

<p>6. What is the relationship between marihuana and juvenile
delinquency? <br>
</p>

<p>In the course of our investigations, we have made extensive
use of subjective data obtained from those who were actual
smokers of marihuana and directly acquainted with its effects and
those who were not smokers, but, because of residence, occupation
or other interests, were acquainted with the general subject.<br>
</p>

<p>(2) Walton, R. P. Marijuana: America's New Drug Problem. J. B.
Lippincott Co., Philadelphia, 1938. </p>

<p>(3) Ibid.</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>