
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-52</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B015-81</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/other/kiddrnk.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101850 text/html 10011
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:18:40 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:22 GMT
Content-length: 9794
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Kids Drink, Use Drugs to Cope </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1><a name="OLE_LINK1">Kids Drink, Use Drugs to Cope </a></h1>

<p> <b>Peer Pressure Actually Less of a Factor in Teen Drinking
Than Parents Think</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> MINNEAPOLIS, Oct. 18, 1995 /PRNewswire/ -- Parents often
believe that teenagers take most of their cues from their
friends. But new statistics show that peer pressure isn't as
important a factor in leading teens to drink alcohol as parents
may believe. Instead, teens feel that alcohol helps them forget
about their problems, according to a recent national survey
released today by the Minnesota-based Hazelden Foundation. </p>

<p> According to the survey statistics, parents are much more
likely to believe that peer pressure plays an important role in
influencing teens to drink or use drugs. Survey results show that
87 percent of parents said teens drink or use drugs because
&quot;everybody else is doing it.&quot; Seventy-nine percent of
parents also pointed to the fact that &quot;other kids will think
they're weird if they don't&quot; as an important factor in why
teens drink. On the other hand, 79 percent of teens pointed to
&quot;the feeling of being drunk or high&quot; as their top
reason for drinking or using drugs. Teens (66.7 percent) also
said that drugs and alcohol &quot;help them forget their
problems.&quot; </p>

<p> &quot;The adolescent years are difficult for kids to
experience,&quot; says Cathy Seward, executive director of
Hazelden's Center for Youth and Families (HCYF). &quot;Parents
shouldn't rule out the possibility that their children could be
tempted to turn to alcohol and drugs to cope.&quot; HCYF is one
of the nation's only adolescent and young adult centers
specializing in alcoholism and chemical dependency treatment and
education for youth ages 14-25. Last year, more than 550 young
adults from throughout the United States benefited from HCYF
programs and services. </p>

<p> TEENS MORE REALISTIC ABOUT SUBSTANCE ABUSE </p>

<p> According to HCYF professionals, alcohol abuse is a more
serious problem among youth today, and teens appear to agree.
Fifty percent of the teens said alcohol is the most serious
problem among youth today. Parents were more evenly divided, with
only 36.4 percent rating alcohol as the most serious and 38.5
percent rating drugs to be a more serious problem. </p>

<p> Twenty-four percent of parents rated both alcohol and drugs a
serious problem in contrast to only six percent of teens. </p>

<p> &quot;Parents today seem to be most concerned about the
effect of hard drugs, such as marijuana and cocaine, on the lives
of their kids,&quot; says Seward. &quot;In reality, alcohol is
still overwhelmingly the primary drug of choice among teens. Kids
who start off experimenting with alcohol are often more likely to
get hooked and turn to harder drugs to get the 'high' feelings
that originally attracted them to drinking.&quot; </p>

<p> PARENTS LIMIT DRUG USE MORE THAN ALCOHOL </p>

<p> When asked to describe the kind of &quot;ground rules&quot;
families had about drug and alcohol use, survey results show
parents set more rigid guidelines for their kids when it comes to
drug use. Both parents and teens agreed at a margin of two to one
that drug use isn't tolerated in the family. </p>

<p> When it comes to outlining specific family rules about
alcohol and drug consumption, parents are much more lenient
toward alcohol -- allowing their teenagers to see them drinking
alcohol and admitting their teens can drink alcohol in a variety
of settings. </p>

<p> Specifically: 21.8 percent of the parents said alcohol
consumption is all right for parents but not teens; 8.3 percent
of parents allow their kids to drink alcohol at home; and 4.7
percent of parents said they allow their teens to drink alcohol
at parties as long as he/she doesn't drive home. </p>

<p> According to survey results, none of these &quot;ground
rules&quot; is allowed when it comes to drug use. </p>

<p> COMMUNICATION GAP EXISTS BETWEEN PARENTS AND TEENS </p>

<p> Even when parents say they have discussed alcohol and drug
use with their teens, survey results show that such discussions
may not have the effect that the parents hoped for. According to
the survey statistics, nearly all of the parents (95.6 percent)
said they have talked to their teenagers about alcohol use. Only
84 percent of the teens surveyed agreed. </p>

<p> While fewer parents -- 92.5 percent -- have discussed drug
use with their teens, the discrepancy with teens is even higher
-- with only 78.5 percent of the youth remembering a discussion
about drug use. </p>

<p> &quot;When talking with kids about alcohol and drug use,
parents need to be extremely clear about the consequences and
potential dangers that can affect their teens,&quot; says Seward.
&quot;It's best to sit down with your child and use real life
examples to illustrate some of the harm that comes to teens who
continue to experiment with drugs.&quot; </p>

<p> OTHER FINDINGS IN THE HAZELDEN SURVEY: </p>

<p> -- When asked how they would react if they found out that
their teen was drinking or using drugs, twice as many parents (87
percent) said they would &quot;sit down and talk it out&quot; as
compared to other options such as grounding their teenager (44
percent) or forbidding their teenager from &quot;hanging around
with the friends who got him/her started in the first
place,&quot; (41 percent). </p>

<p> -- Despite the fact that almost 40 percent (38.1 percent) of
teens surveyed admit they have friends or classmates who both
drink alcohol and use drugs, approximately one third (30 percent)
of parents said they are unsure about whether their teenager has
friends or classmates who use alcohol. An almost equal number of
parents -- an additional 28 percent -- said their teens have
friends who both drink alcohol and use drugs. </p>

<p> -- Parents (36 percent) and teens (40 percent) agreed that
teens at school plan activities that revolve around alcohol and
drugs on a weekly basis. Yet 20 percent of the teens surveyed
admit that teens plan activities that revolve around alcohol or
drugs even more often -- on a daily basis. </p>

<p> -- When asked to rank behaviors that would make them think a
friend had a drug or alcohol problem, teens listed the following:
personality changes (80.4 percent); pressuring others to use
(75.6 percent); giving up favorite activities (69.3 percent);
lying about things (68.5 percent); receiving falling grades (65.6
percent) or avoiding friends (44.8 percent). </p>

<p> -- When asked what they felt would be the top results of
ongoing drug use, teenagers pointed to getting hooked (89.3
percent); death (82.6 percent); and a car crash (81.1 percent) as
primary concerns. Teens ranked unprotected sex (58 percent) as
the least likely result of ongoing drug or alcohol use. </p>

<p> TEENS COMFORTABLE TALKING ABOUT CHEMICAL USE BUT AVOID TOPIC </p>

<p> When asked hypothetically about their comfort level in
talking with friends about drinking or drug use, more than
three-fourths (77 percent) of the teens said they felt very or
somewhat confident and comfortable discussing the topic. Yet in
reality, less than half of the teens surveyed who know friends or
classmates who used alcohol and/or drugs (44 percent) have ever
talked with them about their drug or alcohol use and tried to
offer help. Fifty-five percent of the teens surveyed said they
had never broached the subject with their friends. </p>

<p> &quot;Teenagers tend to listen to the opinions of their
friends more than their parents,&quot; says Seward. &quot;This
makes it very important that friends take any opportunities to
talk to each other about worries associated with drug and alcohol
abuse.&quot; </p>

<p> HAZELDEN OFFERS HELP IN DISCUSSING DRUG USE </p>

<p> To help parents and teens discuss the topic of alcohol and
drug use, Hazelden's Responsibility of Friendship program has
developed &quot;A Guide For Teens,&quot; a free booklet designed
to help teens assist a friend who has a problem with alcohol or
other related drugs. </p>

<p> To get a copy of Hazelden's &quot;A Guide For Teens,&quot;
call Hazelden's toll-free helpline, 800-I-DO-CARE. The helpline
was created by Hazelden in 1992 in response to a widespread need
for information. </p>

<p> ABOUT THE SURVEY </p>

<p> The telephone survey, conducted for the Minnesota-based
Hazelden Center for Youth and Families and the Hazelden
Foundation by Market Facts, Inc., polled a nationally
representative sample of more than 300 parents and 270 teenagers
to learn their opinions about drug and alcohol use and whether or
not kids ever talk to friends about usage. (The margin of error
for the sample is plus or minus 6 percentage points). </p>

<p> HCYF is a program of the Hazelden Foundation, an
internationally recognized nonprofit organization providing
low-cost, quality rehabilitation, education, prevention and
professional services in chemical dependency and related
addictive disorders. </p>

<p> CONTACT: Jeff Moravec of Hazelden Foundation, 612-213-4228,
or Trish Scorpio of Mona Meyer McGrath &amp; Gavin/Shandwick,
612-832-5000. </p>

<p> Date: 10/17/95 </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>