
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-36</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B028-114</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/landopium1896.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095804 text/html 12373
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:57:53 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:55 GMT
Content-length: 12157
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>In The Land of Opium - 1896</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">The New York Times March 29, 1896, p. 28</font></p>

<p><font size="3">IN THE LAND OF OPIUM</font></p>

<p><font size="3">THE IMMENSE AREAS GIVEN TO THE GROWTH OF THE
POPPY.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The Drug's History Traced from the Plant to the
Pipe--The Scenes in the Indian Fields--Processes Through Which
the Opium Goes--The Monopoly of Finishing for Smoking in the
Hands of Chinese--View of a Lucknow Smoking Den.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Few people have any idea of the vast areas
given over wholly to the cultivation of opium. The consumption
and the manufacture of this drug, far from being on the decline,
are on the increase to an almost incredible extent. The greed for
gold is far more predominant in the human make-up than is the
philanthropic spirit which seeks to elevate mankind, though its
purse may suffer in so doing. England, this great moral nation,
&quot;ever ready to take the sword, &amp;c., for the oppressed
and for the elevation of mankind in general,&quot; reaps more
benefit from the cultivation of opium than all other nations put
together.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In the district of Bengal alone there are
nearly 1,000,000 acres devoted exclusively to the cultivation of
the poppy. Its cultivation is legalized and in every way
encouraged by the British Government, which has an absolute
monopoly of this industry in India. The two principal districts
are presided over by and under the direct control of English
officials residing at Patna and Ghazipur. The Bahar agency
embraces an opium field of about 500,000 acres, and that of
Benares is a close second with 478,500 devoted to the cultivation
of this much-talked-of drug.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">There is a fierce dispute going on just now as
to the relative merits or demerits of opium. Many eminent men in
the scientific world openly declare that opium is a blessing. The
Government experts in the country where it grows go so far as to
say that opium is a blessing instead of being a curse to the
natives. However, the vast majority of mankind will long be of
the undivided opinion that opium is the most all-crushing curse
that afflicts man. The enthusiasts, or, rather, extremists, of
the International Anti-Opium Society picture the condition of
India under the ban of opium in the most dreadful manner
possible. According to one of these men, all of the 600,000,000
of human beings in Asia are exposed to the evils of the opium
trade as legalized by the British Government. In order to derive
a revenue from it the Indian Government issues licenses for the
sale and consumption of this poisonous drug in vile places in all
large cities, like Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Lucknow, and
Maulmain, and in all towns and villages of India and Burmah.
These licenses are not issued for the purpose of limiting the
sale of something that cannot be prohibited, but they are issued
with the requirement that the holder of the license must sell a
stipulated quantity or pay a forfeit!</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The more sold the more revenue the English
Crown will receive. As the opium is bought from the Government
agents, of course it is known how much the holder of the license
sells. A member of the Parliament who was most bitterly opposed
to this traffic has been traveling through India gathering facts
and seeing for himself what the condition of the natives is under
an unrestricted use of opium.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">One of the opium dens at Lucknow is graphically
described. There is no secrecy about selling or purchasing the
drug: it is handled as would be sugar, flour, or the other
necessities of life. Entering with the customers, you will find
yourself in a spacious but very dirty courtyard, around which are
ranged fifteen or twenty small rooms. This is the establishment
of the Government collector--the opium farmer. The stench is
sickening, and the swarm of flies intolerable. Enter one of the
small rooms. It has no windows and is very dark, but in the
centre is a small charcoal fire, the glow of which lights up the
faces of nine or ten human beings--men and women--lying on the
floor like pigs in a sty. A young girl fans the fire, lights the
opium pipe, and holds it to the mouth of the last comer till his
head falls heavily on the body of the inert man or woman who
happens to lie near him. In no groggery, in no lunatic or idiot
asylum, will one see such utter, helpless depravity as appears in
the countenances of those in the preliminary stages of opium
drunkenness. Here one may see some handsome young married women,
nineteen or twenty years of age, sprawling over the senseless
bodies of men. Here is a much younger girl sitting among a group
of newly arrived customers singing lewd songs as they hand around
the pipes. At night these dens are all crowded to excess, and it
is estimated that there are some 14,000 people in Lucknow abject
slaves of this hideous vice.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">There are those, however, who have radically
different opinions on the opium question. The use of the drug in
America or Europe under vastly different climatic conditions has
nothing in common with the use of it in its native land. The
Bishop of Calcutta, on being asked for an opinion on this
subject, said among other things that, &quot;while admitting that
there are evils arising from the use of opium, we are of the
opinion that they are not sufficiently great to justify us in
restricting the liberty which all men should be permitted to
express in such matters. Medical testimony [illeg.] to show that
opium used in moderation is in this country harmless and under
certain conditions of life distinctly beneficial.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">One distinguished native, a high official of
the Indian Museum, was rather sarcastic when asked his opinion on
this subject. He said that the opium habit was much preferable to
the alcoholism of America and Europe, and recommended the
introduction of the drug as a substitute for alcohol.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">It is worth a long journey to visit the poppy
fields when the season begins. In February, as a rule, the plant
is in full flower and has attained a height of three or four
feet. Each stem has from two to five capsules of the size of a
duck's egg. This is the time for the all- important operation of
gathering the juice. Before the capsules are pierced the fallen
petals of the flowers are carefully gathered and sorted,
according to condition, in three grades, They are heated over a
slow fire and formed into thin cakes, to be used for the covering
of the drug when collected. This done, the piercing of the pods
begins. This requires great skill, as the yield greatly depends
on the exactness of this operation. The opium farmer and his
assistants to about armed with a small lancet-like affair, which
is provided with three or four short, sharp prongs. With this a
half dozen perpendicular cuts are made in each capsule or seed
pod. The juice begins to flow at once, but quickly congeals. The
day after all the thickened juice is carefully gathered, being
scraped off with a small iron trowel expressly made for this
purpose.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The mass thus gathered is put into an earthen
vessel and kept carefully stirred for a month or more, great care
being taken to have it well aired, but not exposed to the sun.
This finished, the opium examiner comes along with this
assistant, an expert tester. These two pass upon the grade
produced, and when this is done the whole is put into a large
box. Now it is worked very much in the same fashion as baker's
dough, to give it the required consistency. After this operation
is finished, the opium is put up into balls for exportation. This
is a very interesting sight. The natives wade about in the large
vats containing the pastelike drug and hand out the stuff to
hundreds of ballmakers sitting around the room. Every man has a
spherical brass cup, lined with the petals mentioned, before him.
Into this is pressed the regulation quantity of opium. From this
brass cup, when properly pressed, the opium ball is transferred
to another man who gives it a coating of clay. This gives the
drug, when ready for shipment, the appearance of a fair-sized
cannon ball. When well prepared in this manner, opium will keep
its properties for fifteen years or more.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In this condition it is as yet raw opium and
unfit for smoking. For some unexplained reason the final
preparation of the drug to make it marketable for smoking is
almost a monopoly in the hands of the Chinese. These people pay
an enormous bonus for this privilege, but their profits are in
proportion. The Chinese seem to be the most successful in giving
this subtle drug the finishing touches. There are large
establishments devoted to the preparation of the crude opium.
Outside of these factories there are pyramids of opium balls
which at first glance remind one far more of an artillery park
than of an opium factory. The balls are broken, and after being
removed are remoistened with a little water and allowed to stand
abut fourteen hours. They are then put into pans, two and a half
balls with ten pints of water. After this has boiled for about
ten hours it is reduced to a thin paste of uniform consistency.
This is then transferred to a larger vessel and allowed to stand
for fifteen hours. Then it is put through a great deal of
filtering and various other processes and finally put over a
brisk fire. At a certain period it is quickly taken away from the
fire and vigorously stirred until cold, the cooling being
accelerated by coolies with large fans. When quite cold it is
taken to a special room and kept there for some months before it
is considered in prime condition for smoking. Prepared this way,
the opium is of the consistency of a very thick syrup. It is put
up in small boxes or jars of graduated weights to suit the
customers. All such boxes have the name of the maker stamped on
each package. In this condition the drug is exceedingly valuable,
and all the employees are searched for hidden opium before they
leave the factory.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">[NOTE: The article from which this file was
excerpted may include additional text and accompanying
illustrations.]</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>