
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B32-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B046-21</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/fada/fada2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131726 text/html 95235
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:17:15 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:06:50 GMT
Content-length: 95017
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Drug-Law Enforcement Efforts</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<h1>The Facts About Drug Abuse </h1>

<p> <b>The Drug Abuse Council, 1980</b> </p>

<h2>Drug-Law Enforcement Efforts </h2>

<p> John R. Pekkanen </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> When the city of San Francisco passed an ordinance n 1875
banning the smoking o opium in opium dens.&quot; it marked the
first time a law prohibiting the use of narcotics was enacted in
this country. Since then cities, states and the federal
government have enacted a great number of drug laws. Some have
been stringent, others more lenient. Some were passed during
politically volatile periods when &quot;get tough&quot;
approaches were thought to be the answer; others were passed
during calmer times when more moderate approaches were sought. </p>

<p> To understand why we embarked on a course of prohibition for
particular drugs is a difficult and elusive undertaking, too
affected by deeply rooted attitudes and prejudices to allow for
completely dispassionate inquiry. Drug laws from their inception
were a special breed. In effect, the passage of these prohibitory
laws created crimes by definition; drug activities derived their
criminal label more from prevailing attitudes and prejudices than
from actual threats to persons or property. These were laws by
which people could and did express social disapproval, and were
not in the tradition of laws enacted to protect us from those who
steal, murder, or commit fraud. They were the means by which
right and wrong were distinguished according to popular but
arbitrary national values and mores. </p>

<p> In many instances, a proposed drug law would begin as an
attempt to control the use of a certain substance, such as opium,
cocaine, or marijuana. The rhetoric surrounding the proposed
antidrug law would usually call for the preservation of
predominant social and moral values, and it would be offered as a
means of restoring those &quot;lost&quot; values. Frequently such
a law would be directed at an outcast or minority segment of
society identified with the use of the drug. I Supporters of the
law would offer it as a solution to a wide range of social,
moral, racial, political, and economic problems-from unemployment
and crime in the streets to preserving the white race. </p>

<p> Early in the consideration of the Harrison Narcotic Act (the
first major federal antinarcotics act2), there was some
discussion about the hazards of legislating morality, but these
cautions were soon put aside. In essence, the Harrison Narcotic
Act was a tax law enacted to achieve a moral end, similar in that
regard to the Volstead Act prohibiting alcohol. Since then, drug
laws and the enforcement policies which flow from them have never
been seriously challenged. </p>

<p> In his study of alcohol prohibition, Symbolic Crusade: Status
Politics and the American Temperance Movement,3 Joseph Gusfield
examines the components of criminal law and separates them into
&quot;instrumental&quot; and &quot;symbolic&quot; aspects.
Applied to antidrug laws, the &quot;instrumental&quot; aspect is
what the law states as its intention-i.e., the prevention of the
use and availability of certain drugs. The &quot;symbolic&quot;
aspect may have an importance as great as or greater than that of
the instrumental*: In the case of antidrug laws, part of the
symbolic function has been to define users of particular drugs as
abnormal and to designate their behavior as criminal. When this
labelling process was attempted with alcohol prohibition as w
ell, it failed because the number of alcohol users in the country
was so large and diverse that no one group could be singled out
and designated as &quot;abnormal&quot; exclusively because of
drinking alcohol. </p>

<p> *These two functions of the law were best exemplified by the
report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,
which called for the retention of laws against simple marijuana
possession but not enforcement of those laws. The law by itself
would discourage use, it was argued, and not enforcing it would
avoid stigmatizing those who did use the drug. </p>

<p> However, the use of certain drugs, such as opium, heroin,
and-until the 1970s-marijuana was most often primarily confined
to subgroups and minorities, whose separation and isolation were
more easily accomplished. This fact partly explains why only
congressional approval was needed to ban narcotics and marijuana,
while alcohol prohibition required a constitutional amendment,
and why when antidrug laws have appeared to be unsuccessful their
total repeal has never been seriously considered, although repeal
was possible with alcohol prohibition. </p>

<p> In the material that follows, the law enforcement approach to
the control of certain drugs will be discussed from five
perspectives: the development of the laws themselves; how the
agencies charged with enforcing drug control laws have gone about
their task; the relationship between drug use and crime; a case
study of the impact of the nation's &quot;toughest&quot; drug
control law, the New York State Drug Law Amendments of 1973; and
the impact of drug law enforcement on illicit drug-using
behavior. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>Drug Control Laws and Policies</b> </p>

<p> Efforts to control certain drugs have come in cycles,
focusing on specific drugs during specific periods. 4 Generally,
the demand for tough drug control has been most vociferous during
periods of economic or political turmoil in the United States.
The antiopium crusade began during the depression of the 1870s;
the anticocaine crusade came during a period of racial turmoil in
the South . 5 Federal sanctions against selected drugs toughened
considerably between 1915 and 1920, during the first &quot;Red
Scare&quot;; the prohibition of alcohol was of course also
effected during this period. Later, during the depression of the
1930s, the entry of many Mexicans and Mexican-Americans into the
labor market in the Southwest appears to have been a major cause
of the antimarijuana crusade and attendant laws. The creation of
the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) in 1930 established the
preeminence of law enforcement in the drug field, a fact which
has not changed over the years. The FBN's initial major drug
targets were heroin and marijuana; this policy lasted for more
than thirty five years.&quot; </p>

<p> In the 1940s drug control activities remained relatively
stable. There were no new demands for harsh laws or policies.
States adopted legislation comparable to the Harrison Act, the
major federal drug law, and this tightened the nation's drug
prohibition policy, There were also outbreaks of concern over the
misuse of legitimately produced drugs-amphetamines and
barbiturates were the most widely abused-but these drugs escaped
the full force of the antidrug effort. By 1950, however, the
atmosphere had changed, and many voices demanded new, tougher
antidrug laws.7 </p>

<p> Between 1947 and 1950, an apparent increase in illicit drug
use was reported among blacks and Puerto Ricans in many northern
cities. This caused alarm, creating support for passage of a new,
more stringent drug law in 1951. Commonly called the Boggs Act
after its sponsor, the late Representative Hale Boggs, it enacted
the harshest penalties for drug law violations to date . 8
Historian David Musto notes in The American Disease, &quot;Hale
Boggs's bill, which contained mandatory sentences, was passed in
1951 at the beginning of the McCarthy era and fears of Soviet
aggression, the 'betrayal' of China to the Communists, and
suspicion of domestic groups and persons who seemed to threaten
overthrow of the government.&quot;&quot; In 1956 an even more
severe federal narcotics bill was enacted which empowered a jury
to impose the death penalty on anyone over the age of eighteen
selling heroin to anyone Under the age of eighteen. 10 Several
states also enacted extremely harsh laws during this period,
imposing heavy penalties for both sellers and users. </p>

<p> This &quot;tough&quot; approach was eventually moderated: the
mid-1960s marked the beginning of a more comprehensive approach
to drug law enforcement. New criminal laws regulated
&quot;dangerous drugs&quot;-i.e., legally produced hallucinogens,
stimulants, and depressants. These laws were more moderate in
tone and substance, and marked a belated attempt at more uniform
policy at the federal level for the control of legitimate and
illegitimately produced drugs. The previous concern had been
exclusively with a very few illicit drugs like heroin, cocaine,
and marijuana. </p>

<p> The present era in drug law enforcement, an outgrowth of the
1960s, was inaugurated during the Nixon administration which
organized an intensified, coordinated federal antidrug program.
This was the heralded &quot;war on drug abuse.&quot;&quot; The
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970
replaced the former crazy-quilt of criminal drug law statutes
which had been gradually patched together since the beginning of
the century. 12 Through the Controlled Substances Act portion of
the legislation, psychoactive drugs were placed into five
schedules according to their presumed potential hazards. The
federal drug bureaucracy, which had gradually grown since the
1920s, was restructured and further expanded. </p>

<p> As important as these steps were in modernizing the American
approach to drug control and in moderating the Draconian criminal
penalties of the 1950s, the new era did not break significantly
with the past in any fundamental way. The law enforcement
approach to drug use remained fixed and, except for a relatively
brief period, continued to receive the bulk of federal dollars
expended in the drug field. Popular notions about drugs were not
significantly altered, nor were traditional responses seriously
questioned. The beliefs in the almost mystical power of illicit
drugs over people may have become more sophisticated, but they
did not change radically. Users of opiate drugs, instead of being
viewed merely as criminals, were now charitably viewed as
&quot;sick&quot; criminals. But they were still viewed as
criminals, and still are. </p>

<p> Perhaps one of the most important ideas to remain unchanged
was the belief in a direct link between illicit drugs and crime.
This presumed link, which had been the basis for the harsh drug
laws of the past, remained a permanent fixture. The nature of
this assumed relationship-as is discussed in later sections of
this chapter-has undergone some changes, but the basic belief in
a causal link has not. </p>

<p> Whatever the causes and motives behind the nation's drug
laws, the inescapable conclusion from the more than one hundred
years of experience since the first prohibitory law was enacted
is that they have not stopped or even diminished the use of
illicit drugs. For example, in 1924 the U.S. Public Health
Service estimated the opiate addict population at two hundred
fifteen thousands ; although imprecise, this figure is considered
to be the most reliable of that period. In 1976 the National
Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) estimated the heroin addict
population at five hundred thousand; other recent studies
indicate that the figure for all types of heroin users may be two
to four million. 14 Allowing for population increases, there are
more heroin users today than there were a half century ago. The
same appears to hold true for users of other illicit drugs. </p>

<p> Because of such findings, our drug laws and policies are more
openly questioned today than at any point in the past. On one
hand there are those who argue that government has no right at
all to intervene in the private lives of individuals. This view
holds that drug use is essentially a private act, and that
therefore government ought not intervene unless drug-taking leads
to socially disruptive or criminal behavior. A more pragmatic
aspect of this position is the feeling that laws and policies can
do little to diminish the supply of illicit substances because of
the enormous profitability involved and the consequent
development of highly organized &quot;black market&quot;
distribution networks. It is argued that the government's
resources could be better used in attempting to change the
conditions that contribute to illicit drug use-i.e., poverty,
unemployment, and other social problems-than to continue
self-defeating efforts to eliminate the supply and use of
particular drugs. </p>

<p> On the other hand, there are those who feel the government's
antidrug effort is doing about as well as can be expected in
cutting back the supply of illicit drugs, short of abridging
everyone's civil liberties. They argue that if law enforcement
programs did not attempt to diminish supply and frighten some
individuals from using drugs, our drug problems might be far
greater than they are. Then there are those who argue we are not
doing nearly enough, that more severe and repressive approaches
and policies are needed if we are to combat and eradicate the
&quot;enemy, drug abuse.&quot; In its extreme form, this latter
view holds that no price is too great to pay in order to achieve
this end. </p>

<p> However, much of the debate over drug control laws has failed
to focus sufficiently on the difficulties involved in enforcing
them. Passing a drug law is only one part of a control effort;
enforcing it is quite another. It is important to understand that
even when operating at maximum effectiveness, there are serious
limits to what law enforcement agencies can achieve. </p>

<p> One of the primary problems that American drug law
enforcement must face is that the drug laws and drug policies
have been consistently oversold by public officials. Burglary
laws are not expected to eliminate burglary, and penalties for
armed robbery are not expected to eliminate that crime; yet drug
laws are expected to eliminate illicit drug sale and use- a
standard has been set for drug laws that was never set for other
laws. More has frequently been promised than could possibly be
delivered. Consequently, as long as illicit drug use has
persisted, the policies against it have been regarded by some as
abject failures. What is needed in any discussion of drug control
policies is a realistic notion of what they can and cannot
achieve, and what their costs and benefits are. Only when we
understand this will the long cycle of overreaction to the use of
particular drugs subside. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>Law Enforcement Activities</b> </p>

<p> Basically, there are two strategies by which law enforcement
seeks to discourage illicit drug use: The first seeks to disrupt
and discourage use by enforcing domestic laws against drug use
and internal trafficking; the second seeks to prevent supplies of
illicit drugs from entering the country, either by preventing
their cultivation abroad or by intercepting shipments to the
United States. The latter strategy is largely the work of federal
agents, although state and local agencies may occasionally
participate. The efforts to control illicit drug use within the
United States are conducted by federal, state, and local agents.
Occasionally these different levels of government join forces and
work together; all too frequently, however, they act
independently, jealously guarding their &quot;turf&quot; (i.e.,
their resources and sources of information) from one another. </p>

<p> At the federal level the Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA), at present the chief drug enforcement agency, has over
four thousand employees, of whom over two thousand are agents. 15
(While this number may sound impressively large, it merely
approximates the size of the New York City Transit Authority
Police, a force that patrols the subways and buses in that city).
Several other federal agencies play various roles in the
enforcement of federal drug laws: Among these are the Customs
Service, which attempts to screen incoming persons and freight
for illicit drugs; the Internal Revenue Service, which pursues
tax law violations of illicit drug traffickers; the Law
Enforcement Assistance Administration, which provides research
and funding support for state and local drug enforcement; and the
U.S. Coast Guard, which patrols coastlines and harbor areas for
illicit drug trafficking. </p>

<p> At the state and local level there is a substantially larger
number of personnel actively engaged in drug enforcement-the
police; but an exact count is not available, since regular
-patrolmen generally enforce drug laws along with their other
duties. Special narcotics units have been established in
virtually every major-city police department as well as in many
state police departments; most major cities also give some drug
law enforcement training to their uniformed patrolmen. </p>

<p> The strategies for controlling both drug use and supplies
incorporate a number of variables. The analyses that follow
attempt to summarize each strategy and identify some of their
costs and benefits. </p>

<p> Controlling Drug Use. Drug enforcement is unlike most other
types of police enforcement activities where generally a crime is
committed and reported and the police investigate, gathering
evidence and making their case. The victim is central to this
process; he or she initiates the police investigation; it is
often the testimony of the victim during the trial that convicts
the offender. </p>

<p> In drug cases, police usually do not have victims on whom to
rely. Not only are there no complainants, but everyone involved
conspires to conceal the crime from the police. As a result most
illicit drug offenses go entirely undetected; the percentage of
violations which result in arrest are extremely low.17 </p>

<p> Of those drug violations which do result in arrest, more than
75 percent are &quot;spontaneous&quot; arrests involving no prior
police investigation. 18 These drug arrests are often incidental
to an another investigation. For example, if the driver of an
automobile is stopped for a traffic violation and the arresting
officer sees marijuana or suspects its presence and finds
evidence of a drug law offense, a drug arrest may follow. Such
arrests are not due to any overall drug enforcement strategy, but
are rather the result of normal, day-to-day police enforcement
activities. This helps explain why the overwhelming number of
drug arrests are for simple possession, with a majority of these
involving marijuana. </p>

<p> Arrests for simple illicit drug possession have little if any
impact on the overall availability of illicit drugs because they
largely fail to affect drug distribution. The major distributors
of illicit drugs conduct their drug transactions in secret, and,
as in other activities involving drugs, there are no
complainants. Major drug dealers have developed very
sophisticated methods of concealment, including drop systems and
other subterfuges. Even well-known dealers are usually able to
avoid creating probable cause for arrest. Because of this secrecy
and the absence of complainants, the fundamental problem police
face in making arrests for drug trafficking is proving that
something illegal took place. While this can be difficult enough
in cases of simple possession, it is extremely difficult with
drug trafficking, particularly in developing the so-called
&quot;high-level&quot; cases. While many who use illicit drugs
participate to some degree in drug distribution (whether for
profit or not), those who import and deal in large quantities of
particular illicit drugs are not easy to identify, apprehend, or
successfully prosecute. </p>

<p> Undercover Investigations. Narcotics officers at the federal,
state, and local levels often work undercover, and may become
participants in aspects of the offense in order to gather
sufficient evidence to prove a crime has been committed. This
work is hazardous, time-consuming, and, as one former Deputy
Attorney General told Congress, &quot;a dirty, miserable
business.&quot;&quot;' The most serious practical shortcoming of
undercover operations is that, despite the publicity such
operations receive when successful, they result in the arrest of
only a miniscule proportion of those engaged in major drug
trafficking. Moreover, each undercover operation is so
time-consuming, and the number of policemen with the temperament
and skill for this work so limited, that the percentage of major
arrests would not increase substantially even if every undercover
operation were successful. </p>

<p> These problems of investigation are as true at federal as at
state and local levels. In fact, one of the persistent criticisms
of the federal drug enforcement effort is that the overwhelming
majority of arrests are of relatively low-level dealers. A 1975
analysis by the Government Accounting Office of 1974 Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) arrests revealed that only 604
(3.6 percent) of the total 16,796 arrests were Class I violators,
and of these only 63 were convicted. 20 (Class I violators are
major international drug traffickers, drug laboratory operators,
or wholesalers.)&quot; In addition, GAO found only 5 percent of
the arrests to be Class 11 violators, a lesser but still
significant category of offenders. However, following
congressional hearings and considerable public criticism, DEA
appears to have made a major effort to pursue more Class I and H
offenders even at the expense of overall arrest figures. DEA
statistics for 1976 show only 6,143 total drug arrests, but of
these 15 percent were for Class I and 1 1. 9 percent for Class 11
offenses. Still, nearly three-quarters of the arrests were Class
III and IV arrests, a statistic that indicates that major drug
trafficking arrests continue to be elusive in spite of increased
efforts . 22 </p>

<p> An important consequence of undercover operations is that
with arrest and trial of the suspect the undercover officer's
cover is &quot;blown&quot; and his usefulness in that line of
work in that region is usually ended. This is a serious problem,
because good undercover officers are few and far between.
Undercover operations also pose a number of legal problems; for
example, defense attorneys often argue, sometimes successfully,
that the undercover officer is guilty of &quot;entrapment&quot;
by having enticed the defendant into committing the crime in
question. </p>

<p> Another hazard here is the potential for police corruption.
The possibility of corruption through payoffs is always present,
because the sums of money involved in illicit drug traffic are
enormous-generally estimated to involve several billions of
dollars nationally per year-and because the salaries of policemen
are generally rather low. Additionally, substantial amounts of
&quot;buy&quot; money are provided by law enforcement agencies
for this work; in fiscal year 1976, for example, the DEA budget
called for $9 million for &quot;buy&quot; money to be used in
procuring information and allowing agents to &quot;buy into&quot;
drug transactions in the gathering of evidence .23 All major-city
and state narcotics enforcement agencies have substantial amounts
of this &quot;buy&quot; money. With these great sums of money the
possibilities for corruption can be great. Temptation can be
abetted by the fact that the undercover agent is operating in a
lawless environment where one's normal sense of right and wrong
can become distorted. In New York City the corruption of
narcotics investigators reached serious proportions .24 After the
Knapp Commission revelations, the New York City Police Department
instituted a procedure whereby any undercover officer on the
Street Crime Unit is required to obtain specific approval by a
superior officer to make a drug arrest, and, furthermore, that
arrest must be witnessed by the superior officer. This rather
cumbersome policy is still in effect today. </p>

<p> Not all forms of corruption involve money, however. As
mentioned above, there can also be a corruption of attitude
caused by a police officer's constant exposure to the mores of
the underworld. In Buy and Bust Mark Moore writes, &quot;They
[undercover agents] will know more about the violation and the
violators they attack than police usually do, and will sometimes
have personal interests at stake in the arrests. This invites
them to exercise their authority in accordance with their
intimate knowledge rather than what the law requires. 1125 For
example, in some cases undercover police might protect certain
dealers who have acted as informants and select others for
arrest. Such choices are made not on the basis of law but upon
past collaboration or even friendship. Close relationships bred
by undercover ' work can influence a police officer to change his
views on the law, what it means, and his requirements to uphold
it. 211 </p>

<p> Intelligence Gathering. Many critics have argued that if drug
enforcement agencies were to gather and organize intelligence in
a more systematic way, more could be done to successfully
investigate major drug traffickers. Such intelligence presumably
would give more detailed information about the methods drug
traffickers employ and accordingly provide a better overall
picture of trafficking operations. However, the assumption that
better intelligence would lead to more successful enforcement
here is open to question. Nevertheless, this debate does
highlight another basic problem: That drug enforcement agents
traditionally have been hostile toward intelligence functions
performed by special units within their own agencies. As Moore
notes, &quot;No investigator would be happy to admit [to an
intelligence analyst] that he had not mined the files of his
organization for every nugget of relevant information. 1117 One
result is that different agents with different items of
information, which if systematically collected and analyzed might
provide greater information about drug transactions and networks,
often do not share it. Thus the efforts of intelligence units
within the DEA and other drug enforcement agencies are often
thwarted. </p>

<p> I Lack of Coordination. Although many state and local police
agencies rely on federal help to train and establish their
narcotics units, there is a notable absence of uniformity and
coordination between the various levels of law enforcement
agencies. As a police chief in one large American city has
remarked, </p>

<p> It's always been a problem over the years to sort out the
roles of federal, state and local agencies. My obligations to the
citizens of my city are not the same as the Bureau of Narcotics
and Dangerous Drugs [now the DEA], for example. They take a
systems approach, then make a management by objectives analysis,
they can target people and work on them. In the metropolitan
police departments, such as this one, we're at the low rung of
the law enforcement ladder, and we can't do that. We have to be
responsive to the citizen who calls in with just a meager amount
of information but expects and is entitled to action on it. 28 </p>

<p> Overlapping jurisdictions, as well as the different emphases
given to different drugs and to various aspects of enforcement
models, have created conflict. As a result, some local police
believe federal drug enforcement should confine itself to
interstate and international trafficking and should not involve
itself in &quot;local&quot; investigations. </p>

<p> While the basic assumption has been that local police will
enforce laws against small-time street dealers and users, state
police will enforce laws against the larger dealers, and the
federal government will concentrate on the major traffickers and
wholesalers, this has not always been the case. The federal
government investigates cases throughout the country, sometimes
informing state or local police agencies and sometimes not doing
so; its cases do not necessarily involve truly major interstate
or international violations. Because of these overlaps, the three
levels of drug enforcement remain to this day uncoordinated,
competitive, and at times conflicting. This continuing lack of
coordination, coupled with the other pitfalls of domestic drug
enforcement, have at times led to an acute sense of frustration
on the part of police, policymakers, and the public. As a
consequence, excessive measures periodically find support. One
recent, well-known example of this process of frustration and
overreaction involved the now defunct Office of Drug Abuse Law
Enforcement. </p>

<p> ODALE: A Case History. The Office of Drug Abuse Law
Enforcement (ODALE) was established in early 1972 by executive
order of President Nixon and charged with the mission of waging
an even tougher &quot;war&quot; on illicit drug users and dealers
than had been attempted in the past.211 The brief history of this
short-lived agency illustrates the excesses to which a &quot;war
on drugs&quot; philosophy can lead. It also highlights the
difficult position of drug law enforcement in attempting to
enforce the law justly without overstepping constitutional
safeguards. </p>

<p> ODALE was criticized from its inception for being an
&quot;election-year stunt&quot; while being simultaneously lauded
as a bold attempt to fight drug traffickers. ODALE was ostensibly
controlled by the justice Department but actually operated by
direction of the White House. Its initial creation was something
of a curiosity in that the federal government already had two
competing agencies, the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs
(BNDD) and the Customs Bureau, in the forefront of its drug
control effort. ODALE's potential for engendering yet more
bureaucratic rivalry was soon realized; within the space of a few
months, the agency had eclipsed the other traditional federal
drug enforcement efforts in influence. 30 </p>

<p> ODALE was staffed by employees from a number of federal
agencies, including BNDD, Customs, the Internal Revenue Service
(IRS), and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms. The
agents from these departments were deployed into &quot;strike
forces&quot; which were authorized to use &quot;no-knock&quot;
search warrants, court-authorized wiretaps, and other search
privileges when &quot;incidental to arrest.&quot; Furthermore,
ODALE could forward the names of suspected drug traffickers to a
special committee in IRS which could then initiate special audits
or investigations of them.31 </p>

<p> ODALE received most of its funds from the Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration (LEAA), which is empowered by Congress
to fund state and local law enforcement units. While it was not
within the authority of LEAA to directly fund ODALE, a federal
agency, this barrier was skirted by having LEAA make grants to
local police departments participating in drug raids with ODALE
agents. This funding process also allowed ODALE to circumvent
budget appropriation proceedings in Congress. These steps, while
apparently within the letter of the law, were not in its spirit,
but they went largely unchallenged in the name of fighting
&quot;drug abuse. &quot;32 </p>

<p> One of ODALE's first acts was to establish the &quot;heroin
hotline,&quot; a toll-free number which people could call if they
knew or suspected someone of dealing in illicit drugs. Although
the &quot;hotline&quot; received abundant publicity its
accomplishments in aiding drug enforcement were minimal at most.
Only a few months after it was installed, &quot;hotline&quot;
callers were told by a recording to call another number; the
&quot;hotline&quot; was out of business .33 </p>

<p> The excesses this new agency fostered came vividly to light
on the night of April 23, 1973 in Collinsville, Illinois, when
ODALE agents broke into the house of Mr. and Mrs. Herbert J.
Giglotto, asleep at the time, routed them out of bed, roughed
them up, and accused them of drug dealing. But the ODALE agents
had made a mistake and come to the wrong house. They made a
second mistaken raid in another home that very night. These
events led to the suspension of the involved agents. Eventually
they were brought to trial on criminal charges, but were
acquitted.34 </p>

<p> The adverse publicity generated by the Collinsville raids
crippled ODALE's effectiveness and power. But the creation of
that agency and the extraordinary powers given to it demonstrate
how the impulse to combat the use of particular drugs and the
uncritical attitude accompanying that impulse can lead to an
overzealous approach which can seriously erode constitutional
safeguards. The excesses of ODALE were almost predictable, as in
past instances when the climate for stamping out illicit drug use
was equally extreme. </p>

<p> A number of questions surround ODALE even after its
bureaucratic demise. Was it created solely to combat illicit drug
use? Why was such a unique agency with unique powers believed to
be needed? The answers to these questions are not and may never
be clear, because of different interpretations of what ODALE was
or attempted to be. What does seem to be clear, however, is that
ODALE represented one more attempt to allay public fears by
striking hard at illicit drug use with tough enforcement. What is
also clear is that in spite of the hoopla surrounding its
inception, ODALE's arrest statistics reveal that virtually every
individual arrested by the agency was a minor, street-level
dealer of little or no consequence. 35 </p>

<p> Controlling Drug Supplies. In addition to efforts to control
the numbers of users and distributors of illicit drugs through
the criminal justice process, the federal government also has
sought to reduce the quantity of illicit drugs available for use.
There are two ways American law enforcement agencies have sought
to control the supply of illicit drugs: intercepting them as they
come into the country, and destroying them at their source in
other countries. </p>

<p> Interdiction. Many of the illicit drugs used in this country
are produced in foreign nations. One exception is marijuana,
which is grown both within and without the United States,
although the bulk of it is produced in foreign countries; other
exceptions are synthetic psychoactive drugs produced in
laboratories (rather than refined from a harvested plant)-e.g.,
amphetamines, barbiturates, and some hallucinogens. Cocaine and
heroin, officially considered to be the major illicit drugs of
abuse in the United States, originate in other countries. An
obvious --some might say simplistic-drug control strategy is to
try to prevent these illicit substances from reaching this
country. Upon closer examination, this strategy proves to be an
awesome task. </p>

<p> Anyone who has ever passed through American Customs at the
Canadian or Mexican borders or our sea- or airports realizes that
there is rarely any thorough inspection. The vast numbers who
daily cross into and out of American jurisdiction make thorough
inspection of every traveler a practical impossibility. In
addition, American borders have traditionally been open;
constitutional safeguards define the manner and circumstances of
searches. Successful seizures of illicit drugs therefore depend
more on intelligence information than on the luck of random
searches. This intelligence information is usually supplied by
American drug agents in foreign countries, who attempt to
identify drug traffickers to later be either arrested at the
border or kept under surveillance and arrested within the United
States. * </p>

<p> However, even with good intelligence information, preventing
illicit drugs from entering this country is a difficult, indeed
nearly impossible task .311 When the estimated amount of illicit
drugs consumed in this nation is compared with amount seized at
our borders or other ports of entry, it is clear that only a very
small percentage of the drugs being smuggled into the country are
confiscated. </p>

<p> It is estimated, for example, that from twelve to twenty
thousand pounds of high-purity heroin are smuggled into this
country each year&quot;; but in fiscal year 1974 only 115 pounds
of high-purity heroin was seized at all U.S. borders and ports.
This means that, combining this with the amount of heroin seized
internally by the authorities in domestic operations, only 670
pounds of heroin were confiscated that year .38 By fiscal year
1976, after intensive effort, domestic seizures had increased to
a total of 1,124 pounds of heroin, still far short of the total
incoming amount. The publicity accorded these seizures, however,
often has conveyed the impression that law enforcement agencies
are making major inroads against illicit drug smuggling. To a
large extent this publicity has been generated by the agency
involved in the seizure, for both political and bureaucratic
reasons. </p>

<p> Perhaps the most widely used technique for embellishing the
importance of a seizure of illicit drugs is to state the
&quot;street value&quot; of the seized drug.311 A seizure of
fifteen pounds of heroin, therefore, might not be merely a
fifteen-pound seizure, but a seizure of &quot;thirty million
dollars' worth of drugs.&quot; The &quot;street value&quot;
figure is elastic and sometimes exaggerated; it often reflects
the most optimistic price a dealer might possibly ask for his
drugs. This is analogous to estimating the value of rustled
cattle by the price they would bring as steaks at the best
restaurants. What is omitted in these claims of the &quot;street
value&quot; of drugs seized is the fact that between $5 and $11
billion worth of illicit drugs is sold in this country each year
.40 Thus, $30 million or even $300 million, while significant, is
still but a tiny fraction of the total, and has little if any
impact on the total amount of illicit sales. However, when
seizures drop, enforcement agencies frequently also use the
decline to indicate the success of their efforts. </p>

<p> *Additionally, international interdiction also has included
investigations by U.S. agents abroad in cooperation with foreign
governments, and the arrests of drug traffickers in certain
countries. However, U.S. agents are now prohibited by law from
participating in the arrest of individuals in foreign countries. </p>

<p> By this self-serving logic, the drug law enforcement agencies
nearly always can appear to be successful. </p>

<p> Although drug seizure data have often been misused by
competing drug agencies to enhance their public images, seizures
can have a disruptive effect and present an economic risk to drug
traffickers. In addition, limited amounts of these drugs are of
course kept out of the illicit market. </p>

<p> Historically, border interdiction has been a major source of
rivalry among the federal agencies charged with controlling
illicit drugs-specifically, between the Customs Bureau and the
justice Department's drug agencies, from the Federal Bureau of
Narcotics to the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs to the
present Drug Enforcement Administration.&quot; Government
reorganizations, as well as a number of other attempts to
reconcile these disputes-such as specifying which international
areas each agency should be responsible for-have not completely
succeeded in quieting this rivalry, although DEA's incorporation
of some of the drug enforcement duties of Customs has certainly
allayed it. </p>

<p> These jurisdictional disputes have appeared at many critical
points in the federal drug enforcement effort. For example, when
drug agents in a foreign country obtain information regarding a
significant drug-smuggling attempt, this information would
ideally be relayed to the U.S., in order to effect an arrest on
U.S. territory; here, however, the federal drug law enforcement
process often broke down. In some cases Customs would insist that
the drugs be intercepted at the border, to make certain they did
not enter the country, while FBN, BNDD, or DEA would insist that
the smuggler be allowed through the border, whence he might lead
to &quot;higher ups&quot; in the smuggling operation. In point of
fact, however, many times the true reason for these differences
was the desire of each agency to make the drug seizure and arrest
itself. The competing agencies eventually began circumventing one
another, refusing to reveal what they were doing or whom they
were investigating. Sometimes one agency would deliberately
interrupt the investigation of another with a premature arrest.
In one celebrated instance, two agencies, unknown to one another,
were involved in the same investigation; in a showdown shooting
erupted, with agents from two federal agencies of the United
States government mistakenly shooting at each other.&quot; How
often disruptions of this kind occurred is difficult to estimate,
but it is clear that the rivalry was a serious impediment to
effective federal drug control and an embarrassment to the
government generally. </p>

<p> Another problem with border interdiction is simply that our
borders with both Mexico and Canada are so easily accessible;
trying to make them less accessible in order to seize more drugs
would not only erode freedom of entrance and egress, but probably
would not work anyway. As noted, the major border drug seizures
generally result from intelligence information supplied to border
agents. Few illicit drugs are uncovered in random searches, as
Operation Intercept-an attempt to cut off drug supplies at the
Mexican border-amply demonstrated in September 1969. That effort
affords another illustration of the ineffectiveness of extreme
measures taken in the name of fighting illicit drugs. </p>

<p> Operation Intercept: A Case History. The Mexican border has
traditionally been a major trafficking point, both because large
quantities of illicit drugs are produced in Mexico and because
the 1,945-mile border is mostly unguarded. In addition to bridge
and river crossings, it is believed that 200 aircraft carrying
illicit drugs daily fly illegally from Mexico into the United
States. 43 </p>

<p> In September 1909 President Nixon ordered &quot;the country's
largest peacetime search and seizure operation by civil
authorities&quot; along the United States-Mexico border. 44 Two
thousand Customs and border patrol agents began systematically
searching all cars and persons coming from Mexico into the United
States. There were delays of several hours in what is normally a
very quick crossing process over the border. Individuals who
appeared suspicious or argumentative were often stripped and
bodily searched. The tourism traffic between the two countries
was seriously interrupted. And although more than five million
people passed over this border during the three weeks Operation
Intercept was in full gear, virtually no heroin or any other
illicit drug was confiscated. In defense of the project, the
government later explained that its primary intention was not to
interdict drugs at the border, but rather to pressure Mexico into
eradicating its crops of marijuana and Opium.41 While it may have
had this effect eventually, the project had little direct impact
on illicit drug trafficking. </p>

<p> Elimination of the Supply. The most recent major American
supply reduction strategy is &quot;eradication at the
source.&quot; This policy was created in part because of the lack
of success in controlling supply through traditional domestic
enforcement and international interdiction and in part because
advanced technology seemed to make it more feasible than before.
In brief, the objective is to eliminate the crops which furnish
illicit drugs to the American market. </p>

<p> Bolivia, Peru, and Columbia are the major U.S. sources of
cocaine, while opium (the raw material for heroin) is grown in
many countries throughout the world, including Thailand,
Cambodia, Vietnam, Mexico, Turkey, India, and Iran. Marijuana is
grown throughout Mexico and Central and South America in addition
to the United States. However, heroin is the major drug priority
of the federal government, and the most advanced
&quot;eradication at the source&quot; program underway now is
against the opium poppy. Although substantial amounts of
cocaine-from fifteen to one hundred tons annually-regularly flow
into the United States, cocaine remains a lower priority .411 No
major cocaine eradication program has been attempted, because of
the hardy nature of the coca plant (from which cocaine is
derived) and because these plants are grown near drinking water
supplies and closely intermingled with food crops, making
eradication programs extremely difficult if not impossible to
accomplish in safety. Marijuana, despite official disclaimers of
interest, results in the greatest annual seizures47 and is the
object of current American-supported eradication efforts in
Mexico .41 </p>

<p> The key to any eradication program's success is the
cooperation of the foreign government in whose country the drug
is grown and the ability of that government to effect an
eradication policy in its rural areas. Basically, the theory of
eradication rests on the simple premise that if opium poppies or
marijuana plants are-eliminated in sufficient numbers the drug
they produce will also be largely eliminated. To this end, the
United States now actively participates in eradication programs
for both of these illicit drugs. </p>

<p> Opium poppies are grown in many regions of the world; no
special climate or soil conditions are needed. The main
requirement is cheap, abundant manual labor to do the painstaking
work of harvesting. It is estimated that only sixty to one
hundred tons of raw opium are required each year to supply the
entire illicit U.S. market with heroin, an amount which could be
produced from only ten square miles of opium poppies.&quot; (One
hundred tons of opium yields approximately ten tons of pure
heroin5O; the raw opium, which is extracted directly from the
opium poppy, is converted into a morphine base and then into
heroin by a relatively simple cooking and chemical-bonding
process.) </p>

<p> There are two other significant factors which work against
the success of the eradication strategy. First, the opium poppy
has a long tradition in many cultures where it is grown; it is
used for fodder, fuel, oil, and as a pain-killing agent. In many
regions of the world indigenous families have been growing opium
poppies for centuries. Second, opium poppies are a valuable cash
crop in those regions. Even when sold legally, the poppy crops
support many farmers and their families. There are few substitute
crops that will earn more per unit of land.51 </p>

<p> Although the United States has encouraged worldwide
prohibition of illicit opium cultivation through bilateral and
multilateral agreements for more than sixty years, these efforts
have largely failed. One of the reasons for this is that our
prohibition of heroin has inflated the price of the drug, thereby
making it even more profitable to cultivate opium poppies
illegally. </p>

<p> In 1971 this country launched a major effort to restrict the
cultivation of foreign opium when it reached an agreement with
Turkey to ban the cultivation of opium poppies there. In return,
the United States agreed to reimburse the Turkish government $35
million for lost revenues. </p>

<p> (Ultimately, only part of this amount was actually paid to
Turkey. )52 Although the United States selected Turkey as the
site for trying its new policy because Turkish opium was believed
to account for 80 _percent of the illicit heroin used in the
U.S., there was no way to verify this estimate, since it is
nearly impossible to trace heroin back to its original source. 53
It is in fact uncertain that Turkish opium poppies did supply 80
percent of American heroin, since it is also believed that Turkey
grew only about 8 percent of the world's opium poppies.54 In
addition, the existence of other opium-growing areas and the
profitability of the American heroin trade would make the
long-term impact of such a ban questionable; other countries
growing larger amounts of opium had controls as lax as Turkey's,
and much of the opium from these countries also found its way
into the black market. It has also been suggested that Turkey was
selected because, as a NATO ally, it was more susceptible to U.S.
leverage than many other countries. </p>

<p> Whatever the reasons for choosing Turkey, the results of the
opium ban not only failed to stop the flow of heroin into this
country but seriously strained relations between the two
countries until Turkey unilaterally rescinded the ban in 1975 .
5-1 In place of the opium-growing ban, the Turkish government at
this time initiated a centralized poppy-harvesting method called
the &quot;poppy straw process&quot;: This process requires that
the opium poppies be harvested whole rather than lanced, meaning
that the raw opium is brought to secure, central locations before
the extraction process is carried out, and forbids farmers to
lance the poppy pods themselves. This change has reduced if not
eliminated the export of illicit Turkish opium. This stoppage of
Turkish opium, however, led to a substantial increase in illicit
heroin from Mexican sources. As one study noted, </p>

<p> Although the opium ban in Turkey, together with a major
enforcement effort in France which broke up a ring of French and
French-Corsican chemists and traffickers in 1973, did put a
temporary crimp in the supply of heroin in the U.S., Mexican
opium growers and traffickers rapidly took over the market. By
1975 the U.S. government was declaring that over 80 percent of
the heroin available in the U.S. came from Mexico, instead of
Turkey. &quot; </p>

<p> As the illicit Turkish opium supply dwindled and the price of
heroin rose in response, the economics of heroin trafficking thus
became even more favorable, and new suppliers were attracted to
it. For example, in opium-producing countries an investment of
$250 now buys one ounce of 90 percent pure heroin; when cut with
forty dollars' worth of quinine, thereby converting the original
ounce of heroin into one kilo of 21/2 percent purity (an average
level for American heroin), the value becomes $15 per gram, or a
total of $15,000 for the original investment of $290. 57 These
economics keep the international heroin market flourishing and
make significant and lasting eradication extremely difficult to
accomplish. </p>

<p> Mexican heroin-noted for its brown color, a result of the
refining process which has no effect on the quality of the
heroin-quickly filled the vacuum created by the Turkish poppy
ban. In fact, heroin is a great economic boon to regions in
northern Mexico; that mountainous and largely inaccessible region
produces some twenty tons of heroin a year. As noted in one
report on the Mexican heroin trade, </p>

<p> Assuming, however, that only the 10 tons of heroin (from the
tri-state area) reached the border where it would sell in 1975 at
$45,000 a kilo (border value), the value of that crop alone would
be $450 million. The heroin crop alone is thus Mexico's most
valuable commodity. Sugar, shrimp, coffee and cotton, the next
four most valuable commodities, do not total $450 million
together. '8 </p>

<p> In response to this new influx of heroin, the United States
and Mexico agreed in 1973 to attempt another type of eradication
strategy. Essentially, the United States agreed to provide
technical assistance and equipment for a herbicide-spraying
program to eradicate illicit Mexican drug producing crops.
Although marijuana was included, the opium poppy was the primary
target of the eradication program from the American point of
view. This program remains the United States' most ambitious
eradication effort. 59 </p>

<p> During the early phases of the program less than ten thousand
opium poppy fields per year were destroyed manually. These ten
thousand fields represented approximately three to four thousand
acres. In November 1975 aerial spraying began, and by 1976 the
total number of fields reportedly destroyed had risen to twenty
thousand. In 1977, some forty seven thousand poppy fields,
representing an estimated fourteen thousand acres, were
destroyed. This increase was primarily due to the change from
manual to aerial herbicide spraying.60 </p>

<p> The spraying program is conducted year-round and affects
large sections of Mexico, including nearly half of the western
coast. At the present time the herbicide paraquat is used to
eradicate marijuana-a major goal of the Mexican government-and
the chemical &quot;2,4-D,&quot; is used on opium poppies. The
program is assisted by the U.S. government in a number of ways. A
State Department official recently described the Mexican
eradication effort to a congressional committee thus: </p>

<p> The principal forms of State Department-administered support
to the Mexican drug effort have included the furnishing of
aircraft and telecommunications equipment, together with the
requisite training to enable the Mexicans to use them in modern
applications to drug detection, poppy eradication, and
enforcement work. Our technical assistance together with certain
commodities, is also helping them to establish and administer a
network of forward bases in the important eradication areas and
to improve intelligence collection, retrieval, and analysis.
Training and salary supplements are provided to aid. the Mexican]
Federal judicial Police to develop and hold a cadre of qualified
narcotics agents.&quot;' </p>

<p> The United States provided Mexico with approximately $50
million in assistance funds for marijuana and opium poppy control
from 1973 to 1977. Proposed assistance for 1978 was estimated to
be about $13.3 million. Most of these funds are used to purchase
aircraft and support services for the aerial eradication program.
Aircraft supplied by the United States includes more than forty
helicopters and thirty-five fixed-wing aircraft. In addition,
some twenty to twenty-five DEA agents are assigned full time with
the Mexican eradication effort to provide technical assistance.
112 </p>

<p> As an enforcement strategy, eradication at the source may
have some advantages over other reduction and control strategies.
First, there is less potential for domestic police corruption.
Second, as compared to interdiction and undercover efforts it is
a relatively inexpensive way of preventing illicit drugs from
entering the United States. </p>

<p> However, the criteria for determining the success of such an
operation are uncertain. For instance, it is not known what
quantity of illicit drugs were smuggled into this country from
Mexico either before the program or now. However, the State
Department and the Drug Enforcement Administration report that
Mexican brown heroin, which formerly accounted for 80 to 85
percent of the heroin available in this country, has dropped to
60 to 65 percent of the total. Also, the retail and wholesale
prices of heroin have reportedly increased as much as 50 to 75
percent along the U.S.-Mexican border, and increases of as much
as 150 percent have been noted. 113 However, a rise in heroin
prices is not in itself a totally accurate indication of the
effects of a control strategy on heroin use. In fact, higher
heroin prices may be, at best, a mixed blessing. </p>

<p> Eradication policies, when they successfully interrupt
illicit drug production, as the Mexican opium poppy program has
apparently done, may reduce the American heroin supply for a
time, perhaps two or three years. In 1977, heroin-related deaths
dropped approximately 40 percent in this country, a possible
indication that the eradication program was having a beneficial
effect.114 It was also reported by enforcement officials that
American heroin supplies in 1978 were at their lowest level in
several years; however, they admit they have little hard evidence
on which to base that estimate. Moreover, as will be discussed
later, reducing the heroin supply may lead to other social
problems. </p>

<p> There are a number of possible side-effects to such an
eradication program which must also be considered. For example,
Mexican marijuana sprayed with paraquat has reached the United
States; samples seized near the border after the eradication
program began showed that 21 percent were contaminated with
significant levels of paraquat.115 It has been indicated that
paraquat may pose a significant health danger to those who ingest
it. The Secretary of the Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare announced a National Institute on Drug Abuse study in
March 1978. </p>

<p> The report's preliminary findings suggest that if an
individual smokes three to five heavily contaminated marihuana
cigarettes each day for several months, irreversible lung damage
will result. The report cautions, however, that there could be a
risk of lung damage for individuals who use marihuana less often
or in smaller amounts. Although these results are preliminary,
the report concludes that Paraquat contamination may pose a
serious risk to marihuana smokers. 66 </p>

<p> Although one might argue that anyone who uses an illegal
substance like marijuana must bear the consequences and the
risks, the fact remains that as many as forty-five million
Americans have tried marijuana and approximately eleven million
are regular users. The preponderance of medical evidence to date
shows that marijuana is a relatively harmless intoxicant when
used moderately. Therefore, it seems ironic that an official
program may itself produce a serious health risk for the
individual smoker, when the ostensible reason for prohibition in
the first place was to protect users from harming themselves. </p>

<p> The eradication strategy has another shortcoming as well:
Experience has shown that as one opium supply system is
diminished, another develops to take its place, at even more
attractive profits due to the rise in heroin prices caused by the
temporary shortage. Shortly after the Mexican eradication program
began, for example, white heroin from the &quot;Golden
Triangle&quot; in Southeast Asia began to enter the country. Drug
enforcement officials suspect that many Turkish nationals are
involved in this Southeast Asian traffic, which suggests that the
Turkish opium ban may have been more effective with the crop than
with the traffickers. </p>

<p> There is a larger problem, however, which holds the greatest
potential danger. If the country designated for crop eradication
efforts-in this case Mexico-is not part of a vigorous ongoing
program, then its illicit opium production will probably be
revived after the eradication efforts slow or stop. And it may
revive at a time when other areas of the world are also producing
large amounts of illicit heroin for the U.S. market. Then, rather
than facing illicit heroin smuggling from only one major area,
this country could be faced with two or more major supply
sources. This possibility remains a strong one, because the
eradication program depends upon the internal policies and
politics of foreign governments, any one of which for any reason
could end existing agreements and permit the former state of
affairs to reappear. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>Drugs and Crime</b> </p>

<p> The persistent belief that illicit drug use is inextricably
linked to crime has traditionally been advanced as a reason for
laws and policies against particular drugs. A 1972 survey by the
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse found that 58
percent of adults believed that marijuana users often commit
crimes they would not have committed had they not used marijuana.
In that same survey, more than 90 percent of those interviewed
believed that, in the commission's words, &quot;Heroin users
often commit crimes to get the money to buy more heroin. -117 </p>

<p> Crimes that relate to illicit drugs can generally be placed
into four categories.&quot;&quot; Two of these are not germane to
this discussion; these are crimes among individuals involved in
the illicit-drug distribution system-e.g., drug or money thefts
by one drug dealer from another-and the crimes of simply using,
possessing, or selling the drug itself, activities which are
criminal by definition, since they are illegal. </p>

<p> Generally, the perceived drug and crime relationship which
most concerns the public falls into two basic categories. The
first category involves the pharmacological effect of a drug on
the user. Historically, the presumed pharmacological connection
between illicit drug use and assaultive crime has been the
impetus behind antidrug laws. However, the evidence to date shows
that alcohol and secobarbital-both legally produced psychoactive
substances-are the drugs most likely to be involved with
subsequent assaultive behavior. There is no substantial evidence
to link the use of any other drug, licit or illicit, with
assaultive crime. Some stimulant drugs, such as the amphetamines,
have reportedly led to aggressive behavior in some individuals,
but there is insufficient evidence to show a causal link between
their use and assaultive crime. </p>

<p> The second category consists of revenue-producing crimes like
burglary, shoplifting, and larceny. More recently, the use of
heroin has been linked to crimes of this sort. The assumption is
that the use of heroin invariably results in addiction; that
heroin addicts require ever-increasing amounts of the drug; and
that, due to the high cost of the drug on the American market,
they must commit various crimes to support their use. As pointed
out by the press and electronic media, the stereotypic portrait
of the heroin user is of a dishevelled, trembling individual
without motivation or legitimate source of income. However, while
there is evidence to suggest that many heroin users may commit
property crimes to support use, 70 nobody really knows how much
crime is actually committed to obtain money to support heroin
habits. Police and court records do not contain this information,
and estimates-which are not particularly reliable-vary, calling
it anywhere from 10 to 50 percent of all revenue-producing
crimes, depending upon the type of offense and the location .71 </p>

<p> A survey by the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration of
ten thousand inmates of correctional facilities concluded that 13
percent of the inmates had used heroin at the time of their
arrest. The same survey estimated between 13 and 60 percent of
incarcerated criminals to have been heroin users ' 12 Although
this kind of data suggests links between heroin use and crime,
nothing was established in that survey to demonstrate that these
individuals began to commit crimes because of their heroin use,
nor does the study indicate whether the correctional population
surveyed was typical of all those arrested, or of all committing
crimes. It may indicate a tendency to jail heroin users in
disproportionate numbers. </p>

<p> The studies which indicate that after the onset of opiate
addiction individuals generally increase their criminal activity
come closest to demonstrating a causal link between drug use and
crime .73 These studies suggest that although an individual may
have been a criminal before he used heroin, his heavy use led to
an increase in criminal activity to meet the new income need. On
its face, this implies a connection between heroin use and crime.
However, there is an across-the-board increase in crime among men
between ages eighteen and twenty-five, irrespective of drug use.
74 Thus, any data suggesting increased crime because of heroin
use would have to correct for the general increase in crime for
this age bracket. </p>

<p> The evidence relating to a heroin-crime link could best be
described as showing that regular, heavy opiate use in the United
States probably means a higher rate of revenue-producing crime by
the addict. Because of its broad political appeal, however, this
connection has been repeatedly overstated and even misrepresented
to support tough enforcement policies. For example, Governor
Rockefeller of New York told the legislature, by way of
introducing a &quot;get tough&quot; drug law, that addicts were
&quot;robbing, mugging, murdering day in and day out for their
money to fix their habit. &quot;75 The state estimated that drug
addicts committed a total of $6.5 billion per year in crime. ff
that were in fact the case, it would have meant that these
addicts were committing on the order of 44 million robberies,
muggings, and murders each year in New York to support their
habit, 400 times more than all of the reported crimes in New
York, well beyond any conceivable total of reported and
unreported.crimes in that state .711 </p>

<p> Other data indicate that such figures had little factual
basis. The Federal Bureau of Investigation's 1971 Uniform Crime
Index reported a total of $1.3 billion in theft in 1970 for the
entire nation. Thus, New York State's claim of $6.5 billion in
crime losses for New York alone exceeded the national figure by
five times .77 Another study, an economic analysis by the Hudson
Institute of New York of the extent of heroin use nationwide,
estimated that in 1970 there were 250,000 addicts who were
responsible for a maximum cf $1.7 billion in crime .78 </p>

<p> The New York figures disseminated by Governor Rockefeller's
office were misleading in another important respect. In New York
City, which is generally acknowledged to have more illicit drug
use than any other American city, only a small percentage of the
110,000 reported crimes in 1973 (the year of the
&quot;tougher&quot; New York drug law's passage) were attributed
by police to heroin users. The New York Police Department
estimated only 4.4 percent of those arrested for felonies against
a person-which would include robbery, muggings, and murder-could
be classified as heroin users, and only a small percentage of
those users could be classified as addicts .79 </p>

<p> In a 1974 study by the Crime Analysis Unit of the New York
City Police Department it was found that among arrested criminal
heroin users and nonusers, the 'rates of property crime were
about the same, suggesting that there is little difference in
patterns of property crime between them. However, the percentage
of nonusers who committed serious crimes against a person was
substantially higher than for heroin users.80 A Hudson Institute
study reported even lower figures for assaultive property crimes
among heroin users in New York City. It reported that less than 2
percent supported their heroin use by either robbery or
muggings.81 </p>

<p> These studies call into question the more dramatic statements
about the extent of crime committed by those who use illicit
drugs, particularly heroin. It does seem that property crimes
are. committed by some unknown proportion of regular heavy heroin
users not as a result of the drug itself but of the high cost of
obtaining it in America's black market. Little hard statistical
evidence exists to show a cause-and-effect relationship between
the use of any drug and criminal behavior. </p>

<p> The Impact of Demand and Price. One goal of drug enforcement
is to cut back the supply of heroin and thereby raise the street
price, which in theory will drive heroin addicts into treatment.
This concept has proved to be more unpredictable and complex than
simple cause-and-effect scenarios generally concede. There are
studies which demonstrate that such law enforcement policies may
be a double-edged sword, at least in the short run. </p>

<p> A study of heroin prices in Detroit indicates that as heroin
prices rise because of diminished supply there is a consequent
increase in property crime. The study, performed by the Public
Research Institute of the Center for Naval Analyses noted, </p>

<p> The relationship between drug addiction and criminality is
complex and, because of the lack of data, hard to supply. This
study has shown that the level of property crime in Detroit is in
part affected by the price of heroin. When the price rises, crime
rises. When the price falls, crime falls. This finding supports
the general hypothesis that criminal heroin users as a class try
to maintain their level of consumption in the face of price
increases, and that they rely partly on property crime for the
additional funds. The level of personal crime is little affected
by the price of heroin. 82 </p>

<p> The Detroit study also found that the areas hardest hit by
the crime increases were the poor neighborhoods. It said,
&quot;We have preliminary evidence that poor people are
victimized by addict criminals; thus, law enforcement policies
that tend to raise the price of heroin hurt this income class
.&quot;83 The impact of many national policy shifts is often felt
most acutely in neighborhoods with the least political power;
this phenomenon is particularly profound with drug policies. </p>

<p> The reason why diminished heroin availability may lead to
more crime relates to the economics of the illicit heroin market,
which lies at the raw edge of laissez-faire capitalism. It rests
on the fundamental economic principle of supply and demand: When
the supply is less, the price is more. It should be kept in mind,
however, that supply is but one factor governing the price of
heroin; the purity of the drug and experience of the dealer, as
well as other factors, also affect its price. Supply of the drug
remains, however, one of the strongest single influences on
price. A 1971 East Coast dock strike, for example, is believed
responsible for a temporary heroin shortage and a consequent rise
in street-level prices. After settlement of the strike, supplies
increased and prices dropped, from a high in New York of
sixty-two dollars per gram (for a two-gram purchase at 10 percent
purity) to fifty dollars, all over a period of three months. 84 </p>

<p> The predicted crime increase is of course based on the idea
that if it costs more for a heroin user to support his use and he
has no other income sources than crime, he will need to commit
more crimes to support use at the same level. Also, because many
users support themselves by selling small quantities of drugs
there is the possibility that they could turn to other forms of
crime besides dealing. </p>

<p> The American experience in Vietnam in attempting to eradicate
use of a drug without fully considering the possible consequences
is also instructive. When the army clamped down on marijuana use
the demand for a drug among soldiers who had used it did not
decrease; when they could not get marijuana, they turned in large
numbers to another easily purchased and more easily concealed
drug-heroin. It was a classic example of attempting to control
supply without addressing demand.,&quot;* </p>

<p> *The Vietnam drug experience also underscores other important
points about illicit drug use, i.e., the setting and the
availability. The setting in Vietnam, at once boring and very
dangerous, created a situation which encouraged many individuals
to use drugs there. Also, the fact that drug supplies were so
plentiful contributed to their widespread use. </p>

<p> Despite these occurrences the notion persists that use of
illicit drugs can be brought under control with enforcement
policies, and that bringing it under control will in great
measure solve the crime problem. In part, this notion persists
because of the common stereotype of the heroin user as an
unscrupulous individual willing to commit any crime for his next
fix. Like all stereotypes, it does not encompass the diversity of
the individuals who use drugs compulsively. Many illicit drug
users and opiate addicts hold steady, legitimate jobs. Not all
heroin users are, as previously assumed, heroin
&quot;addicts.&quot; Some, perhaps many, enjoy the euphoric
effects of heroin but do not have a compulsive need for
it.&quot;' Many, perhaps most, of these would not consider
stealing in order to buy their drugs. These occasional heroin
users, sometimes called &quot;chippers,&quot; may, if
mathematical projections are correct, outnumber compulsive heroin
users by as much as six to one. 117 The very notion that they can
exist is frequently met with skepticism because it is contrary to
the well-entrenched belief that to use heroin is to be addicted
to it. </p>

<p> Because heroin users are a diverse group with no uniform
patterns of drug use and widely different ways of earning money,
one cannot simply multiply estimated users by a single monetary
figure to arrive at an accurate estimate of the amount of crime
they commit. It is interesting, however, to speculate on what
might happen to the crime rate if no heroin were available in
this country. The Nixon administration, which like other
administrations before it adopted the conventional assumption of
a direct link between heroin and crime in many of its public
utterances, did not find such a link in a private study it
commissioned. While stating publicly that American drug-related
crime amounted to $18 billion a year, a 1971 White House Domestic
Council decision paper circulated within the Executive Office
noted, &quot;Even if all drug abuse were eradicated, there might
not be a dramatic drop in crime statistics on a national level,
since much crime is not related to drug abuse. -811 </p>

<p> The difficulty of threading through all of the data on drugs
and crime and arriving at any certainties will persist, as will
the unpredictability of the effects of various enforcement
policies. Despite these uncertainties, however, the drug-crime
issue often invokes emotional responses having little to do with
the facts. It is therefore likely that the presumed drug-crime
link will continue to inspire &quot;get tough&quot; approaches to
drug law enforcement in the future. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>The New York Drug Law</b> </p>

<p> During the early 1970s, a period when the country was greatly
concerned about illicit drugs, New York State embarked on the
strictest &quot;get tough&quot; enforcement approach to illicit
drugs in the country. It is difficult to discern with precision
how much of the zeal for the new law came from an angry and
frustrated citizenry and how much came from the state's leaders,
or how much they coincided. In any case, the new law received
wide national publicity and was passed amid bold promises that it
would squarely address the drug problem in that state. </p>

<p> There was general agreement that the practice of the 1960s of
diverting low-level drug users into treatment and meting out
harsher penalties for higher-level traffickers had largely
failed. New York had heavily committed its resources to
&quot;civil commitment&quot; during the 1960s, a prograin
described -at the time as a model for other states to adopt.
However, 1972 overdose deaths in New York were six times greater
than they had been in 1960; the tougher new laws were regarded by
many as a solution. </p>

<p> The new legislation, which went into effect on September 1,
1973, had two principal objectives. First, it sought to frighten
illicit drug users out of using and drug dealers out of
trafficking. Second, it aimed to reduce crimes commonly
associated with drug addiction, i.e., burglaries, robberies, and
theft; it was believed that potential illicit drug users would be
frightened off by the law and that hardened criminals would be
given long prison sentences, thus reducing the crime rate.119 </p>

<p> The new law was aimed primarily at heroin trafficking, in
particular at the lower-level &quot;street&quot; dealers. The law
divided-heroin dealers into three groups, placed them in the
highest felony category in the state, and required minimum
periods of imprisonment plus mandatory lifetime parole
supervision for each group. The groups were: </p>

<p> I. The highest level dealers. Those who sell one ounce or
more, or possess more than two ounces. These dealers were
subjected to the most severe penalty: a prison sentence of
indefinite length, but with a minimum of between fifteen and
twenty-five years and a lifetime maximum. </p>

<p> II The middle level dealers. Those who sell one-eighth of an
ounce or more, or possess one or two ounces. These offenders were
subjected to prison sentences of indefinite length, with a
minimum term of between six and eight-and-one-third years, and a
lifetime maximum. </p>

<p> III. Street level dealers, also referred to as
&quot;sharer-pushers.&quot; Those who sell less than one-eighth
of an ounce or possess up to an ounce with the intent to sell.
These dealers were made liable to prison sentences of indefinite
length, with a minimum term of between one year and eight-and
one-third years, and a lifetime maximum.110 </p>

<p> The mandatory minimum prison sentences were made a major
provision of the New York law, even though such sentences had
previously been abandoned in federal and state drug laws.
Restrictions on plea bargaining were another controversial aspect
of this law; a person indicted on a low-level felony charge was
not permitted to plead guilty to a misdemeanor, a provision which
eventually led to court congestion and a slowdown of the judicial
process as well as precluding any cooperation of suspects with
police seeking information on higher-level dealers and suppliers.
</p>

<p> New York State became in effect a laboratory in which the
effectiveness of a &quot;get tough&quot; drug law could be
examined. By comparing the drug-related statistics for New York
before and after the new law went into effect, and by examining
similar statistics from neighboring states whose laws had not
changed, comparisons could be drawn and evidence could be
weighed. A study commissioned by the Association of the Bar of
the City of New York to find out the effects of the law concluded
that neither heroin use nor the crime commonly associated with it
declined in New York State as a result of the tough new
legislation. With respect to heroin use, the study found the
following: </p>

<p> Heroin use [in New York City] was as widespread in mid-1976
as it had been when the 1973 revision took effect, and ample
supplies of the drug were available. </p>

<p> The pattern of stable heroin use in New York City between
1973 and mid-1976 was not appreciably different from the average
pattern in other East Coast cities. </p>

<p> The new law may have temporarily deterred heroin use [in New
York City and other New York State jurisdictions]- </p>

<p> There is no evidence of a sustained reduction in heroin use
after 1973 [in New York State as a whole or in upstate New York].
</p>

<p> Most evidence suggests that the illegal use of drugs other
than narcotics in New York City was more widespread in 1976 than
in 1973, and that in this respect New York was not unique among
East Coast cities.&quot; </p>

<p> With respect to crime, the study found: </p>

<p> Serious property crime of the kind often associated with
heroin users increased sharply [in New York State] between 1973
and 1975. The rise in New York State was similar to increases in
nearby states. </p>

<p> There was a sharp rise in non-drug felony crimes between 1973
and 1975 [in New York City]. However, the rise was apparently
unconnected with illegal narcotics use: non-drug felony crimes
known to have been committed by narcotics users remained stable
during that period. </p>

<p> The available evidence suggests that the recidivist
sentencing [predicate felony] provisions of the 1973 law did not
significantly deter prior felony offenders from committing
additional crimes [in New York City].92 </p>

<p> In addition, the study found little enthusiasm for the 1973
law within the criminal justice system. </p>

<p> Many judges and prosecutors felt that the mandatory minimum
sentencing provisions reduced the of individual treatment of
offenders and, therefore, the quality of justice. </p>

<p> Some were troubled because the penalties level drug
traffickers were more severe than those applicable to crimes that
most citizens consider heinous.... New York City prosecutors
tended to believe that the 1973 law was forcing them to scatter
their limited resources on what they considered relatively minor
offenses. (Note: The Class III (lowest level) felony accounted
for 41% of all drug indictments in New York City and 61% of the
trial workload.) ... As for the police, the New York City Police
Department believed that a policy of all-out street level
enforcement would be only marginally productive and would
hopelessly inundate the courts. 93 </p>

<p> Because of the large volume of street-level drug activity in
New York City, the New York City Police Department had the
opportunity to make large numbers of street-level arrests under
the new drug law. It did not elect to do so, for the reason that
past efforts had been perceived as ineffective. As the study
recorded, </p>

<p> In 1969, the Department had implemented a policy similar to
the one implied by the new law. Large numbers of low-level drug
arrests had been encouraged, and the number of felony drug
arrests had risen from 7,199 in 1967 to 26,379 in 1970. In 1971,
however, Police Commissioner Patrick Murphy abandoned this policy
because (a) only a small percentage of the arrests were resulting
in prison or jail sentences and (b) the mass arrest policy did
not appear to be having a significant impact on the drug traffic.
In the Department's view, the mass arrest policy was also
creating serious workload problems for the courts. Immediately
after the change in policy, arrests fell sharply; in 1973, there
were only a little more than one-third as many as two years
earlier.... According to Donald Cawley, New York City Police
Commissioner when the 1973 law became effective, the Department
decided not to change its enforcement policies in response to the
1973 legislation. The Department continued to focus its
enforcement activities on the middle and upper levels of drug
distribution rather than upon street-level drug activity.&quot; </p>

<p> The study concluded, &quot;The key lesson to be drawn from
the experience with the 1973 drug law is that passing a new law
is not enough. What criminal statutes say matters a great deal,
but the efficiency, morale, and capacity of the criminal justice
system is even more of a factor in determining whether the law is
effectively implemented.&quot;95 In addition, the study noted
that implementation of the new law, which included the hiring of
new narcotics case judges, prosecutors, defense attorneys, and
support staff, cost the state of New York $32 million. </p>

<p> What the study of the New York law indicates is that there
are serious limits to what any law can control. It is apparent
now that the rhetoric which helped create a climate for the new
law-i.e., statements which attributed exaggerated amounts of
crime to drug addicts-was also in part responsible for the
failure of the law to live up to expectations. This is not to
suggest that law enforcement approaches to illicit drug use
should be abandoned because they fail in what they attempt to do.
Rather, it means that our expectations should be realistic,
because our ability to deal with these complex problems is
limited. In New York, administrative problems, court congestion,
the doubts which many judges and prosecutors had about the new
law, and the difficulties of policing illicit drugs under any
circumstances all joined together to reduce the law's
effectiveness. The conclusion is that this law changed very
little in New York. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>The Impact of Drug Law Enforcement on Drug Using Behavior<br>
</b> </p>

<p> An interesting contrast to the New York &quot;get tough&quot;
law is the Oregon law of 1973 which &quot;decriminalized&quot;
the possession of a small quantity of marijuana. The state took
this action following the recommendations of the National
Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. The new Oregon law-and
those in other states which subsequently enacted similar
legislation-eliminated the possibility of imprisonment for simple
possession of an ounce or less of marijuana. A civil fine,
similar to a traffic citation, was substituted for the former
criminal penalties. There were to be no criminal arrests for such
offenses nor would there be court arraignment. </p>

<p> Critics of the new law predicted an explosion of both
experimental and regular marijuana use in Oregon. This prediction
was rooted in the persistent belief that it is primarily the law
that restrains people from using illicit drugs-the same view
which in part prompted the tough New York law. </p>

<p> However, annual surveys conducted in Oregon during the four
years following enactment of the new law have shown little change
at all in marijuana use patterns.&quot;&quot; Marijuana users
have increased gradually in number, but this is true across the
nation. Regular users have remained relatively constant, a
pattern that is also typical of other state and national trends. </p>

<p> Since Oregon passed its law, only ten other states have
adopted the reduced penalty for possession of small amounts of
marijuana, despite the preponderance of available evidence that
marijuana is not a major health hazard when used moderately and
that criminal laws apparently do not deter millions from using
it. </p>

<p> The New York law was aimed primarily at heroin, and did
little, if anything, to change use patterns there. The Oregon law
was aimed at marijuana, and it too did little, if anything, to
change use patterns. What both these experiences suggest is just
how little the criminal law influences an individual's decision
to use a particular drug, illegal or not. Similarly, the
prohibition of alcohol in the early part of this century did
little to prevent millions of Americans from consuming it. </p>

<p> These recent legislative developments underscore another
point. Generally, the public and its policymakers have focused
narrowly on eliminating the consumption of one or two drugs in
particular, without giving much thought as to the effect of this
restricted concentration. These policies seem to be based upon
the theory that once marijuana or heroin or cocaine is eliminated
then the problems of drug abuse in the United States will be
solved.<br>
</p>

<p> In 1971 the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA), an
organization established by the joint Chiefs of Staff to develop
independent information and analysis, examined aspects of illicit
drug use in this country. The IDA study concluded that heroin
addicts are probably willing to switch to amphetamines,
barbiturates, and other drugs should heroin become prohibitively
expensive or unavailable .97 Through studies of the urinalysis
screening program of inmates of the Washington, D.C. jails, the
Institute found that before the East Coast dock strike of 1971
nearly 20 percent of the inmates tested positive for opiates.
During the strike, however, this percentage dropped to zero while
that for barbiturate and amphetamine use rose from its former 3
or 4 percent level to nearly 20 percent.,,,, While it is not
conclusive, the study did underscore the fact that we have very
little hard data on the habits, preferences, alternatives, and
attitudes of heroin users. Models, analyses, and other
information offer a limited glimpse of these factors, and then
for only a limited time frame. </p>

<p> This study and other more recent ones&quot;&quot; have
suggested that the usage patterns for heroin may be more flexible
than is generally believed, and therefore less vulnerable to
strategies that focus on the elimination of supply. Although
better domestic enforcement, border control, and foreign
eradication efforts might tighten the heroin market to some
extent, any long-range improvement as regards drug-related
problems remains uncertain. Despite this, and the limited ability
of the criminal justice system to alter human behavior, when laws
fail to discourage an activity' that the majority in a society
deems undesirable the natural impulse is to toughen them to
attain the desired effect.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <b><font size="5">Concluding Thoughts<br>
</font></b> </p>

<p> Since federal antinarcotics laws have been in force in this
country for more than sixty years-and local ordinances for more
than a century-it seems appropriate to ask what such laws can or
have accomplished. if we were expecting our drug laws to
eradicate illicit drug use, then the local, state, and federal
antidrug effort must be judged an abject failure. Tough laws have
not been a solution to the drug abuse crisis. If, however, one
was hoping for a containment policy, then enforcement efforts
might be judged a partial success, because only a relatively
small number of people use heroin, the drug with which we seem
most concerned today. This conclusion, of course, is impossible
to prove. Moreover, mere containment of heroin use was never the
stated goal of our drug control efforts. </p>

<p> The best way to judge the value of our present drug control
policies is to weigh their benefits and costs. This may give us
some clues with which to better analyze our current policies and
reach a clearer understanding of their worth. In making this
assessment, it is natural that drug law enforcement be examined
more critically than other approaches, such as treatment or
education. Drug enforcement has received the majority of the
available time, money, technology, and hope and faith for the
past seven decades. It is not unreasonable to say that law
enforcement efforts have been given the greatest possible
opportunity to respond to illicit drugs, and that those efforts
ought to be evaluated in light of their performance. </p>

<p> What then are the costs of drug law enforcement? Several can
be identified: money outlays for enforcement; such side effects
as the stigma of arrest, the risk of impure drugs and associated
health hazards, the creation of a black market, a potential rise
in non-drug crime rates, and the risk of police corruption; the
alienation of many segments of society; selective enforcement
patterns; diversion of scarce resources; erosion of the rule of
law; invasion of privacy; reduction of personal freedom;
hostility between police and the community; and potential police
perjury and official deception. These are some costs generally
ascribed to the current prohibitionist policy approach to
particular drugs. </p>

<p> The benefits are less specific and less provable. We can
point to the arrest of individuals who traffic in illicit drugs
as a benefit, at least in the small percentage of cases where
arrest is followed by conviction and punishment But we cannot
point to drug enforcement generally and argue that it has had a
dramatically successful impact in prohibiting these activities.
One benefit often cited is the channeling into treatment by means
of criminal justice diversion of illicit drug users who might
otherwise not have entered; however, this process may have a
negative impact in deterring voluntary applicants from seeking
help (see Staff Paper 3, &quot;Heroin Treatment&quot;, below).
Law enforcement efforts may also have had an impact in containing
the spread of illicit drug use during years when strong penalties
have been on the books and substantial efforts were made to
enforce those laws. While drug law enforcement efforts
undoubtedly do harass some low-level operatives in the illicit
drug market and make them afraid to deal openly on the street,
this may be a marginal benefit, in that it makes it likely that
users will only become more cautious and harder to detect. While
ease of availability does appear to have some influence on the
numbers who will use a particular drug, making availability
harder does not eliminate the demand for a particular drug or
psychoactive substances generally. </p>

<p> The key question remains: Is the current system of drug
control worthwhile? An abundance of data has been collected-some
of it presented in this chapter-but it is consistently
contradictory, imprecise, of questionable reliability, and laden
with the values we impute to it. Nevertheless, we would conclude
that the costs are greater than the benefits derived. Part of the
difficulty with criminal law as a control measure lies in the
fact that it has been consistently oversold as a cure for illicit
drug use. A serious consequence of this is that drug law
enforcement has rarely been viewed dispassionately; rather, it
has been the object of either heated attack or staunch defense,
and rarely the object of thoughtful analysis. </p>

<p> Our current drug control policies exact a heavy toll in
social costs, while data showing a solid return on the investment
are difficult to find. This imbalance has been known for some
time, but the knowledge of it has not materially changed our drug
control policies and laws. The basic policy established a century
ago continues today, and there are no immediate prospects of the
government, federal or state, seriously reconsidering its heavy
reliance on the criminal justice system to deal with illicit
drugs.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>