
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-10</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-21</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf81_90.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043624 text/html 38077
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:36:14 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:22 GMT
Content-length: 37859
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp facts 81 - 90</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>Hemp FACT #81- D. Miller Pt.2 </p>

<p>Date: 95-04-11 10:48:04 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Part 2.</b> </p>

<p><b>From &quot;Dennis Miller Live&quot; on HBO, Friday, Nov.
11, 1994, 10:00 pm</b> </p>

<p>&quot;Is their anything more fruitless than trying to
legislate sexual behavior? You know according to the law, you
can't even get a blow job in Georgia? No wonder Sherman hustled
through there. And really if you stop to think about it, who is
hurt by the time honored unavoidable trade of prostitution? Only
the guys who pay extra to be hurt. There is no sane reason to
cling to this archaic legal attempt to curtail an activity that
will be around until the end of time. You know, you could come
back to this planet ten thousand years from now and man could
have evolved to the point where he doesn't even take in nutrition
from a hole in head anymore, but I guarantee you that he'll still
be cruising ninth avenue trying to get a knob-shine from somebody
named Desiree. </p>

<p>&quot;What sort of perfect harried experiment society are we
striving for folks? One where you will be forced by the
puritanical mentality of your pin-headed Gladys Kravitz neighbors
into a tightly constricted, over-regimented existence? A life
safe from the temptations and rewards of the flesh? If that's
your kink - go for it. But for the rest of us, let's save the
money we're wasting trying to regulate other people's private
lives. If an individual wants to smoke a joint, or shoot up, or
munch blotter like tic-tacs and drop out, let them. All right?
Let's put the billions we're wasting on a drug war, fought by
fitness fanatics on steroids and three-martini senators rolling
in pork, let's put it back in the educational system. Let's free
the courts and jails of lonely men and broken women who feel the
need to buy and sell sex. Let's let hookers and their johns have
a safe building somewhere off the streets, inspected medically
and taxed up the wazoo. Let's go on from there to tax liquor and
cigarettes so that those industries can pay for safe one-lane
drunk-proof highways and air purification systems. Most
importantly, let's stop retending that people are going to lead
the lives that we tell them to lead. Let's stop pretending that a
few simple prohibitions on substances and activities will yield
up a nation of Beaver Cleavers: polite, clean, sexless, and ready
to serve their fellow man, no questions asked. People are people.
They're going to with their lives what they want to do, whether
you like it or not. There is nothing you can do about them that
won't break the bank, overcrowd the prisons, or corrode an
already oxidized judicial system. </p>

<p>People are perennially going to get f***** up and f***, and we
will continue to get f***** over if we don't concede the fact
that there is absolutely f***-all we can do about it. </p>

<p>&quot;Of course, that's just my opinion, I could be
wrong.&quot; </p>

<p>Dennis Miller </p>

<p>-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>If anyone has suggestions for topics, let me know here or
email. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #82- Drug Test-pt.1 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-12 11:16:24 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>his article may be a little old, but it's still worthy. </p>

<p>From the Baltimore Sun 5-9-1991 </p>

<p><b>SURPRISE ! HORROR STORIES OF DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE DON'T
HOLD UP</b> </p>

<p><b>By David Morris</b> </p>

<p><b>St. Paul Minnesota</b> </p>

<p>It has been a while since drugs made the front page. So let me
bring you up to date on recent findings about drug use that
didn't make it to prime-time news. </p>

<p>The National Institute on Drug Abuse reported that the giant
utility Utah Power and Light, &quot;spent $215 per employee per
year less on the drug abusers in health insurance benefits than
on the control group.&quot; Employees that tested positive for
drugs at Georgia Power Company had a higher promotion rate than
the company average. Workers testing positive only for Marijuana
exhibited absenteeism some 30 percent lower than average. </p>

<p>Scientific American, after exhaustive research, found that the
studies usually cited to prove the dangers of drug use in the
workplace were either shoddy or misinterpreted. Astonishingly,
the magazine could identify only one study on workplace drug use
that has passed through the standard peer review process for
scientific evaluation. </p>

<p>That one, published in the Journal of General Internal
Medicine, studied 180 hospital employees, 22 of whom had tested
positive after being hired. It found &quot;no difference between
drug-positive and drug-negative employees&quot; with respect to
supervisor valuations or performance. Except for one intriguing
item: </p>

<p>Eleven of the negatives had been fired during their first year
on the job, but none of the positives. </p>

<p>More recently the American Psychologist, a peer-reviewed
scientific journal, reported on a 15 year study of the San
Francisco-area children by researchers Jonathan Shedler and Jack
Block of the University of California at Berkley. </p>

<p>Their report reveals that adolescents who occasionally use
drugs are healthier than both drug abusers and drug abstainers.
Moreover, those who abuse drugs as teen-agers have distinct
behavioral problems that were identifiable years before there
drug use began. Drug use is a symptom, not a cause. </p>

<p>Says Mr. Shedler, &quot;the most effective drug prevention
programs might not deal with drugs at all.&quot; </p>

<p>In an interview published in the National Review, Michael S.
Gazzaniga, professor of psychiatry at Dartmouth Medical School,
discussed several studies that found that drug use increases in
groups under stress, but that &quot;the rate of addiction doesn't
go up no matter what the degree of stress. Most people can walk
away from high drug use if their lives become more normal.&quot; </p>

<p>The British journal New Scientist reports research that found
the majority of those who become dependant on Cocaine return to
moderate use or total abstinence without treatment. </p>

<p>Finally, Florida State University conducted a study for the
Florida legislature of 45,096 people arrested for drug possesion
in 1987. Eighty-eight percent had never been arrested for
property crimes like burglary. Says professor David Rasmussen,
&quot;this study suggests we are incarcerating people for the use
of drugs when they do not commit other crimes and tend not to
commit other crimes.&quot; </p>

<p>What are we to conclude ? </p>

<p>Relying on these and many other studies, the Washington-based
Drug Policy Foundation, a beacon of reason in a sea of hysteria,
offers the following framework. Stress causes drug use. The vast
majority of those who use drugs are casual users. Those who use
drugs tend not to commit other crimes. Drugs in the workplace are
not a serious burden on productivity. </p>

<p>Which isn't to say there is no problem. There is. But it's a
problem caused more by making drug use a crime than by the use
itself. </p>

<p>Part 2 comin' at ya tomorrow. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #83- Drug Test-pt.2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-13 10:14:06 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Part 2.</b> </p>

<p><b>From the Baltimore Sun 5-9-1991</b> </p>

<p><b>SURPRISE ! HORROR STORIES OF DRUGS IN THE WORKPLACE DON'T
HOLD UP</b> </p>

<p><b>By David Morris</b> </p>

<p><b>St. Paul Minnesota</b> </p>

<p>&quot;There is little argument that drug trafficking has
played crucial role in spawning the rise of violent crime,&quot;
the Washington Post recently observed. Gangs have spread from a
localized phenomenon to nationally franchised businesses,
financed by drug money and armed with ever-higher caliber
weaponry. We're fueling a level of violence rarely seen before, a
violence now spilling over into areas that don't involve drugs. </p>

<p>We can't build new prisons fast enough to house all the drug
users we want to put in them. In some states, education budgets
are declining to guarantee sufficient money for jails. In our
panic about drugs, we are willing to sacrifice not only our
schools but our liberty. Forfeitures of property by drug users is
rising into the hundreds of millions of dollars, and virtually
all this revenue goes back into drug enforcement, creating an
unhealthy symbiotic relationship between drug dealers and the
police. </p>

<p>Last year, for the first time, military troops were used on
Marijuana raids. Strip-searches of high school students in Kansas
and Missouri elicit little protest, even when no drugs are found.
Anderson County, S.C., billboards announce, &quot;Need cash? Turn
in a drug dealer.&quot; Informers recieve as much as 25 percent
of the assets seized from drug raids. </p>

<p>Public pronouncements notwithstanding, the evidence is piling
up that the collateral damage from our War on Drugs far exceeds
the damage from drug use itself. </p>

<p>David Morris is a columnist for the St. Paul Pioneer
Press..... </p>

<p>----------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #84- Food for Thought </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-14 10:38:06 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Well this info is a little different. It came from the Hungry
Bear Hemp Home Page at www.hempbc.com. These guys even sell hemp
seed nutrition bars. </p>

<p>Hemp Seed is one of the most nutritionally complete and
balanced foods on the planet in the following regard: </p>

<p>Protein---Second to soybeans in protein content (25%), and
contains all eight essential amino acids in amounts and
proportions necessary for the production of immune-enhancing
antibodies (such as gamma globulin). </p>

<p>Essential Fatty Acids (EFA's)---Hemp Seed is the richest plant
source of EFA's (80% of total oil volume). They are essential to
children for proper growth, used to perform various metabolic
rolds, indispensible in the structure and functioning of cell
membranes, regulators of cholesterol metabolism, and raw material
for hormone-like substances which regulate nearly all body
processes.* </p>

<p>* Rudin, Donald O. and Felix, Clara, The Omega=3 Phenomenon,
Rawson Associates, NY 1987 pp. 9, 10. </p>

<p>Content of all three EFA's in Hemp Seed Oil </p>

<p>Alpha Linolenic acid (LNA;Omega=3)...25% </p>

<p>Alpha Linoleic acid(LA;Omega=6)......55% </p>

<p>Arachididic acid....................0.5%* </p>

<p>*Sufficient amounts of this EFA are naturally converted from
LA in our bodies. </p>

<p>Linoleic acid is abundant in many of our common foods, yet LNA
and other Omega=3's are seldom found in sufficient amounts. As
you see above, Hemp Seed is very rich in thes EFA. </p>

<p>EFA deficiency (especially Alpha Linoleic Acid) symptoms
include the following: skin problems, hair loss, easy bruising,
inflammation of joints, fatigue, infertility, kidney problems, a
variety of neurological, gastrointestinal and cardiovascular
problems, and a whole range of chronic degenerative disease. </p>

<p>Being a plant that can grow nearly everywhere humans inhabit
plus having a seed with a hull that seals in all these vital
proteins and oils for extended periods, Cannabis Hemp is the
ideal crop for famine-stricken bioregions (and anywhere else,
wouldn't you agree?). </p>

<p>May we also be aware of Hemp as our planet's most valuable
natural resource for industrial fiber, medicine and biomass fuel.
</p>

<p>More tommorow, same Hemp time (and we all know Hemp time does
not mean the same time ;-), same Hemp Message Board. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #85-Christian Sacremnt </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-15 10:48:24 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Let me wish all of you a safe and happy Passover, Easter or
Weekend (your pick). Since this is a religous time of your, I
thought I'd bring this article out. This will be another of those
that goes on for several days. If anyone wants this in it's
entirety, email and request M.S. Word or text format. </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT</b> </p>

<p>According to Jack Herer in The Emperor Wears No Clothes or
Everything You Wanted to Know About Marijuana But Were Not Taught
in School, &quot;The Essenes, a kabalistic priest/prophet/healer
sect of Judaism dating back to the era of the Dead Sea Scrolls,
used hemp, as did the Theraputea of Egypt, from where we get the
term 'therapeutic'.&quot; </p>

<p>The Theraputea of Egypt were Jewish ascetics that dwelt near
Alexandria and described by Philo (1st century B.C.) as devoted
to contemplation and meditation. Alexandria is where St. Mark is
traditionally held to have established the Coptic Church in 45
A.D. The Coptic Church has been neglected by Western scholars
despite its historical significance. This has been due to the
various biases and interest of the Catholic Church which claimed
Christianity for its own. The result is that for the Coptic
Church there is very little history. It is however assumed that
the Coptic religious services have their roots in the earliest
layers of Christian ritual in Jerusalem and it is known that the
Coptic church is of ancient origin going back to the time of the
first Christian communities and even before. </p>

<p>Tradition states that &quot;Coptic&quot; was derived from
&quot;Kuftaim&quot;, son of Mizraim, a grandchild of Noah who
first settled in the Nile valley, in the neighborhood of Thebes,
the ancient capital of Egypt. At one time Thebes was the greatest
city in the world and history records that by 2200 B.C. the whole
of Egypt was united under a Theban prince. The splendor of Thebes
was known to Homer, who called it &quot;the city with a hundred
gates&quot;. (Richard Schultes states that in ancient Thebes
marijuana was made into a drink.) </p>

<p>According to E.A. Wallis Budge in The Divine Origin of the
Herbalist, page 79, &quot;The Copts, that is to say the Egyptians
who accepted the teachings of St. Mark in the first century of
our era, and embraced Christianity, seem to have eschewed medical
science as taught by the physicians of the famous School of
Medicine of Alexandria, and to have been content with the methods
of healing employed by their ancestors.&quot; </p>

<p>The Essenes were an ascetic sect closely related to the
Theraputea that had established a monastic order in the desert
outside of Palestine and were known as spiritual healers. It has
been suggested that both John the Baptist and Jesus may have been
of the Essene sect as they were both heavily dependent on Essene
teachings. The scripture makes no mention of the life of Jesus
from the age of 13 to 30. Certain theologians speculate that
Jesus was being initiated by the Essenes, the last fraternity to
keep alive the ancient traditions of the prophets. </p>

<p>Every prophet, however great, must be initiated. His higher
self must be awakened and made conscious so that his mission can
be fulfilled. Amongst the Essenes' ritual lustrations preceded
most liturgical rites, the most important one of which was
participation in a sacred meal_an anticipation of the Messianic
banquet. </p>

<p>Throughout the ancient world sacrifice was a sacramental
communal meal involving the idea of the god as a participant in
the meal or as identical with the food consumed. The communion
sacrifice was one in which the deity indwells the oblation so
that the worshippers actually consume the divine. The original
motive of sacrifice was an effort toward communion among the
members of a group, on one hand, and between them and their god,
on the other. At its best, sacrifice was a &quot;sacrament&quot;
and in one form or another life itself. </p>

<p>Next part tomorrow or Monday. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #86-Sacrement-2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-17 11:15:48 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Hope everyone had a safe holiday. </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT - Part 2.</b> </p>

<p>The central focus of the early Christian church was the
Eucharist or the &quot;body and blood&quot; of the Lord. This was
interpreted as a fellowship meal with the resurrected Christ. In
meeting the Resurrected One in the Eucharist meal the Christian
community had the expectation of the Kingdom of God and
salvation. </p>

<p>Christ communicated life to his disciples through the
Eucharist or Christian sacrament. Christ said in describing the
sacrament, &quot;Take, eat, this is my body, this is my blood. Do
this as often as you will in remembrance of me.&quot; (I
Corinthians 11:24-25) Baptism is defined as the Christian
sacrament used in purification and the spiritual rebirth of the
individual. I Corinthians 10:1 makes it clear that the smoking
cloud of incense was directly related to baptism. </p>

<p>I Corinthians 10:1 &quot;Moreover, brethren, I would not that
ye should be ignorant, how that our fathers were under the cloud,
and all passed through the sea; 2 And were all baptized unto
Moses in the Cloud and in the sea; 3 And did all eat the same
spiritual meat: for they drank of that Spiritual Rock that
followed them: and that Rock was Christ. </p>

<p>In the Biblical story of Creation, God said, &quot;Behold, I
have given you every herb bearing seed and to you it will be for
meat.&quot; (Genesis 1:29) Marijuana is technically an herb and
was considered a spiritual meat in the ancient world. From this
passage in Corinthians we see that the spiritual cloud resulting
from the burning of incense was instrumental in the baptism of
the Israelites. This baptism is also compared to the &quot;eating
and drinking&quot; of the spirit of Christ. </p>

<p>Spirit is defined as the active essence of the Deity serving
as an invisible and life-giving or inspiring power in motion.
Scripture makes it abundantly clear that the sacrificial cloud or
smoke contained the Spirit of God (Christ) and was instrumental
in inspiring, sanctifying, and purifying the patriarchs. In
Numbers 11:25 the cloud results in the Spirit resting upon Moses
and the seventy elders. This passage indicates that they
prophesied ecstatically. &quot;Prophesy&quot; is defined as
follows: to utter or announce by or as if by divine inspiration;
to speak for God or a deity; to give instruction in religious
matters. Throughout the Holy Bible prophets of God spake as they
were moved by the Holy Spirit. The smoking burning cloud of
incense contained the spirit and was instrumental in bringing
about the spiritual revelations of the prophets. In the ancient
world marijuana was used to reveal the future. The virtues of
marijuana include speech-giving and inspiration of mental powers.
&quot;Psychoactive&quot; is defined as effecting the mind or
behavior. </p>

<p>When we of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church think of mind or
behavior we think of that inward essence or element that makes up
the individual. This is the person's spirit. We are all spiritual
beings. It is just as important to keep the spiritual part of a
person healthy as it is to keep the physical body healthy and in
fact they are related. Hence marijuana and its relationship to
spiritual food. </p>

<p>In the Apocrypha (Book of Jubilees), Chapter 10, God tells an
angel to teach Noah the medicines which heal and protect from
evil spirits. Surely God taught Noah about marijuana. In the
ancient world marijuana played an important role in purification
and protecting from evil influences. </p>

<p>Part tres manana, amigas y amigos. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #87-Sacrament-2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-18 09:39:23 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Poster's note--All of the information contained in the
Sacrament (and yes I've been spelling it wrong) comes from: </p>

<p>-- </p>

<p>The University of Massachusetts at Amherst </p>

<p>Cannabis Reform Coalition </p>

<p>S.A.O. Box #2 </p>

<p>415 Student Union Building </p>

<p>UMASS, Amherst MA 01003 </p>

<p><b>Part 3.</b> </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT</b> </p>

<p>Note the following concerning the transfiguration of Christ: </p>

<p>St. Matthew 17:1 &quot;And after six days Jesus taketh Peter,
James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into a high
mountain apart. 2 And he was transfigured before them: and his
face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as light. 3
And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking
with him. 4 Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is
good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three
tabernacles; one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias. 5
When yet he spake, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them; and
behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.&quot; </p>

<p>The Bible Dictionary by John McKenzie, page 898, says
concerning the transfiguration that the cloud and the formula of
the utterance of the Father are derived from the baptism of
Jesus. He says that the change described in the appearance of
Jesus suggests the change which is implied in the resurrection
narratives. </p>

<p>Some of the synonyms for transfiguration are transformation,
metamorphosis, transubstantiation, and avatar. These terms imply
the change that accompanies resurrection or deification. Across
the world, legends of godlike men who manage to rise, in a state
of perfection go back to an era before human beings had cast away
from the divine source. Hence the gods were beings which once
were men, and the actual race of men will in time become gods.
Christ revealed this to the people of his day when he told them
to whom the word of God came, &quot;Ye are gods.&quot; (St. John
10:34) </p>

<p>St. Matthew 17:2 says that during the transfiguration of
Christ that his face did shine as the sun. The face of Moses also
shone when he returned from the cloud on Mt. Sinai (Exodus
30:34). The shining countenances are the result of their
resurrections, of their being spiritually illumined in the cloud
of smoking incense. </p>

<p>Most people are under the impression that Christ baptized with
water. As you can see from the following account of John the
Baptist this isn't so. John the Baptist baptized with water and
Christ baptized with fire. </p>

<p>St. Matthew 3:11 &quot;I indeed baptize you with water into
repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy
Spirit and with fire.&quot; </p>

<p>It is only logical that this baptism with the Holy Spirit and
with fire is related to the baptism of Christ in the burning,
smoking cloud of incense and to the baptism of the patriarchs in
which the patriarchs did all eat of the same spiritual meal
(incense). In the section dealing with the &quot;Holy
Spirit&quot; the Encyclopedia Britannica states that Christian
writers have seen in various references to the Spirit of Yahweh
in the Old Testament an anticipation of the doctrine of the Holy
Spirit. It also says that the Holy Spirit is viewed as the main
agent of man's restoration to his original natural state through
communion in Christ's body and, thus, as the principle of life in
the Christian community. </p>

<p>------------------------------------ </p>

<p>Part 4. Tomorrow. Anyone wishing the full text of this article
can email me. Specify MS Word or text format. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #88-Sacrament-4 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-19 10:01:06 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Just finished watching &quot;Texas&quot; (had to tape it).
Surely they could have done better than Bobby Ewing playing the
part of my 5th great uncle Stephen F. Austin. </p>

<p><b>Part 4.</b> </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT</b> </p>

<p>The patriarchs were recipients of a revelation coming directly
from the Spirit (incense) and this was expressed in the
heightening and enlargement of their consciousness. It is clear
from Scripture that this spiritual dimension was also evident in
the life of Jesus, in whom the experience of the Hebrew prophets
was renewed. Through the Eucharist Christ passed this spiritual
dimension on to his apostles. One of the apostles even makes
mention in Philippians 4:18 of a sweet smelling sacrifice that is
well pleasing to God. </p>

<p>Christ compares this baptism to the drinking of a cup. </p>

<p>St. Mark 10:38 &quot;But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not
what ye ask: can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and be
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?&quot; </p>

<p>This cup is referred to as the cup of salvation in Psalms
116:12. </p>

<p>Psalms 116:12 &quot;What shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and call
upon the name of the Lord. </p>

<p>It is called the cup of blessing in connection in connection
with the eucharist. </p>

<p>1 Corinthians 10:16 &quot;The cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood and the body of Christ? 17
For we being many are one bread, and one body; for we are all
partakers of one bread. </p>

<p>Here we see a connection between the cup of blessing and the
communion of the blood of Christ. Blood is the life-giving
substance of the living being. Christ communicated life to his
disciples through the Eucharist or Christian sacrament. </p>

<p>In I Corinthians 10:16 we note the mention of bread as the
communion of the body of Christ and that we are all partakers of
one bread. This is the spiritual bread or food used by Christ and
his disciples. (A synonym for the Eucharist or the Body and Blood
of the Lord is the bread of life.) It is interesting to note that
the finest marijuana in Jamaica is called Lamb's bread. </p>

<p>1 Corinthians 12:13 &quot;For by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one body, whether we be Jew or Gentiles, whether we
be bond or free; and have all been made to drink into one Spirit.
</p>

<p>1 Corinthians 11:25 &quot;After the same manner also he took
the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the New
Testament in my blood: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me. 26 For as often as ye eat this bread and drink
this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come. </p>

<p>If these passages are compared to 1 Corinthians 10:1-4, it is
plain that the &quot;eating of one bread&quot; is the same as the
patriarchs &quot;eating the same spiritual meat&quot; and the
&quot;drinking of one Spirit&quot; (the cup) is the same as the
patriarchs &quot;drinking of the Spiritual Rock that followed
them: and that Rock was Christ.&quot; By making this comparison
we see that the terminology of the Eucharist is directly related
to the smoking cloud of incense used in the baptism of Christ and
the patriarchs. </p>

<p>It is interesting to note that smoking was referred to as
&quot;eating&quot; or &quot;drinking&quot; by the early American
Indians. Peter J. Furst in Hallucinogen and Culture states the
following: </p>

<p>&quot;Considering its enormous geographic spread in the
Americas at the time of European discovery, as well as the
probable age of stone tobacco pipes in California, the inhaling
(often called &quot;drinking&quot; or &quot;eating&quot;) of
tobacco smoke by the Shaman, as a corollary to therapeutic
fumigation and the feeding of the gods with smoke, must also be
of considerable antiquity.&quot; </p>

<p>In Licit and Illicit Drugs, page 209, the following is quoted:
</p>

<p>&quot;Columbus and other early explorers who followed him were
amazed to meet Indians who carried rolls of dried leaves that
they set afire_and who then &quot;drank the smoke&quot; that
emerged from the rolls. Other Indians carried pipes in which they
burned the same leaves, and from which they similarly &quot;drank
the smoke&quot;. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #89-Sacrament-5 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-20 10:00:06 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Wow, what a night!! Actually heard a tornado passing by.
Luckily it didn't touch down in my part of town. </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT -- Part 5</b> </p>

<p>The Encyclopedia Britannica states in the section on
&quot;Sacrifice&quot; that the interpretation of sacrifice and
particularly of the Eucharist as sacrifice has varied greatly
within the different Christian traditions because of the
sacrificial terminology in which the Eucharist was originally
described became foreign to Christian thinkers. </p>

<p>We (Poster's Note--The poster is not a member of any organized
religion) of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare that the
true understanding of the Eucharist has been passed down from
generation to generation so that we are able to give an accurate
interpretation of the sacrificial terminology used to describe
the Eucharist. We have shown, using history and Biblical
passages, that his terminology is directly related to burning
smoking incense. We have shown that the &quot;eating&quot; or
&quot;drinking&quot; contained in the terminology concerning the
Eucharist is associated with the inhalation of smoke. We have
shown that marijuana was used as incense and that it was the
number one spiritual plant of the ancient world. </p>

<p>We of the Ethiopian Zion Coptic Church declare that the cup
that Christ baptized his disciples with in the baptism of the
Holy Spirit and fire was in fact a pipe or chillum in which
marijuana was smoked. This is a bottomless cup and soon as it is
emptied, it is filled again and passed in a circle. There is a
picture of this cup or pipe below, as well as on the cover. Like
the pipe of the ancient North American Indians, this cup was a
portable altar. </p>

<p>Christ was the Father of the doctrine of the Eucharist which
is the communion that Jesus gave his brethren. Jesus taught that
the communion is his body and blood. Jesus was not speaking of
His physical body and blood. He was speaking of His spiritual
body and spiritual blood that was the communion of his holy
church. The supper that Jesus celebrated with his disciples
&quot;on the night that he was betrayed&quot; (1 Corinthians
11:23) inaugurated the heavenly meal that was to be continued. </p>

<p>1 Corinthians 11:23 &quot;For I have received of the Lord that
which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same
night in which he was betrayed took bread: 24 And when he had
given thanks, he brake it and said, Take, eat, this is my body,
which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me. 25 After
the same manner also he took the cup, which he had supped,
saying, This cup is the new testament in my blood; this do ye, as
oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. 26 For as often as ye
eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye do shew the Lord's
death till he come. 27 Wherefore whosoever shall eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. 28 But let a man
examine himself, and let him eat of the bread, and drink of that
cup. 29 For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and
drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body. </p>

<p>Christ said, &quot;Do this in remembrance of me.&quot; Here
the original unity of man with God is restored. In general the
reception of the Holy Spirit is connected with the actual
realization, the inward experiencing of God. </p>

<p>Marijuana has been referred to as a mild euphoric (the
producer of a feeling of well-being) that produces a profound
religious experience of a mystical and transcendental nature.
This religious experience is said to be brought about by the
stirring of deeply buried, unconscious sensitivities so that one
experiences ultimate reality or the divine and confirms the
feeling of the worshipper that he has been in the presence of God
and has assimilated some of His powers. </p>

<p>Part 6. Tomorrow -- Pass it on ;-) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #90-Sacrament-6 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-04-21 10:26:00 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>MARIJUANA AS THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT-- Part 6.</b> </p>

<p>To be lifted above sense to behold the beatific vision and
become &quot;incorporate&quot; in God is the end sought in
ecstasy. The priest or mystic in enthusiasm or ecstasy enjoys the
beatific vision by entering into communion with God and by
undergoing deification. The experience of ecstasy, states Mircea
Eliade, one of the foremost authorities on religion, is a
timeless primary phenomenon. Psychological experience of rapture,
he continues, are fundamental to the human condition and hence
known to the whole of archaic humanity. (Some of the synonyms of
rapture are bliss, beatitude, transport, exaltation.) </p>

<p>Baudelaire, a member of the Club Des Hashichins (Hashish Club)
founded in Paris around 1835 and writer of Artificial Paradises
states the following about hashish: Hashish is the unadulterated
resin from the flowering tops of the female hemp plant. </p>

<p>&quot;One will find in hashish nothing miraculous, absolutely
nothing but an exaggeration of the natural. The brain and
organisms on which hashish operates will produce only the normal
phenomena peculiar to that individual increased, admittedly, in
number and force, but always faithful to the original. A man will
never escape from his destined physical and moral temperament:
hashish will be a mirror of his impression and private thoughts a
magnifying mirror, it is true, but only a mirror. </p>

<p>He cautions that the user must be in the right frame of mind
to take hashish, for just as it exaggerates the natural behavior
of the individual, so too does hashish intensify the user's
immediate feelings. Baudelaire describes three successive phases
a hashish user will pass through. He says the final stage is
marked by a feeling of calmness, in which time and space have no
meaning, and there is a sense that one has transcended matter. He
says that in this state, one final supreme thought breaks into
consciousness. &quot;I have become God.&quot; </p>

<p>Realization of one's union with God is necessary in
understanding the true Christian sacrament. The understanding of
man's relationship to God and God's relationship to man (God in
Man and Man in God) was quite prevalent in the ancient world,
particularly among the religions that utilized marijuana as part
of their religious practice. </p>

<p>Said the great Hindu sage, Manu, &quot;He who in his own soul
perceives the Supreme Soul in all beings and acquires equanimity
toward them all, attains the highest bliss.&quot; To recognize
oneness of self with God was contained in all the teachings of
Gautama Buddha. In the Liturgy of Mithra (the Persian god of
light and truth) the suppliant prays &quot;abide with me in my
soul; leave me not,&quot; and &quot;that I may be initiated and
the Holy Spirit may breathe within me.&quot; The communion became
so intimate as to pass into identity: &quot;I am thou and thou
art I.&quot; Athanasius, a theologian, ecclesiastical statesman,
and Egyptian national leader who was closely tied to the Coptic
Church in Egypt said, &quot;Even we may become gods walking in
the flesh,&quot; and &quot;God became man that man might become
God.&quot; </p>

<p>Western theology (Catholic and Protestant) teaches that the
spirit created matter but remained aloof of it. In Hinduism and
other Eastern religions, the spirit is the inside, the matter is
the outside; the two are inseparable. Eastern theologians hive
rightly perceived that the God one worships must posses all the
aspects of his worshippers' nature as well as his own divine
nature. Otherwise, how can he create beings whose nature is
entirely foreign to his own? What, then, would be the meaning of
the Biblical phrase: &quot;God made man in his own image&quot;? </p>

<p>Part 7 Tomorrow--Pass it on :-) <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>