
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-43</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B007-407</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/debate/debate.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034549 text/html 9683
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:45:29 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:20:59 GMT
Content-length: 9466
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>The Drug Legalization Debate</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<h1>The Drug Policy Debate </h1>

<h3>Legalization? Decriminalization? Prohibition? </h3>

<p><b>This page contains information regarding the debate over
drug policy. Should we legalize? Decriminalize? Build bigger
prisons? The viewpoints of the various sides are represented
here.</b> </p>

<hr>

<h2>Contents </h2>

<p><a href="#Submissions">Submissions Invited</a> -- Got
something new to add? Read this. </p>

<p><a href="#Manuals">Debate Manuals</a> - Manuals for debating
the issue from various points of view. </p>

<p><a href="#Competition">The Competition</a> - Web sites of
people who don't agree with us. </p>

<p><a href="#Chicken">The Chicken Page</a> - The
&quot;chickens&quot; who are afraid to debate this in public. </p>

<p><a href="opinion.htm">The Opinion Page</a> - Opinions are like
----, everybody's got one. I have made an effort to select some
of the best.</p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Submissions">Submissions Invited </a></h2>

<p>We are making a genuine effort to present the best arguments
we can find for every point of view. We have done extensive work
and research to locate the best of our opponents' arguments and
present them here, along with any evidence offered in support of
those arguments. We have also, in many cases, provided direct
line-for-line rebuttals of those arguments. We invite all readers
to submit </p>

<ul>
    <li>any argument we have not properly covered, </li>
    <li>their arguments in favor of their point of view, and </li>
    <li>any evidence they have to support their statements. </li>
</ul>

<p>Send submissions to: <a href="mailto:schaffer@smartlink.net">schaffer@smartlink.net</a>
Please read all of the information on these pages before you
submit. </p>

<hr>

<p><a name="Chicken"><img src="chicsmal.gif" width="68"
height="97"></a><a href="chicken.htm">The Chicken Page </a>-
Wherein we list our opponents who, so far, have been too
&quot;chicken&quot; to come out for an open and honest debate on
drug policy. What's the problem folks? Why can't we just talk
about this? </p>

<hr>

<h2><a name="Manuals">Debate Manuals</a></h2>

<p>In this section, we present the manuals prepared by the
opposing sides for debating this issue. Of course, my personal
opinion is that we have better manuals and arguments than our
opponents do, but we invite you to read them all and make your
own judgment. </p>

<p><a href="../ACTIVIST/persuas.htm">The Persuasive Strategies</a>
- <a href="../ACTIVIST/answers.htm">Answers to Specific Questions</a>
- <a href="../ACTIVIST/showstop.htm">Showstopper Questions</a> -
These are the debate strategies which blew the drug warriors out
of the debate so badly that the DEA felt compelled to hold a
conference in August, 1994, to write the following book. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22"><a
href="../ACTIVIST/how2men.htm">Speaking Out Against Drug
Legalization</a> -- This is the DEA debate manual which was
written in response to the success of the Persuasive Strategies.
It was originally titled &quot;How to Hold Your Own in a Drug
Legalization Debate,&quot; but the title was changed because the
first title seemed to assume they would get their butts kicked no
matter what and the best they could hope to do is survive. This
copy of the DEA debate manual includes my line by line rebuttal.
The full text of the DEA manual can also be found on the DEA home
page. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22"><a
href="myths/myths1.htm">Drug Legalization: Myths and
Misconceptions </a>by the U.S. Department of Justice Drug
Enforcement Administration </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22"><a
href="../GOVPUBS/wrong1.htm">The Wrong Message Of Legalizing
Illicit Drugs </a>This is a pamphlet put out by the Partnership
for a Drug-Free America which basically states that it is wrong
to talk about drug policy reform because even talking about it
encourages drug use. Now even ordinary discussion has become
dangerous. </p>

<hr>

<h3><a name="Competition">The Competition</a> </h3>

<p>One of the main differences between me and the
&quot;competition&quot; (those who support the drug war) is that
I am fully devoted to airing all the facts and arguments on the
issue, regardless of whether they favor my point of view. I
firmly believe that any honest comparison of their evidence (such
as they have presented - not much) and arguments (generally weak,
emotional, and illogical) will lead any intelligent, reasonable
person to the truth. Therefore, I am including links to all the
other sites on the web which seem to be opposed to mine. Read and
compare yourself. I recommend to all my opponents that they do
the same, in order to make it easier for all interested parties
to get to the truth. However, I expect that none of them will.
The truth is that our opponents aren't much interested in the
truth. </p>

<p><b>Please Note: We have invited all of the following listed
parties to come out for a live debate at which their evidence and
arguments could be presented against ours in an open forum.
Though we have made repeated invitations, none of the groups and
people listed below have had the courage to come out for an open
debate. We stand ready to debate them at any time they are ready.</b>
</p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22"><a
href="http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/deahome.html">DEA Home Page </a></p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22"><a
href="http://www.intellinet.com/~aclight/kim/legaltzn.html">Dr.
Kim Edward Light's Home Page</a> - Dr. Light presents some short,
poorly documented, and fundamentally illogical arguments against
&quot;legalization&quot; (he seems to have his own definition for
&quot;legalization&quot; which doesn't quite match up with what I
have heard other people suggest). We will soon be posting
point-by-point rebuttals to his statements, complete with links
to the full text of relevant documents which contradict what he
says. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22"><a
href="http://www.lec.org/">Drug Watch International </a>- This is
one of the larger international organizations devoted to
supporting the war on drugs. I have had personal communications
with Rev. David Noffs, who first started his communications with
me by stating that I was the kind of person they are trying to
protect their children against. He said this when the only thing
he knew about me was an e-mail I had sent him asking him to join
us in an open debate on the subject. When I told him that an
intelligent debate requires that people not engage in random
character attacks against people they never even met, he quit
responding. </p>

<hr>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" width="22" height="22"> <a
name="Resolution">The Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug
Policy </a></h3>

<p><a href="introhv.htm">Introduction to the Hoover Resolution </a></p>

<p><a href="hoover.htm">The Hoover Resolution</a></p>

<p><a href="shortlst.htm">Short List of Signers </a>of the Hoover
Resolution </p>

<p><a href="longlist.htm">Long List of Signers </a>of the Hoover
Resolution </p>

<p><a href="../GOVPUBS/crimebil.htm">Excerpt from the 1994 Crime
Bill</a> </p>

<p>Calling for the establishment of a commission to study the
drug problem. This clause was inserted into the Crime Bill as a
result of the Resolution for a Federal Commission on Drug Policy
(Hoover Resolution). </p>

<hr>

<p><a href="atlanta.htm">The Atlanta Resolution</a> </p>

<p>The Atlanta Resolution and the list of signers. The
Prohibitionists answer to the Hoover Resolution. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>