
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-20</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B031-30</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065344 text/html 39295
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:53:27 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:10 GMT
Content-length: 39076
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Chapter 6</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>6. The dome of many-colored glass</h2>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; <i>&quot;The Malay has been a fearful enemy for
months,&quot;</i> Thomas De Quincey wrote in May 1818. <i>&quot;I
have been every night, through his means, transported into
Asiatic scenes.&quot;</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The entry is contained in the famous drug addict's
autobiographical account, <i>Confessions of an English Opium
Eater</i>. The passage which follows describes the Eastern
nightmares produced by the Eastern drug, and it is worth quoting
at length: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>I know not whether others share in my feelings on this
    point; but I have often thought that if I were compelled to
    forego England, and to live in China . . . I should go mad.
    The causes of my horror lie deep; and some of them must be
    common to others. Southern Asia, in general, is the seat of
    awful images and associations. As the cradle of the human
    race, it would alone have a dim and reverential feeling
    connected with it. But there are other reasons. No man can
    pretend that the wild, barbarous, and capricious
    superstitions of Africa, or of savage tribes elsewhere,
    affect him in the way that he is affected by the ancient,
    monumental, cruel and elaborate religions of Indostan, etc.
    The mere antiquity of Asiatic things, of their institutions,
    histories, modes of faith, etc., is so impressive, that to me
    the vast age of the race and name overpowers the sense of
    youth in the individual. A young Chinese seems to me an
    antediluvian man renewed . . . nor can any man fail to be
    awed by the names of the Ganges, or the Euphrates. It
    contributes much to these feelings, that southern Asia is,
    and has been for thousands of years, the part of the earth
    most swarming with human life; the great <i>officina gentian</i>
    Man is a weed in these regions. The vast empires also, into
    which the enormous population of Asia has always been cast,
    give a further sublimity to the feelings associated with all
    Oriental names or images. In China, over and above what it
    has in common with the rest of southern Asia, I am terrified
    by the modes of life, by the manners, and the barrier of
    utter abhorrence, and want of sympathy, placed between us by
    feelings deeper than I can analyze. I could sooner live with
    lunatics, or brute animals. All this, and much more than I
    can say, or have time to say, the reader must enter into,
    before he can comprehend the unimaginable horror which these
    dreams of Oriental imagery, and mythological tortures,
    impressed upon me. Under the connecting feeling of tropical
    heat and vertical sunlights, I brought together all
    creatures, birds, beasts, reptiles, all trees and plants,
    usages and appearances, that are found in all tropical
    regions and assembled them together in China or Indostan.
    From kindred feelings, I soon brought Egypt and all her gods
    under the same law. I was stared at, hooted at, grinned at,
    chattered at, by monkeys, by paroquets, by cockatoos. I ran
    into pagodas: and was fixed, for centuries, at the summit, or
    in secret rooms.... I fled from the wrath of Brahma through
    all the forests of Asia. Vishnu hated me: Seeva laid wait for
    me. I came suddenly upon Isis and Osiris: I had done a deed,
    they said, which the ibis and crocodile trembled at. I was
    buried, for a thousand years, in stone coffins, with mummies
    and sphinxes, in narrow chambers at the heart of eternal
    pyramids. I was kissed, with cancerous kisses, by crocodiles;
    and laid, confounded with all unutterable slimy things,
    amongst reeds and Nilotic mud. I thus give the reader some
    slight abstraction of my Oriental dreams, which always filled
    me with such amazement at the monstrous scenery, that horror
    seemed absorbed, for a while, in sheer astonishment. Sooner
    or later came a reflux of feeling that swallowed up the
    astonishment, and left me, not so much in terror, as in
    hatred and abomination of what I saw. Over every form, and
    threat, and punishment, and dim sightless incarceration,
    brooded a sense of eternity and infinity that drove me into
    an oppression as of madness. . . . [And] many times the very
    same dream was broken up in the very same way: I heard gentle
    voices speaking to me . . . and instantly I awoke: it was
    broad noon; and my children were standing, hand in hand, at
    my bedside; come to show me their colored shoes, or new
    frocks, or to let me see them dressed for going out. I
    protest that so awful was the transition from the damned
    crocodile, and the other unutterable monsters and abortions
    of my dreams, to the sight of innocent <i>human</i> natures
    and of infancy, that, in the mighty and sudden revulsion of
    mind, I wept, and could not forbear it, as I kissed their
    faces. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; De Quincey's attitude might well reflect English
provincialism at its best, or worst, but surely he was correct in
assuming that some of the causes of his horror are shared by
others. Undoubtedly he has summed up very well the reaction of
the average Westerner to that nebulous something we have referred
to as Eastern ideas. A similar attitude was expressed, for
example, by Grecophile Edith Hamilton in her comparison of Greek
and Eastern art. The Greeks, she wrote, were the first
Westerners, introducing into the ancient world something
completely new: the rule of reason and the supremacy of the
rational intellect. The Greeks loved order, they loved life, and
they embraced with joy the beauty of the visible world. They were
the first people to play, and their games were conducted on a
grand scale. But this point of view was unique; it did not belong
&quot;to the immense expanse and the multitudinous populations of
the East.&quot; With its oppressed masses and its wretched
conditions of life, the East was preoccupied with the
unseen&#151;and with death. So insecure and unbearable was the
visible world that men could find hope only by rejecting outside
fact and turning inward to the invisible world of spirit and
intuition. Thus a tomb in Egypt and a theater in Greece.
&quot;The one comes to the mind as naturally as the other.&quot;
Thus a grotesquely stylized Hindu bronze of Shiva, its many arms
and hands curving outward&#151;and the Olympic Hermes, &quot;a
perfectly beautiful human being, no more, no less.&quot; </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>When Egypt ended, the East went on ever farther in the
    direction Egypt had pointed. The miseries of Asia are a
    fearful page in history. Her people found strength to endure
    by denying any meaning and any importance to what they could
    not escape. The Egyptian world where dead men walked and
    slept and feasted was transmuted into what had always been
    implicit in its symbolism, the world of the spirit. In India,
    for centuries the leader of thought to the East, ages long
    since, the world of the reason and the world of the spirit
    were divorced and the universe handed over to the latter....
    The mystical artist always sees patterns. The symbol, never
    quite real, tends to be expressed less and less
    realistically, and as the reality becomes abstracted the
    pattern comes forward. The wings on Blake's angels do not
    look like real wings, nor are they there because wings belong
    to angels. They have been flattened, stylized, to provide a
    curving pointed frame, the setting required by the pattern of
    the composition. In Hindoo art and its branches, stylization
    reaches its height. Human figures are stylized far beyond the
    point of becoming a type; they too are made into patterns,
    schematic designs of the human body, an abstraction of
    humanity. In the case of an Eastern rug all desire to express
    any semblance of reality has gone. Such a work of art is pure
    decoration. It is the expression of the artist's final
    withdrawal from the visible world, essentially his denial of
    the intellect.... Again, the gigantic temples of Egypt, those
    massive immensities of granite which look as if only the
    power that moves in the earthquake were mighty enough to
    bring them into existence, are something other than the
    creation of geometry balanced by beauty. The science and the
    spirit are there, but what is there most of all is force,
    inhuman force, calm but tremendous, overwhelming. It reduces
    to nothingness all that belongs to man. He is annihilated....
    The Greek temple [on the other hand] is the perfect
    expression of the pure intellect illumined by the spirit. No
    other great buildings anywhere approach its simplicity....
    Majestic but human, truly Greek. No superhuman force as in
    Egypt; no strange supernatural shapes as in India; the
    Parthenon is the home of humanity at ease, calm, ordered,
    sure of itself and the world. The Greeks flung a challenge to
    nature in the fullness of their joyous strength. They set
    their temples on the summit of a hill overlooking the wide
    sea, outlined against the circle of the sky.... To the Greek
    architect man was the master of the world. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In so far as it remains Greek, and therefore
rational, the Western mind no doubt abhors Oriental images and
the metaphysical concepts they might seem to imply. Indeed, many
Occidentals have emerged from a psychedelic experience with the
same sense of horror and relief De Quincey felt when he awakened
from his opium-haunted dreams to find himself safe again in
merry, common-sense England. As we have already suggested,
however, those images and concepts are not as remote as they may
appear. They are and always have been an aspect of Western
tradition, as counterpoint if nothing more, and it would probably
be possible to demonstrate their influence in almost every phase
of Western history. We have no intention of doing so. The task is
beyond us and would serve no useful purpose here; without any
attempt at comprehensiveness, however, we shall try to show how
this or that thread of Eastern thought has appeared from time to
time in the Western fabric. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The earliest of the threads can be picked up in
Greece itself. It was Heraclitus who observed that no man can
step twice into the same stream. The phenomenal universe is not
the secure and dependable piece of real estate our senses
suggest; on the contrary, it is in a constant state of flux and
chaos. Nothing stays the same. The only thing that never changes,
said Heraclitus, is the fact that everything is changing. Thus
the visible world of the West was called into question from the
very beginning, and philosophical attempts to refute Heraclitus
led in turn to the hypothesis of an invisible realm beyond the
senses. Parmenides, for example, proposed that reality consisted
of pure Being: an eternal One, never changing, which had no
describable qualities whatever, except for the fact that it
existed&#151;and since existence in this sense did not change,
what then of that phenomal world where everything changed?
Obviously, it did not really exist. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Then came Plato with his eternal Essences or Ideas,
which Gordon Wasson has suggested were psychedelic in origin.
&quot;The eye and the ear and the other senses are full of
deception,&quot; said Plato. The soul is a helpless prisoner of
the body. It is &quot;simply fastened and glued to the
body.&quot; Or so it was until philosophy came to its rescue.
Referring to the soul in the feminine gender, Plato said that
philosophy advised her to abstain from all use of the senses
&quot;and be gathered up and collected into herself, bidding her
trust in herself and her own pure apprehension of pure existence,
and to mistrust whatever comes to her through other channels and
is subject to variation; for such things are visible and
tangible, but what she sees in her own nature is intelligible and
invisible.&quot; The soul is &quot;dragged by the body into the
region of the changeable, and wanders and is confused; the world
spins round her, and she is like a drunkard, when she touches
change.... But when returning into herself she reflects, then she
passes into the other world, the region of purity, and eternity,
and immortality, and unchangeableness, which are her kindred, and
with them she ever lives.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Platonism evolved into the Neo-Platonism expounded
by Plotinus, who preached a doctrine of mystical union with the
Absolute. Both Platonism and Neo-Platonism in turn were
assimilated by Christianity, and in fact they provided the
metaphysical roots of the early church. This was due largely to
the enormous influence of Saint Augustine, who was a
Neo-Platonist before he became a Christian. Plato's pure Ideas
were interpreted to be the thoughts of God, and as such Platonic
philosophy continued as the mainstay of Roman Catholicism until
the rediscovery of Aristotle in the thirteenth century. Saint
Thomas became the most articulate spokesman for this revived
school of thought, arguing the case for intellect, reason, and
the interdependence of the spiritual and the material. And so it
was that Platonism gave way at last to Aristotelianism, mysticism
to empiricism, and Augustinianism to Thomism. Thomism in essence
was officially adopted by the Roman Catholic Church. But the
break really was not all that sharp, even within the church, and
Platonism has continued to be a major influence in Western
theology and philosophy. Today's drug movement might even be
described as a sort of Neo-Platonist revival. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The point is that Plato was talking Net of Illusion
talk and that this so-called Eastern idea is entirely within the
Western tradition&#151;the idea that the phenomenal world does
not really exist; or the idea that our truncated senses cannot
perceive ultimate reality; or the idea that our intellect
deceives us. Take Berkeley, take Hume. Take almost any Western
philosopher you would care to name. Take modern physics, for that
matter. It seems clear that the West mistrusts the visible world
just as much as the East does, and always has. The only real
issue has been, in James's terminology: Does some unseen order
lie beyond that visible world, and should we seek to adjust
thereto? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Platonism also contains other Oriental threads.
Plato, too, spoke of a morality based wholly on knowledge. He
spoke of reincarnation and of concepts equivalent to nirvana and
karma. For example, Socrates in the <i>Phaedo</i> is discussing
the fate of the soul after death: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>That soul, I say, herself invisible, departs to the
    invisible world&#151;to the divine and immortal and rational:
    thither arriving, she is secure of bliss and is released from
    the error and folly of men, their fears and wild passions and
    all other human ills, and forever dwells, as they say of the
    initiated, in company with the gods.... But the soul which
    has been polluted, and is impure at the time of her
    departure, and is the companion and servant of the body
    always, and is in love with and fascinated by the body . . .
    do you suppose that such a soul will depart pure and
    unalloyed? </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Such souls are held fast by the corporeal. They
haunt sepulchres and tombs. They </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>. . . wander about such places in payment of the penalty
    of their former evil way of life; and they continue to wander
    until through the craving after the corporeal which never
    leaves them they are imprisoned finally in another body. And
    they may be supposed to find their prisons in the same
    natures which they have had in their former lives.... men who
    have followed after gluttony, and wantonness, and
    drunkenness, and have had no thought of avoiding them, would
    pass into asses and animals of that sort.... And those who
    have chosen the portion of injustice, and tyranny, and
    violence, will pass into wolves, or into hawks and kites. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; If the Greeks worshipped Apollo, god of reason,
they were devoted also to Dionysus, the wine-drunk god of
instinct and mysticism. The cult of the Eleusinian Mysteries paid
homage to Dionysus, and it is believed the Mysteries included a
theory of reincarnation. The possibility that the cult utilized
some sort of psychedelic host would appear to gain considerable
support from a Plutarch fragment, quoted by Edith Hamilton, which
is thought to describe the Eleusinian initiation rites:
&quot;When a man dies he is like those who are initiated into the
Mysteries. Our whole life is a journey by tortuous ways without
outlet. At the moment of quitting it come terrors, shuddering
fear, amazement. Then a light that moves to meet you, pure
meadows that receive you, songs and dances and holy
apparitions.&quot; As we shall see later, this passage suggests a
remarkable parallel between the Mysteries and the contemporary
drug movement's esoteric interpretation of the <i>Tibetan Book of
the Dead</i>. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Reincarnation also was entertained as a doctrine by
some of those Gnostic sects that flourished during the first
three centuries of Christianity. The sects were Platonist in that
they took a very negative view of existence in the world of
appearances, and they taught that release could be obtained
through a secret <i>gnosis</i> or knowledge of the divine order.
They also assumed Plato's concept of the Demiurge&#151;an
imperfect creator god who made the earth, as opposed to the
supreme and perfect god who exists as pure Being. They made of
the Demiurge an evil, fallen deity who was responsible for the
creation of matter and hence for the curse of phenomenal
existence, for the fall from pure Being, for the Net of Illusion.
The sects were a curious hodgepodge of Christian dogma, magic,
and Eastern metaphysics. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Christianity had to absorb Gnosticism, just as it
had to absorb Neo-Platonism, and the early church was plagued in
addition by a whole spectrum of Asian-flavored heresies: for
example, the Albigenses, the Bogomiles, the Paulicians. These
sects adulterated their Christianity with strong doses of Eastern
idealism, including the concept of the Demiurge and a hatred of
matter. Similarly, Judaism had come under the dualistic influence
of Zoroastrianism during the Babylonian Captivity. The precise
extent of the East's impact upon the development of Judaism and
Christianity is impossible to measure at this point in history;
indeed, there is an equally frustrated body of scholarship which
has attempted to demonstrate a Western impact upon Eastern
religions during some period in the misty past. But there clearly
was some East-to-West metaphysical commerce, and this has led to
some rather airy speculation that the Bible contains an esoteric
teaching along Eastern lines. Much is made of the fact that Jesus
spoke in parables, and it is suggested that these perhaps were
Oriental abstractions presented in parabolic style for the
benefit of his unsophisticated flock. The people were not ready
for meat, so he fed them milk. &quot;And with many such parables
spoke he the word unto them [the multitudes], as they were able
to hear it. But without a parable spoke he not to them: and when
they were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Hidden meaning is thus read into many preachments.
&quot;The kingdom of God cometh not with observation.&quot; (The
senses are trapped in the Net of Illusion.) &quot;Neither shall
they say, Lo here! or, lo there? for, behold, the kingdom of God
is within you.&quot; (You are God.) &quot;Inasmuch as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done
it unto me.&quot; (We are a monistic One. ) &quot;Love thy
neighbor as thyself.&quot; (You and your neighbor are the same
person.) &quot;Who is my mother? and who are my brethren?&quot;
(We are all the same person.) &quot;If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself.... For whosoever will save his life
shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall
find it.&quot; (You must obliterate the ego to recognize your
true Self.) &quot;God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham.&quot; (God is immanent in matter. )
&quot;A good man out of the treasure of the heart bringeth forth
good things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth
forth evil things.&quot; (Karma.) And so on. Small wonder, then,
that no man dared ask Jesus any question after he declared,
&quot;Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.&quot; And the
&quot;I AM THAT I AM&quot; of the Old Testament is obviously a
Zen statement of pure experience. If nothing else, such
conjecture indicates that truly great thoughts are like the
commerce clause of the U.S. Constitution: they can be interpreted
to meet any need in any period. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The thread of pantheism can be picked up again in
the monopsychism of Averroes, the Great Commentator who was
largely responsible for reintroducing Aristotle to the Western
world. His theories fell short of pure pantheism, perhaps, for
they included a remote First Cause; but they were both Eastern
and heretical in their monistic denial of personal immortality,
and they had gained considerable popularity in thirteenth-century
Europe before Saint Thomas managed to reclaim Aristotle for the
faith. Pantheistic tendencies appeared in the medieval Jewish
mysticism of the Cabala, and the latter movement did much to
shape the thought of Spinoza in the seventeenth century. The
philosophy of the Jewish Dutchman was wholly pantheistic,
equating God with creative Nature and creative Nature with God.
Spinoza also denied the possibility of personal immortality. He
did, however, speak of the immortality of the mind in language
which might well set psychedelic bells to ringing:
&quot;Nevertheless we feel and know by experience that we are
eternal.... Although, therefore, we do not recollect that we
existed before the body, we feel that our mind, in so far as it
involves the essence of the body under the form of eternity, is
eternal, and that this existence of the mind cannot be limited by
time nor manifested through duration.&quot; (A hundred micrograms
of LSD will make that statement perfectly intelligible.) For his
intellectual pains, Spinoza was excommunicated by his temple in
Amsterdam. But he had considerable influence on later
philosophers, including Hegel. Hegel's system of absolute
idealism proposed that the universe consists of a single absolute
Mind or Spirit which is attempting to realize and comprehend its
own nature through an evolutionary process. Hegel in turn
influenced such disparate thinkers as Karl Marx, Teilhard de
Chardin, and Thomas J. J. Altizer. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Some of the more fragile nuances of Eastern
philosophy perhaps are best caught in poetry&#151;and the poetry
of the West abounds in Oriental themes or hints of them. We could
quote countless examples but will limit ourselves to only a few,
offering them in the hope they may serve to sharpen some of these
ideas, and to show that the ideas as such have a definite place
in Western literature as well as philosophy. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Shakespeare, to begin with, certainly lends himself
to an esoteric interpretation. The Delphic injunction, Know
Thyself, is echoed in Polonius' fatherly advice to Laertes:
&quot;This above all: to thine own self be true, and it must
follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any
man.&quot; That might easily be taken to reflect the Hindu idea
that men abuse one another only through ignorance of their
monistic continuity, and that knowledge of the true Self
therefore will automatically result in a perfect morality. And
Hamlet himself sums up that delusion of the rational intellect
which gives rise to the dualistic concept of evil: &quot;There is
nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so.&quot;
Shakespeare plainly is a commerce-clause bard par excellence, and
nobody has described the Net of Illusion so well as his Prospero:
</p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Our revels now are ended. These our actors,<br>
    As I foretold you, were all spirits and<br>
    Are melted into air, into thin air;<br>
    And, like the baseless fabric of this vision,<br>
    The cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces,<br>
    The solemn temples, the great globe itself,<br>
    Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve,<br>
    And, like this insubstantial pageant faded,<br>
    Leave not a rack behind. We are such stuff<br>
    As dreams are made on, and our little life<br>
    Is rounded with a sleep. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We must of course include John Donne: &quot;No man
is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the
continent, a part of the main; if a clod be washed away by the
sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory were, as well
as if a manor of thy friends or of thine own were; any man's
death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind; and
therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls
for thee.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Blake's poetry can be taken as a whole. It rejects
the rational intellect and its dualistic perceptions, and indeed
it gives the Eden story an interpretation quite similar to that
suggested in an earlier chapter: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Serpent Reasonings us entice<br>
    Of Good &amp; Evil, Virtue &amp; Vice....<br>
    Two Horn'd Reasoning, Cloven Fiction,<br>
    In Doubt, which is Self contradiction,<br>
    A dark Hermaphrodite We stood,<br>
    Rational Truth, Root of Evil &amp; Good. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Blake had his own term for the Net of Illusion:
&quot;the mind-forg'd manacles.&quot; He rejected the intellect,
the phenomenal world, the God of Theism. He rejected everything
but man's eternal spirit, and he looked back with longing to the
Universal Brotherhood of Eden, to the Universal Man, to the
&quot;Immortal Man that cannot Die.&quot; Blake in fact was a
Gnostic, and his <i>Prophetic Books</i> revive the concept of the
Demiurge. His Urizen (&quot;your reason&quot;?) is that sinister
deity who was responsible for the fall from pure Being and the
world of appearances. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Earth was not: nor globes of attraction;<br>
    The will of the Immortal expanded<br>
    Or contracted his all flexible senses;<br>
    Death was not, but eternal life sprung.<br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Then came Urizen with his ten thousands of
thunders, and a shadow of horror was risen in Eternity. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>The Eternal mind, bounded, began to roll<br>
    Eddies of wrath ceaseless round &amp; round,<br>
    And the sulphureous foam, surgeing thick,<br>
    Settled, a lake, bright &amp; shining clear,<br>
    White as the snow on the mountains cold.<br>
    Forgetfulness, dumbness, necessity,<br>
    In chains of the mind locked up,<br>
    Like fetters of ice shrinking together,<br>
    Disorganiz'd, rent from Eternity . . . </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; That eternal life, the furnace of all creation, was
the subject of Blake's best-known poem, which Alfred Kazin has
aptly termed &quot;a hymn to pure being.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Pure Being, from which sprang the Tyger. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>In what distant deeps or skies<br>
    Burnt the fire of thine eyes?<br>
    On what wings dare he aspire?<br>
    What the hand dare seize the fire? </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After Blake, as might be expected, the Romantic
poets come to mind&#151;and one of the best examples would
naturally be Shelley, who abandoned rationalism and atheism to
become a full-blown Platonic idealist. As for the Passing Parade
of Phenomena, compare that fragile speech of Prospero's and
Shelley's stark: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>&quot;My name is Ozymandias, king of kings:<br>
    Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!&quot;<br>
    Nothing beside remains. Round the decay<br>
    Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare<br>
    The lone and level sands stretch far away. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Just as our contemporary mystics are dismissed upon
the grounds of biochemical imbalance, so too has the Romantic
movement been supplied now with a medical interpretation. The
poets did not know it, but the source of their inspiration was a
bacillus, the mood of that period resulting from the prevalence
of tuberculosis. Keats was a victim of the disease, although
Shelley insisted the critics had done his friend in, and
Shelley's Platonic philosophy finds full expression in his elegy
to the dead poet: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>The One remains, the many change and pass;<br>
    Heaven's light forever shines, Earth's shadows fly;<br>
    Life, like a dome of many-coloured glass,<br>
    Stains the white radiance of Eternity,<br>
    Until Death tramples it to fragments.&#151;Die,<br>
    If thou wouldst be with that which thou dost seek!<br>
    Follow where all is fled!&#151;Rome's azure sky,<br>
    Flowers, ruins, statues, music, words, are weak<br>
    The glory they transfuse with fitting truth to speak. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Then to Wordsworth, poet of the mescal drinkers.
His ode, &quot;Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of
Early Childhood,&quot; includes the provocative stanza: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:<br>
    The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star,<br>
    Hath had elsewhere its setting,<br>
    And cometh from afar:<br>
    Not in entire forgetfulness,<br>
    And not in utter nakedness,<br>
    But trailing clouds of glory do we come<br>
    From God, who is our home:<br>
    Heaven lies about us in our infancy!<br>
    Shades of the prison-house begin to close<br>
    Upon the growing Boy,<br>
    But He beholds the light, and whence it flows,<br>
    He sees it in his joy;<br>
    The Youth, who daily farther from the east<br>
    Must travel, still is Nature's Priest,<br>
    And by the vision splendid<br>
    Is on his way attended;<br>
    At length the Man perceives it die away,<br>
    And fade into the light of common day. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The poem as a whole might appear to support the
doctrine of pre-existence or reincarnation&#151;an implication
which Wordsworth later admitted &quot;has given pain to some good
and pious persons.&quot; He protested he had not intended
&quot;to inculcate such a belief.&quot; The poem was concerned
with &quot;that dream-like vividness and splendour which invest
objects of sight in childhood,&quot; and Wordsworth had cast
about in his mind for some device to express that vision,
deciding finally to picture it as &quot;presumptive evidence of a
prior state of existence.&quot; He explained further: &quot;I
took hold of the notion of pre-existence as having sufficient
foundation in humanity for authorizing me to make for my purpose
the best use of it I could as a poet.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The argument about this stanza, and about
Wordsworth's intentions, is extremely significant. It offers us a
key. And that key fits many locks. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It may give us access to the real issues and deeper
meanings that are still half-hidden below the surface of Eastern
philosophy, the drug movement, and radical theology. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Professor Arthur Beatty, a Wordsworth authority,
suggested that the poet really meant to say: &quot;It is as if
our birth were but a sleep and a forgetting.&quot; And that is
the key. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Consider, for example, a comment that Coleridge
made about the poem: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>But the ode was intended for such readers only as had been
    accustomed to watch the flux and reflux of their inmost
    nature, to venture at times into the twilight realms of
    consciousness, and to feel a deep interest in modes of inmost
    being, to which they know that the attributes of time and
    space are inapplicable and alien, but which yet can not be
    conveyed save in symbols of time and space. For such readers
    the sense is sufficiently plain, and they will be as little
    disposed to charge Mr. Wordsworth with believing the Platonic
    pre-existence <i>in the ordinary interpretation of the words</i>,
    as I am to believe that Plato himself ever meant or taught
    it. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The italics are ours. And the point is simply this:
that poets are poets, and they express themselves in the language
of poetry &#151;saying <i>&quot;is&quot;</i> when they mean <i>&quot;as
if.&quot;</i> Prophets are poets as well, and so are the great
philosophers. And all poets, of whatever kind, have found it
necessary at times to express their ideas in terms of symbol; the
tools of their trade are the simile, the metaphor, the poetic
image, the myth. The Greeks indeed may have held themselves aloof
from the formal figures of speech, but they could and did make
ample use of myth. So, too, perhaps did Jesus, Buddha, and those
faceless authors of the Hindu holy books and the Old Testament.
They were poets all. And we can only guess how often their <i>&quot;is&quot;</i>
really means <i>&quot;as if.&quot;</i> One is tempted to ask, of
course, why they couldn't just come out with it&#151;say what
they meant and so have done with it&#151;and the question is fair
enough. In some cases, however, the people in fact may not have
been ready for meat. In some cases it may be that the poet
himself only half-knew what he meant&#151;knew what he felt, all
right, but could not quite put his finger upon it. In some cases
he may have said what he meant and meant what he said, failing
himself to apprehend the deeper meaning. And finally: he knew
what he felt, and he knew what it meant; but what he felt and
what he knew could not be expressed in conventional language.
Such language simply did not apply in those twilight realms of
consciousness where the poet explored the modes of inmost Being. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This is not as fuzzy as it may sound. Many of the
discoveries of modern physics cannot be expressed in conventional
language either; the physicists have been forced to leave
language behind altogether, resorting instead to a complex
mathematical symbolism&#151;a form of myth, if you
will&#151;which cannot be retranslated into words. Many popular
books have been written for the general public on the theory of
relativity, for example; the fact remains that you cannot really
understand the theory unless you have the math. Or so at least
the mathematicians tell us, and we are prepared to take their
word for it, while we are by no means ready to take the mystics
at their word for anything. But the relativity theory is no less
valid because it is expressed symbolically, for in fact
everything is expressed that way. Expression as such is by
definition symbolic: only the thing-in-itself is something more
than a symbol of itself. Language and math, therefore, are
equally symbolic; they are simply different kinds of symbolism.
In any case, it follows that Plato did not necessarily mean that
people really return to life as wolves, hawks, and kites; Blake
did not necessarily mean that there really exists a deity
comparable to Urizen; and <i>&quot;is&quot;</i> does not
necessarily mean <i>&quot;is&quot;</i> every time it occurs in
the various Hindu, Buddhist, Christian, and Jewish scriptures. It
may in many cases mean <i>&quot;as if,&quot;</i> and, when so
interpreted, these various scriptures perhaps are closer in
meaning than they appear. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Using the key provided us, a case could be made
that contemporary developments in theology and psychedelic
experience can be explained essentially in terms of two basic
myths and the conflict between them: the myth of the Demiurge and
the myth of Ulysses. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Let us leave no doubt as to our own meaning. As we
interpret it, the Demiurge is a symbol of the rational
mind&#151;of the cerebral cortex, which separates man from the
beasts and (it may be) from much else besides. As for the Ulysses
myth, we take it to suggest the presence of an evolutionary
purpose in the cosmos: that is to say, an inherent state of Being
as yet unrealized. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We shall return to these concepts later. Meanwhile,
turning from Wordsworth, we skip ahead a few decades and look
across the ocean from Europe to America. </p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | <a
    href="braden7.htm">Chapter 7</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>