
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B041-308</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/intell.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130810 text/html 44975
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:07:57 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:02:21 GMT
Content-length: 44757
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana -- Intellectual
function</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana</b> </p>

<h1>INTELLECTUAL FUNCTIONING </h1>

<p><b>Florence Halpern, MA</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>In this phase of the study investigation was directed
primarily toward establishing the effect of marihuana on the
subject's intellectual functioning. An attempt was made to
determine what changes in mental ability occur under different
amounts of the drug, what direction these changes take, when they
are first measurable, and how long they persist. </p>

<p>TESTS Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test This test was used to
measure the general mental level of all the subjects. It was
chosen in preference to other available scales because it is the
only individual test of intelligence which has been standardized
on an adult population, takes into account both verbal and
performance abilities, and compares the individual with standards
established for his particular age group. It consists of ten
tests, five verbal and five performance. The verbal tests cover
the fields of general information and general comprehension, draw
on the individual's capacity for abstract reasoning and test his
arithmetical ability and his rote memory. The performance tests
also evaluate the subject's comprehension of social situations,
but here the results are independent of language. There are also
tests of the individual's ability to carry out a routine task, to
organize parts into a meaningful whole, to distinguish between
essential and unessential details, and to analyze and synthesize.
Army Alpha (Bregman Revision, Forms A, B. 5, 7 and Bellevue
Revision) This is a group test first used in the United States
Army in 1917 and 1918 when it was given to more than a million
recruits. It consists of eight tests: test 1, a direction test
which was not used in this study since the item does not appear
on all forms; test 2, a test of arithmetical reasoning; test 3, a
test of common sense in which the subject indicates which he
considers the best of three possible responses to a given
question; test 4, a.modified vocabulary test; tests. in which the
subject must mentally reorganize disarranged sentences and then
indicate whether the resultant statement is true or false; test
6, a test of numerical relations in which the subject must supply
the last two numbers in a numerical series on the basis of the
relationship between the first six numbers; test 7, a test of
analogies in which the subject determines the relationship
between two given words and then underlines one of four words
which is related to a third word in the same way; and test 8,
which on Forms A and B and on the Bellevue Revision is a test of
general information in which the subject is given a choice of
five answers to a question. On Forms 5 and 7, this test is a test
of directions. </p>

<p>Because this test has five alternate forms which are roughly
of equivalent difficulty it could be repeated many times within a
short time interval. It was therefore used to establish a curve
showing at what time following ingestion the marihuana has an
effect on general intelligence and on individual higher mental
processes. Pyle's Digit Symbol Test In this test each number from
1 through 9 is associated with a specific symbol, as, for
example, number 1 is associated with a square and number 2 with
an asterisk. The numbers and their associated symbols appear at
the top of the sheet of paper. Below the sample are rows of
symbols, five symbols to a row, followed by five blank squares.
The subject is expected to fill in each square with the number
associated with the respective symbol. With practice the
association bond between the number and the symbol becomes
stronger and the subject depends less and less on the model at
the top of the sheet. He is therefore able to work faster and his
learning rate is reflected in the increased number of squares
filled. Cancellation Test The subject is required to cross out a
specific geometric form wherever it appears on a sheet which is
covered with rows of geometric figures. This measures the
individual's capacity for carrying out a routine task. </p>

<p>Form Board Test The measurement of the ability to manipulate
concrete material in contrast to the verbal or abstract ability
determined by the Army Alpha test required the introduction of
certain form board tests. These were the Seguin Form Board, the
Two Figure Board, the Casuist Board, - the Five Figure Board,
Healy A, Triangle Test, Diagonal Test, all administered and
scored according to the Pintner-Patterson Performance Series. The
Seguin Form Board has ten blocks of various goemetric forms, to
be put in their appropriate places as rapidly as possible. Three
trials are given. The Two Figure Board has nine pieces which,
when placed correctly, form a large cross and a large square.
Time and the number of moves are recorded. The Casuist Board has
twelve pieces which, when correctly placed, form three circles
and an oval. Time and errors are recorded. The Five Figure Board
has five geometrical figures which are formed by the correct
placement of two or three pieces for each figure. Time and errors
are recorded. Healy A has five small rectangular pieces which,
when placed correctly, form a large rectangle. Time and the
number of moves are recorded. The Triangle Test consists of four
triangular pieces which are fitted together in a board. Time and
errors are recorded. The Diagonal Test has five pieces of various
shapes which must be fitted together in a rectangular frame. Time
and moves are recorded. Kohs Block Design Test This is a
performance test which is less a test of manual dexterity and
more dependent on abstract intelligence than are the form board
tests. It correlates more highly with intelligence than do most
performance items and yet it is entirely independent of language.
Therefore, the individual who cannot express himself well or who
suffers from a language handicap is not penalized as he is on
verbal scales. The test consists of sixteen cubes each with a
red, a white, a blue, a yellow, a red-and- white, and a
blue-and-yellow side. A colored design which can be reproduced
with the cubes is placed before the subject and he is expected to
make it. Results are rated numerically, depending upon the time
consumed in execution. In this experiment two sets of designs of
equivalent difficulty were required- Designs IV, VI, and XIV were
selected for one series and V, VII, and XII for the other. </p>

<p>Memory Tests Although memory in itself cannot be considered a
measure of intelligence, it is essential to any intelligent
functioning and must therefore be included in any estimate of
intelligence. Three aspects of memory, namely rote memory, the
ability tof recall presented objects, and visual memory were
tested. The rote memory test requires the repetition of digits in
forward and reverse order as given on the Bellevue Intelligence
Test. Object memory was tested by exposing ten small objects for
three seconds and recording the number of articles the subject
was able to recall. Visual memory or the ability to reproduce
designs after a ten-second exposure was estimated by using the
designs and scoring technique from the Army Performance Test.
PROCEDURE The Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test Each subject was
given the Bellevue Adult Intelligence test within two or three
days after his admission to the hospital and before any marihuana
had been administered. </p>

<p>The Army Alpha, Pyle's Digit Symbol, and Cancellation Tests
These tests were given as group tests to a total of 20 subjects.
The Army Alpha and Pyle's Digit Symbol tests were given every
half-hour, beginning a half-hour after drug ingestion. The Army
Alpha was continued for seven hours and Digit Symbol for five
hours. The Cancellation test was given every hour for six hours,
beginning one hour after drug administration. Eleven users and 9
non-users took the Army Alpha and the Digit Symbol tests, while 9
users and 11 non-users took the Cancellation test. Tests 2
through 8 of the Army Alpha require twenty and a half minutes for
actual performance while such preparations as the distribution of
papers and the reading of directions consume almost ten minutes
more, so that had the entire Alpha been given at each half-hourly
session, the subjects would have gone from test to test with no
intermittent rest period. For this reason the tests were divided
and the following schedule arranged: (table a)<br>
Each subject took three test series, one without the drug, one
with 2 cc. and one with 3, 4, 5, or 6 cc., depending on indi
vidual tolerance. A test series consisted of fourteen half-hour
sessions for the Alpha, ten half- hour sessions for the Digit
Symbol and seven hourly sessions for the Cancellation tests.
Because of the time factor, a series required two days for its
completion. The halves of a series were given on successive days,
and the different series a week apart. Thus for example, a
subject might take his first test series with 2 cc. on Monday and
Tuesday of one week; the following Monday and Tuesday the series
would be repeated with the subject in a different drug state (no
drug or S cc.); and a final series would be given the third week
with the subject in still another drug condition. </p>

<p>An effort was made to obviate practice effect by giving the
first test series to one third of the subjects without drug, to
one third with 2 cc., and to one third with 3, 4, or 5 cc.
However because of the necessity of increasing dosage gradually
this ideal presentation was not actually obtained. The following
gives the amount of drug administered to users and non-users at
each test series. </p>

<p>(table b) Since the various forms of the Army Alpha are not
absolutely equivalent in difficulty, their order of presentation
for any one group had to be identical in each of the three drug
states. However, for each of the three groups tested the order of
presentation was different so that all the difficult forms did
not come at the same interval, as is shown on the following page.
Kohs Block Design, Form Board, and Memory Tests Administration of
these tests differed markedly from those discussed above in that
no attempt was made to give them at regular successive time
intervals. Rather, they formed part of a battery of individual
tests given to various subjects under specific drug conditions.
For example, 5 cc. of marihuana would be ordered for a patient
for 8:00 A.M., and testing began as soon thereafter as the
patient appeared &quot;high,&quot; the state of
&quot;highness&quot; being judged by the subject's own statement,
his pulse rate, the condition of his pupils and other
physiological signs. </p>

<p>(table c) Kohs Block Design was given to each subject twice,
once without the drug and once with 5 cc. The test was taken by a
total of 21 subjects, 10 users and 11 non-users. Five users tools
the test first without the drug, S had their first trial with 5
cc. Of the non-user group 8 had their first trial without
marihuana, 3 with 4 cc. The average time at which the test was
given to the user group was three and a half hours after drug
administration, with range from two to five and a half hours. For
the nonuser group, the average time of administration of the test
was also three and a half hours after the drug was given, range
two and a half to five and a half hours. </p>

<p>The two series of designs (one series being Designs IV, VI and
XIV, the other V, VII and XII) were presented in such manner that
half of the subjects were tested on one series and half on the
other series while they were under the influence of marihuana.
Thus any difference in degree of difficulty between the two sets
of designs was canceled out. The weighted scores given on the
Arthur Point scale were used in evaluating the results. </p>

<p>Form Board Tests were divided into three batteries, each
battery consisting of the Seguin Form Board, one of the three
larger boards (Two Figure, Five Figure, or Casuist) and one of
the three smaller boards. Various combinations of boards were
used under various drug conditions in order to make the results
as comparable as possible. The following indicates the number of
times the various boards were used with different dosages of
marihuana. </p>

<p>From the results it appears that Gwyn Triangle was used too
often with 5 cc. and Healy A was not used often enough. </p>

<p>(table d) </p>

<p>Aside from the Triangle and the Healy A, the distribution of
boards in different drug stages was such as to obviate any
differences in degree of difficulty. Nineteen subjects, 10 users
and 9 non- users, took this test. The results were scored for
time and errors according to the Pintner-Patterson Performance
series. </p>

<p>Memory tests. The first digit span test was always given
before marihuana had been administered, since the Bellewe Scale
was given each patient during the first two or three days of the
study. The trials under 2 cc. and 5 cc. were alternated. In all,
28 subjects, 17 users and 11 non-users, took this test before and
after the ingestion of marihuana. The final score equaled the
number of digits recalled. </p>

<p>To test Object Memory, ten small articles such as a key, a
ring, a pill box, and a crayon were placed on a flat, neutral
surface and exposed for three seconds. An attempt was made to
vary some of the articles at each presentation so that six or
seven were the same and three or four were different. Twenty-six
subjects, 11 users and 15 non-users, took this test. They were so
divided that 10 of them took the test the first time without
drug, 10 with 2 cc., and 6 with 5 cc. </p>

<p>To test Visual Memory, Army designs were given each subject
three times, once prior to the administration of marihuana, once
under 2 cc., and once under 5 cc. The test was riven to a total
of 28 subiects. 16 users and 12 non-users. Because there is no
alternative form for this test, results were definitely
influenced by practice. </p>

<p>Here, therefore, more than with any other test, it became
important to arrange the order of administration. The following
indicates the dosage of marihuana at the first test. </p>

<p>(table e) </p>

<p>It is obvious that the initial examination was given slightly
more often when the subjects were not under the influence of the
drug. </p>

<p>Improvement derived from practice is therefore more of a
factor in the tests which were performed under marihuana. </p>

<hr>

<h2>FINDINGS</h2>

<p>Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test General Intelligence. The
results of the Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test which was
administered to 60 subjects, 40 users and 20 non-users, are shown
in Table 5. As has been pointed out elsewhere, these findings
indicate that both the user and the non-user groups may be
classified as of average intelligence. </p>

<p>(Table 5) </p>

<p>Mental Deterioration. Studies of mental deterioration due to
toxic, organic or psychotic factors, as given in the literature,
reveal that in such cases the subtest scores on the Bellevue
Adult Intelligence Test show marked irregularity, depending upon
the functions involved in the deteriorative process. As a group,
the marihuana users tested show very even functioning, and what
little irregularity occurred can be explained on the basis of
language and racial factors.(4) From this we may conclude that
the marihuana users had suffered no mental deterioration as a
result of their use of the drug. The age factor does not affect
the result since the groups were well equated in this respect. </p>

<p>Army Alpha Test Total Mental Functioning. The total scores
obtained from this test at the successive testing periods are
shown in Table 6. Those recorded before the administration of the
drug give a picture like that seen in any learning curve, that
is, there is a gradual increment in test scores at each testing
interval, interspersed with plateau periods. </p>

<p>Thus, without drug the test score for the second testing
interval showed a 2 per cent gain over the initial score, the
score for the third testing interval showed a 4 per cent gain
over the initial score, and so on up to the last testing period
when there was a 13 per cent gain over the initial test score. </p>

<p>Between two and a half and three hours after ingestion of 2
cc. of the drug there appeared to be a possible very slight
falling off in mental ability. Otherwise the results paralleled
the findings obtained in the undrugged condition except that
toward the end of the day the increments were larger than those
which occurred when the subjects were undrugged. This may be due
to complications in the experimental procedure or may be an
indication of accelerated mental functioning resulting from drug
ingestion. This point is discussed more fully when the effect on
different mental functions is considered. </p>

<p>Deleterious effects were apparent an hour after the ingestion
of 5 cc. of marihuana. There was a 3 per cent drop from the
initial score at this one-hour period and this first attainment
is not surpassed until four and a half hours after drug
ingestion. From the four-and-a- half- hour period on to the end
of the testing there were gradual increments in score. </p>

<p>Different Mental Functions. A very elaborate study was made of
the scores made on the subtest (Table 7). Some irregularities
occurred even in the undrugged state, and these may be attributed
primarily to chance factors, as, for example, the difference in
difficulty of the various test forms. On the whole, the findings
were in line with those which one would expect in any situation
where constant repetition increases efficiency. </p>

<p>The effects of 2 cc. of marihuana on the different mental
functions were variable. Tests involving number concepts gave
clear-cut, consistent findings and revealed that impairment
occurred an hour after the drug was taken and continued for from
two and a half to three hours after ingestion. Results of other
tests showed that there was little if any loss in ability, and
some of them, especially those done toward the end of the day,
showed gains which exceeded the ones made in the undrugged state.
It is not possible on the basis of the present data to ascertain
whether these large increments indicate that small amounts of the
drug serve as stimulants in situations dependent primarily upon
verbal facility or whether they are due to certain complications
in the test technique. The former theory coincides with the
increased verbosity noted on other tests as well as with the
clinical impression, but the latter also cannot be overlooked. </p>

<p>Further investigation of this point is definitely indicated. </p>

<p>The effect of the 5 cc. dosage on each function was in line
with that reported for total scores, that is, there was a falling
off in efficiency one hour after the drug was taken and this
impairment continued for anywhere from three and a half to six
and a half hours after ingestion. Here too the scores on tests
involving number concepts were most severely affected, recovery
for them taking place from six to six and a half hours after drug
administration. </p>

<p>Degree and Duration of Drug Effect. In general it may be
stated that marihuana has a deleterious effect on mental
functioning, the extent, time of onset, and duration of the
impairment being related to the amount of drug taken. </p>

<p>The adverse effect of the 2 cc. dosage on global intelligence
was slight (about 3 per cent to 4 per cent impairment in
efficiency) and of sort duration, occurring at about two and a
half hours after ingestion and lasting little longer than a
half-hour or an hour. Certain mental functions, especially those
dealing with number concepts, appear to have been affected much
earlier than others, the effect on the number test scores being
measurable as early as one hour after ingestion and continuing
until two and a half hours after ingestion. For other functions,
in particular those involving verbal facility, the results were
variable, in some instances showing no adverse effect and even a
slight acceleration. </p>

<p>The effect of 5 cc. of marihuana on global intellectual
functioning was apparent within an hour from the time the drug
was taken and was operative until four and a half hours after
ingestion. All mental functions showed this early impairment but
for some of them recovery from the adverse effect was earlier
than for others. Those most severely impaired from point of view
of duration were the ones dealing with number concepts. </p>

<p>(Table 6) </p>

<p>The testing program was continued for only seven hours after
the drug was taken and, therefore, any estimate of the effect of
marihuana after this time is purely a subjective one. However,
both the subject and the examiner felt that the drug produced a
&quot;hang- over&quot; which in most cases continued into the
following day. The subject complained of being headachy, sleepy,
and unable to work at his usual level, and the examiner also
noted that the subject did not work as well or as quickly when
called upon to do something on a day following marihuana
ingestion. </p>

<p>The impairment reported here is not entirely representative of
the maximum impairment which occurs under the influence of
marihuana. Two opposing variables account for the results
obtained in the drugged condition. One variable is practice
effect which tends to increase test scores with each succeeding
trial. The other variable, the drug, tends to lower test scores.
In the earlier sessions there was evidence that the marihuana,
especially when given in large doses, is the more potent force,
as seen by the continuing downward trend of the curve during the
first few hours. In these earlier phases, in spite of repetition,
results were lower with each succeeding trial, or if there was no
actual loss, the increments made were never comparable to those
made in the undrugged state. Three or four hours after drug
administration there was a general trend toward rising scores.
Some of this gain must be attributed to increased practice effect
which was counteracting, in part at least, the deleterious effect
of the marihuana. For this reason it is not certain that the drug
was less effective at later points in the curve than it was at
the moment of seemingly greatest impairment. This seems
particularly plausible because, beginning with the third hour,
the subject was no longer working on new tasks but was actually
repeating identical tasks that he performed earlier in the day.
Thus, at the third hour the test form used was the same as the
one given at the initial session; at the end of the
three-and-a-half-hour period the form was the same as the
one-hour examination, and so on. What is shown in the curves is
the effect of marihuana on intellectual tasks with which the
subject has become very familiar. For practical purposes the test
situation has the advantage of being comparable with daily living
since the tasks performed in daily routine are usually relatively
familiar ones. </p>

<p>(Table 7) </p>

<p>Speed Versus Power. Intellectual impairment under the
influence of marihuana resulted from a loss in both speed and
efficiency. There was a slowing up in output indicated by the
difference in the number of items done before and after the
administration of the drug. On the whole the number of test items
attempted tended to increase at each succeeding examination
period even when the subject was under the influence of
marihuana, but the percentage of increase in the drugged state
practically never equaled that attained for the corresponding
time interval when the subject had not ingested the drug. The
findings for the number of items done in the drugged and
undrugged condition follow very closely the findings in respect
to the number of items correctly done. From this it may be
concluded that under the influence of marihuana an individual
functions less rapidly and also less efficiently than when he has
had no drug. </p>

<p>Careful analysis of what causes the loss in efficiency reveals
that certain factors not necessarily related to mental ability
per se were accountable for the reduced scores in the drugged
state. For example, under the influence of the drug the subject
felt dizzy, had blurred vision, or exhibited other handicapping
physiological disturbances. These impeded his efficiency in
putting his answer on the correct line, or marking a cross in the
right box. Men were observed running their fingers across the
page in an effort to keep their place. On the other hand, much of
the intellectual loss can be ascribed to an impairment in the
thinking processes, and there seemed to be a general confusion of
ideas and inability to maintain a fixed goal. Some subjects
reported that the reason they accomplished so little was that, by
the time they had finished reading a question, they no longer
remembered what their purpose in reading it had been.
Occasionally perseveration of a form of response specific to one
test was found in a subsequent test. For example, some forms of
the Same-Opposite test require the subject to mark the answer S
or O. In a later test requiring a plus or minus response
occasional irrelevant S's or O's appeared. </p>

<p>Comparison of the Effect of Marihuana on User and Non-User. </p>

<p>When the group is divided into marihuana users and nonusers
certain interesting and suggestive differences are revealed
(Table 8). </p>

<p>Although the general findings for total intelligence scores
for the two groups follow similar curves, the deleterious effects
were not as great on the user as on the non-user. Thus under 2
cc. of marihuana the user showed no real intellectual impairment
except for a very short interval beginning about two and a half
hours after ingestion and lasting for an hour or an hour and a
half. In contrast to this he made gains both at the beginning of
the testing and toward the end of the day which exceeded those
made in the undrugged state. The non-user who had ingested 2 cc.
of marihuana showed a definite drop in score beginning about two
and a half hours after ingestion, and for a period from one and a
half to two and a half hours after this time he did not make
increments comparable to those which he made in the undrugged
state. Following this, during the last two hours of testing he,
like the user, obtained scores which showed an acceleration not
paralleled in the undrugged state. </p>

<p>(Table 8) </p>

<p>Under 5 cc. of marihuana both the user and the non-user showed
a 3 per cent loss in efficiency within an hour of the time that
the drug was taken. Although recovery was slow for both groups,
the user was less severely affected, as is indicated by the fact
that at the next testing interval his score was only 1 per cent
below his initial score as compared with a 7 per cent loss on the
part of the non-user. The disparity in the degree of impairment
for the two groups continued for several hours. The more marked
drug effect in the case of the non-user was further evidenced by
the fact that the user showed recovery four or four and a half
hours after ingestion (as measured by the time when his scores
approach those made when in the undrugged state) while the
non-user, even at the end of seven hours of testing, did not
approximate his undrugged performances. </p>

<p>No simple explanation of this difference is available. The
most probable reason seems to be that previous use of the drug in
some way serves to ameliorate that anxiety and inevitable
disorganization which the use of any drug may have on an
individual who has never taken it before. Another explanation may
lie in possible physiological adaptation to the drug which,
though not identical with tolerance in the ordinary
pharmacological sense, seems to act in the same direction. </p>

<p>Variability. The results reported here are all in terms of
averages. </p>

<p>A study of individual scores indicates that there was marked
variability in the effect of the drug on different subjects. In
one case the drug action came early and soon disappeared. Another
subject experienced no reaction until after he had eaten his
lunch, at which time a very definite effect was apparent. A third
subject showed impairment late in the day when the drug effect on
almost all the other subjects had worn off. There were some hardy
souls who did not appear to be affected by even large quantities
of marihuana, while a few (mainly non-users) became so ill that
they could not continue with the examinations. </p>

<p>Pyle's Digit Symbol Test Comparison of the results obtained on
this test when the subject was in the undrugged condition and
when he had had 2 cc. of marihuana reveals that small amounts of
the drug did not interfere with his ability to carry out the
appointed task (Table 9). In fact, as was noted above for certain
other tests, the improvement in score at the end of two and a
half or three hours was greater after the ingestion of 2 cc. of
marihuana than it was when no drug had been administered, and at
the end of the five-hour testing period there was a 32 per cent
increase in score as against a 22 per cent increase in the
undrugged condition. </p>

<p>Under the influence of 5 cc. of marihuana, however, there was
a decrease in ability occuring within an hour after the time the
drug was administered. Although the scores show no actual loss as
compared with the initial score, the increments did not equal
those made in the undrugged condition until from four to four and
a half hours after ingestion. </p>

<p>It may therefore be concluded that certain types of learning
ability are not affected by small amounts (2 cc.) of marihuana,
but are impaired when larger amounts (5 cc.) are ingested. </p>

<p>(Table 9) (Table 10) </p>

<p>Cancelling a Geometric Form The results of this test are shown
in Table 10. </p>

<p>With 2 cc. of marihuana, there was a slight falling off in the
subject's efficiency occurring about three hours after drug
ingestion. </p>

<p>At that time he was 3 per cent less efficient than he had been
an hour previous. With S cc. of marihuana there was a slowing up
in the subject's ability to carry out the appointed task, which
was apparent two hours after drug ingestion (and possibly
earlier). At that time there was only a 4 per cent increment over
his initial score as compared with a 10 per cent increment in the
undrugged state and a 12 per cent increment when the 2 cc. dosage
had been administered. </p>

<p>He improved only slightly at the three- and four-hour testing
interval, and only at the five-hour interval did he show an
appreciable improvement. </p>

<p>Apparently, the carrying out of a simple routine task is
adversely affected to a slight degree and for a short period of
time as the result of the ingestion of 2 cc. of marihuana while
the ingestion of S cc. of the drug produces adverse effects which
are more severe and more lasting. </p>

<p>Performance Tests Seguin Form Board. For adults of average
intelligence this test is primarily one involving speed of
reaction time. The average time taken by the subjects when they
were not under the influence of marihuana was 12.8 seconds. This
was increased to 14.0 and 14.1 seconds under doses of 2 cc. and 5
cc. respectively. Thus, ingestion of marihuana in 2 cc. and 5 cc.
doses caused a 9 per cent delay in performance time. </p>

<p>Form Boards. The time scores for this test remained
practically the same whether no drug, 2 cc. or 5 cc. of marihuana
had been administered, the average scores in terms of mental age
being respectively 11.7, 11.7 and 11.9 years. The error scores
also showed little change as a result of drug ingestion, the
averages in terms of mental age being 9.7 years (no marihuana),
9.9 years (2 cc.) and 10.2 years (5 cc.), and what change
occurred was in a positive direction, that is, there was a very
slight improvement in the subject's performance when he was under
the influence of marihuana. </p>

<p>Kohs Block Design. This test correlates more highly with
abstract intelligence than do any of the other performance tests.
Here the drug had a definitely deleterious effect when it was
administered in large amounts. The average score was 17.6 when
the subjects were not under the influence of marihuana and 14.8
after they had ingested the drug; that is, under S cc. of
marihuana there was a 16 per cent loss in score as compared with
undrugged results. </p>

<p>In general it appears that those functions most closely as
sociated with higher intellectual processes are more impaired by
the drug than are the simpler functions.<br>
Memory Tests Rote Memory. As measured by the ability to repeat
digits forward there were no changes in rote memory as a result
of drug ingestion, the average scores under no drug, 2 cc. of
marihuana, and 5 cc. of marihuana being in each case 7.1. </p>

<p>Digits Reversed. Although the giving of digits in reverse
order is always grouped with memory testss this task actually
requires something over and above mere recall. It demands a
mental control not necessary in tests dependent purely upon rote
memory. Although simple rote memory, as measured by the ability
to repeat digits forward, was not affected by the ingestion of
marihuana, the repetition of digits reversed was affected
adversely. In the undrugged state the average for the group was
5.4, with 2 cc. the average was 5.0, and with S cc. it was 4.8.
The impairment was comparatively small but it seems to have been
related to the amount of drug taken. </p>

<p>Object Memory. The average scores under no drug, 2 cc. of
marihuana, and 5 cc. of marihuana were respectively 6.2, 5.6, and
5.9- that is, there was a loss of about 9 per cent in the
subject's ability to recall objects which had been exposed to his
vision for three seconds when he took the test under the
influence of 2 cc. of marihuana, while after the ingestion of 5
cc. the impairment was less, being only about 5 per cent. This
seemingly contradictory result is probably due to the fact that
by the time the subjects took the test under the influence of 5
cc. most of them had already had it two times previously. The
loss in terms of absolute number of remembered articles was
slight. </p>

<p>Visual Memory. In this test as in the case of digits reversed
something over and above simple memory function is involved. A
capacity for analysis and synthesis which correlates well with
intelligence is required for the successful execution of this
task, and it is this function which is adversely affected by the
ingestion of marihuana. The average scores were 10.3 (no drug),
9.7 (2 cc.) and 7.8 (5 cc.); that is, after the ingestion of 2
cc. of marihuana there was a 6 per cent drop in score, while
under 5 cc. there was a 24 per cent drop. </p>

<p>In general one may conclude that simple memory functions are
not affected by the administration of marihuana while the more
complex memory functions are affected adversely, the extent of
the impairment being related to the amount of drug taken. </p>

<p>Throughout the examination of subjects on individual tests,
the same difference was observed in intensity of the effect upon
user and non-user as was noted in group tests.<br>
Experiments with Marihuana cigarettes In addition to the tests
made to determine the effect of the ingestion of marihuana on
various intellectual functions, several experiments were tried
with marihuana cigarettes. The tests used in this part of the
study were the Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test; the Woody McCall
Mixed Fundamentals Test, Form I, which consists of thirty-five
examples requiring addition, subtraction, multiplication or
division; a cancellation test in which the subject is required to
cross out a specific number (in this instance the number 8)
wherever it appears on a sheet covered with rows of numbers; the
Kohs Block Design Test; and the test for rote, object, and visual
memory. </p>

<p>The subjects took the test series and individual tests twice,
once without the drug and once after having smoked marihuana
cigarettes. They were not given a specific number of cigarettes
but were told to smoke until they felt &quot;high.&quot; The
number of cigarettes smoked to produce this effect ranged from
two to seven. </p>

<p>The Mixed Fundamentals and cancellation tests were given as
group tests and were repeated at half-hour intervals for two and
a half hours. In the series given when the subjects were
&quot;high,&quot; the first test was taken as soon as the
cigarettes had been smoked. Time limit on each test was one and a
half minutes. </p>

<p>The Bellevue Adult, Kohs, and memory tests were given as
individual tests and were administered only twice, once before
the subject had smoked marihuana cigarettes and once after he had
become &quot;high&quot; from smoking them. If during the course
of the examination he wanted another cigarette or the examiner
had reason to suspect that he was no longer under the influence
of the drug, more cigarettes were smoked. The number of
cigarettes used during a three-hour testing period ranged from
six to twelve. </p>

<p>In the cancellation, Kohs, and memory tests the subjects were
so divided that half took the tests for the first time before
they had smoked and half after they had smoked. In the Woody
McCall Mixed Fundamentals Test more non-users had their first
tests before they had smoked. The Bellevue Adult Intelligence
Test was always given first without the drug during the two or
three days immediately following the subject's admission. Four
weeks later the test was repeated on 10 subjects while they were
under the influence of marihuana cigarettes. </p>

<p>Bellevue Adult Intelligence Test Ten subjects, 5 users and 5
non-users, repeated this test under the influence of marihuana.
The results are shown in Table 11. </p>

<p>(TABLE 11) </p>

<p>Since the test taken when the subject was &quot;high&quot; was
always his second experience with it, some allowance must be made
for practice effect. Without drug the average I.Q. of these
subjects was 101.6, while after they had smoked cigarettes it was
104.4. This increase of only 2.8 points is smaller than one would
probably get with repetition occurring after such a short time
interval. It may be concluded, therefore, that smoking marihuana
cigarettes has some negative effect on intellectual functioning,
in that the subject benefits less from previous experiences than
he would if he had not smoked. <br>
Woody McCall Mixed Fundamentals Test, Form 1 This test was given
to 24 subjects, 10 users and 14 non-users. </p>

<p>&gt;From the results which are shown in Table 12 it may be
concluded that when the subject was &quot;high&quot; after
smoking marihuana cigarettes there was a slowing up in his
ability to do simple arithmetic calculations. This lag occurred
within the first half-hour after smoking and continued for at
least an hour. The deleterious effect was not such as to cause an
actual loss in ability but the increments resulting from repeated
practice were never as great in the drugged as in the undrugged
state. Thus, the initial increment was 10 per cent in the test
given before smoking and only 4 per cent in the one administered
after the subject had become &quot;high.&quot; The final
increment at the end of two and a half hours was 20 per cent
without drug, 13 per cent with drug. </p>

<p>This test measures the subject's ability to use acquired
knowledge. </p>

<p>Under the influence of marihuana cigarettes the capacity for
using such an acquired skill is not lost but is slowed down. The
adverse effect of smoking marihuana in cigarette form occurs
almost immediately in contrast to the delayed action of the
pills. </p>

<p>(TABLE 12) </p>

<p>Cancelling 8's Sixteen subjects, 8 users and 8 non-users, took
this test, the results of which are shown in Table 13. As a
result of smoking marihuana cigarettes the subject worked a
little slower in his execution of a routine task than he did when
he had not smoked. The increment over the initial score in the
test score made a half-hour after he became &quot;high&quot; was
only 7 per cent as against an increment of 9 per cent when the
cigarettes had not been smoked. His performance was slowed up for
one hour after smoking and possibly longer. </p>

<p>(TABLE 13) </p>

<p>Kohs Block Design Test This test, which measures performance
ability, was given to a total of 9 subjects, 6 users and 3
non-users. The average score without the drug was 18.5, and after
cigarettes had been smoked 14.7. This difference in score of 3.8
points indicates a loss in efficiency of 21 per cent. </p>

<p>Memory Tests Rote Memory. Thirteen users and 9 non-users took
this test. </p>

<p>Neither in repeating digits forward nor in giving them in
reverse did the subjects show any disadvantageous effects from
the use of marihuana cigarettes, the average scores before and
after smoking being 6.9 and 7.1 respectively for the digits
forward test and 5.2 and 5.1 for the digits reversed test. The
only explanation for this deviation from the results obtained
when marihuana was taken in pill form is the inability to control
the dosage when marihuana is given in cigarette form. </p>

<p>Object Memory. Thirteen subjects took this test. Object memory
was not impaired by the smoking of marihuana, the average scores
being 6.8 before the cigarettes were smoked and 7.1 when the
subjects were &quot;high.&quot; Visual Memory. There was an .8
point loss (from 10-5 to 9.7) in the average score of the 20
subjects, 11 users and 9 non-users, who took this test. This
represents an impairment of about 8 per cent. </p>

<p>Effect of Marihuana Cigarettes on Users and Non-Users The
difference in intensity of effect of marihuana cigarettes on the
user and on the non- user was not the same as the difference in
the effect of the marihuana concentrate on these two groups. The
user was usually more affected by smoking marihuana than was the
non- user, probably because the nonuser did not smoke as much or
as intensely as the user and was not as much under the influence
of the drug. <br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>