
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B05-59</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA044-000801-B012-209</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://samsara.law.cwru.edu:80/itar.html 129.22.184.108 19970118133412 text/html 342360
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 18 Jan 1997 13:37:09 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 342187
Last-modified: Tue, 16 Jul 1996 18:35:56 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<html>
<head>
<title>International Traffic in Arms Regulations</title>
</head>
<pre>
                                FEDERAL REGISTER
                                VOL. 58, No. 139
                             Rules and Regulations
                              DEPARTMENT OF STATE
                       Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs
       22 CFR Parts 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, and 130
                              [Public Notice 1832]
          Amendments to the International Traffic in Arms Regulations
                                    Part II
                                  58 FR 39280
DATE: Thursday, July 22, 1993

ACTION: Final rule. 

SUMMARY: This rule amends the regulations implementing section 38 of
the Arms Export Control Act, which governs the import and export of
defense articles and services. The rule clarifies existing regulations
and reduces the regulatory burden on exporters of defense articles and
services.  Although this is a final rule public comment is welcome and
will be taken into account to the extent possible.

EFFECTIVE DATE: This final rule is effective July 22, 1993.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Information regarding this notice may
be obtained from James Andrew Lewis, U.S. Department of State, Bureau
of Politico- Military Affairs (202-647-4231), Mal Zerden or Allan
Suchinsky, U.S. Department of State, Office of Defense Trade Controls
(703-875-6644).
   SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The regulations implementing section 38
of the Arms Export Control Act were last revised substantially in
November 1984. A proposed rule was published on May 7, 1992 (57 FR
19666), for public comment.  This Final Rule clarifies and simplifies
the current regulations. Certain sections are consolidated while
others are revised in the interests of clarity and consistency. To the
extent possible, related sections are cross-referenced.  In amending
the regulations, public comments and suggestions from industry and
other U.S. agencies have been considered and in many cases
incorporated into the regulations.
   The most significant changes are an increase in the validity period
of a license from three to four years and a revision of the policy
used by the Department for designating defense articles that takes
into account civil application and functional equivalence. Several new
exemptions from licensing requirements are also established. These
exemptions will cover exports under approved manufacturing or
technical assistance agreements; spare parts valued at $ 500 or less;
intra-company transfers of components being sent abroad for assembly;
temporary imports for repair and servicing; and items which were
previously licensed for temporary export to trade shows.
   Other changes include a clarification of the commodity jurisdiction
process, which establishes a review period and specifies the appeal
process. The definition of public domain is expanded and clarified. An
exception allows for the re-export of certain U.S.-origin components
to the Governments of NATO countries, and the Governments of Japan and
Australia without prior U.S.  approval for components which are not
significant military equipment or controlled for purposes of the
Missile Technology Control Regime and do not require Congressional
notification.
  Specific Changes
   The Office of Munitions Control was renamed the Office of Defense
Trade Controls on January 8, 1990. All references to the Office of
Munitions Control are now referred to as the Office of Defense Trade
Controls. For clarification, all references to the Assistant Secretary
for Politico-Military Affairs are replaced by Assistant Secretary of
State for Politico-Military Affairs. Due to a change in office
designation, all references to the Under Secretary of State for
Security Assistance, Science and Technology are replaced by Under
Secretary of State for International Security Affairs.
   There has been extensive renumbering due to the deletion,
consolidation and addition of sections in the regulations. Sections in
which there are substantive changes are noted below. These section
designations refer to the new section numbers.
  Section 120.1 General
   Section 120.1(b) adds reference to retransfer approvals for
clarification and lists the Department officials authorized to
exercise the authorities of the subchapter. Section 120.1(c) adds a
new section which specifies that exemptions in this subchapter do not
apply to exporters who have been convicted of violating certain
U.S. criminal statutes or are debarred.
  Section 120.3 Policy for Designating and Determining Defense
Articles and Services
   The policy on designating defense articles and services in the
future has been amended to take into consideration civil application,
functional equivalence, and the significance of the military or
intelligence applicability of articles and services.
  Section 120.4 Commodity Jurisdiction
   The title is changed from Commodity jurisdiction and redesignated
&#167; 120.4 (previously &#167; 120.5). Establishes criteria used by
State for determination of export licensing jurisdiction. Establishes
a review period and specifies the appeal process, with a fixed review
period, for commodity jurisdiction determinations.
  Section 120.5 Relation to Regulations of Other Agencies
   Redesignates section number (previously 120.4). Clarifies the
licensing roles and responsibilities of other U.S. Government
agencies.
  Section 120.6 Defense Article
   Clarifies the definition to specify the inclusion of components,
parts, accessories, attachments and associated equipment. Clarifies
the definition of models and mockups.
  Section 120.8 Major Defense Equipment
   This is a new section which defines major defense equipment.
  Section 120.9 Defense Service
   Modifies the definition to be consistent with the revised
definition of technical data.
  Section 120.10 Technical Data
   Modifies the definition to include certain types of
software. Clarifies the definition by explicitly identifying assembly
and reconstruction of defense articles.
  Section 120.11 Public Domain
   Adds methods by which technical data may be considered to be in the
public domain and includes a definition of fundamental research.
  Section 120.12 Office of Defense Trade Controls
   Identifies the name and address of the subject office.
  Section 120.16 Foreign Person
   Modifies the definition to fit 8 U.S.C. 1324 (a)(3) and address the
term protected individual, consistent with the Immigration and
Nationality Act, as amended.
  Section 120.17 Export
   Modifies the definition to include transfers in the United States
of defense articles to embassies or other agencies of foreign
governments.
  Section 120.18 Import-Temporary
   Changes title from In-transit shipment and clarifies the
definition. [*39281]
  Section 120.19 Reexport or Retransfer
   This is a new section which defines reexport and retransfer as the
transfer to an end use or end user or destination not previously
defined.
  Section 120.20 License
   Changes wording referring to temporary import to agree with Section
120.18, and specifies that licenses are for items controlled by this
subchapter.
  Section 120.22 Technical Assistance Agreement
   Clarifies the services covered under this type of agreement.
  Section 120.23 Distribution Agreement
   Adds a definition of distribution agreement.
  Section 120.28 Listing of Forms Referred to in This Subchapter
   Lists the specific office within each agency from which forms are
available.
  Section 120.29 Missile Technology Control Regime
   This is a new section which defines the Missile Technology Control
Regime consistent with section 71(a) of the Arms Export Control Act.
  Part 121 The United States Munitions List
   Federal Register Notices modifying the U.S. munitions list have
recently been published. Under these proposals, technical data is
included as a subcategory under each munitions list category.
  Section 121.12 Military Explosives
   Provides a definition of military explosives and more specifically
indicates the types of explosives covered under category V.
  Section 121.15 Vessels of War and Special Naval Equipment
   Provides a definition of vessels of war and special naval
equipment.
  Section 121.16 Missile Technology Control Regime Annex
   This new section lists the defense articles on the MTCR annex.
  Section 122.4 Notification of Changes in Information Furnished By
Registrants
   Provides that mergers and acquisitions of registrants must be
notified to the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
  Section 122.5 Maintenance of Records By Registrants
   Clarifies what records are to be maintained during the mandatory
period for record maintenance. Changes the maintenance period from
seven to five years.
  Section 123.1 Requirement for Export or Temporary Import Licenses
   Enumerates licensing and documentation requirements including those
previously specified under &#167; 123.22.
  Section 123.2 Import Jurisdiction
   Clarifies the regulatory authority over temporary and permanent
import of defense articles into the U.S.
  Section 123.3 Temporary Import Licenses
   Clarifies the requirements for temporary import licenses and
associated exemptions.
  Section 123.4 Temporary Import License Exemptions
   Establishes a licensing exemption for defense articles temporarily
imported into the U.S. for servicing and return to the country from
which they were imported. Establishes criteria and procedures for use
of the exemption.
  Section 123.5 Temporary Export Licenses
   Establishes criteria and procedures for temporary export of defense
articles.  References the new four year validity period for licenses.
  Section 123.6 Foreign Trade Zones and U.S. Customs Bonded Warehouses
   Clarifies the procedure for handling classified defense articles
including technical data.
  Section 123.7 Exports to Warehouses or Distribution Points Outside
the United States
   Clarifies that certain exemptions may apply to exports under this
subchapter.
  Section 123.9 Country of Ultimate Destination and Approval of
Reexports or Retransfers
   Establishes procedures for obtaining approval for the reexport or
retransfer or change in end use of a defense article. Provides for an
exemption for the reexport of defense articles to the Governments of
NATO countries, and the Governments of Japan and Australia for the
reexport of articles which are not significant military equipment or
controlled for purposes of the Missile Technology Control Regime and
which do not require Congressional notification.
  Section 123.10 Non-transfer and Use Assurances
   Modifies the section to move congressional notification. A new
section (123.15) is created to address congressional
notifications. Clarifies the assurances requirement by explicitly
addressing usage assurances.
  Section 123.11 Movements of Vessels and Aircraft Covered By the
U.S. Munitions List Outside the United States
   Changes section title.
  Section 123.12 Shipments Between U.S. Possessions
   Clarifies that licensing requirements under this section do not
apply to direct shipment of defense articles under this section.
  Section 123.14 Import Certificate/Delivery Verification Procedure
   Eliminates specific identification of countries subject to this
procedure.
  Section 123.15 Congressional Notification for Licenses
   Previously covered by &#167; 123.10(e). Provides additional
information to clarify the Department's requirement.
  Section 123.16 Exemptions of General Applicability
   Provides for additional licensing exemptions for the export of
unclassified defense articles and procedures for utilizing these
exemptions. The exemption for obsolete nonautomatic firearms (&#167;
123.16(a)) has been moved to &#167; 123.17.  This section creates
exemptions for: The export of unclassified defense articles in
furtherance of approved agreements; spare parts valued at $ 500 or
less; components, tools or test equipment being sent abroad for
assembly and return by the same company; and unclassified defense
articles being temporarily exported to trade shows when the article
has previously been licensed for this purpose.
  Section 123.17 Exports of Firearms and Ammunition
   Moves &#167; 123.16(a) to &#167; 123.17(a).
  Section 123.21 Duration, Renewal and Disposition of Licenses
   Modifies title to add the word duration. Changes the validity
period for licenses from three to four years. Clarifies that a license
expires when the total value authorized has been shipped.
  Section 123.22 Filing of Export Licenses and Shipper's Export
Declarations With District Directors of Customs
   Modifies the title to omit the word and in-transit. Clarifies the
procedures for filing of export licenses and Shipper's Export
Declarations with [*39282] District Directors of Customs. Explains
procedures for self-endorsement of licenses when
appropriate. Establishes a new procedure for exports of unclassified
technical data.
  Section 123.23 Monetary Value of Shipments
   New title. Section incorporates the provisions of previous &#167;
123.25(d) and clarifies the dollar thresholds for Congressional
Notification.
  Section 123.24 Shipments by Mail
   Allows self-endorsement of license.
  Section 123.25 Amendments to Licenses
   Creates new section to address the amendment process.
  Section 124.1 Manufacturing License Agreements and Technical
Assistance Agreements
   Divides previous &#167; 124.1(b) into two sections, one addressing
substantive amendments, the other addressing minor amendments.
  Section 124.7 Information Required in All Manufacturing License
Agreements and Technical Assistance Agreements
   New title combining previous titles of &#167;&#167; 124.7 and
124.8. Consolidates information in &#167; 124.7.
  Section 124.10 Nontransfer and Use Assurances
   Eliminates reference to General Security of Information Agreements
and other foreign government security assurances.
  Section 124.11 Congressional Notification for Agreements
   Creates a new section which explains the requirements under the
Arms Export Control Act that certain agreements are subject to
Congressional notification prior to approval.
  Section 124.12 Required Information in Letters of Transmittal
   Revises the reporting requirement threshold pursuant to section 130
to $ 500,000 or more. Adds a clause relating to sublicensing
arrangements.
  Section 124.13 Procurement by U.S. Persons (Offshore Procurement)
   Allows technical data which discloses details of design or
production necessary for bid purposes.
  Section 124.14 Exports to Warehouses or Distribution Points Outside
the United States
   Specifies that the exemption under &#167; 123.16(b)(1) may be
applicable for the export of unclassified defense articles in
furtherance of approved agreements.  Corrects misnumbered paragraphs.
  Section 125.1 Exports Subject to This Part
   Clarifies that technical data authorized for export may not be
retransferred from the authorized end-user without prior approval.
  Section 125.2 Exports of Unclassified Technical Data
   Clarifies the licensing procedure for export (and return to the
U.S.) of unclassified technical data. Specifies the number of copies
of technical data required for submission. Incorporates requirements
previously contained in &#167; 125.7(b).
  Section 125.4 Exemptions of General Applicability
   Clarifies that if prior approval or prior notification are
necessary, those requirements must first be met before any exemption
under this section may be used.
  Section 125.6 Exemptions-Certification Requirements
   Title change to include the word Exemptions. Specifies that
certifications must be in written form and retained by the exporter
for a period of five years.  Clarifies the procedure for certification
in the absence of Customs or Postal officials.
  Section 125.7 Procedures for the Export of Classified Technical Data
and Other Classified Defense Articles
   Title change and specifies that only one copy of data or
descriptive literature is required for license renewals.
  Section 125.8 Filing of Licenses for Exports of Unclassified
Technical Data
   Clarifies the procedure for self-endorsement of licenses.
  Section 126.1 Prohibited Exports and Sales to Certain Countries
   Revises list of prohibited countries to reflect current policy and
country identifications.
  Section 126.4 Shipments by or for United States Government Agencies
   Clarifies that this section also applies to temporary imports and
temporary exports and that certain transfers that result in
incorporating U.S.-origin defense articles into foreign-owned launches
or satellites to be launched overseas are permanent exports requiring
the prior approval of the Department.
  Section 126.5 Canadian Exemptions
   Clarifies that a license is not required for the permanent or
temporary import from Canada of certain defense articles.
  Section 126.10 Disclosure of Information to the Public
   Reference to the Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Science,
and Technology is replaced by Under Secretary of State for
International Security Affairs.
  Section 126.13 Required Information
   Advises the provision of a Technology Transfer Control Plan in
cases when foreign nationals are employed at or assigned to security
cleared facilities.
  Section 127.4 Authority of U.S. Customs Service Officers
   Specifies the authority of the Customs Service Officers.
  Section 127.5 Authority of Defense Investigative Service
   Specifies the authority of the Defense Investigative Service in the
case of exports of classified defense articles, including technical
data.
  Section 127.10 Past Violations
   Clarifies the authority of the Office of Defense Trade Controls
with respect to making exceptions to cases that have been denied and
addresses consultation with other offices and agencies.
  Section 127.12 Voluntary Disclosures
   Includes a provision encouraging exporters to voluntarily disclose
in writing information regarding possible violations.
  Part 130 Political Contributions, Fees and Commissions
   The reporting requirement threshold is increased from $ 250,000 to
$ 500,000.
   This amendment involves a foreign affairs function of the United
States, and thus is excluded from the major rule procedures of
Executive Order 12291 (46 FR 13193) and the procedures of the
Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 553 and 554). In addition, this
rule affects collection of information subject to the Paperwork
Reduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 et. seq.), and will serve to reduce the
burden on exporters in that respect. The relevant information
collection is to be reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget
under control no. 1405-0013.

  List of Subjects
  22 CFR Parts 120 and 125
   Arms and munitions, Classified information, Exports.  [*39283]
  22 CFR Part 121
   Arms and munitions, Exports, U.S. munitions list.
  22 CFR Part 122
   Arms and munitions, Exports, Reporting and recordkeeping
requirements.
  22 CFR Parts 123 and 126
   Arms and munitions, Exports.
  22 CFR Part 124
   Arms and munitions, Exports, Technical assistance.
  22 CFR Part 127
   Arms and munitions, Crime, Exports, Penalties, Seizures and
forfeitures.
  22 CFR Part 128
   Administrative procedures, Arms and munitions, Exports.
  22 CFR Part 130
   Arms and munitions, Campaign funds, Confidential business
information, Exports, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.
   Accordingly, for the reasons set forth in the preamble, 22 CFR
subchapter M is amended by revising parts 120, 121, 122, 123, 124,
125, 126, 127, 128 and 130 to read as follows:
  SUBCHAPTER M-INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC IN ARMS REGULATIONS


  PART 120-PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
  Sec.
  120.1 General authorities and eligibility.
  120.2 Designation of defense articles and defense services.
  120.3 Policy on designating and determining defense articles and
services.
  120.4 Commodity jurisdiction.
  120.5 Relation to regulations of other agencies.
  120.6 Defense article.
  120.7 Significant military equipment.
  120.8 Major defense equipment.
  120.9 Defense service.
  120.10 Technical data.
  120.11 Public domain.
  120.12 Office of Defense Trade Controls.
  120.13 United States.
  120.14 Person.
  120.15 U.S. person.
  120.16 Foreign person.
  120.17 Export.
  120.18 Temporary import.
  120.19 Reexport or retransfer.
  120.20 License.
  120.21 Manufacturing license agreement.
  120.22 Technical assistance agreement.
  120.23 Distribution agreement.
  120.24 District Director of Customs.
  120.25 Empowered Official.
  120.26 Presiding Official.
  120.27 U.S. criminal statutes.
  120.28 Listing of forms referred to in this subchapter.
  120.29 Missile Technology Control Regime.
   Authority: Secs. 2, 38, and 71, Pub. L. 90-629, 90 Stat. 744 (22
U.S.C. 2752, 2778, 2797); E.O. 11958, 42 FR 4311; 3 CFR 1977
Comp. p. 79; 22 U.S.C. 2658.
  &#167; 120.1 -- General authorities and eligibility.
   (a) Section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778)
authorizes the President to control the export and import of defense
articles and defense services. The statutory authority of the
President to promulgate regulations with respect to exports of defense
articles and defense services was delegated to the Secretary of State
by Executive Order 11958, as amended (42 FR 4311).  This subchapter
implements that authority. By virtue of delegations of authority by
the Secretary of State, these regulations are primarily administered
by the Director of the Office of Defense Trade Controls, Bureau of
Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State.
   (b) Authorized Officials. All authorities conferred upon the
Director of the Office of Defense Trade Controls by this subchapter
may be exercised at any time by the Under Secretary of State for
International Security Affairs, the Assistant Secretary of State for
Politico-Military Affairs, or the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
for Politico-Military Affairs responsible for supervising the Office
of Defense Trade Controls unless the Legal Adviser or the Assistant
Legal Adviser for Politico-Military Affairs of the Department of State
determines that any specific exercise of this authority under this
subsection may be inappropriate.
   (c) Eligibility. Only U.S. persons (as defined in &#167; 120.15)
and foreign governmental entities in the United States may be granted
licenses or other approvals (other than retransfer approvals sought
pursuant to this subchapter).  Foreign persons (as defined in &#167;
120.16) other than governments are not eligible. U.S. persons who have
been convicted of violating the criminal statutes enumerated in &#167;
120.27, who have been debarred pursuant to part 127 or 128 of this
subchapter, who are the subject of an indictment involving the
criminal statutes enumerated in &#167; 120.27, who are ineligible to
contract with, or to receive a license or other form of authorization
to import defense articles or defense services from any agency of the
U.S. Government, who are ineligible to receive export licenses (or
other forms of authorization to export) from any agency of the
U.S. Government, who are subject to Department of State
Suspension/Revocation under &#167; 126.7 (a)(1)-(a)(7) of this
subchapter, or who are ineligible under &#167; 127.6(c) of this
subchapter are generally ineligible.  Applications for licenses or
other approvals will be considered only if the applicant has
registered with the Office of Defense Trade Controls pursuant to part
122 of this subchapter. All applications and requests for approval
must be signed by a U.S. person who has been empowered by the
registrant to sign such documents.
   (d) The exemptions provided in this subchapter do not apply to
transactions in which the exporter or any party to the export (as
defined in &#167; 126.7(e) of this subchapter) is generally ineligible
as set forth above in paragraph (c) of this section, unless an
exception has been granted pursuant to &#167; 126.7(c) of this
subchapter.
  &#167; 120.2 -- Designation of defense articles and defense
services.
   The Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(a) and 2794(7))
provides that the President shall designate the articles and services
deemed to be defense articles and defense services for purposes of
this subchapter. The items so designated constitute the United States
Munitions List and are specified in part 121 of this subchapter. Such
designations are made by the Department of State with the concurrence
of the Department of Defense. For a determination on whether a
particular item is included on the U.S. Munitions List see &#167;
120.4(a).
  &#167; 120.3 -- Policy on designating and determining defense
articles and services.
   An article or service may be designated or determined in the future
to be a defense article (see &#167; 120.6) or defense service (see
&#167; 120.9) if it:
   (a) Is specifically designed, developed, configured, adapted, or
modified for a military application, and
   (i) Does not have predominant civil applications, and
   (ii) Does not have performance equivalent (defined by form, fit and
function) to those of an article or service used for civil
applications; or a military application, and has significant military
or intelligence applicability such that control under this subchapter
is necessary.
   The intended use of the article or service after its export (i.e.,
for a military or civilian purpose) is not relevant in determining
whether the article or service is subject to the controls of this
subchapter. Any item covered by the U.S. Munitions List must [*39284]
be within the categories of the U.S.  Munitions List. The scope of the
U.S. Munitions List shall be changed only by amendments made pursuant
to section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C.  2778).
  &#167; 120.4 -- Commodity jurisdiction.
   (a) The commodity jurisdiction procedure is used with the
U.S. Government if doubt exists as to whether an article or service is
covered by the U.S.  Munitions List. It may also be used for
consideration of a redesignation of an article or service currently
covered by the U.S. Munitions List. The Department must submit a
report to Congress at least 30 days before any item is removed from
the U.S. Munitions List. Upon written request, the Office of Defense
Trade Controls shall provide a determination of whether a particular
article or service is covered by the U.S. Munitions List. The
determination, consistent with &#167;&#167; 120.2, 120.3, and 120.4,
entails consultation among the Departments of State, Defense, Commerce
and other U.S. Government agencies and industry in appropriate cases.
   (b) Registration with the Office of Defense Trade Controls as
defined in part 122 of this subchapter is not required prior to
submission of a commodity jurisdiction request. If it is determined
that the commodity is a defense article or service covered by the
U.S. Munitions List, registration is required for exporters,
manufacturers, and furnishers of defense articles and defense services
(see part 122 of this subchapter).
   (c) Requests shall identify the article or service, and include a
history of the product's design, development and use. Brochures,
specifications and any other documentation related to the article or
service shall be submitted in seven collated sets.
   (d)(1) A determination that an article or service does not have
predominant civil applications shall be made by the Department of
State, in accordance with this subchapter, on a case-by-case basis,
taking into account:
   (i) The number, variety and predominance of civil applications;
   (ii) The nature, function and capability of the civil applications;
and
   (iii) The nature, function and capability of the military
applications.
   (2) A determination that an article does not have the performance
equivalent, defined by form, fit and function, to those used for civil
applications shall be made by the Department of State, in accordance
with this subchapter, on a case- by-case basis, taking into account:
   (i) The nature, function, and capability of the article;
   (ii) Whether the components used in the defense article are
identical to those components originally developed for civil use.
   Note: The form of the item is its defined configuration, including
the geometrically measured configuration, density, and weight or other
visual parameters which uniquely characterize the item, component or
assembly. For software, form denotes language, language level and
media. The fit of the item is its ability to physically interface or
interconnect with or become an integral part of another item. The
function of the item is the action or actions it is designed to
perform.
   (3) A determination that an article has significant military or
intelligence applications such that it is necessary to control its
export as a defense article shall be made, in accordance with this
subchapter, on a case-by-case basis, taking into account: (i) The
nature, function, and capability of the article;
   (ii) The nature of controls imposed by other nations on such items
(including COCOM and other multilateral controls), and
   (iii) That items described on the COCOM Industrial List shall not
be designated defense articles or defense services unless the failure
to control such items on the U.S. Munitions List would jeopardize
significant national security or foreign policy interests.
   (e) The Office of Defense Trade Controls will provide a preliminary
response within 10 working days of receipt of a complete request for
commodity jurisdiction. If after 45 days the Office of Defense Trade
Controls has not provided a final commodity jurisdiction
determination, the applicant may request in writing to the Director,
Center for Defense Trade that this determination be given expedited
processing.
   (f) State, Defense and Commerce will resolve commodity jurisdiction
disputes in accordance with established procedures. State shall notify
Defense and Commerce of the initiation and conclusion of each case.
   (g) A person may appeal a commodity jurisdiction determination by
submitting a written request for reconsideration to the Director of
the Center for Defense Trade. The Center for Defense Trade will
provide a written response of the Director's determination within 30
days of receipt of the appeal. If desired, an appeal of the Director's
decision can then be made directly to the Assistant Secretary for
Politico-Military Affairs.
  &#167; 120.5 -- Relation to regulations of other agencies.
   If an article or service is covered by the U.S. Munitions List, its
export is regulated by the Department of State, except as indicated
otherwise in this subchapter. For the relationship of this subchapter
to regulations of the Department of Commerce, the Department of Energy
and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, see &#167; 123.20 of this
subchapter. The Treasury Department controls permanent imports of
articles and services covered by the U.S. Munitions Import List from
foreign countries by persons subject to U.S. jurisdiction (31 CFR part
505). The Department of Commerce regulates the export of items on the
Commerce Control List (CCL) under the Export Administration
Regulations (15 CFR parts 768-799).
  &#167; 120.6 -- Defense article.
   Defense article means any item or technical data designated in
&#167; 121.1 of this subchapter. The policy described in &#167; 120.3
is applicable to designations of additional items. This term includes
technical data recorded or stored in any physical form, models,
mockups or other items that reveal technical data directly relating to
items designated in &#167; 121.1 of this subchapter. It does not
include basic marketing information on function or purpose or general
system descriptions.
  &#167; 120.7 -- Significant military equipment.
   (a) Significant military equipment means articles for which special
export controls are warranted because of their capacity for
substantial military utility or capability. Section 47(6) of the Arms
Export Control Act (22 U.S.C.  2794(6) note) refers to significant
combat equipment on the U.S. Munitions List.  The terms significant
military equipment and significant combat equipment are equivalent for
purposes of that section of the Arms Export Control Act and this
subchapter.
   (b) Significant military equipment includes:
   (1) Items in &#167; 121.1 of this subchapter which are preceded by
an asterisk; and
   (2) All classified articles enumerated in &#167; 121.1 of this
subchapter.
  &#167; 120.8 -- Major defense equipment.
   Pursuant to section 47(6) of the Arms Export Control Act (22
U.S.C. 2794(6) note), major defense equipment means any item of
significant military equipment (as defined in &#167; 120.7) on the
U.S. Munitions List having a nonrecurring research and development
cost of more than $ 50,000,000 or a total [*39285] production cost of
more than $ 200,000,000.
  &#167; 120.9 -- Defense service.
   Defense service means:
   (1) The furnishing of assistance (including training) to foreign
persons, whether in the United States or abroad in the design,
development, engineering, manufacture, production, assembly, testing,
repair, maintenance, modification, operation, demilitarization,
destruction, processing or use of defense articles; or
   (2) The furnishing to foreign persons of any technical data
controlled under this subchapter (see &#167; 120.10), whether in the
United States or abroad.
  &#167; 120.10 -- Technical data.
   Technical data means, for purposes of this subchapter:
   (1) Information, other than software as defined in &#167;
120.10(d), which is required for the design development, production,
manufacture, assembly, operation, repair, testing, maintenance or
modification of defense articles.  This includes information in the
form of blueprints, drawings, photographs, plans, instructions and
documentation.
   (2) Classified information relating to defense articles and defense
services;
   (3) Information covered by an invention secrecy order;
   (4) Software as defined in &#167; 121.8(f) of this subchapter
directly related to defense articles;
   (5) This definition does not include information concerning general
scientific, mathematical or engineering principles commonly taught in
schools, colleges and universities or information in the public domain
as defined in &#167; 120.11. It also does not include basic marketing
information on function or purpose or general system descriptions of
defense articles.
  &#167; 120.11 -- Public domain.
   Public domain means information which is published and which is
generally accessible or available to the public:
   (1) Through sales at newsstands and bookstores;
   (2) Through subscriptions which are available without restriction
to any individual who desires to obtain or purchase the published
information;
   (3) Through second class mailing privileges granted by the
U.S. Government;
   (4) At libraries open to the public or from which the public can
obtain documents;
   (5) Through patents available at any patent office;
   (6) Through unlimited distribution at a conference, meeting,
seminar, trade show or exhibition, generally accessible to the public,
in the United States;
   (7) Through public release (i.e., unlimited distribution) in any
form (e.g., not necessarily in published form) after approval by the
cognizant U.S.  government department or agency (see also &#167;
125.4(b)(13) of this subchapter);
   (8) Through fundamental research in science and engineering at
accredited institutions of higher learning in the U.S. where the
resulting information is ordinarily published and shared broadly in
the scientific community. Fundamental research is defined to mean
basic and applied research in science and engineering where the
resulting information is ordinarily published and shared broadly
within the scientific community, as distinguished from research the
results of which are restricted for proprietary reasons or specific
U.S.  Government access and dissemination controls. University
research will not be considered fundamental research if:
   (i) The University or its researchers accept other restrictions on
publication of scientific and technical information resulting from the
project or activity, or
   (ii) The research is funded by the U.S. Government and specific
access and dissemination controls protecting information resulting
from the research are applicable.
  &#167; 120.12 -- Office of Defense Trade Controls.
   Office of Defense Trade Controls, Bureau of Politico-Military
Affairs, Department of State, Washington, D.C. 20522-0602.
  &#167; 120.13 -- United States.
   United States, when used in the geographical sense, includes the
several states, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the insular
possessions of the United States, the District of Columbia, the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, any territory or
possession of the United States, and any territory or possession over
which the United States exercises any powers of administration,
legislation, and jurisdiction.
  &#167; 120.14 -- Person.
   Person means a natural person as well as a corporation, business
association, partnership, society, trust, or any other entity,
organization or group, including governmental entities. If a provision
in this subchapter does not refer exclusively to a foreign person
(&#167; 120.16) or U.S. person (&#167; 120.15), then it refers to
both.
  &#167; 120.15 -- U.S. person.
   U.S. person means a person (as defined in &#167; 120.14 of this
part) who is a protected individual as defined by 8
U.S.C. 1324b(a)(3). It also means any corporation, business
association, partnership, society, trust or any other entity,
organization or group that is incorporated to do business in the
United States. It also includes any governmental (federal, state or
local) entity. It does not include any foreign person as defined in
&#167; 120.16 of this part.
  &#167; 120.16 -- Foreign person.
   Foreign person means any natural person who is not a protected
individual as defined by 8 U.S.C. 1324b(a)(3). It also means any
foreign corporation, business association, partnership, trust, society
or any other entity or group that is not incorporated or organized to
do business in the United States, as well as international
organizations, foreign governments and any agency or subdivision of
foreign governments (e.g diplomatic missions).
  &#167; 120.17 -- Export.
   Export means:
   (1) Sending or taking a defense article out of the United States in
any manner, except by mere travel outside of the United States by a
person whose personal knowledge includes technical data; or
   (2) Transferring registration, control or ownership to a foreign
person of any aircraft, vessel, or satellite covered by the
U.S. Munitions List, whether in the United States or abroad; or
   (3) Disclosing (including oral or visual disclosure) or
transferring in the United States any defense article to an embassy,
any agency or subdivision of a foreign government (e.g., diplomatic
missions); or
   (4) Disclosing (including oral or visual disclosure) or
transferring technical data to a foreign person, whether in the United
States or abroad; or
   (5) Performing a defense service on behalf of, or for the benefit
of, a foreign person, whether in the United States or abroad.
   (6) A launch vehicle or payload shall not, by reason of the
launching of such vehicle, be considered an export for purposes of
this subchapter. However, for certain limited purposes (see &#167;
126.1 of this subchapter), the controls of this subchapter may apply
to any sale, transfer or proposal to sell or transfer defense articles
or defense services.
  &#167; 120.18 -- Temporary import.
   Temporary import means bringing into the United States from a
foreign country any defense article that is to be returned to the
country from which it was shipped or taken, or any defense [*39286]
article that is in transit to another foreign destination. Temporary
import includes withdrawal of a defense article from a customs bonded
warehouse or foreign trade zone for the purpose of returning it to the
country of origin or country from which it was shipped or for shipment
to another foreign destination. Permanent imports are regulated by the
Department of the Treasury (see 27 CFR parts 47, 178 and 179).
  &#167; 120.19 -- Reexport or retransfer.
   Reexport or retransfer means the transfer of defense articles or
defense services to an end use, end user or destination not previously
authorized.
  &#167; 120.20 -- License.
   License means a document bearing the word license issued by the
Director, Office of Defense Trade Controls or his authorized designee
which permits the export or temporary import of a specific defense
article or defense service controlled by this subchapter.
  &#167; 120.21 -- Manufacturing license agreement.
   An agreement (e.g., contract) whereby a U.S. person grants a
foreign person an authorization to manufacture defense articles abroad
and which involves or contemplates:
   (a) The export of technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.10) or
defense articles or the performance of a defense service; or
   (b) The use by the foreign person of technical data or defense
articles previously exported by the U.S. person. (See part 124 of this
subchapter).
  &#167; 120.22 -- Technical assistance agreement.
   An agreement (e.g., contract) for the performance of a defense
service(s) or the disclosure of technical data, as opposed to an
agreement granting a right or license to manufacture defense
articles. Assembly of defense articles is included under this section,
provided production rights or manufacturing know- how are not
conveyed. Should such rights be transferred, &#167; 120.21 is
applicable.  (See part 124 of this subchapter).
  &#167; 120.23 -- Distribution agreement.
   An agreement (e.g., a contract) to establish a warehouse or
distribution point abroad for defense articles exported from the
United States for subsequent distribution to entities in an approved
sales territory (see part 124 of this subchapter).
  &#167; 120.24 -- District Director of Customs.
   District Director of Customs means the District Directors of
Customs at Customs Headquarters Ports (other than the port of New York
City, New York, where it is the Area Director of Customs); the
Regional Commissioners of Customs, the Deputy and Assistant Regional
Commissioners of Customs for Customs Region II at the Port of New
York, New York; and Port Directors at Customs ports not designated as
Headquarters Ports.
  &#167; 120.25 -- Empowered official.
   Empowered Official means a U.S. person who:
   (1) Is directly employed by the applicant or a subsidiary in a
position having authority for policy or management within the
applicant organization; and
   (2) Is legally empowered in writing by the applicant to sign
license applications or other requests for approval on behalf of the
applicant; and
   (3) Understands the provisions and requirements of the various
export control statutes and regulations, and the criminal liability,
civil liability and administrative penalties for violating the Arms
Export Control Act and the International Traffic in Arms Regulations;
and
   (4) Has the independent authority to:
   (i) Enquire into any aspect of a proposed export or temporary
import by the applicant, and
   (ii) Verify the legality of the transaction and the accuracy of the
information to be submitted; and
   (iii) Refuse to sign any license application or other request for
approval without prejudice or other adverse recourse.
  &#167; 120.26 -- Presiding official.
   Presiding official means a person authorized by the U.S. Government
to conduct hearings in administrative proceedings.
  &#167; 120.27 -- U.S. criminal statutes.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the phrase U.S. criminal statutes
means:
   (1) Section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778);
   (2) Section 11 of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50
U.S.C. App.  2410);
   (3) Sections 793, 794, or 798 of title 18, United States Code
(relating to espionage involving defense or classified information);
   (4) Section 16 of the Trading with the Enemy Act (50
U.S.C. App. 16);
   (5) Section 206 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act
(relating to foreign assets controls; 50 U.S.C. 1705);
   (6) Section 30A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15
U.S.C. 78dd-1) or section 104 of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (15
U.S.C. 78dd-2);
   (7) Chapter 105 of title 18, United States Code (relating to
sabotage);
   (8) Section 4(b) of the Internal Security Act of 1950 (relating to
communication of classified information; 50 U.S.C. 783(b));
   (9) Sections 57, 92, 101, 104, 222, 224, 225, or 226 of the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2077, 2122, 2131, 2134, 2272, 2274,
2275, and 2276);
   (10) Section 601 of the National Security Act of 1947 (relating to
intelligence identities protection; 50 U.S.C. 421);
   (11) Section 603(b) or (c) of the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act
of 1986 (22 U.S.C. 5113(b) and (c)); and
   (12) Section 371 of title 18, United States Code (when it involves
conspiracy to violate any of the above statutes).
  &#167; 120.28 -- Listing of forms referred to in this subchapter.
   The forms referred to in this subchapter are available from the
following government AGENCY:
   (a) Department of State, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs,
Office of Defense Trade Controls, Washington, DC. 20522-0602.
   (1) Application/License for permanent export of unclassified
defense articles and related technical data (Form DSP-5).
   (2) Application for registration (Form DSP-9).
   (3) Application/License for temporary import of unclassified
defense articles (Form DSP-61).
   (4) Application/License for temporary export of unclassified
defense articles (Form DSP-73).
   (5) Non-transfer and use certificate (Form DSP-83).
   (6) Application/License for permanent/temporary export or temporary
import of classified defense articles and related classified technical
data (Form DSP-85).
   (7) Authority to Export Defense Articles and Defense Services sold
under the Foreign Military Sales program (Form DSP-94).
   (b) Department of Commerce, Bureau of Export Administration:
   (1) International Import Certificate (Form
BXA-645P/ATF-4522/DSP-53).
   (2) Shipper's Export Declaration (Form No. 7525-V).
   (3) Department of Defense, Defense Security Assistance Agency:
Letter of Offer and Acceptance (DD Form 1513).
  &#167; 120.29 -- Missile technology control regime.
   (a) For purposes of this subchapter, Missile Technology Control
Regime (MTCR) means the policy statement [*39287] between the United
States, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany, France,
Italy, Canada, and Japan, announced on April 16, 1987, to restrict
sensitive missile-relevant transfers based on the MTCR Annex, and any
amendments thereto;
   (b) The term MTCR Annex means the Guidelines and Equipment and
Technology Annex of the MTCR, and any amendments thereto;
   (c) List of all items on the MTCR Annex. Section 71(a) of the Arms
Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. &#167; 2797) refers to the establishment
as part of the U.S.  Munitions List of a list of all items on the MTCR
Annex, the export of which is not controlled under section 6(l) of the
Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 U.S.C. App. 2405(l)), as
amended. In accordance with this provision, the list of MTCR Annex
items shall constitute all items on the U.S. Munitions List in &#167;
121.16 of this subchapter.


  PART 121-THE UNITED STATES MUNITIONS LIST
  Enumeration of Articles
  Sec.
  121.1 General. The United States Munitions List.
  121.2 Interpretations of the United States Munitions List and the
Missile Technology Control Regime Annex.
  121.3 Aircraft and related articles.
  121.4 Amphibious vehicles.
  121.5 Apparatus and devices under Category IV(c).
  121.6 Cartridge and shell casings.
  121.7 Chemical agents.
  121.8 End-items, components, accessories, attachments, parts,
firmware, software and systems.
  121.9 Firearms.
  121.10 Forgings, castings and machined bodies.
  121.11 Military demolition blocks and blasting caps.
  121.12 Military explosives.
  121.13 Military fuel thickeners.
  121.14 Propellants.
  121.15 Vessels of war and special naval equipment.
  121.16 Missile Technology Control Regime Annex.
   Authority: Sec. 2, 38, and 71, Pub. L. 90-629, 90 Stat. 744 (22
U.S.C. 2752, 2778, 2797); E.O. 11958, 42 FR 4311; 3 CFR 1977
Comp. p. 79; 22 U.S.C. 2658.
  Enumeration of Articles
  &#167; 121.1 -- General. The United States munitions list.
   (a) The following articles, services and related technical data are
designated as defense articles and defense services pursuant to
sections 38 and 47(7) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778
and 2794(7)). Changes in designations will be published in the Federal
Register. Information and clarifications on whether specific items are
defense articles and services under this subchapter may appear
periodically in the Defense Trade News published by the Center for
Defense Trade.
   (b) Significant military equipment: An asterisk precedes certain
defense articles in the following list. The asterisk means that the
article is deemed to be "significant military equipment" to the extent
specified in &#167; 120.19. The asterisk is placed as a convenience to
help identify such articles.
   (c) Certain items in the following list are placed in brackets. The
brackets mean that the item is (1) scheduled to be moved to the
licensing jurisdiction of the Department of Commerce upon
establishment of a foreign policy control or (2) in the case of
spacecraft and related equipment, the item is under review by an
interagency space technical working group. The interagency review will
result in a recommendation as to whether an item should be moved to
the jurisdiction of the Department of Commerce or to USML category XV
which was established for this purpose.
   (d) Missile Technology Control Regime Annex (MTCR). Certain defense
articles and services are identified in &#167; 121.16 as being on the
list of MTCR Annex items on the United States Munitions List. These
are articles as specified in &#167; 120.29 of this subchapter and
appear on the list at &#167; 121.16.
  Category I-Firearms
   *(a) Nonautomatic, semi-automatic and fully automatic firearms to
caliber .50 inclusive, and all components and parts for such
firearms. (See &#167; 121.9 and &#167;&#167; 123.16-123.19 of this
subchapter.)
   (b) Riflescopes manufactured to military specifications, and
specifically designed or modified components therefor; firearm
silencers and suppressors, including flash suppressors.
   *(c) Insurgency-counterinsurgency type firearms or other weapons
having a special military application (e.g. close assault weapons
systems) regardless of caliber and all components and parts therefor.
   (d) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (c) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated SME.
  Category II-Artillery Projectors
   *(a) Guns over caliber .50, howitzers, mortars, and recoilless
rifles.
   *(b) Military flamethrowers and projectors.
   (c) Components, parts, accessories and attachments for the articles
in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this category, including but not limited
to mounts and carriages for these articles.
   (d) Technical data (as defined in 120.21 of this subchapter) and
defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (c) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated SME.
  Category III-Ammunition
   *(a) Ammunition for the arms in Categories I and II of this
section. (See &#167; 121.6.)
   (b) Components, parts, accessories, and attachments for articles in
paragraph (a) of this category, including but not limited to cartridge
cases, powder bags, bullets, jackets, cores, shells (excluding shotgun
shells), projectiles, boosters, fuzes and components therefor,
primers, and other detonating devices for such ammunition. (See &#167;
121.6.)
   (c) Ammunition belting and linking machines.
   *(d) Ammunition manufacturing machines and ammunition loading
machines (except handloading ones).
   (e) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (d) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated SME.
  Category IV-Launch Vehicles, Guided Missiles, Ballistic Missiles,
Rockets, Torpedoes, Bombs and Mines
   *(a) Rockets (including but not limited to meteorological and other
sounding rockets), bombs, grenades, torpedoes, depth charges, land and
naval mines, as well as launchers for such defense articles, and
demolition blocks and blasting caps. (See &#167; 121.11.)
   *(b) Launch vehicles and missile and anti-missile systems including
but not limited to guided, tactical and strategic missiles, launchers,
and systems.
   (c) Apparatus, devices, and materials for the handling, control,
activation, monitoring, detection, protection, discharge, or
detonation of the articles in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this
category. (See &#167; 121.5.)
   *(d) Missile and space launch vehicle powerplants.
   *(e) Military explosive excavating devices.
   *(f) Ablative materials fabricated or semi-fabricated from advanced
composites (e.g., silica, graphite, carbon, carbon/carbon, and boron
filaments) for the articles in this category that are derived directly
from or specifically developed or modified for defense articles.
[*39288]
   *(g) Non/nuclear warheads for rockets and guided missiles.
   (h) All specifically designed or modified components, parts,
accessories, attachments, and associated equipment for the articles in
this category.
   (i) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (h) of this category. this category that are designated as
Significant Military Equipment (SME) shall itself be designated SME.
  Category V-Explosives, Propellants, Incendiary Agents, and Their
Constituents
   *(a) Military explosives. (See &#167; 121.12.)
   *(b) Military fuel thickeners. (See &#167; 121.13.)
   (c) Propellants for the articles in Categories III and IV of this
section.  (See &#167; 121.14.)
   (d) Military pyrotechnics, except pyrotechnic materials having dual
military and commercial use.
   (e) All compounds specifically formulated for the articles in this
category.
   (f) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (e) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated SME.
  Category VI-Vessels of War and Special Naval Equipment
   *(a) Warships, amphibious warfare vessels, landing craft, mine
warfare vessels, patrol vessels, auxiliary vessels and service craft,
experimental types of naval ships and any vessels specifically
designed or modified for military purposes. (See &#167; 121.15.)
   *(b) Turrets and gun mounts, arresting gear, special weapons
systems, protective systems, submarine storage batteries, catapults
and other components, parts, attachments, and accessories specifically
designed or modified for combatant vessels.
   (c) Mine sweeping equipment, components, parts, attachments and
accessories specifically designed or modified therefor.
   (d) Harbor entrance detection devices, (magnetic, pressure, and
acoustic ones) and controls and components therefor.
   *(e) Naval nuclear propulsion plants, their land prototypes, and
special facilities for their construction, support, and
maintenance. This includes any machinery, device, component, or
equipment specifically developed, designed or modified for use in such
plants or facilities. (See &#167; 123.21 of this subchapter)
   (f) All specifically designed or modified components, parts,
accessories, attachments, and associated equipment for the articles in
this category.
   (g) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8) directly related to
the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a) through (f) of this
category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for exemptions.)
Technical data directly related to the manufacture or production of
any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this category that are
designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME) shall itself be
designated SME.
  Category VII-Tanks and Military Vehicles
   *(a) Military type armed or armored vehicles, military railway
trains, and vehicles specifically designed or modified to accommodate
mountings for arms or other specialized military equipment or fitted
with such items.
   *(b) Military tanks, combat engineer vehicles, bridge launching
vehicles, half-tracks and gun carriers.
   *(c) Self-propelled guns and howitzers.
   (d) Military trucks, trailers, hoists, and skids specifically
designed, modified, or equipped to mount or carry weapons of
Categories I, II and IV or for carrying and handling the articles in
paragraph (a) of Categories III and IV.
   *(e) Military recovery vehicles.
   *(f) Amphibious vehicles. (See &#167; 121.4)
   *(g) Engines specifically designed or modified for the vehicles in
paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (f) of this category.
   (h) All specifically designed or modified components and parts,
accessories, attachments, and associated equipment for the articles in
this category, including but not limited to military bridging and deep
water fording kits.
   (i) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (h) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated SME.
  Category VIII-Aircraft, [Spacecraft] and Associated Equipment
   *(a) Aircraft, including but not limited to helicopters,
non-expansive balloons, drones, and lighter-than-air aircraft, which
are specifically designed, modified, or equipped for military
purposes. This includes but is not limited to the following military
purposes: Gunnery, bombing, rocket or missile launching, electronic
and other surveillance, reconnaissance, refueling, aerial mapping,
military liaison, cargo carrying or dropping, personnel dropping,
airborne warning and control, and military training. (See &#167;
121.3.) engines] specifically designed or modified for the aircraft in
paragraph (a) of this category.
   *(c) Cartridge-actuated devices utilized in emergency escape of
personnel and airborne equipment (including but not limited to
airborne refueling equipment) specifically designed or modified for
use with the aircraft, [spacecraft] and engines of the types in
paragraphs (a), (b), [and (h)] of this category.
   (d) Launching and recovery equipment for the articles in paragraph
(a) [and (i)] of this category, if the equipment is specifically
designed or modified for military use [or for use with
spacecraft]. Fixed land-based arresting gear is not included in this
category.
   *(e) Inertial navigation systems, aided or hybrid inertial
navigation systems, Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs), and Attitude
and Heading Reference Systems (AHRS) specifically designed, modified,
or configured for military use and all specifically designed
components, parts and accessories. For other inertial reference
systems and related components refer to Category XII(d).
   *(f) Developmental aircraft and components thereof which have a
significant military applicability, excluding such aircraft and
components that have been certified by the Federal Aviation
Administration and determined through the commodity jurisdiction
procedure specified in &#167; 120.4 of this subchapter, to be subject
to the export control jurisdiction of the Department of Commerce for
purposes of section 17(c) of the Export Administration Act, as
amended.
   *(g) Ground effect machines (GEMS) specifically designed or
modified for military use, including but not limited to surface effect
machines and other air cushion vehicles, and all components, parts,
and accessories, attachments, and associated equipment specifically
designed or modified for use with such machines.
   (h) * Spacecraft, including manned and unmanned, active and passive
satellites (except those listed in Category XV).
   [(i) Power supplies and energy sources specially designed or
modified for spacecraft in paragraph (h).]
   (j) Components, parts, accessories, attachments, and associated
equipment (including ground support equipment) specifically designed
or modified for the articles in paragraphs (a) through (i) of this
category, excluding aircraft tires and propellors used with
reciprocating engines.
   (k) Technical Data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (j) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated SME.
   [(l) Non-military aircraft inertial navigation systems, except
those systems or components that are standard equipment in civil
aircraft, including spare parts and spare units to be used exclusively
for the maintenance of inertial navigation equipment incorporated in
civil aircraft and that are certified by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) as being an integral part of such aircraft.]
   [(m) Technical data for the design, development, production or
manufacture of [*39289] inertial navigation equipment or its related
parts, components or subsystems which are standard equipment in civil
aircraft and which are certified by the Federal Aviation
Administration as being an integral part of such aircraft. FAA
certified inertial navigation systems and all other technical data
associated with such systems is under the licensing jurisdiction of
the Department of Commerce.]
  Category IX-Military Training Equipment
   (a) Military training equipment including but not limited to attack
trainers, radar target trainers, radar target generators, gunnery
training devices, antisubmarine warfare trainers, target equipment,
armament training units, operational flight trainers, air combat
training systems, radar trainers, navigation trainers, and simulation
devices related to defense articles.
   (b) Components, parts, accessories, attachments, and associated
equipment specifically designed or modified for the articles in
paragraph (a) of this category.
   (c) Technical Data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
and (b) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 for exemptions.).
  Category X-Protective Personnel Equipment
   (a) Body armor specifically designed, modified or equipped for
military use; articles, including but not limited to clothing,
designed, modified or equipped to protect against or reduce detection
by radar, infrared (IR) or other sensors; military helmets equipped
with communications hardware, optical sights, slewing devices or
mechanisms to protect against thermal flash or lasers, excluding
standard military helmets.
   (b) Partial pressure suits and liquid oxygen converters used in
aircraft in Category VIII(a).
   (c) Protective apparel and equipment specifically designed or
modified for use with the articles in paragraphs (a) through (d) in
Category XIV.
   (d) Components, parts, accessories, attachments, and associated
equipment specifically designed or modified for use with the articles
in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this category.
   (e) Technical Data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (d) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.)
  Category XI-Military [and Space] Electronics
   (a) Electronic equipment not included in Category XII of the
U.S. Munitions List which is specifically designed, modified or
configured for military application. This equipment includes but is
not limited to:
   *(1) Underwater sound equipment to include active and passive
detection, identification, tracking, and weapons control equipment.
   *(2) Underwater acoustic active and passive countermeasures and
counter- countermeasures.
   (3) Radar systems, with capabilities such as:
   *(i) Search,
   *(ii) Acquisition,
   *(iii) Tracking,
   *(iv) Moving target indication,
   *(v) Imaging radar systems,
   (vi) Any ground air traffic control radar which is specifically
designed or modified for military application.
   *(4) Electronic combat equipment, such as:
   (i) Active and passive countermeasures,
   (ii) Active and passive counter-countermeasures, and
   (iii) Radios (including transceivers) specifically designed or
modified to interfere with other communication devices or
transmissions.
   *(5) Command, control and communications systems to include radios
(transceivers), navigation, and identification equipment.
   (6) Computers specifically designed or developed for military
application and any computer specifically modified for use with any
defense article in any category of the U.S. Munitions List.
   (7) Any experimental or developmental electronic equipment
specifically designed or modified for military application or
specifically designed or modified for use with a military system.
   *(b) Electronic systems or equipment specifically designed,
modified, or configured for intelligence, security, or military
purposes for use in search, reconnaissance, collection, monitoring,
direction-finding, display, analysis and production of information
from the electromagnetic spectrum and electronic systems or equipment
designed or modified to counteract electronic surveillance or
monitoring. A system meeting this definition is controlled under this
subchapter even in instances where any individual pieces of equipment
constituting the system may be subject to the controls of another U.S.
Government agency. Such systems or equipment described above include,
but are not limited to, those:
   (1) Designed or modified to use cryptographic techniques to
generate the spreading code for spread spectrum or hopping code for
frequency agility. This does not include fixed code techniques for
spread spectrum.
   (2) Designed or modified using burst techniques (e.g., time
compression techniques) for intelligence, security or military
purposes.
   (3) Designed or modified for the purpose of information security to
suppress the compromising emanations of information-bearing
signals. This covers TEMPEST suppression technology and equipment
meeting or designed to meet government TEMPEST standards. This
definition is not intended to include equipment designed to meet
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) commercial electro-magnetic
interference standards or equipment designed for health and safety.
   [(c) Space electronics:
   *(1) Electronic equipment specifically designed or modified for
spacecraft and spaceflight, and
   (2) Electronic equipment specifically designed or modified for use
with non- military communications satellites.
   (3) Components, parts, accessories, attachments, and associated
equipment specifically designed or modified for use with the equipment
in subparagraphs (1) and (2).]
   (d) Components, parts, accessories, attachments, and associated
equipment specifically designed or modified for use with the equipment
in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this category, except for such items as
are in normal commercial use.
   (e) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (d) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated as SME.
  Category XII-Fire Control, Range Finder, Optical and Guidance and
Control Equipment
   *(a) Fire control systems; gun and missile tracking and guidance
systems; gun range, position, height finders, spotting instruments and
laying equipment; aiming devices (electronic, optic, and acoustic);
bomb sights, bombing computers, military television sighting and
viewing units, and periscopes for the articles of this section.
   *(b) Lasers specifically designed, modified or configured for
military application including those used in military communication
devices, target designators and range finders, target detection
systems, and directed energy weapons.
   *(c) Infrared focal plane array detectors specifically designed,
modified or configured for military use; image intensification and
other night sighting equipment or systems specifically designed,
modified, or configured for military use; second generation and above
military image intensification tubes (defined below) specifically
designed, developed, modified, or configured for military use, and,
infrared, visible, and ultraviolet devices specifically designed,
developed, modified, or configured for military application.
   Note: Special Definition. For purposes of this subparagraph, second
and third generation image intensifier tubes are defined as having:
   A peak response within the 0.4 to 1.05 micron wavelength range and
incorporating a microchannel plate for electron image amplification
having a hole pitch (center-to-center spacing) of less than 25
microns, and having either:
   (a) An S-20, S-25 or multialkali photocathode; or
   (b) A semiconductor photocathode;
   *(d) Inertial platforms and sensors for weapons or weapon systems;
guidance, control and stabilization systems except for those systems
covered in category VIII; astro-compasses and star trackers and
military and [non-military] accelerometers and gyros. For [*39290]
aircraft inertial reference systems and related components refer to
Category VIII.
   [(e) Non-military second generation and above image intensification
tubes, non-military infrared focal plane arrays, and image
intensification tubes identified in paragraph (c) of this section when
a part of a commercial system (i.e. those systems originally designed
for commercial use). This does not include military systems comprised
of non-military specification components.]
   (f) Components, parts, accessories, attachments and associated
equipment specifically designed or modified for the articles in
paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of this category, except for such
items as are in normal commercial use.
   (g) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8) directly related to
the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a) through (f) of this
category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for exemptions.)
Technical data directly related to manufacture and production of any
defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this category that are
designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME) shall itself be
designated as SME.
  Category XIII-Auxiliary Military Equipment
   (a) Cameras [including space cameras] and specialized processing
equipment therefor, photointerpretation, stereoscopic plotting, and
photogrammetry equipment which are specifically designed or modified
for military purposes, and components specifically designed or
modified therefor;
   (b) Information Security Systems and equipment, cryptographic
devices, software, and components specifically designed or modified
therefor, including:
   (1) Cryptographic (including key management) systems, equipment,
assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, components or software with
the capability of maintaining secrecy or confidentiality of
information or information systems, except cryptographic equipment and
software as follows:
   (i) Restricted to decryption functions specifically designed to
allow the execution of copy protected software, provided the
decryption functions are not user-accessible.
   (ii) Specially designed, developed or modified for use in machines
for banking or money transactions, and restricted to use only in such
transactions.  Machines for banking or money transactions include
automatic teller machines, self-service statement printers, point of
sale terminals or equipment for the encryption of interbanking
transactions.
   (iii) Employing only analog techniques to provide the cryptographic
processing that ensures information security in the following
applications:
   (A) Fixed (defined below) band scrambling not exceeding 8 bands and
in which the transpositions change not more frequently than once every
second;
   (B) Fixed (defined below) band scrambling exceeding 8 bands and in
which the transpositions change not more frequently than once every
ten seconds;
   (C) Fixed (defined below) frequency inversion and in which the
transpositions change not more frequently than once every second;
   (D) Facsimile equipment;
   (E) Restricted audience broadcast equipment;
   (F) Civil television equipment.
   Note: Special Definition. For purposes of this subparagraph, fixed
means that the coding or compression algorithm cannot accept
externally supplied parameters (e.g., cryptographic or key variables)
and cannot be modified by the user.
   (iv) Personalized smart cards using cryptography restricted for use
only in equipment or systems exempted from the controls of the USML.
   (v) Limited to access control, such as automatic teller machines,
self- service statement printers or point of sale terminals, which
protects password or personal identification numbers (PIN) or similar
data to prevent unauthorized access to facilities but does not allow
for encryption of files or text, except as directly related to the
password of PIN protection.
   (vi) Limited to data authentication which calculates a Message
Authentication Code (MAC) or similar result to ensure no alteration of
text has taken place, or to authenticate users, but does not allow for
encryption of data, text or other media other than that needed for the
authentication.
   (vii) Restricted to fixed data compression or coding techniques.
   (viii) Limited to receiving for radio broadcast, pay television or
similar restricted audience television of the consumer type, without
digital encryption and where digital decryption is limited to the
video, audio or management functions.
   (ix) Software designed or modified to protect against malicious
computer damage, (e.g., viruses).
   Note: A procedure has been established to facilitate the
expeditious transfer to the Commodity Control List of mass market
software products with encryption that meet specified criteria
regarding encryption for the privacy of data and the associated key
management. Requests to transfer commodity jurisdiction of mass market
software products designed to meet the specified criteria may be
submitted in accordance with the commodity jurisdiction provisions of
&#167; 120.4.  Questions regarding the specified criteria or the
commodity jurisdiction process should be addressed to the Office of
Defense Trade Controls. All mass market software products with
cryptography that were previously granted transfers of commodity
jurisdiction will remain under Department of Commerce control. Mass
market software governed by this note is software that is generally
available to the public by being sold from stock at retail selling
points, without restriction, by means of over the counter
transactions, mail order transactions, or telephone call transactions;
and designed for installation by the user without further substantial
support by the supplier.
   (2) Cryptographic (including key management) systems, equipment,
assemblies, modules, integrated circuits, components or software which
have the capability of generating spreading or hopping codes for
spread spectrum systems or equipment.
   (3) Cryptanalytic systems, equipment, assemblies, modules,
integrated circuits, components or software.
   (4) Systems, equipment, assemblies, modules, integrated circuits,
components or software providing certified or certifiable multi-level
security or user isolation exceeding class B2 of the Trusted Computer
System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) and software to certify such
systems, equipment or software.
   (5) Ancillary equipment specifically designed or modified for
paragraphs (b) (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this category;
   (c) Self-contained diving and underwater breathing apparatus as
follows:
   (1) Closed and semi-closed circuits (rebreathing) apparatus;
   (2) Specially designed components for use in the conversion of
open-circuit apparatus to military use; and
   (3) Articles exclusively designed for military use with
self-contained diving and underwater swimming apparatus.
   (d) Carbon/carbon billets and preforms which are reinforced with
continuous unidirectional tows, tapes, or woven cloths in three or
more dimensional planes (i.e. 3D, 4D, etc.). This is exclusive of
carbon/carbon billets and preforms where reinforcement in the third
dimension is limited to interlocking of adjacent layers only, and
carbon/carbon 3D, 4D, etc. end items which have not been specifically
designed or modified for defense articles (e.g., brakes for commercial
aircraft or high speed trains). Armor (e.g., organic, ceramic,
metallic), and reactive armor which has been specifically designed or
modified for defense articles. Structural materials including
carbon/carbon and metal matrix composites, plate, forgings, castings,
welding consumables and rolled and extruded shapes which have been
specifically designed or modified for defense articles.
   (e) Concealment and deception equipment, including but not limited
to special paints, decoys, and simulators and components, parts and
accessories specifically designed or modified therefor.
   (f) Energy conversion devices for producing electrical energy from
nuclear, thermal, or solar energy, or from chemical reaction which are
specifically designed or modified for military application.
   (g) Chemiluminescent compounds and solid state devices specifically
designed or modified for military application.
   (h) Devices embodying particle beam and electromagnetic pulse
technology and associated components and subassemblies (e.g., ion beam
current injectors, particle accelerators for neutral or charged
particles, beam handling and projection equipment, beam steering, fire
control, and pointing equipment, test and diagnostic instruments, and
targets) which are specifically designed or modified for directed
energy weapon applications.
   (i) Metal embrittling agents.
   *(j) Hardware and equipment, which has been specifically designed
or modified for military applications, that is associated with
[*39291] the measurement or modification of system signatures for
detection of defense articles. This includes but is not limited to
signature measurement equipment; prediction techniques and codes;
signature materials and treatments; and signature control design
methodology.
   (k) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
related to the defense articles listed in this category. (See &#167;
125.4 of this subchapter for exemptions; see also &#167; 123.21 of
this subchapter). Technical data directly related to the manufacture
or production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated as SME.
  Category XIV-Toxicological Agents and Equipment and Radiological
Equipment
   *(a) Chemical agents, including but not limited to lung irritants,
vesicants, lachrymators, tear gases (except tear gas formulations
containing 1% or less CN or CS), sternutators and irritant smoke, and
nerve gases and incapacitating agents. (See &#167; 121.7.)
   *(b) Biological agents.
   *(c) Equipment for dissemination, detection, and identification of,
and defense against, the articles in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this
category.
   *(d) Nuclear radiation detection and measuring devices,
manufactured to military specification.
   (e) Components, parts, accessories, attachments, and associated
equipment specifically designed or modified for the articles in
paragraphs (c) and (d) of this category.
   (f) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a) through
(e) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions; see also &#167; 123.21 of this subchapter).  Technical
data directly related to the manufacture or production of any defense
articles enumerated elsewhere in this category that are designated as
Significant Military Equipment (SME) shall itself be designated as
SME.
  Category XV-Spacecraft Systems and Associated Equipment
   *(a) Spacecraft and associated hardware, including ground support
equipment, specifically designed or modified for military use.
   (b)(1) [Reserved]
   (2) Communications satellites (excluding ground stations and their
associated equipment and technical data not enumerated elsewhere in
&#167; 121.1 of this subchapter; for controls on such ground stations,
see the Commerce Control List) with any of the following
characteristics:
   (i) Anti-jam capability. Antennas and/or antenna systems with
ability to respond to incoming interference by adaptively reducing
antenna gain in the direction of the interference.
   (ii) Antennas:
   (A). With aperture (overall dimension of the radiating portions of
the antenna) greater than 30 feet; or
   (B). With sidelobes less than or equal to -35dB; or
   (C). Designed, modified, or configured to provide coverage area on
the surface of the earth less than 200 nm in diameter, where "coverage
area" is defined as that area on the surface of the earth that is
illuminated by the main beam width of the antenna (which is the
angular distance between half power points of the beam).
   (iii) Designed, modified or configured for intersatellite data
relay links that do not involve a ground relay terminal
("cross-links").
   (iv) Spaceborne baseband processing equipment that uses any
technique other than frequency translation which can be changed
several times a day on a channel by channel basis among previously
assigned fixed frequencies.
   (v) Employing any of the cryptographic items controlled under
Category XIII (b) of this subchapter.
   (vi) Employing radiation-hardened devices controlled elsewhere in
&#167; 121.1 that are not "embedded in the satellite in such a way as
to deny physical access. (Here "embedded" means that the device either
cannot feasibly be removed from the satellite or be used for other
purposes.)
   (vii) Having propulsion systems which permit acceleration of the
satellite on-orbit (i.e., after mission orbit injection) at rates
greater than 0.1g.
   (viii) Having attitude control and determination systems designed
to provide spacecraft pointing determination and control better than
0.02 degrees azimuth and elevation.
   (ix) Having orbit transfer engines ("kick-motors") which remain
permanently with the spacecraft and are capable of being restarted
after achievement of mission orbit and providing acceleration greater
than 1g. (Orbit transfer engines which are not designed, built, and
shipped as an integral part of the satellite are controlled under
Category IV of this subchapter.)
   (c) Global Positioning System (GPS) receiving equipment
specifically designed, modified or configured for military use; or GPS
receiving equipment with any of the following characteristics:
   (1) Designed for encryption or decryption (e.g., Y-Code) of GPS
precise positioning service (PPS) signals;
   (2) Designed for producing navigation results above 60,000 feet
altitude and at 1,000 knots velocity or greater;
   (3) Specifically designed or modified for use with a null steering
antenna or including a null steering antenna designed to reduce or
avoid jamming signals;
   (4) Designed or modified for use with unmanned air vehicle systems
capable of delivering at least a 500 kg payload to a range of at least
300 km.
   Note: GPS receivers designed or modified for use with military
unmanned air vehicle systems with less capability are considered to be
specifically designed, modified or configured for military use and
therefore covered under this subparagraph.
   Any GPS equipment not meeting this definition is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Department of Commerce (DOC). Manufacturers or
exporters of equipment under DOC jurisdiction are advised that the
U.S. Government does not assure the availability of the GPS P-Code for
civil navigation. It is the policy of the Department of Defense (DOD)
that GPS receivers using P-Code without clarification as to whether or
not those receivers were designed or modified to use Y-Code will be
presumed to be Y-Code capable and covered under this subparagraph. The
DOD policy further requires that a notice be attached to all P-Code
receivers presented for export. The notice must state the following:
"ADVISORY NOTICE: This receiver uses the GPS P-Code signal, which by
U.S.  policy, may be switched off without notice."
   (d) Components, parts, accessories, attachments, and associated
equipment (including ground support equipment) specifically designed,
modified orconfigure for the articles in paragraphs (a) through (c) of
this category, as well as for any satellites under the export
licensing jurisdiction of the Department of Commerce, except as noted
below.
  Explanatory Note
   This language is not intended to preclude a license application of
a complete satellite that is under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Commerce from including in that license application any directly
associated components, parts, accessories, attachments and associated
equipment (including ground support equipment) unless such items are
specifically identified for control in paragraph (a) or (b) of this
category or any other category of &#167; 121.1 of this subchapter. It
is understood that spares, replacement parts, ground support and test
equipment, payload adapter/interface hardware, etc. are typically
provided as part of a satellite launch campaign; however, such items
are only exempt from USML licensing when their intended use is
directly related to supporting the Commerce-licensed satellite launch
campaign. Once the satellite has been successfully launched, it is
understood that such items remaining unlaunched will be returned to
the United States.
   (e) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (d) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exceptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated SME. In addition, detailed design,
development, production or manufacturing data for all spacecraft
systems and specifically designed or modified components thereof,
regardless of which U.S. Government agency has jurisdiction for export
of the hardware. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for exceptions.)
This restriction does not include that level of technical data
(including marketing data) necessary and reasonable for a purchaser to
have assurance [*39292] that a U.S.-built item intended to operate in
space has been designed, manufactured and tested in conformance with
specified contract requirements (e.g., operational performance,
reliability, lifetime, product quality, or delivery expectations) and
data necessary to evaluate in-orbit anomalies and to operate and
maintain associated ground equipment.
  Category XVI-Nuclear Weapons Design and Test Equipment
   *(a) Any article, material, equipment, or device which is
specifically designed or modified for use in the design, development,
or fabrication of nuclear weapons or nuclear explosive devices. (See
&#167; 123.21 of this subchapter and Department of Commerce Export
Regulations, 15 CFR part 778).
   *(b) Any article, material, equipment, or device which is
specifically designed or modified for use in the devising, carrying
out, or evaluating of nuclear weapons tests or any other nuclear
explosions, except such items as are in normal commercial use for
other purposes.
   (c) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (b) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated SME.
  Category XVII-Classified Articles, Technical Data and Defense
Services Not Otherwise Enumerated
   *(a) All articles, technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of
this subchapter) and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of
this subchapter) relating thereto which are classified in the
interests of national security and which are not otherwise enumerated
in the U.S. Munitions List.
  Category XVIII-[Reserved]
  Category XIX-[Reserved]
  Category XX-Submersible Vessels, Oceanographic and Associated
Equipment
   *(a) Submersible vessels, manned or unmanned, tethered or
untethered, designed or modified for military purposes, or powered by
nuclear propulsion plants.
   *(b) Swimmer delivery vehicles designed or modified for military
purposes.
   (c) Equipment, components, parts, accessories, and attachments
specifically designed or modified for any of the articles in
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this category.
   (d) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
through (c) of this category. (See &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter for
exemptions.) Technical data directly related to the manufacture or
production of any defense articles enumerated elsewhere in this
category that are designated as Significant Military Equipment (SME)
shall itself be designated as SME.
  Category XXI-Miscellaneous Articles
   (a) Any article not specifically enumerated in the other categories
of the U.S. Munitions List which has substantial military
applicability and which has been specifically designed or modified for
military purposes. The decision on whether any article may be included
in this category shall be made by theDirecto of the Office of Defense
Trade Controls.
   (b) Technical data (as defined in &#167; 120.21 of this subchapter)
and defense services (as defined in &#167; 120.8 of this subchapter)
directly related to the defense articles enumerated in paragraphs (a)
of this category.
  &#167; 121.2 -- Interpretations of the U.S. Munitions List and the
Missile Technology Control Regime Annex. a part of the U.S. Munitions
List (USML) category to which they refer. In addition, all the items
listed in &#167; 121.16 shall constitute all items on the United
States Munitions List which are Missile Technology Control Regime
Annex items in accordance with section 71(a) of the Arms Export
Control Act.
  &#167; 121.3 -- Aircraft and related articles.
   In Category VIII, "aircraft" means aircraft designed, modified, or
equipped for a military purpose, including aircraft described as
"demilitarized." All aircraft bearing an original military designation
are included in Category VIII.  However, the following aircraft are
not included so long as they have not been specifically equipped,
re-equipped, or modified for military operations:
   (a) Cargo aircraft bearing "C" designations and numbered C-45
through C-118 inclusive, C-121 through C-125 inclusive, and C-131,
using reciprocating engines only.
   (b) Trainer aircraft bearing "T" designations and using
reciprocating engines or turboprop engines with less than 600
horsepower (s.h.p.)
   (c) Utility aircraft bearing "U" designations and using
reciprocating engines only.
   (d) All liaison aircraft bearing an "L" designation.
   (e) All observation aircraft bearing "O" designations and using
reciprocating engines.
  &#167; 121.4 -- Amphibious vehicles.
   An amphibious vehicle in Category VII(f) is an automotive vehicle
or chassis which embodies all-wheel drive, is equipped to meet special
military requirements, and which has sealed electrical systems or
adaptation features for deep water fording.
  &#167; 121.5 -- Apparatus and devices under Category IV(c).
   Category IV includes but is not limited to the following: Fuzes and
components specifically designed, modified or configured for items
listed in that category, bomb racks and shackles, bomb shackle release
units, bomb ejectors, torpedo tubes, torpedo and guided missile
boosters, guidance systems equipment and parts, launching racks and
projectors, pistols (exploders), ignitors, fuze arming devices,
intervalometers, thermal batteries, hardened missile launching
facilities, guided missile launchers and specialized handling
equipment, including transporters, cranes and lifts designed to handle
articles in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this category for preparation
and launch from fixed and mobile sites. The equipment in this category
includes robots, robot controllers and robot end-effectors specially
designed or modified for military applications.
  &#167; 121.6 -- Cartridge and shell casings.
   Cartridge and shell casings are included in Category III unless,
prior to export, they have been rendered useless beyond the
possibility of restoration for use as a cartridge or shell casing by
means of heating, flame treatment, mangling, crushing, cutting, or
popping.
  &#167; 121.7 -- Chemical agents.
   A chemical agent in Category XIV(a) is a substance having military
application which by its ordinary and direct chemical action produces
a powerful physiological effect. The term "chemical agent" includes,
but is not limited to, the following chemical compounds:
   (a) Lung irritants:
   (1) Diphenylcyanoarsine (DC).
   (2) Fluorine (but not fluorene).
   (3) Trichloronitro methane (chloropicrin PS).
   (b) Vesicants:
   (1) B-Chlorovinyldichloroarsine (Lewisite, L).
   (2) Bis(dichloroethyl)sulphide (Mustard Gas, HD or H).
   (3) Ethyldichloroarsine (ED).
   (4) Methyldichloroarsine (MD).
   (c) Lachrymators and tear gases:
   (1) A-Bromobenzyl cyanide (BBC).
   (2) Chloroacetophenone (CN).
   (3) Dibromodimethyl ether.
   (4) Dichlorodimethyl ether (ClCi).
   (5) Ethyldibromoarsine.
   (6) Phenylcarbylamine chloride.
   (7) Tear gas solutions (CNB and CNS).
   (8) Tear gas orthochlorobenzalmalononitrile (CS).
   (d) Sternutators and irritant smokes:
   (1) Diphenylamine chloroarsine (Adamsite, DM).  [*39293]
   (2) Diphenylchloroarsine (BA).
   (3) Liquid pepper.
   (e) Nerve agents, gases and aerosols. These are toxic compounds
which affect the nervous system, such as:
   (1) Dimethylaminoethoxycyanophosphine oxide (GA).
   (2) Methylisopropoxyfluorophosphine oxide (GB).
   (3) Methylpinacolyloxyfluoriphosphine oxide (GD).
   (f) Antiplant chemicals, such as: Butyl
2-chloro-4-fluorophenoxyacetate (LNF).
  &#167; 121.8 -- End-items, components, accessories, attachments
parts, firmware, software and systems.
   (a) An end-item is an assembled article ready for its intended
use. Only ammunition, fuel or another energy source is required to
place it in an operating state.
   (b) A component is an item which is useful only when used in
conjunction with an end-item. A major component includes any assembled
element which forms a portion of an end-item without which the
end-item is inoperable. (Example: Airframes, tail sections,
transmissions, tank treads, hulls, etc.) A minor component includes
any assembled element of a major component.
   (c) Accessories and attachments are associated equipment for any
component, end-item or system, and which are not necessary for their
operation, but which enhance their usefulness or
effectiveness. (Examples: Military riflescopes, special paints, etc.)
   (d) A part is any single unassembled element of a major or a minor
component, accessory, or attachment which is not normally subject to
disassembly without the destruction or the impairment of design
use. (Examples: Rivets, wire, bolts, etc.)
   (e) Firmware and any related unique support tools (such as
computers, linkers, editors, test case generators, diagnostic
checkers, library of functions and system test diagnostics)
specifically designed for equipment or systems covered under any
category of the U.S. Munitions List are considered as part of the
end-item or component. Firmware includes but is not limited to
circuits into which software has been programmed.
   (f) Software includes but is not limited to the system functional
design, logic flow, algorithms, application programs, operating
systems and support software for design, implementation, test,
operation, diagnosis and repair. A person who intends to export
software only should, unless it is specifically enumerated in &#167;
121.1 (e.g., XIII(b)), apply for a technical data license pursuant to
part 125 of this subchapter.
   (g) A system is a combination of end-items, components, parts,
accessories, attachments, firmware or software, specifically designed,
modified or adapted to operate together to perform a specialized
military function.
  &#167; 121.9 -- Firearms.
   (a) Category I includes revolvers, pistols, rifles, carbines, fully
automatic rifles, submachine guns, machine pistols and machine guns to
caliber .50, inclusive. It includes combat shotguns. It excludes other
shotguns with barrels 18 seconds or longer, BB, pellet, and muzzle
loading (black powder) firearms.
   (b) A firearm is a weapon not over .50 caliber which is designed to
expel a projectile by the action of an explosive or which may be
readily converted to do so.
   (c) A rifle is a shoulder firearm which can discharge a bullet
through a rifled barrel 16 inches or longer.
   (d) A carbine is a lightweight shoulder firearm with a barrel under
16 inches in length.
   (e) A pistol is a hand-operated firearm having a chamber integral
with or permanently aligned with the bore.
   (f) A revolver is a hand-operated firearm with a revolving cylinder
containing chambers for individual cartridges.
   (g) A submachine gun, "machine pistol" or "machine gun" is a
firearm originally designed to fire, or capable of being fired, fully
automatically by a single pull of the trigger.
  &#167; 121.10 -- Forgings, castings and machined bodies.
   Articles on the U.S. Munitions List include articles in a partially
completed state (such as forgings, castings, extrusions and machined
bodies) which have reached a stage in manufacture where they are
clearly identifiable as defense articles. If the end-item is an
article on the U.S. Munitions List (including components, accessories,
attachments and parts as defined in &#167; 121.8), then the particular
forging, casting, extrusion, machined body, etc., is considered a
defense article subject to the controls of this subchapter, except for
such items as are in normal commercial use.
  &#167; 121.11 -- Military demolition blocks and blasting caps.
   Military demolition blocks and blasting caps referred to in
Category IV(a) do not include the following articles:
   (a) Electric squibs.
   (b) No. 6 and No. 8 blasting caps, including electric ones.
   (c) Delay electric blasting caps (including No. 6 and No. 8
millisecond ones).
   (d) Seismograph electric blasting caps (including SSS,
Static-Master, Vibrocap SR, and SEISMO SR).
   (e) Oil well perforating devices.
  &#167; 121.12 -- Military explosives.
   (a) Military Explosives in Category V are military explosives or
energetic materials consisting of high explosives, propellants or low
explosives, pyrotechnics and high energy solid or liquid fuels,
including aircraft fuels specially formulated for military
purposes. Military explosives are solid, liquid or gaseous substances
or mixtures of substances which, in their application as primary,
booster or main charges in warheads, demolition and other military
applications, are required to detonate. Military explosives, military
propellants and military pyrotechnics in Category V include substances
or mixtures containing any of the following:
   (1) Spherical aluminium powder of particle size 60 micrometres or
less manufactured from material with an aluminum content of 99% or
more;
   (2) Metal fuels in particle sizes less than 60 micrometres whether
spherical, atomized, spheroidal, flaked or ground, consisting of 99%
or more of any of the following: Zirconium, boron, magnesium and
alloys of these; beryllium; fine iron powder with average particle
size of 3 micrometres or less produced by reduction of iron oxide with
hydrogen;
   (3) Any of the foregoing metals or alloys listed in (a) (1) and (2)
of this section, whether or not encapsulated in aluminum, magnesium,
zirconium or beryllium;
   (4) Perchlorates, chlorates and chromates composited with powdered
metal or other high energy fuel components;
   (5) Nitroglycerin;
   (6) Trinitrophenylmenthylnitramine (TETRYL);
   (7) Trinitrotoluene (TNT);
   (8) Nitroguanidine (NQ);
   (9) With the exception of chlorinetrifluoride, compounds composed
of fluorine and one or more of the following: other halogens, oxygen,
nitrogen;
   (10) Carboranes; decaborane; pentaborane and derivatives;
   (11) Cyclotetramethylenetetranitramine (HMX); octahydro-1,
3,5,7-tetranitro- 1,3,5,7-tetrazine; 1,3,5,7-tetranitro- [*39294]
1,3,5,7-tetraza-cyclooctane; (octogen, octogene);
   (12) Hexanitrostilbene (HNS);
   (13) Diaminotrinitrobenzene (DATB);
   (14) Triaminotrinitrobenzene (TATB);
   (15) Triaminoguanidinenitrate (TAGN);
   (16) Titanium subhydride of stiochiometry TiH sub 0.65-1.68;
   (17) Dinitroglycoluril (DNGU, DINGU); tetranitroglycoluril TNGU,
SORGUYL);
   (18) Tetranitrobenzotriazolobenzotriazole (TACOT);
   (19) Diaminohexanitrobiphenyl (DIPAM);
   (20) Picrylaminodinitropyridine (PYX);
   (21) 3-nitro-1,2,4-triazol-5-one (NTO or ONTA);
   (22) Hydrazine in concentrations of 70% or more; hydrazine nitrate;
hydrazine perchlorates; unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine; monomethyl
hydrazine; symmetrical dimethyl hydrazine;
   (23) Ammonium perchlorate;
   (24) 2-(5-cyanotetrazolato) penta amminecobalt (III) perchlorate
(CP);
   (25) cis-bis (5-nitrotetrazolato) penta amminecobalt (III)
perchlorate (or BNCP);
   (26) 7-amino 4,6-dinitrobenzofurazane-1-oxide (ADNBF); amino
dinitrobenzofuroxan;
   (27) 5,7-diamino-4,6-dinitrobenzofurazane-1-oxide, (CL-14 or
diaminodinitrobenzofuroxan);
   (28) 2,4,6-trinitro-2,4,6-triaza-cyclo-hexanone (K-6 or keto-RDX);
   (29) 2,4,6,8-tetranitro-2,4,6,8-tetraaza-bicyclo (3,3,0)-octanone-
3(tetranitrosemiglycoluril, K-55, or keto-bicyclic HMX);
   (30) 1,1,3-trinitroazetidine (TNAZ);
   (31) 1,4,5,8-tetranitro-1,4,5,8-tetraazadecalin (TNAD);
   (32) Hexanitrohexaazaisowurtzitane (CL-20 or HNIW; and clathrates
of CL-20);
   (33) Polynitrocubane with more than four nitro groups;
   (34) Ammonium dinitramide (ADN or SR-12);
   (35) Cyclotrimethylentrinitramine (RDX); cyclonite; T4;
hexahydro-1,3,5- trinitro-1,3,5-triazine;
1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triaza-cyclohexane; hexogen, hexogene;
   (36) Hydroxylammonium nitrate (HAN); hydroxylammonium perchlorate
(HAP);
   (37) Pentaerythritol Tetranitrate (PETN); 2.28, a hydroxyl value of
less than 0.77 meq/g, and a viscosity at 30 degrees C of less than 47
poise;
   (b) "Additives" include the following:
   (1) Glycidylazide Polymer (GAP) and its derivatives;
   (2) Polycyanodifluoroaminoethyleneoxide (PCDE);
   (3) Butanetrioltrinitrate (BTTN);
   (4) Bis-2-fluoro-2,2-dinitroethylformal (FEFO);
   (5) Catocene, N-butyl-ferrocene and other ferrocene derivatives;
   (6) Bis(2, 2-dinitropropyl) formal and acetal;
   (7) Energetic monomers, plasticisers and polymers containing nitro,
azido, nitrate, nitraza or difluroamino groups;
   (8) 1,2,3-Tris [1,2-bis(difluoroamino)ethoxy] propane; Tris vinoxy
propane adduct, (TVOPA);
   (9) Bisazidomethyloxetane (BAMO) and its polymers;
   (10) Nitratomethylmethyloxetane (NMMO) Azidomethylmethyloxetane
(AMMO);
   (11) Tetraethylenepentamine- acrylonitrile (TEPAN); cyanoethylated
polyamine and its salts;
   (12) Tetraethylenepentamineacryloni-trileglycidol (TEPANOL);
cyanoethylated polyamine adducted with glycidol and its salts;
   (13) Polyfunctional aziridine amides with isophthalic, trimesic
(BITA or butylene imine trimesamide isoyanuric), or trimethyladipic
backbone structures and 2-methyl or 2-ethyl substitutions on the
aziridine ring;
   (14) Basic copper salicylate; lead salicylate;
   (15) Lead beta resorcylate;
   (16) Lead stannate, lead maleate, lead citrate;
   (17) Tris-1-(2-methyl)aziridinyl phosphine oxide (MAPO) and its
derivatives;
   (18) Organo-metallic coupling agents, specifically:
   (i) Neopentyl (diallyl) oxy, tri [dioctyl] phosphato titanate or
titanium IV, 2,2[bis 2-propenolatomethyl, butanolato or tris [dioctyl]
phosphato-O], or LICA 12;
   (ii) Titanium IV, [(2-propenolato-1)methyl, N-propanolatomethyl]
butanolato- 1; or tris(dioctyl)pyrophosphato, or KR3538;
   (iii) Titanium IV, [(2-propenolato-1)methyl, N-propanolatomethyl]
butanolato- 1; or tris(dioyctyl) phosphate;
   (19) FPF-1 (poly-[2,2,3,3,4,4-hexafluoro pentane-1,5-diolformal]);
   (20) FPF-3 (poly-[2,4,4,5,5,6,6-heptafluoro-2-
trifluoromethyl-3-oxaheptane- 1,7-diolformal]);
   (21) Polyglycidylnitrate (PGN);
   (22) Lead-copper chelates of beta-resorcylate and/or salicylates;
   (23) Triphenyl bismuth (TPB);
   (24) bis-2-hydroxyethylglycolamide (BHEGA);
   (25) Superfine iron oxide with a specific surface area greater than
250 m sup 2 /g and an average particle size of 0.0003 micrometres or
less;
   (c) "Precursors" include the following:
   (1) 1,2,4-trihydroxybutane (1,2,4-butanetriol);
   (2) 1,3,5-trichlorobenzene;
   (3) Bischloromethyloxetane (BCMO);
   (4) Low (less than 10,000) molecular weight,
alcohol-functionalised, poly(ephichlorohydrin);
poly(ephichlorhydrindiol); diol and triol;
   (5) Propyleneimide, 2-methylaziridine;
   (6) 1,3,5,7,-tetraacetyl-1,3,5,7-tetraaza-cyclooctane (TAT);
   (7) Dinitroazetidine-t-butyl salt;
   (8) Hexabenzylhexaazaisowurtzitane (HBIW);
   (9) Tetraacetyldi- benzyl- hexaazaiso- wurtzitane (TAIW);
   (10) 1,4,5,8-tetraazadecaline.
   (d) Stabilisers include the following;
   (1) N-Methyl-p-nitroaniline;
   (2) Protech.
   (e) Any substance or mixture meeting the following performance
requirements:
   (1) Any explosive with a detonation velocity greater than 8,700 m/s
or a detonation pressure greater than 340 kilobars;
   (2) Other organic high explosives yielding detonation pressures of
250 kilobars or greater that will remain stable at temperatures of 523
K (250 degrees C) or higher for periods of 5 minutes or longer;
   (3) Any other UN Class 1.1 solid propellant with a theoretical
specific impulse (under standard conditions) greater than 250 seconds
for non-metallized, or greater than 270 seconds for aluminized
compositions;
   (4) Any UN Class 1.3 solid propellant with a theoretical specific
impulse greater than 230 seconds for non-halogenized, 250 seconds for
non-metallized and 266 seconds for metallized compositions;
   (5) Any other explosive, propellant or pyrotechnic that can sustain
a steady- state burning rate greater than 38mm (1.5 in) per second
under standard conditions of 68.9 bar (1,000 PSI) pressure and 294K
(21 degrees C);
   (6) Any other gun propellants having a force constant greater than
1,200 kJ/kg;
   (7) Elastomer modified cast double based propellants (EMCDB) with
extensibility at maximum stress greater than 5% at 233 K or (-40
degrees C).
   (f) Liquid oxidizers, as follows:
   (1) Enriched nitric acid (inhibited red fuming nitric acid
(IRFNA)); [*39295]
   (2) Oxyfluoride.
  &#167; 121.13 Military fuel thickeners.
   Military fuel thickeners in Category V include compounds (e.g.,
octal) or mixtures of such compounds (e.g., napalm) specifically
formulated for the purpose of producing materials which, when added to
petroleum products, provide a gel-type incendiary material for use in
bombs, projectiles, flame throwers, or other defense articles.
  &#167; 121.14 -- Propellants.
   Propellants in Category V include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   (a) Propellant powders, including smokeless shotgun powder.
   (b) Hydrazine (including Monomethyl hydrazine and symmetrical
dimethyl hydrazine, but excluding hydrazine hydrate).
   (c) Unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine.
   (d) Hydrogen peroxide of over 85 percent concentration.
   (e) Nitroguanidine or picrite.
   (f) Nitrocellulose with nitrogen content of over 12.20 percent.
   (g) Nitrogen tetroxide (nitrogen dioxide, dinitrogen tetroxide).
   (h) Other solid propellant compositions, including but not limited
to, the following:
   (1) Single base (nitrocellulose).
   (2) Double base (nitrocellulose, nitroglycerin).
   (3) Triple base (nitrocellulose, nitroglycerin, nitroguanidine).
   (4) Composite of nitroglycerin, ammonium perchlorate, potassium
perchlorate, nitronium perchlorate, guanidine (guanidinium)
perchlorate, nitrogen tetroxide, ammonium nitrite or nitrocellulose
with plastics, metal fuels, or rubbers added; and compounds composed
only of fluorine and halogens, oxygen, or nitrogen.
   (5) Special purpose high energy solid military fuels with a
chemical base.
   (i) Other liquid propellant compositions, including but not limited
to, the following:
   (1) Monopropellants (hydrazine, hydrazine nitrate, and water).
   (2) Bipropellants (hydrazine, fuming nitric acid HNO(3)).
   (3) Special purpose chemical base high energy liquid military fuels
and oxidizers.
  &#167; 121.15 -- Vessels of war and special naval equipment.
   Vessels of war means vessels, waterborne or submersible, designed,
modified, or equipped for military purposes, including vessels
described as developmental, "demilitarized" or decommissioned. Vessels
of war in Category VI, whether developmental, "demilitarized" and/or
decommissioned or not, include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (a) Combatant vessels.
   (1) Warships (including nuclear-powered versions):
   (i) Aircraft carriers.
   (ii) Battleships.
   (iii) Cruisers.
   (iv) Destroyers.
   (v) Frigates.
   (vi) Submarines.
   (2) Other Combatants.
   (i) Patrol Combatants (e.g., including but not limited to PHM).
   (ii) Amphibious Aircraft/Landing Craft Carriers.
   (iii) Amphibious Materiel/Landing Craft Carriers.
   (iv) Amphibious Command Ships.
   (v) Mine Warfare Ships.
   (vi) Coast Guard Cutters (i.e. WHEC's and WMEC's).
   (b) Auxiliaries.
   (1) Combat Logistics Support.
   (i) Underway Replenishment Ships.
   (ii) Surface Vessel and Submarine Tender/Repair Ships.
   (2) Support Ships.
   (i) Submarine Rescue Ships.
   (ii) Other Auxiliaries (e.g., including but not limited to: AGDS,
AGF, AGM, AGOR, AGOS, AGS, AH, AP, ARC, ARL, AVB, AVM, AVT).
   (c) Combatant Craft.
   (1) Patrol Craft.
   (i) Coastal Patrol Combatants.
   (ii) River, Roadstead Craft (including swimmer delivery craft).
   (iii) Coast Guard Patrol Craft.
   (2) Amphibious Warfare Craft.
   (i) Landing Craft (e.g., including but not limited to: LCAC, LCM,
LCPL, LCU, LWT, SLWT).
   (ii) Special Warfare Craft (e.g., including but not limited to:
LSSC, MSSC, SDV, SWCL, SWCM).
   (3) Mine Warfare Craft.
   (i) Mine Countermeasures Craft (e.g., including but not limited to:
MCT, MSB).
   (d) Support and Service Vessels.
   (1) Miscellaneous (e.g., including but not limited to: APL, DSRV,
DSV, IX, WIX, NR, YFRT, YHLC, YP, YR, YRB, YRDH, YRDM, YRR, YSD).
  &#167; 121.16 -- Missile Technology Control Regime Annex.
   Some of the items on the Missile Technology Control Regime Annex
are controlled by both the Department of Commerce on the Commodity
Control List and by the Department of State on the United States
Munitions List. To the extent an article is on the United States
Munitions List, a reference appears in parentheses listing the
U.S. Munitions List category in which it appears. The following items
constitute all items on the Missile Technology Control Regime Annex
which are covered by the U.S. Munitions List:
  Item 1-Category I
   Complete rocket systems (including ballistic missile systems, space
launch vehicles, and sounding rockets (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV(a)
and (b)) and unmanned air vehicle systems (including cruise missile
systems see &#167; 121.1, Cat. VIII (a), target drones and
reconnaisance drones (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. VIII (a)) capable of
delivering at least a 500 kg payload to a range of at least 300 km.
  Item 2-Cateogry I
   Complete subsystems usable in the systems in Item 1 as follows:
   (a) Individual rocket stages (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV(h));
   (b) Reentry vehicles (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV(g)), and equipment
designed or modified therefor, as follows, except as provided in Note
(1) below for those designed for non-weapon payloads;
   (1) Heat shields and components thereof fabricated of ceramic or
ablative materials (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV(f));
   (2) Heat sinks and components thereof fabricated of light-weight,
high heat capacity materials;
   (3) Electronic equipment specially designed for reentry vehicles
(see &#167; 121.1, Cat. XI(a)(7));
   (c) Solid or liquid propellant rocket engines, having a total
impulse capacity of 1.1 x 10 N-sec (2.5 x 10 lb-sec) or greater (see
&#167; 121.1, Cat. IV, (h)).
   (d) "Guidance sets" capable of achieving system accuracy of 3.33
percent or less of the range (e.g., a CEP of 1 j,. or less at a range
of 300 km), except as provided in Note (1) below for those designed
for missiles with a range under 300 km or manned aircraft (see &#167;
121.1, Cat. XII(d));
   (e) Thrust vector control sub-systems, except as provided in Note
(1) below for those designed for rocket systems that do not exceed the
range/payload capability of Item 1 (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV);
   (f) Warhead safing, arming, fuzing, and firing mechanisms, except
as provided in Note (1) below for those designed for systems other
than those in Item 1 (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV(h)).
  Notes to Item 2
   (1) The exceptions in (b), (d), (e), and (f) above may be treated
as Category II if the subsystem is exported subject to end use
statements and quantity limits appropriate for the excepted end use
stated above.
   (2) CEP (circle of equal probability) is a measure of accuracy, and
defined as the radius of the circle centered at the target, at a
specific range, in which 50 percent of the payloads impact.
   (3) A "guidance set" integrates the process of measuring and
computing a vehicle's position and velocity (i.e. navigation) with
that of computing and sending commands to the vehicle's flight control
systems to correct the trajectory.  [*39296]
   (4) Examples of methods of achieving thrust vector control which
are covered by (e) include:
   (i) Flexible nozzle;
   (ii) Fluid or secondary gas injection;
   (iii) Movable engine or nozzle;
   (iv) Deflection of exhaust gas stream (jet vanes or probes); or
   (v) Use of thrust tabs.
  Item 3-Category II
   Propulsion components and equipment usable in the systems in Item
1, as follows:
   (a) Lightweight turbojet and turbofan engines (including)
turbocompound engines) that are small and fuel efficient (see &#167;
121.1, both Cat. IV(h) and VIII(b));
   (b) Ramjet/Scramjet/pulse jet/combined cycle engines, including
devices to regulate combustion, and specially designed components
therefor (see &#167; 121.1, both Cat. IV(h) and Cat. VIII(b));
   (c) Rocket motor cases, "interior lining", "insulation" and nozzles
therefor (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV(h) and Cat. V(c));
   (d) Staging mechanisms, separation mechanisms, and interstages
therefor (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV(c) and (h));
   (e) Liquid and slurry propellant (including oxidizers) control
systems, and specially designed components therefor, designed or
modified to operate in vibration environments of more than 100 g RMS
between 20 Hz and,000 Hz (see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV(c) and (h));
   (f) Hybrid rocket motors and specially designed components therefor
(see &#167; 121.1, Cat. IV(h)).
  Notes to Item 3
   (1) Item 3(a) engines may be exported as part of a manned aircraft
or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for manned
aircraft.
   (2) In Item 3(C), "interior lining" suited for the bond interface
between the solid propellant and the case or insulating liner is
usually a liquid polymer based dispersion of refractory or insulating
materials, e.g., carbon filled HTPB or other polymer with added curing
agents to be sprayed or screeded over a case interior (see &#167;
121.1, Cat. V(c)).
   (3) In Item 3(c), "insulation" intended to be applied to the
components of a rocket motor, i.e., the case, nozzle inlets, case
closures, includes cured or semi-cured compounded rubber sheet stock
containing an insulating or refractory material. It may also be
incorporated as stress relief boots or flaps.
   (4) The only servo valves and pumps covered in (e) above, are the
following:
   (i) Servo valves designed for flow rates of 24 liters per minute or
greater, at an absolute pressure of 7,000 kPa (1,000 psi) or greater,
that have an actuator response time of less than 100 msec;
   (ii) Pumps, for liquid propellants, with shaft speeds equal to or
greater than 8,000 RPM or with discharge pressures equal to or greater
than 7,000 kPa (1,000 psi).
   (5) Item 3(e) systems and components may be exports as part of a
satellite.
  Item 4-Category II
   Propellants and constituent chemicals for propellants as follows:
(see &#167; 121.1, Cat. V(c) and &#167; 121.12 and &#167; 121.14).
   (a) Propulsive substances:
   (1) Hydrazine with a concentration of more than 70 percent and its
derivatives including monomethylhydrazine (MMH) (see &#167;
121.12(a)(22));
   (2) Unsymmetric dimethylhydrazine (UDHM) (see &#167;
121.12(a)(22));
   (3) Ammonium perchlorate (see &#167; 121.12(a)(23));
   (4) Spherical aluminum powder with particle of uniform diameter of
less than 500 x 10-m (500 micrometer) and an aluminum content of 97
percent or greater (see &#167; 121.12(a)(1));
   (5) Metal fuels in particle sizes less than 500 x 10-m (500
Microns), whether spherical, atomized, spheroidal, flaked or ground,
consisting of 97 percent or more of any of the following: zirconium,
beryllium, boron, magnesium, zinc, and alloys of these (see &#167;
121.12(a)(2));
   (6) Nitro-amines (cyclotetramethylene-tetranitramene (HMX) (see
&#167; 121.12(a)(11)), cyclotrimethylene-trinitramine (RDX)) (see
121.12(a)(35));
   (7) Perchlorates, chlorates or chromates mixed with powdered metals
or other high energy fuel components (see &#167; 121.12(a)(4);
   (8) Carboranes, decaboranes, pentaboranes and derivatives thereof
(see &#167; 121.12(a)(10);
   (9) Liquid oxidizers, as follows:
   (i) Nitrogen dioxide/dinitrogen tetroxide (see &#167; 121.14.(g));
   (ii) Inhibited Red Fuming Nitric Acid (IRFNA) (see &#167;
121.12(f)(1);
   (iii) Compounds composed of flourine and one or more of other
halogens, oxygen or nitrogen (see &#167; 121.12(a)(9).
   (b) Polymeric substances:
   (2) Hydroxy-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) (see &#167;
121.12(a)(38);
   (3) Glycidyl azide polymer (GAP) (see &#167; 121.12(b)(1)).
   (c) Other high energy density propellants such as, Boron Slurry,
having an energy density of 40 x 10 joules/kg or greater (see &#167;
121.12(a)(3)).
   (d) Other propellant additives and agents:
   (1) Bonding agents as follows:
   (i) tris(1-(2-methyl)aziridinyl phosphine oxide (MAPO) (see &#167;
121.12(b)(17));
   (ii) trimesol-1(2-ethyl)aziridine (HX-868, BITA) (see &#167;
121.12(b)(13));
   (iii) "Tepanol" (HX-878), reaction product of
tetraethylenepentamine, acrylonitrile and glycidol (see &#167;
121.12.(b)(11));
   (iv) "Tepan" (HX-879), Reaction product of tet enepentamine and
acrylonitrile (see &#167; 121.12(b)(11));
   (v) Polyfunctional aziridene amides with isophthalic, trimesic,
isocyanuric, or trimethyladipic backbone also having a 2-methyl or
2-ethyl aziridine group (HX-752, HX-872 and HX-877). (see &#167;
121.12(b)(13)).
   (2) Curing agents and catalysts as follows:
   (i) Triphenyl bismuth (TPB) (see &#167; 121.12(b)(23));
   (3) Burning rate modifiers as follows:
   (i) Catocene (see &#167; 121.12(b)(5));
   (ii) N-butyl-ferrocene (see &#167; 121.12(b)(5));
   (iii) Other ferrocene derivatives (see &#167; 121.12(b)).
   (4) Nitrate esters and nitrato plasticizers as follows:
   (i) 1,2,4-butanetriol trinitrate (BTTN) (see &#167; 121.12(b)(3));
   (5) Stabilizers as follows:
   (i) N-methyl-p-nitroaniline (see &#167; 121.12(d)(1)).
  Item 8-Category II
   Structural materials usable in the systems in Item 1, as follows:
   (a) Composite structures, laminates, and manufactures thereof,
including resin impregnated fibre prepregs and metal coated fibre
preforms therefor, specially designed for use in the systems in Item 1
and the subsystems in Item 2 made either with organix matrix or metal
matrix utilizing fibrous or filamentary reinforcements having a
specific tensile strength greater than 7.62 x 10 4 m (3 x 10 6 inches)
and a specific modules greater than 3.18 x 10 6 m (1.25 x 10 8
inches), (see &#167; 121.1, Category IV (f), and Category XIII (d));
   (b) Resaturated pyrolized (i.e. carbon-carbon) materials designed
for rocket systems, (see &#167; 121.1 Category IV (f));
   (c) Fine grain recrystallized bulk graphites (with a bulk density
of at least 1.72 g/cc measured at 15 degrees C), pyrolytic, or fibrous
reinforced graphites useable for rocket nozzles and reentry vehicle
nose tips (see &#167; 121.1, Category IV (f) and Category XIII;
   (d) Ceramic composites materials (dielectric constant less than 6
at frequencies from 100 Hz to 10,000 MHz) for use in missile radomes,
and bulk machinable silicon-carbide reinforced unfired ceramic useable
for nose tips (see &#167; 121.1, Category IV (f));
  Item 9-Category II
   Instrumentation, navigation and direction finding equipment and
systems, and associated production and test equipment as follows; and
specially designed components and software therefor:
   (a) Integrated flight instrument systems, which include
gyrostabilizers or automatic pilots and integration software therefor;
designed or modified for use in the systems in Item 1 (See &#167;
121.1, Category XII(d));
   (b) Gyro-astro compasses and other devices which derive position or
orientation by means of automatically tracking celestrial bodies or
satellites (see &#167; 121.1, Category XV(d));
   (c) Accelerometers with a threshold of 0.05 g or less, or a
linearity error within 0.25 percent of full scale output, or both,
which are designed for use in inertial navigation systems or in
guidance systems of all types (see &#167; 121.1, Category VIII(e) and
Category XII (d));
   (d) All types of gyros usable in the systems in Item 1, with a
rated drift rate stability of less than 0.5 degree (1 sigma or rms)
per hour in a 1 q environment (see &#167; 121.1, Category VIII(e) and
Category XII(d));
   (e) Continuous output accelerometers or gyros of any type,
specified to function at acceleration levels greater than 100 g (see
&#167; 121.1, Category XII(d));
   (f) Inertial or other equipment using accelerometers described by
subitems (c) and (e) above, and systems incorporating such equipment,
and specially designed integration software therefor (see &#167;
121.1, Category VIII (e) and Category XII(d)); [*39297]
  Notes to Item 9
   (1) Items (a) through (f) may be exported as part of a manned
aircraft or satellite or in quantities appropriate for replacement
parts for manned aircraft.
   (2) In subitem (d):
   (i) Drift rate is defined as the time rate of output deviation from
the desired output. It consists of random and systematic components
and is expressed as an equivalent angular displacement per unit time
with respect to inertial space.
   (ii) Stability is defined as standard deviation (1 sigma) of the
variation of a particular parameter from its calibrated value measured
under stable temperature conditions. This can be expressed as a
function of time.
  Item 10-Category II
   Flight control systems and "technology" as follows; designed or
modified for the systems in Item 1.
   (a) Hydraulic, mechanical, electro-optical, or electro-mechanical
flight control systems (including fly-by-wire systems), (see &#167;
121.1, Category IV (h));
   (b) Attitude control equipment, (see &#167; 121.1, Category IV, (c)
and (h));
   (c) Design technology for integration of air vehicle fuselage,
propulsion system and lifting control surfaces to optimize aerodynamic
performance throughout the flight regime of an unmanned air vehicle,
(see &#167; 121.1, Category VIII (k));
   (d) Design technology for integration of the flight control,
guidance, and propulsion data into a flight management system for
optimization of rocket system trajectory, (see &#167; 121.1, Category
IV (i)).
  Note to Item 10
   Items (a) and (b) may be exported as part of a manned aircraft or
satellite or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for
manned aircraft.
  Item 11-Category II
   Avionics equipment, "technology" and components as follows;
designed or modified for use in the systems in Item 1, and specially
designed software therefor:
   (a) Radar and laser radar systems, including altimeters (see &#167;
121.1, Category XI(a)(3));
   (b) Passive sensors for determining bearings to specific
electromagnetic sources (direction finding equipment) or terrain
characteristics (see &#167; 121.1, Category XI(b) and (d));
   (c) Global Positioning System (GPS) or similar satellite receivers;
   (1) Capable of providing navigation information under the following
operational conditions:
   (i) At speeds in excess of 515 m/sec (1,000 nautical miles/hours);
and
   (ii) At altitudes in excess of 18 km (60,000 feet), (see &#167;
121.1, Category XV(d)(2); or
   (2) Designed or modified for use with unmanned air vehicles covered
by Item 1 (see &#167; 121.1, Category XV(d)(4)).
   (d) Electronic assemblies and components specifically designed for
military use and operation at temperatures in excess of 125 degrees C,
(see &#167; 121.1, Category XI(a)(7)).
   (e) Design technology for protection of avionics and electrical
subsystems against electromagnetic pulse (EMP) and electromagnetic
interference (EMI) hazards from external sources, as follows, (see
&#167; 121.1, Category XI (b)).
   (1) Design technology for shielding systems;
   (2) Design technology for the configuration of hardened electrical
circuits and subsystems;
   (3) Determination of hardening criteria for the above.
  Notes to Item 11
   (1) Item 11 equipment may be exported as part of a manned aircraft
or satellite or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for
manned aircraft.
   (2) Examples of equipment included in this Item:
   (i) Terrain contour mapping equipment;
   (ii) Scene mapping and correlation (both digital and analog)
equipment;
   (iii) Doppler navigation radar equipment;
   (iv) Passive interferometer equipment;
   (v) Imaging sensor equipment (both active and passive);
   (3) In subitem (a), laser radar systems embody specialized
transmission, scanning, receiving and signal processing techniques for
utilization of lasers for echo ranging, direction finding and
discrimination of targets by location, radial speed and body
reflection characteristics.
  Item 12-Category II
   Launch support equipment, facilities and software for the systems
in Item 1, as follows:
   (a) Apparatus and devices designed or modified for the handling,
control, activation and launching of the systems in Item 1, (see
&#167; 121.1, Category IV(c));
   (b) Vehicles designed or modified for the transport, handling,
control, activation and launching of the systems in Item 1, (see
&#167; 121.1, Category VII(d));
   (c) Telemetering and telecontrol equipment usable for unmanned air
vehicles or rocket systems, (see &#167; 121.1, Category XI(a));
   (d) Precision tracking systems:
   (1) Tracking systems which use a translb nv installed on the rocket
system or unmanned air vehicle in conjunction with either surface or
airborne references or navigation satellite systems to provide
real-time measurements of in-flight position and velocity, (see &#167;
121.1, Category XI(a));
   (2) Range instrumention radars including associated
optical/infrared trackers and the specially designed software therefor
with all of the following capabilities (see &#167; 121.1, Category
XI(a)(3)):
   (i) angular resolution better than 3 milli-radians (0.5 mils);
   (ii) range of 30 km or greater with a range resolution better than
10 meters RMS;
   (iii) velocity resolution better than 3 meters per second.
   (3) Software which processes post-flight, recorded data, enabling
determination of vehicle position throughout its flight path (see
&#167; 121.1, Category IV(i)).
  Item 13-Category II
   Analog computers, digital computers, or digital differential
analyzers designed or modified for use in the systems in Item 1 (see
&#167; 121.1, Category XI (a)(6), having either of the following
characteristics:
   (a) Rated for continuous operation at temperature from below minus
45 degrees C to above plus 55 degrees C; or
   (b) Designed as ruggedized or "radiation hardened".
  Note to Item 13
   Item 13 equipment may be exported as part of a manned aircraft or
satellite or in quantities appropriate for replacement parts for
manned aircraft.
  Item 14-Category II
   Analog-to-digital converters, usable in the system in Item 1,
having either of the following characteristics:
   (a) Designed to meet military specifications for ruggedized
equipment (see &#167; 121.1, Category XI(d)); or,
   (b) Designed or modified for military use (see &#167; 121.1,
Category XI(d)); and being one of the following types:
   (1) Analog-to-digital converter "microcircuits," which are
"radiation hardened" or have all of the following characteristics:
   (i) Having a resolution of 8 bits or more;
   (ii) Rated for operation in the temperature range from below minus
54 degrees C to above plus 125 degrees C; and
   (iii) Hermetically sealed.
   (2) Electrical input type analog-to-digital converter printed
circuit boards or modules, with all of the following characteristics:
   (i) Having a resolution of 8 bits or more;
   (ii) Rated for operation in the temperature range from below minus
45 degrees C to above plus 55 degrees C; and
   (iii) Incorporated "microcircuits" listed in (1), above.
  Item 16-Category II
   Specially designed software, or specially designed software with
related specially designed hybrid (combined analog/digital) computers,
for modeling, simulation, or design integration of the systems in Item
1 and Item 2 (see &#167; 121.1, Category IV(i) and Category XI(a)(6)).
  Note to Item 16
   The modelling includes in particular the aerodynamic and
thermodynamic analysis of the system.
  Item 17-Category II
   Materials, devices, and specially designed software for reduced
observables such as radar reflectivity, ultraviolet/infrared
signatures on acoustic signatures (i.e. stealth technology), for
applications usable for the systems in Item 1 or Item 2 (see &#167;
121.1, Category XIII (e) and (k)), for example:
   (a) Structural material and coatings specially designed for reduced
radar reflectivity;
   (b) Coatings, including paints, specially designed for reduced or
tailored reflectivity or emissivity in the microwave, infrared or
ultraviolet spectra, except when specially used for thermal control of
satellites.
   (c) Specially designed software or databases for analysis of
signature reduction.  [*39298]
   (d) Specially designed radar cross section measurement systems (see
&#167; 121.1, Category XI(a)(3)).
  Item 18-Category II
   Devices for use in protecting rocket systems and unmanned air
vehicles against nuclear effects (e.g. Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP),
X-rays, combined blast and thermal effects), and usable for the
systems in Item 1, as follows (see &#167; 121.1, Category IV (c) and
(h)):
   (a) "Radiation Hardened" "microcircuits" and detectors (see &#167;
121.1, Category XI(c)(3) Note: This commodity has been formally
proposed for movement to category XV(e)(2) in the near future).
   (b) Radomes designed to withstand a combined thermal shock greater
than 1000 cal/sq cm accompanied by a peak over pressure of greater
than 50 kPa (7 pounds per square inch) (see &#167; 121.1, Category
IV(h)).
  Note to Item 18(a)
   A detector is defined as a mechanical, electrical, optical or
chemical device that automatically identifies and records, or
registers a stimulus such as an environmental change in pressure or
temperature, an electrical or electromagnetic signal or radiation from
a radioactive material. The following pages were removed from the
final itar for replacement by DTC's updated version section 6(l) of
the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 U.S.C. App.  2405(l)), as
amended. In accordance with this provision, the list of MTCR Annex
items shall constitute all items on the U.S. Munitions List in &#167;
121.16.


  PART 122-REGISTRATION OF MANUFACTURERS AND EXPORTERS
  Sec.
  122.1 Registration requirements.
  122.2 Submission of registration statement.
  122.3 Registration fees.
  122.4 Notification of changes in information furnished by
registrants.
  122.5 Maintenance of records by registrants.
   Authority: Secs. 2 and 38, Pub. L. 90-629, 90 Stat. 744 (22
U.S.C. 2752, 2778); E.O. 11958, 42 FR 4311, 1977 Comp. p. 79; 22
U.S.C. 2658.
  &#167; 122.1 -- Registration requirements.
   (a) Any person who engages in the United States in the business of
either manufacturing or exporting defense articles or furnishing
defense services is required to register with the Office of Defense
Trade Controls. Manufacturers who do not engage in exporting must
nevertheless register.
   (b) Exemptions. Registration is not required for:
   (1) Officers and employees of the United States Government acting
in an official capacity.
   (2) Persons whose pertinent business activity is confined to the
production of unclassified technical data only.
   (3) Persons all of whose manufacturing and export activities are
licensed under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
   (4) Persons who engage only in the fabrication of articles for
experimental or scientific purpose, including research and
development.
   (c) Purpose. Registration is primarily a means to provide the
U.S. Government with necessary information on who is involved in
certain manufacturing and exporting activities. Registration does not
confer any export rights or privileges. It is generally a precondition
to the issuance of any license or other approval under this
subchapter.
  &#167; 122.2 -- Submission of registration statement.
   (a) General. The Department of State Form DSP-9 (Registration
Statement) and the transmittal letter required by paragraph (b) of
this section must be submitted by an intended registrant with a
payment by check or money order payable to the Department of State of
one of the fees prescribed in &#167; 122.3(a) of this subchapter. The
Registration Statement and transmittal letter must be signed by a
senior officer who has been empowered by the intended registrant to
sign such documents. The intended registrant shall also submit
documentation that demonstrates that it is incorporated or otherwise
authorized to do business in the United States. The Office of Defense
Trade Controls will return to the sender any Registration Statement
that is incomplete, or that is not accompanied by the required letter
or payment of the proper registration fee.
   (b) Transmittal letter. A letter of transmittal, signed by an
authorized senior officer of the intended registrant, shall accompany
each Registration Statement.
   (1) The letter shall state whether the intended registrant, chief
executive officer, president, vice-presidents, other senior officers
or officials (e.g.  comptroller, treasurer, general counsel) or any
member of the board of directors:
   (i) Has ever been indicted for or convicted of violating any of the
U.S.  criminal statutes enumerated in &#167; 120.27 of this
subchapter; or
   (ii) Is ineligible to contract with, or to receive a license or
other approval to import defense articles or defense services from, or
to receive an export license or other approval from, any agency of the
U.S. Government.
   (2) The letter shall also declare whether the intended registrant
is owned or controlled by foreign persons (as defined in &#167; 120.16
of this subchapter). If the intended registrant is owned or controlled
by foreign persons, the letter shall also state whether the intended
registrant is incorporated or otherwise authorized to engage in
business in the United States.
   (c) Definition. For purposes of this section, ownership means that
more than 50 percent of the outstanding voting securities of the firm
are owned by one or more foreign persons. Control means that one or
more foreign persons have the authority or ability to establish or
direct the general policies or day-to-day operations of the
firm. Control is presumed to exist where foreign persons own 25
percent or more of the outstanding voting securities if no
U.S. persons control an equal or larger percentage. The standards for
control specified in 22 CFR 60.2(c) also provide guidance in
determining whether control in fact exists.
  &#167; 122.3 -- Registration fees.
   (a) A person who is required to register may do so for a period up
to 5 years upon submission of a completed form DSP-9, transmittal
letter, and payment of a fee as follows:
  1 year -- $ 250
  2 years -- 500
  3 years -- 700
  4 years -- 850
  5 years -- 1,000
   (b) Lapse in registration. A registrant who fails to renew a
registration and, after an intervening period, seeks to register again
must pay registration fees for any part of such intervening period
during which the registrant engaged in the business of manufacturing
or exporting defense articles or defense services.
   (c) Refund of fee. Fees paid in advance for future years of a
multiple year registration will be refunded upon request if the
registrant ceases to engage in the manufacture or export of defense
articles and defense services. A request for a refund must be
submitted to the Office of Defense Trade Controls prior to the
beginning of any year for which a refund is claimed.
  &#167; 122.4 -- Notification of changes in information furnished by
registrants.
   (a) A registrant must, within five days of the event, notify the
Office of Defense Trade Controls by registered mail if:
   (1) Any of the persons referred to in &#167; 122.2(b) are indicted
for or convicted of violating any of the U.S. criminal statutes
enumerated in &#167; 120.27 of this subchapter, or become ineligible
to contract with, or to receive a license or other approval to export
or temporarily import defense articles or defense services from any
agency of the U.S. government; or
   (2) There is a material change in the information contained in the
[*39299] Registration Statement, including a change in the senior
officers; the establishment, acquisition or divestment of a subsidiary
or foreign affiliate; a merger; a change of location; or the dealing
in an additional category of defense articles or defense services.
   (b) A registrant must notify the Office of Defense Trade Controls
by registered mail at least 60 days in advance of any intended sale or
transfer to a foreign person of ownership or control of the registrant
or any entity thereof. Such notice does not relieve the registrant
from obtaining the approval required under this subchapter for the
export of defense articles or defense services to a foreign person,
including the approval required prior to disclosing technical
data. Such notice provides the Office of Defense Trade Controls with
the information necessary to determine whether the authority of
section 38(g)(6) of the Arms Export Control Act regarding licenses or
other approvals for certain sales or transfers of articles or data
should be invoked (see &#167;&#167; 120.10 and 126.1(e) of this
subchapter).
   (c) The new entity formed when a registrant merges with another
company or acquires, or is acquired by, another company or a
subsidiary or division of another company shall advise the Office of
Defense Trade Controls of the following:
   (1) The new firm name and all previous firm names being disclosed;
   (2) The registration number that will survive and those that are to
be discontinued (if any);
   (3) The license numbers of all approvals on which unshipped
balances will be shipped under the surviving registration number,
since any license not the subject of notification will be considered
invalid; and
   (4) Amendments to agreements approved by the Office of Defense
Trade Controls to change the name of a party to those agreements. The
registrant must, within 60 days of this notification, provide to the
Office of Defense Trade Controls a signed copy of an amendment to each
agreement signed by the new U.S. entity, the former U.S. licensor and
the foreign licensee. Any agreements not so amended will be considered
invalid.
   (d) Prior approval by the Office of Defense Trade Controls is
required for any amendment making a substantive change.
  &#167; 122.5 -- Maintenance of records by registrants.
   (a) A person who is required to register must maintain records
concerning the manufacture, acquisition and disposition of defense
articles; the provision of defense services; and information on
political contributions, fees, or commissions furnished or obtained,
as required by part 130 of this subchapter.  All such records must be
maintained for a period of five years from the expiration of the
license or other approval. The Director, Office of Defense Trade
Controls, may prescribe a longer or shorter period in individual
cases.
   (b) Records maintained under this section shall be available at all
times for inspection and copying by the Director, Office of Defense
Trade Controls or a person designated by the Director (the Director of
the Diplomatic Security Service or a person designated by the Director
of the Diplomatic Security Service or another designee), or the
Commissioner of the U.S. Customs Service or a person designated by the
Commissioner.


  PART 123-LICENSES FOR THE EXPORT OF DEFENSE ARTICLES
  Sec.
  123.1 Requirement for export or temporary import licenses.
  123.2 Import jurisdiction.
  123.3 Temporary import licenses.
  123.4 Temporary import license exemptions.
  123.5 Temporary export licenses.
  123.6 Foreign trade zones and U.S. Customs bonded warehouses.
  123.7 Exports to warehouses or distribution points outside the
United States.
  123.8 Special controls on vessels, aircraft and satellites covered
by the U.S.  Munitions List.
  123.9 Country of ultimate destination and approval of reexports or
retransfers.
  123.10 Non-transfer and use assurances.
  123.11 Movements of vessels and aircraft covered by the
U.S. Munitions List outside the United States.
  123.12 Shipments between U.S. possessions.
  123.13 Domestic aircraft shipments via a foreign country.
  123.14 Import certificate/delivery verification procedure.
  123.15 Congressional notification for licenses.
  123.16 Exemptions of general applicability.
  123.17 Exports of firearms and ammunition.
  123.18 Firearms for personal use of members of the U.S. Armed Forces
and civilian employees of the U.S. Government.
  123.19 Canadian and Mexican border shipments.
  123.20 Nuclear materials.
  123.21 Duration, renewal and disposition of licenses.
  123.22 Filing of export licenses and Shipper's Export Declarations
with District Directors of Customs.
  123.23 Monetary value of shipments.
  123.24 Shipments by mail.
  123.25 Amendments to licenses.
  123.26 Recordkeeping requirement for exemptions.
   Authority: Secs. 2 and 38, Pub. L. 90-629, 90 Stat. 744 (22
U.S.C. 2752, 2778); E.O. 11958, 42 FR 4311, 3 CFR 1977 Comp. 79; 22
U.S.C. 2658.
  &#167; 123.1 -- Requirement for export or temporary import licenses.
   (a) Any person who intends to export or to import temporarily a
defense article must obtain the approval of the Office of Defense
Trade Controls prior to the export or temporary import, unless the
export or temporary import qualifies for an exemption under the
provisions of this subchapter. Applications for export or temporary
import must be made as follows:
   (1) Applications for licenses for permanent export must be made on
Form DSP-5 (unclassified);
   (2) Applications for licenses for temporary export must be made on
Form DSP- 73 (unclassified);
   (3) Applications for licenses for temporary import must be made on
Form DSP- 61 (unclassified); and
   (4) Applications for the export or temporary import of classified
defense articles or classified technical data must be made on Form
DSP-85.
   (b) Applications for Department of State export licenses must be
confined to proposed exports of defense articles including technical
data.
   (c) As a condition to the issuance of a license or other approval,
the Office of Defense Trade Controls may require all pertinent
documentary information regarding the proposed transaction and proper
completion of the application form as follows:
   (1) Form DSP-5, DSP-61, DSP-73, and DSP-85 applications must have
an entry in each block where space is provided for an entry. All
requested information must be provided.
   (2) Attachments and supporting technical data or brochures should
be submitted in seven collated copies. Two copies of any freight
forwarder lists must be submitted. If the request is limited to
renewal of a previous license or for the export of spare parts, only
two sets of any attachment (including freight forwarder lists) and one
copy of the previous license should be submitted.
   (3) A certification letter signed by an empowered official must
accompany all application submissions (see &#167; 126.13 of this
subchapter).
   (4) An application for a license under this part for the permanent
export of defense articles sold commercially must be accompanied by a
copy of a purchase order, letter of intent or other appropriate
documentation. In cases involving the U.S. Foreign Military Sales
program, three copies of the relevant Department of Defense Form
[*39300] 1513 are required, unless the procedures of &#167; 126.4(c)
or &#167; 126.6 of this subchapter are followed.
   (5) Form DSP-83, duly executed, must accompany all license
applications for the permanent export of significant military
equipment, including classified hardware or classified technical data
(see &#167;&#167; 123.10 and 125.3 of this subchapter).
   (6) A statement concerning the payment of political contributions,
fees and commissions must accompany a permanent export application if
the export involves defense articles or defense services valued in an
amount of $ 500,000 or more and is being sold commercially to or for
the use of the armed forces of a foreign country or international
organization (see part 130 of this subchapter).
   (d) Provisions for furnishing the type of defense services
described in &#167; 120.9(a) of this subchapter are contained in part
124 of this subchapter.  Provisions for the export or temporary import
of technical data and classified defense articles are contained in
part 125 of this subchapter.
   (e) A request for a license for the export of unclassified
technical data (DSP-5) related to a classified defense article should
specify any classified technical data or material that subsequently
will be required for export in the event of a sale.
  &#167; 123.2 -- Import jurisdiction.
   The Department of State regulates the temporary import of defense
articles.  Permanent imports of defense articles into the United
States are regulated by the Department of the Treasury (see 27 CFR
parts 47, 178 and 179).
  &#167; 123.3 -- Temporary import licenses.
   (a) A license (DSP-61) issued by the Office of Defense Trade
Controls is required for the temporary import and subsequent export of
unclassified defense articles, unless exempted from this requirement
pursuant to &#167; 123.4. This requirement applies to:
   (1) Temporary imports of unclassified defense articles that are to
be returned directly to the country from which they were shipped to
the United States;
   (2) Temporary imports of unclassified defense articles in transit
to a third country;
   (b) A bond may be required as appropriate (see part 125 of this
subchapter for license requirements for technical data and classified
defense articles.)
  &#167; 123.4 -- Temporary import license exemptions.
   (a) District Directors of Customs shall permit the temporary import
(and subsequent export) without a license, for a period of up to 4
years, of unclassified U.S.-origin defense articles (including any
article manufactured abroad pursuant to U.S. Government approval) if
the article temporarily imported:
   (1) Is serviced (e.g., inspection, testing, calibration or repair,
including overhaul, reconditioning and one-to-one replacement of any
defective articles, parts or components, but excluding any
modification, enhancement, upgrade or other form of alteration or
improvement that changes the basic performance of the article), and is
subsequently returned to the country from which it was
imported. Shipment may be made by the U.S. importer or a foreign
government representative of the country from which the goods were
imported; or
   (2) Is to be enhanced, upgraded or incorporated into another
article which has already been authorized by the Office of Defense
Trade Controls for permanent export; or
   (3) Is imported for the purpose of exhibition, demonstration or
marketing in the United States and is subsequently returned to the
country from which it was imported; or
   (4) Has been rejected for permanent import by the Department of the
Treasury and is being returned to the country from which it was
shipped; or
   (5) Is approved for such import under the U.S. Foreign Military
Sales (FMS) program pursuant to an executed U.S. Department of Defense
Letter of Offer and Acceptance (DD Form 1513).
   Note: These Exceptions do not apply to shipments that transit the
U.S. to or from Canada (see &#167; 123.19 and &#167; 126.5 of this
subchapter for exceptions).
   (b) District Directors of Customs shall permit the temporary import
(but not the subsequent export) without a license of unclassified
defense articles that are to be incorporated into another article, or
modified, enhanced, upgraded, altered, improved or serviced in any
other manner that changes the basic performance or productivity of the
article prior to being returned to the country from which they were
shipped or prior to being shipped to a third country. A DSP-5 is
required for the reexport of such unclassified defense articles after
incorporation into another article, modification, enhancement,
upgrading, alteration or improvement.
   (c) Requirements. To use an exemption under &#167; 123.4 (a) or
(b), the following criteria must be met:
   (1) The importer must meet the eligibility requirements set forth
in &#167; 120.1(b) of this subchapter;
   (2) At the time of export, the ultimate consignee named on the
Shipper's Export Declaration (SED) must be the same as the foreign
consignee or end-user of record named at the time of import; and
   (3) As stated in &#167; 126.1 of this subchapter, the temporary
import must not be from or on behalf of a proscribed country listed in
that section unless an exception has been granted in accordance with
&#167; 126.3 of this subchapter.
   (d) Procedures. To the satisfaction of the District Director of
Customs, the importer and exporter must comply with the following
procedures:
   (1) At the time of temporary import-
   (i) File and annotate the applicable U.S. Customs document (e.g.,
Form CF 3461, 7512, 7501, 7523 or 3311) to read: "This shipment is
being imported in accordance with and under the authority of 22 CFR
123.4(a) (identify subsection)," and
   (ii) Include, on the invoice or other appropriate documentation, a
complete list and description of the defense article(s) being
imported, including quantity and U.S. dollar value; and
   (2) At the time of export, file with the District Director of
Customs at the port of exit a Shipper's Export Declaration (Department
of Commerce Form 7525-V) and include on the SED or as an attachment
the following information:
   (i) the U.S. Customs entry document number or a copy of the
U.S. Customs documentation under which the article was imported;
   (ii) the following statement: "22 CFR (identify section) and 22 CFR
120.1(b) applicable."
  &#167; 123.5 -- Temporary export licenses.
   (a) The Office of Defense Trade Controls may issue a license for
the temporary export of unclassified defense articles (DSP-73). Such
licenses are valid only if (1) the article will be exported for a
period of less than 4 years and will be returned to the United States
and (2) transfer of title will not occur during the period of
temporary export. Accordingly, articles exported pursuant to a
temporary export license may not be sold or otherwise permanently
transferred to a foreign person while they are overseas under a
temporary export license. A renewal of the license or other written
approval must be obtained from the Office of Defense Trade Controls if
the article is to remain outside the United States beyond the period
for which the license is valid.
   (b) Requirements. Defense articles authorized for temporary export
under this section may be shipped only from [*39301] a port in the
United States where a District Director of Customs is available, or
from a U.S. Post Office (see 39 CFR part 20), as appropriate. The
license for temporary export must be presented to the District
Director of Customs who, upon verification, will endorse the exit
column on the reverse side of the license. In some instances of the
temporary export of technical data (e.g postal shipments),
self-endorsement will be necessary (see &#167; 123.22(d)). The
endorsed license for temporary export is to be retained by the
licensee. In the case of a military aircraft or vessel exported under
its own power, the endorsed license must be carried on board such
vessel or aircraft as evidence that it has been duly authorized by the
Department of State to leave the United States temporarily.
   (c) Upon the return to the United States of defense articles
covered by a license for temporary export, the license will be
endorsed in the entry column by the District Director of Customs. This
procedure shall be followed for all exits and entries made during the
period for which the license is valid. The licensee must send the
license to the Office of Defense Trade Controls immediately upon
expiration or after the final return of the defense articles approved
for export, whichever occurs first.
  &#167; 123.6 -- Foreign trade zones and U.S. Customs bonded
warehouses.
   Foreign trade zones and U.S. Customs bonded warehouses are
considered integral parts of the United States for the purpose of this
subchapter. An export license is therefore not required for shipment
between the United States and a foreign trade zone or a Customs bonded
warehouse. In the case of classified defense articles, the provisions
of the Department of Defense Industrial Security Manual will apply. An
export license is required for all shipments of articles on the
U.S. Munitions List from foreign trade zones and U.S. Customs bonded
warehouses to foreign countries, regardless of how the articles
reached the zone or warehouse.
  &#167; 123.7 -- Exports to warehouses or distribution points outside
the United States.
   Unless the exemption under &#167; 123.16(b)(1) is used, a license
is required to export defense articles to a warehouse or distribution
point outside the United States for subsequent resale and will
normally be granted only if an agreement has been approved pursuant to
&#167; 124.14 of this subchapter.
  &#167; 123.8 -- Special controls on vessels, aircraft and satellites
covered by the U.S. Munitions List.
   (a) Transferring registration or control to a foreign person of any
aircraft, vessel, or satellite on the U.S. Munitions List is an export
for purposes of this subchapter and requires a license or written
approval from the Office of Defense Trade Controls. This requirement
applies whether the aircraft, vessel, or satellite is physically
located in the United States or abroad.
   (b) The registration in a foreign country of any aircraft, vessel
or satellite covered by the U.S. Munitions List which is not
registered in the United States but which is located in the United
States constitutes an export. A license or written approval from the
Office of Defense Trade Controls is therefore required. Such
transactions may also require the prior approval of the Maritime
Administration, the Federal Aviation Administration or other agencies
of the U.S. Government.
  &#167; 123.9 -- Country of ultimate destination and approval of
reexports or retransfers.
   (a) The country designated as the country of ultimate destination
on an application for an export license, or on a Shipper's Export
Declaration where an exemption is claimed under this subchapter, must
be the country of ultimate end- use. The written approval of the
Office of Defense Trade Controls must be obtained before reselling,
transferring, transshipping, or disposing of a defense article to any
end user, end use or destination other than as stated on the export
license, or on the Shipper's Export Declaration in cases where an
exemption is claimed under this subchapter. Exporters must ascertain
the specific end-user and end-use prior to submitting an application
to the Office of Defense Trade Controls or claiming an exemption under
this subchapter.
   (b) The exporter shall incorporate the following statement as an
integral part of the bill of lading, and the invoice whenever defense
articles on the U.S. Munitions List are to be exported:
   These commodities are authorized by the U.S. Government for export
only to [country of ultimate destination] for use by [end-user]. They
may not be transferred, transshipped on a non-continuous voyage, or
otherwise be disposed of in any other country, either in their
original form or after being incorporated into other end-items,
without the prior written approval of the U.S. Department of State."
   (c) A U.S. person or a foreign person requesting approval for the
reexport or retransfer, or change in end-use, of a defense article
shall submit a written request which shall be subject to all the
documentation required for a permanent export license (see &#167;
123.1) and shall contain the following:
   (1) The license number under which the defense article was
previously authorized for export from the United States;
   (2) A precise description, quantity and value of the defense
article;
   (3) A description of the new end-use; and
   (4) Identification of the new end-user.
   (d) The written approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls
must be obtained before reselling, transferring, transshipping on a
non-continuous voyage, or disposing of a defense article in any
country other than the country of ultimate destination, or anyone
other than the authorized end-user, as stated on the Shipper's Export
Declaration in cases where an exemption is claimed under this
subchapter.
   (e) Reexports or retransfers of U.S.-origin components incorporated
into a foreign defense article to a government of a NATO country, or
the governments of Australia or Japan, are authorized without the
prior written approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls,
provided:
   (1) The U.S.-origin components were previously authorized for
export from the United States, either by a license or an exemption;
   (2) The U.S.-origin components are not significant military
equipment, the items are not major defense equipment sold under a
contract in the amount of $ 14,000,000 ($ 14 million) or more; the
articles are not defense articles or defense services sold under a
contract in the amount of $ 50,000,000 ($ 50 million) or more; and are
not identified in part 121 of this subchapter as Missile Technology
Control Regime (MTCR) items; and
   (3) The person reexporting the defense article must provide written
notification to the Office of Defense Trade Controls of the retransfer
not later than 30 days following the reexport. The notification must
state the articles being reexported and the recipient government.
   (4) In certain cases, the Director, Office of Defense Trade
Controls, may place retransfer restrictions on a license prohibiting
use of this exemption.
  &#167; 123.10 -- Non-transfer and use assurances.
   (a) A nontransfer and use certificate (Form DSP-83) is required for
the export of significant military equipment and classified articles
including classified technical data. A license will [*39302] not be
issued until a completed Form DSP-83 has been received by the Office
of Defense Trade Controls.  This form is to be executed by the foreign
consignee, foreign end-user, and the applicant. The certificate
stipulates that, except as specifically authorized by prior written
approval of the Department of State, the foreign consignee and foreign
end-user will not reexport, resell or otherwise dispose of the
significant military equipment enumerated in the application outside
the country named as the location of the foreign end-use or to any
other person.
   (b) The Office of Defense Trade Controls may also require a DSP-83
for the export of any other defense articles or defense services.
   (c) When a DSP-83 is required for an export of any defense article
or defense service to a non-governmental foreign end-user, the Office
of Defense Trade Controls may require as a condition of issuing the
license that the appropriate authority of the government of the
country of ultimate destination also execute the certificate.
  &#167; 123.11 -- Movements of vessels and aircraft covered by the
U.S. Munitions List outside the United States.
   (a) A license issued by the Office of Defense Trade Controls is
required whenever a privately-owned aircraft or vessel on the
U.S. Munitions List makes a voyage outside the United States.
   (b) Exemption. An export license is not required when a vessel or
aircraft referred to in paragraph (a) of this section departs from the
United States and does not enter the territorial waters or airspace of
a foreign country if no defense articles are carried as cargo. Such a
vessel or aircraft may not enter the territorial waters or airspace of
a foreign country before returning to the United States, or carry as
cargo any defense article, without a temporary export license (Form
DSP-73) from the Department of State. (See &#167; 123.5.)
  &#167; 123.12 -- Shipments between U.S. possessions.
   An export license is not required for the shipment of defense
articles between the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
and U.S.  possessions. A license is required, however, for the export
of defense articles from these areas to foreign countries.
  &#167; 123.13 -- Domestic aircraft shipments via a foreign country.
   A license is not required for the shipment by air of a defense
article from one location in the United States to another location in
the United States via a foreign country. The pilot of the aircraft
must, however, file a written statement with the District Director of
Customs at the port of exit in the United States. The original
statement must be filed at the time of exit with the District Director
of Customs. A duplicate must be filed at the port of reentry with the
District Director of Customs, who will duly endorse it and transmit it
to the District Director of Customs at the port of exit. The statement
will be as follows:
  Domestic Shipment Via a Foreign Country of Articles on the
U.S. Munitions List
   Under penalty according to Federal law, the undersigned certifies
and warrants that all the information in this document is true and
correct, and that the equipment listed below is being shipped from
(U.S. port of exit) via (foreign country) to (U.S. port of entry),
which is the final destination in the United States.
  Description of Equipment __________ Quantity: __________ Equipment:
__________ Value: __________ Signed:
   Endorsement: Customs Inspector. __________ Port of Exit __________
Date: __________ Signed:
   Endorsement: Customs Inspector. __________ Port of Entry:
__________ Date:
  &#167; 123.14 -- Import certificate/delivery verification procedure.
   (a) The Import Certificate/Delivery Verification Procedure is
designed to assure that a commodity imported into the territory of
those countries participating in IC/DV procedures will not be
diverted, transshipped, or reexported to another destination except in
accordance with export control regulations of the importing country.
   (b) Exports. The Office of Defense Trade Controls may require the
IC/DV procedure on proposed exports of defense articles to
non-government entities in those countries participating in IC/DV
procedures. In such cases, U.S. exporters must submit both an export
license application (the completed Form DSP-5) and the original Import
Certificate, which must be provided and authenticated by the
government of the importing country. This document verifies that the
foreign importer complied with the import regulations of the
government of the importing country and that the importer declared the
intention not to divert, transship or reexport the material described
therein without the prior approval of that government. After delivery
of the commodities to the foreign consignee, the Department of State
may also require U.S. exporters to furnish Delivery Verification
documentation from the government of the importing country. This
documentation verifies that the delivery was in accordance with the
terms of the approved export license. Both the Import Certificate and
the Delivery Verification must be furnished to the U.S. exporter by
the foreign importer.
   (c) Triangular transactions. When a transaction involves three or
more countries that have adopted the IC/DV procedure, the governments
of these countries may stamp a triangular symbol on the Import
Certificate. This symbol is usually placed on the Import Certificate
when the applicant for the Import Certificate (the importer) states
either (1) that there is uncertainty whether the items covered by the
Import Certificate will be imported into the country issuing the
Import Certificate; (2) that he or she knows that the items will not
be imported into the country issuing the Import Certificate; or (3)
that, if the items are to be imported into the country issuing the
Import Certificate, they will subsequently be reexported to another
destination. All parties, including the ultimate consignee in the
country of ultimate destination, must be shown on the completed Import
Certificate.
  &#167; 123.15 -- Congressional notification for licenses.
   All exports of major defense equipment, as defined in &#167; 120.8
of this subchapter, sold under a contract in the amount of $
14,000,000 or more, or exports of defense articles and defense
services sold under a contract in the amount of $ 50,000,000 or more,
may take place only after the Office of Defense Trade Controls
notifies the exporter through issuance of a license or other approval
that 30 calendar days have elapsed since receipt by the Congress of
the certification required by 22 U.S.C. 2776(c)(1) and that Congress
has not enacted a joint resolution prohibiting the export. Persons who
intend to export defense articles and defense services pursuant to any
exemption in this subchapter (e.g., &#167; 126.5 of this subchapter)
under the circumstances described in the first sentence of this
subsection must notify the Office of Defense Trade Controls by letter
of the intended export and, prior to transmittal to Congress, provide
a signed contract and a DSP-83 signed by the applicant, the foreign
consignee and end-user.
  &#167; 123.16 -- Exemptions of general applicability.
   (a) The following exemptions apply to exports of unclassified
defense articles for which no approval is needed from the Office of
Defense Trade Controls.  [*39303] These exemptions do not apply to:
Proscribed destinations under &#167; 126.1 of this subchapter; exports
for which Congressional notification is required; MTCR articles; and
may not be used by persons who are generally ineligible as described
in &#167; 120.1(c) of this subchapter. All shipments of defense
articles, including those to and from Canada, require a Shippers
Export Declaration (SED). If the defense article is exempt from
licensing, the SED must cite the exemption. Refer to &#167; 123.22(c)
for Shipper's Export Declaration requirements.
   (b) The following exports are exempt from the licensing
requirements of this subchapter.
   (1) District Directors of Customs shall permit the export without a
license of defense articles being exported in furtherance of an
approved manufacturing license agreement, technical assistance
agreement or distribution agreement provided that:
   (i) The defense articles to be exported support the activity and
must be identified by item, quantity and value in the agreement; and
   (ii) Any provisos or limitations placed on the authorized agreement
are adhered to; and
   (iii) The exporter certifies on the Shipper's Export Declaration
that the export is exempt from the licensing requirements of this
subchapter. This is done by writing, "22 CFR 123.16(b)(1) and AG
[identify agreement number] applicable and
   (iv) The total value of all shipments does not exceed the value
authorized in the agreement.
   (v) In the case of distribution agreements, export must be made
directly to the approved foreign distributor.
   (2) District Directors of Customs shall permit the export of
components or spare parts (for exemptions for firearms and ammunition
see &#167; 123.17) without a license when the total value does not
exceed $ 500 in a single transaction and:
   (i) The components or spare parts are being exported to support a
defense article previously authorized for export; and
   (ii) The spare parts or components are not going to a distributor,
but to a previously approved end-user of the defense articles; and
   (iii) The spare parts or components are not to be used to enhance
the capability of the defense article;
   (iv) exporters shall not split orders so as not to exceed the
dollar value of this exemption;
   (v) the exporter may not make more than 24 shipments per calender
year to the previously authorized end user;
   (vi) The exporter must certify on the Shipper's Export Declaration
that the export is exempt from the licensing requirements of this
subchapter. This is done by writing 22 CFR 123.16(b)(2) applicable.
   (3) District Directors of Customs shall permit the export without a
license, of packing cases specially designed to carry defense
articles.
   (4) District Directors of Customs shall permit the export without a
license, of unclassified models or mock-ups of defense articles,
provided that such models or mock-ups are nonoperable and do not
reveal any technical data in excess of that which is exempted from the
licensing requirements of &#167; 125.4(b) of this subchapter and do
not contain components covered by the U.S. Munitions List (see &#167;
120.6(b) of this subchapter). Some models or mockups built to scale or
constructed of original materials can reveal technical
data. U.S. persons who avail themselves of this exemption must provide
a written certification to the District Director of Customs that these
conditions are met. This exemption does not imply that the Office of
Defense Trade Controls will approve the export of any defense articles
for which models or mocks-ups have been exported pursuant to this
exemption.
   (5) District Directors of Customs shall permit the temporary export
without a license of unclassified defense articles to any public
exhibition, trade show, air show or related event if that article has
previously been licensed for a public exhibition, trade show, air show
or related event and the license is still valid. U.S. persons who
avail themselves of this exemption must provide a written
certification to the District Director of Customs that these
conditions are met.
   (6) For exemptions for firearms and ammunition for personal use
refer to &#167; 123.17.
   (7) For exemptions for firearms for personal use of members of the
U.S. Armed Forces and civilian employees see &#167; 123.18.
   (8) For exports to Canada refer to &#167; 126.5 of this subchapter.
   (9) District Directors of Customs shall permit the temporary export
without a license by a U.S. person of any unclassified component,
part, tool or test equipment to a subsidiary, affiliate or facility
owned or controlled by the U.S.  person (see &#167; 122.2(c) of this
subchapter) if the component, part, tool or test equipment is to be
used for manufacture, assembly, testing, production, or modification
provided:
   (i) The U.S. person is registered with the Office of Defense Trade
Controls and complies with all requirements set forth in part 122 of
this subchapter;
   (ii) No defense article exported under this exemption may be sold
or transferred without the appropriate license or other approval from
the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
  &#167; 123.17 -- Exports of firearms and ammunition.
   (a) Except as provided in &#167; 126.1 of this subchapter, District
Directors of Customs shall permit the export without a license of
components and parts for Category I(a) firearms, except barrels,
cylinders, receivers (frames) or complete breach mechanisms when the
total value does not exceed $ 500 wholesale in any transaction.
   (b) District Directors of Customs shall permit the export without a
license of nonautomatic firearms covered by Category I(a) of &#167;
121.1 of this subchapter if they were manufactured in or before 1898,
or are replicas of such firearms.
   (c) District Directors of Customs shall permit U.S. persons to
export temporarily from the United States without a license not more
than three nonautomatic firearms in Category I(a) of &#167; 121.1 of
this subchapter and not more than 1,000 cartridges therefor, provided
that:
   (1) A declaration by the U.S. person and an inspection by a customs
officer is made;
   (2) The firearms and accompanying ammunition must be with the
U.S. person's baggage or effects, whether accompanied or unaccompanied
(but not mailed); and
   (3) They must be for that person's exclusive use and not for
reexport or other transfer of ownership. The foregoing exemption is
not applicable to a crew-member of a vessel or aircraft unless the
crew-member declares the firearms to a Customs officer upon each
departure from the United States, and declares that it is his or her
intention to return the article(s) on each return to the United
States. It is also not applicable to the personnel referred to in
&#167; 123.18.
   (d) District Directors of Customs shall permit a foreign person to
export without a license such firearms in Category I(a) of &#167;
121.1 of this subchapter and ammunition therefor as the foreign person
brought into the United States under the provisions of 27 CFR
178.115(d). (The latter provision specifically excludes from the
definition of importation the bringing into the United States of
firearms and ammunition by certain foreign persons for specified
purposes).
   (e) District Directors of Customs shall permit U.S. persons to
export without a [*39304] license ammunition for nonautomatic firearms
referred to in paragraph (a) of this section if the quantity does not
exceed 1,000 cartridges (or rounds) in any shipment. The ammunition
must also be for personal use and not for resale or other transfer of
ownership. The foregoing exemption is also not applicable to the
personnel referred to in &#167; 123.18.
  &#167; 123.18 -- Firearms for personal use of members of the
U.S. Armed Forces and civilian employees of the U.S. Government.
   The following exemptions apply to members of the U.S. Armed Forces
and civilian employees of the U.S. Government who are U.S. persons
(both referred assigned abroad for extended duty. These exemptions do
not apply to dependents.
   (a) Firearms. District Directors of Customs shall permit
nonautomatic firearms in Category I(a) of &#167; 121.1 of this
subchapter and parts therefor to be exported, except by mail, from the
United States without a license if:
   (1) They are consigned to servicemen's clubs abroad for uniformed
members of the U.S. Armed Forces; or,
   (2) In the case of a uniformed member of the U.S. Armed Forces or a
civilian employee of the Department of Defense, they are for personal
use and not for resale or other transfer of ownership, and if the
firearms are accompanied by a written authorization from the
commanding officer concerned; or
   (3) In the case of other U.S. Government employees, they are for
personal use and not for resale or other transfer of ownership, and
the Chief of the U.S.  Diplomatic Mission or his designee in the
country of destination has approved in writing to Department of State
the import of the specific types and quantities of firearms into that
country. The exporter shall provide a copy of this written statement
to the District Director of Customs.
   (b) Ammunition. District Directors of Customs shall permit not more
than 1,000 cartridges (or rounds) of ammunition for the firearms
referred to in paragraph (a) of this section to be exported (but not
mailed) from the United States without a license when the firearms are
on the person of the owner or with his baggage or effects, whether
accompanied or unaccompanied (but not mailed).
  &#167; 123.19 -- Canadian and Mexican border shipments.
   A shipment originating in Canada or Mexico which incidentally
transits the United States en route to a delivery point in the same
country that originated the shipment is exempt from the requirement
for an in transit license.
  &#167; 123.20 -- Nuclear materials.
   (a) The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to equipment in
Category VI(e) and Category XVI of &#167; 121.1 of this subchapter to
the extent such equipment is under the export control of the
Department of Energy or the Nuclear Regulatory Commission pursuant to
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Act of 1978.
   (b) A license for the export of any machinery, device, component,
equipment, or technical data relating to equipment referred to in
Category VI(e) will not be granted unless the proposed export comes
within the scope of an existing Agreement for Cooperation for Mutual
Defense Purposes concluded pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended, with the government of the country to which the article is
to be exported. Licenses may be granted in the absence of such an
agreement only (1) if the proposed export involves an article which is
identical to that in use in an unclassified civilian nuclear power
plant, (2) if the proposed export has no relationship to naval nuclear
propulsion, and (3) if it is not for use in a naval propulsion plant.
  &#167; 123.21 -- Duration, renewal and disposition of licenses.
   (a) A license is valid for four years. The license expires when the
total value or quantity authorized has been shipped or when the date
of expiration has been reached, whichever occurs first. Defense
articles to be shipped thereafter require a new application and
license. The new application should refer to the expired license. It
should not include references to any defense articles other than those
of the unshipped balance of the expired license.
   (b) Unused, expired, expended, suspended, or revoked licenses must
be returned immediately to the Department of State.
  &#167; 123.22 -- Filing of export licenses and Shipper's Export
Declarations with District Directors of Customs.
   (a) The exporter must deposit the license with the District
Director of Customs at the port of exit before shipment, unless
paragraph (d) of this section or &#167; 125.9 applies (for exports by
mail, see &#167; 123.24). Licenses for temporary export or temporary
import are to be retained by the exporter and presented to the
District Director of Customs at the time of import or export for
endorsement. If necessary, the export may be made through a port other
than the one designated on the license if the exporter complies with
the procedures established by the U.S. Customs Service. Every license
will be returned to the Office of Defense Trade Controls by the
District Director of Customs when the total value or quantity
authorized has been shipped or when the date of expiration is reached,
whichever occurs first.
   (b) Before shipping any defense article, the exporter must also
file a Shipper's Export Declaration with the District Director of
Customs at the port of exit (unless otherwise exempt from filing a
Shipper's Export Declaration).  The District Director of Customs at
the port of exit must authenticate the Shipper's Export Declaration,
and endorse the license to show the shipments actually made. The
District Director of Customs will return a copy of each authenticated
Shipper's Export Declaration to the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
   (c) Except for the export of unclassified technical data, an
exporter must file a Shipper's Export Declaration with District
Directors of Customs or Postmasters in those cases in which no export
license is required because of an exemption under this subchapter. The
exporter must certify that the export is exempt from the licensing
requirements of this subchapter by writing 22 CFR (identify section)
and 22 CFR 120.1(b) applicable on the Shipper's Export Declaration,
and by identifying the section under which an exemption is claimed.  A
copy of each such declaration must be mailed immediately by the
exporter to the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
   (d) A Shipper's Export Declaration is not required for exports of
unclassified technical data. Exporters shall notify the Office of
Defense Trade Controls of the initial export of the data by either
returning the license after self endorsement or by sending a letter to
the Office of Defense Trade Controls.  The letter shall provide the
method, date, license number and airway bill number (if applicable) of
the shipment. The letter must be signed by an empowered official of
the company and provided to the Office of Defense Trade Controls
within thirty days of the initial export. Additionally, similar
notification must be provided to the Office of Defense Trade Controls
for any subsequent exports.
   (e) If a license for the export of unclassified defense articles,
including technical data, is used but not endorsed by U.S. Customs or
a Postmaster for whatever reason (e.g., electronic transmission,
unavailability of Customs [*39305] officer or Postmaster, etc.), the
person exporting the article must self-endorse the license, showing
when and how the export took place. Every license shall also be
returned by the exporter to the Office of Defense Trade Controls when
the total value or quantity authorized has been shipped or when the
date of expiration is reached, whichever occurs first.
  &#167; 123.23 -- Monetary value of shipments.
   District Directors of Customs shall permit the shipment of defense
articles identified on any license when the total value of the export
does not exceed the aggregate monetary value (not quantity) stated on
the license by more than ten percent, provided that the additional
monetary value does not make the total value of the license or other
approval for the export of any major defense equipment sold under a
contract reach $ 14,000,000 or more, and provided that the additional
monetary value does not make defense articles or defense services sold
under a contract reach the amount of $ 50,000,000 or more.
  &#167; 123.24 -- Shipments by mail.
   A Shipper's Export Declaration must be authenticated before an
article is actually sent abroad by mail (see &#167; 123.22(d)). The
postmaster or exporter will endorse each license to show the shipments
made. Every license must be returned by the exporter to the Office of
Defense Trade Controls upon completion of the mailings.
  &#167; 123.25 -- Amendments to licenses.
   (a) The Office of Defense Trade Controls may approve an amendment
to a license for permanent export, temporary export and temporary
import of unclassified defense articles. A suggested format is
available from the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
   (b) The following types of amendments to a license that will be
considered: Addition of U.S. freight forwarder or U.S. consignor;
change due to an obvious typographical error; change in source of
commodity; and change of foreign intermediate consignee if that party
is only transporting the equipment and will not process (e.g.,
integrate, modify) the equipment. For changes in U.S. dollar value see
&#167; 123.23.
   (c) The following types of amendments to a license will not be
approved: Additional quantity, changes in commodity, country of
ultimate destination, end- use or end-user, foreign consignee and/or
extension of duration. The foreign intermediate consignee may only be
amended if that party is acting as freight forwarder and the export
does not involve technical data. A new license is required for these
changes. Any new license submission must reflect only the unshipped
balance of quantity and dollar value.
  &#167; 123.26 -- Recordkeeping requirement for exemptions.
   When an exemption is claimed for the export of unclassified
technical data, the exporter must maintain a record of each such
export. The business record should include the following information:
A description of the unclassified technical data, the name of the
recipient end-user, the date and time of the export, and the method of
transmission.


  PART 124-AGREEMENTS, OFF-SHORE PROCUREMENT AND OTHER DEFENSE
SERVICES
  Sec.
  124.1 Manufacturing license agreements and technical assistance
agreements.
  124.2 Exemptions for training and military service.
  124.3 Exports of technical data in furtherance of an agreement.
  124.4 Deposit of signed agreements with the Office of Defense Trade
Controls.
  124.5 Proposed agreements that are not concluded.
  124.6 Termination of manufacturing license agreements and technical
assistance agreements.
  124.7 Information required in all manufacturing license agreements
and technical assistance agreements.
  124.8 Clauses required both in manufacturing license agreements and
technical assistance agreements.
  124.9 Additional clauses required only in manufacturing license
agreements.
  124.10 Nontransfer and use assurances.
  124.11 Certification to Congress for agreements.
  124.12 Required information in letters of transmittal.
  124.13 Procurement by United States persons in foreign countries
(offshore procurement).
  124.14 Exports to warehouses or distribution points outside the
United States.
   Authority: Sec. 2, 38, and 71, Pub. L. 90-629, 90 Stat. 744 (22
U.S.C. 2752, 2778, 2797); E.O. 11958, 42 FR 4311; 3 CFR 1977
Comp. p. 79; 22 U.S.C. 2658.
  &#167; 124.1 -- Manufacturing license agreements and technical
assistance agreements.
   (a) The approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls must be
obtained before the defense services described in &#167; 120.9(a) of
this subchapter may be furnished. In order to obtain such approval,
the U.S. person must submit a proposed agreement to the Office of
Defense Trade Controls. Such agreements are generally characterized as
either Manufacturing license agreements, technical assistance
agreements, distribution agreements or off-shore procurement
agreements, and may not enter into force without the prior written
approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls. Once approved, the
defense services described in the agreements may generally be provided
without further licensing in accordance with &#167;&#167; 124.3 and
125.4(b)(2) of this subchapter. The requirements of this section apply
whether or not technical data is to be disclosed or used in the
performance of the defense services described in &#167; 120.9(a) of
this subchapter (e.g., all the information relied upon by the
U.S. person in performing the defense service is in the public domain
or is otherwise exempt from the licensing requirements of this
subchapter pursuant to &#167; 125.4 of this subchapter). This
requirement also applies to the training of any foreign military
forces, regular and irregular, in the use of defense articles.
Technical assistance agreements must be submitted in such cases. In
exceptional cases, The Office of Defense Trade Controls, upon written
request, will consider approving the provision of defense services
described in &#167; 120.9(a) of this subchapter by granting a license
under part 125 of this subchapter. Also, see &#167; 126.8 of this
subchapter for the requirements for prior approval of proposals
relating to significant military equipment.
   (b) Classified Articles. Copies of approved agreements involving
the release of classified defense articles will be forwarded by the
Office of Defense Trade Controls to the Defense Investigative Service
of the Department of Defense.
   (c) Amendments. Changes to the scope of approved agreements,
including modifications, upgrades, or extensions must be submitted for
approval. The amendments may not enter into force until approved by
the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
   (d) Minor Amendments. Amendments which only alter delivery or
performance schedules, or other minor administrative amendments which
do not affect in any manner the duration of the agreement or the
clauses or information which must be included in such agreements
because of the requirements of this part, do not have to be submitted
for approval. One copy of all such minor amendments must be submitted
to the Office of Defense Trade Controls within thirty days after they
are concluded.
  &#167; 124.2 -- Exemptions for training and military service.
   (a) Technical assistance agreements are not required for the
provision of [*39306] training in the basic operation and maintenance
of defense articles lawfully exported or authorized for export to the
same recipient. This does not include training in intermediate and
depot level maintenance.
   (b) Services performed as a member of the regular military forces
of a foreign nation by U.S. persons who have been drafted into such
forces are not deemed to be defense services for purposes of &#167;
120.9 of this subchapter.
  &#167; 124.3 -- Exports of technical data in furtherance of an
agreement.
   (a) Unclassified technical data. District Directors of Customs or
postal authorities shall permit the export without a license of
unclassified technical data if the export is in furtherance of a
manufacturing license or technical assistance agreement which has been
approved in writing by the Office of Defense Trade Controls and the
technical data being exported does not exceed the scope or limitations
of the relevant agreement. The U.S. party to the agreement must
certify on the Shippers Export Declaration that the export does not
exceed the scope of the agreement and any limitations imposed pursuant
to this part. The approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls
must be obtained for the export of any unclassified technical data
which may exceed the terms of the agreement.
   (b) Classified technical data. The export of classified information
in furtherance of an approved manufacturing license or technical
assistance agreement which provides for the transmittal of classified
information does not require further approval from the Office of
Defense Trade Controls when:
   (1) The United States party certifies to the Department of Defense
transmittal authority that the classified information does not exceed
the technical or product limitations in the agreement; and
   (2) The U.S. party complies with the requirements of the Department
of Defense Industrial Security Manual concerning the transmission of
classified information and any other requirements of cognizant
U.S. departments or agencies.
  &#167; 124.4 -- Deposit of signed agreements with the Office of
Defense Trade Controls.
   The United States party to a manufacturing license or a technical
assistance agreement must file one copy of the concluded agreement
with the Office of Defense Trade Controls not later than 30 days after
it enters into force.
  &#167; 124.5 -- Proposed agreements that are not concluded.
   The United States party to any proposed manufacturing license
agreement or technical assistance agreement must inform the Office of
Defense Trade Controls if a decision is made not to conclude the
agreement. The information must be provided within 60 days of the date
of the decision. These requirements apply only if the approval of the
Office of Defense Trade Controls was obtained for the agreement to be
concluded (with or without any provisos).
  &#167; 124.6 -- Termination of manufacturing license agreements and
technical assistance agreements.
   The U. S. party to a manufacturing license or a technical
assistance agreement must inform the Office of Defense Trade Controls
in writing of the impending termination of the agreement not less than
30 days prior to the expiration date of such agreement.
  &#167; 124.7 -- Information required in all manufacturing license
agreements and technical assistance agreements.
   The following information must be included in all proposed
manufacturing license agreements and technical assistance
agreements. The information should be provided in terms which are as
precise as possible. If the applicant believes that a clause or that
required information is not relevant or necessary, the applicant may
request the omission of the clause or information. The transmittal
letter accompanying the agreement must state the reasons for any
proposed variation in the clauses or required information.
   (1) The agreement must describe the defense article to be
manufactured and all defense articles to be exported, including any
test and support equipment or advanced materials. They should be
described by military nomenclature, contract number, National Stock
Number, nameplate data, or other specific information.  Supporting
technical data or brochures should be submitted in seven copies. Only
defense articles listed in the agreement will be eligible for export
under the exemption in &#167; 123.16(b)(1) of this subchapter.
   (2) The agreement must specifically describe the assistance and
technical data, including the design and manufacturing know-how
involved, to be furnished and any manufacturing rights to be granted;
   (3) The agreement must specify its duration; and
   (4) The agreement must specifically identify the countries or areas
in which manufacturing, production, processing, sale or other form of
transfer is to be licensed.
  &#167; 124.8 -- Clauses required both in manufacturing license
agreements and technical assistance agreements.
   The following statements must be included both in manufacturing
license agreements and in technical assistance agreements:
   (1) "This agreement shall not enter into force, and shall not be
amended or extended, without the prior written approval of the
Department of State of the U.S. Government."
   (2) "This agreement is subject to all United States laws and
regulations relating to exports and to all administrative acts of the
U.S. Government pursuant to such laws and regulations."
   (3) "The parties to this agreement agree that the obligations
contained in this agreement shall not affect the performance of any
obligations created by prior contracts or subcontracts which the
parties may have individually or collectively with the
U.S. Government."
   (4) "No liability will be incurred by or attributed to the
U.S. Government in connection with any possible infringement of
privately owned patent or proprietary rights, either domestic or
foreign, by reason of the U.S.  Government's approval of this
agreement."
   (5) "The technical data or defense service exported from the United
States in furtherance of this agreement and any defense article which
may be produced or manufactured from such technical data or defense
service may not be transferred to a person in a third country or to a
national of a third country except as specifically authorized in this
agreement unless the prior written approval of the Department of State
has been obtained."
   (6) "All provisions in this agreement which refer to the United
States Government and the Department of State will remain binding on
the parties after the termination of the agreement."
  &#167; 124.9 -- Additional clauses required only in manufacturing
license agreements.
   (a) Clauses for all manufacturing license agreements. The following
clauses must be included only in manufacturing license agreements:
   (1) "No export, sale, transfer, or other disposition of the
licensed article is authorized to any country outside the territory
wherein manufacture or sale is herein licensed without the prior
written approval of the U.S. Government unless otherwise exempted by
the U.S. Government. Sales or other [*39307] transfers of the licensed
article shall be limited to governments of countries wherein
manufacture or sale is hereby licensed and to private entities seeking
to procure the licensed article pursuant to a contract with any such
government unless the prior written approval of the U.S. Government is
obtained."
   (2) "It is agreed that sales by licensee or its sub-licensees under
contracts made through the U.S. Government will not include either
charges for patent rights in which the U.S. Government holds a
royalty-free license, or charges for data which the U.S. Government
has a right to use and disclose to others, which are in the public
domain, or which the U.S. Government has acquired or is entitled to
acquire without restrictions upon their use and disclosure to others."
   (3) "If the U.S. Government is obligated or becomes obligated to
pay to the licensor royalties, fees, or other charges for the use of
technical data or patents which are involved in the manufacture, use,
or sale of any licensed article, any royalties, fees or other charges
in connection with purchases of such licensed article from licensee or
its sub-licensees with funds derived through the U.S. Government may
not exceed the total amount the U.S. Government would have been
obligated to pay the licensor directly."
   (4) "If the U.S. Government has made financial or other
contributions to the design and development of any licensed article,
any charges for technical assistance or know-how relating to the item
in connection with purchases of such articles from licensee or
sub-licensees with funds derived through the U.S.  Government must be
proportionately reduced to reflect the U.S. Government contributions,
and subject to the provisions of paragraphs (a) (2) and (3) of this
section, no other royalties, or fees or other charges may be assessed
against U.S. Government funded purchases of such articles. However,
charges may be made for reasonable reproduction, handling, mailing, or
similar administrative costs incident to the furnishing of such data."
   (5) "The parties to this agreement agree that an annual report of
sales or other transfers pursuant to this agreement of the licensed
articles, by quantity, type, U.S. dollar value, and purchaser or
recipient, shall be provided by (applicant or licensee) to the
Department of State." This clause must specify which party is
obligated to provide the annual report. Such reports may be submitted
either directly by the licensee or indirectly through the licensor,
and may cover calendar or fiscal years. Reports shall be deemed
proprietary information by the Department of State and will not be
disclosed to unauthorized persons. See &#167; 126.10(b) of this
subchapter.
   (6) (Licensee) agrees to incorporate the following statement as an
integral provision of a contract, invoice or other appropriate
document whenever the licensed articles are sold or otherwise
transferred:
   These commodities are authorized for export by the U.S. Government
only to (country of ultimate destination or approved sales
territory). They may not be resold, diverted, transferred,
transshipped, or otherwise be disposed of in any other country, either
in their original form or after being incorporated through an
intermediate process into other end-items, without the prior written
approval of the U.S. Department of State.
   (b) Special clause for agreements relating to significant military
equipment.  With respect to an agreement for the production of
significant military equipment, the following additional provisions
must be included in the agreement:
   (1) "A completed nontransfer and use certificate (DSP-83) must be
executed by the foreign end-user and submitted to the Department of
State of the United States before any transfer may take place."
   (2) "The prior written approval of the U.S. Government must be
obtained before entering into a commitment for the transfer of the
licensed article by sale or otherwise to any person or government
outside of the approved sales territory."
  &#167; 124.10 -- Nontransfer and use assurances.
   A nontransfer and use certificate (Form DSP-83) (see &#167; 123.10
of this subchapter) signed by the applicant and the foreign party to a
manufacturing license agreement or technical assistance agreement is
required as a condition to the approval of any such agreement which
relates to significant military equipment, classified articles or
classified technical data. The Office of Defense Trade Controls may in
some cases require that this certificate or a comparable undertaking
be provided before approving an agreement that does not relate to
significant military equipment. The Office of Defense Trade Controls
may also require as a condition of approval that an appropriate
authority of the foreign party's government also execute the
certificate or provide undertakings comparable to those contained in
the Form DSP-83 (e.g., in a diplomatic note).  Agreements involving
classified articles or classified technical data should be accompanied
by a nontransfer and use certificate signed by an authorized
representative of the foreign government concerned unless the Office
of Defense Trade Controls has granted an exception to this
requirement.
  &#167; 124.11 -- Certification to Congress for agreements.
   Regardless of dollar value, a Technical Assistance Agreement or a
Manufacturing License Agreement for or in a country not a member of
NATO that involves the manufacture abroad of any item of significant
military equipment (as defined in &#167; 120.7 of this subchapter)
shall be certified to Congress by the Department as required by 22
U.S.C. 2776(d). Additionally, any technical assistance agreement or
manufacturing license agreement providing for the export of major
defense equipment, as defined in &#167; 120.8, sold under a contract
in the amount of $ 14 million or more, or of defense articles or
defense services sold under a contract in the amount of $ 50 million
or more, shall be certified to Congress by the Department as required
by 22 U.S.C. 2776(c)(1). The Office of Defense Trade Controls will not
approve agreements requiring Congressional notification until 30
calendar days have elapsed since receipt by the Congress of the
required certification without the Congress having enacted a joint
resolution prohibiting the agreement.
  &#167; 124.12 -- Required information in letters of transmittal.
   (a) An application for the approval of a manufacturing license or
technical assistance agreement with a foreign person must be
accompanied by an explanatory letter. The original letter and seven
copies of the letter and eight copies of the proposed agreement shall
be submitted to the Office of Defense Trade Controls. The explanatory
letter shall contain:
   (1) A statement giving the applicant's Defense Trade Controls
registration number.
   (2) A statement identifying the licensee and the scope of the
agreement.
   (3) A statement identifying the U.S. Government contract under
which the equipment or technical data was generated, improved, or
developed and supplied to the U.S. Government, and whether the
equipment or technical data was derived from any bid or other proposal
to the U.S. Government.
   (4) A statement giving the military security classification of the
equipment or technical data.
   (5) A statement identifying any patent application which discloses
any of the subject matter of the equipment or technical data covered
by an invention [*39308] secrecy order issued by the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office.
   (6) A statement of the actual or estimated value of the agreement,
including the estimated value of all defense articles to be exported
in furtherance of the agreement or amendments thereto. If the value is
$ 500,000 or more, an additional statement must be made regarding the
payment of political contributions, fees or commissions, pursuant to
part 130 of this subchapter.
   (7) A statement indicating whether any foreign military sales
credits or loan guarantees are or will be involved in financing the
agreement.
   (8) The agreement must describe any classified information involved
and identify, from Department of Defense form DD254, the address and
telephone number of the U.S. Government office that classified the
information.
   (9) For agreements that may require the export of classified
information, the Defense Investigative Service cognizant security
offices that have responsibility for the facilities of the
U.S. parties to the agreement shall be identified. The facility
security clearance codes of the U.S. parties shall also be provided.
   (b) The following statements must be made in the letter of
transmittal:
   (1) "If the agreement is approved by the Department of State, such
approval will not be construed by (the applicant) as passing on the
legality of the agreement from the standpoint of antitrust laws or
other applicable statutes, nor will (the applicant) construe the
Department's approval as constituting either approval or disapproval
of any of the business terms or conditions between the parties to the
agreement."
   (2) "The (applicant) will not permit the proposed agreement to
enter into force until it has been approved by the Department of
State."
   (3) "The (applicant) will furnish the Department of State with one
copy of the signed agreement (or amendment) within 30 days from the
date that the agreement is concluded and will inform the Department of
its termination not less than 30 days prior to expiration and provide
information on the continuation of any foreign rights or the flow of
technical data to the foreign party. If a decision is made not to
conclude the proposed agreement, the applicant will so inform the
Department within 60 days."
   (4) "If this agreement grants any rights to sub-license, it will be
amended to require that all sub-licensing arrangements incorporate all
the provisions of the basic agreement that refer to the
U.S. Government and the Department of State (i.e., 22 CFR 124.9 and
124.10)."
  &#167; 124.13 -- Procurement by United States persons in foreign
countries (offshore procurement).
   Notwithstanding the other provisions in part 124 of this
subchapter, the Office of Defense Trade Controls may authorize by
means of a license (DSP-5) the export of unclassified technical data
to foreign persons for offshore procurement of defense articles,
provided that:
   (a) The contract or purchase order for offshore procurement limits
delivery of the defense articles to be produced only to the person in
the United States or to an agency of the U.S. Government; and
   (b) The technical data of U.S.-origin to be used in the foreign
manufacture of defense articles does not exceed that required for bid
purposes on a build- to-print basis (build-to-print means producing an
end-item (i.e., system, subsystem or component) from technical
drawings and specifications (which contain no process or know-how
information) without the need for additional technical
assistance). Release of supporting documentation (e.g., acceptance
criteria, object code software for numerically controlled machines) is
permissible. Build-to-print does not include the release of any
information which discloses design methodology, engineering analysis,
detailed process information or manufacturing know-how); and
   (c) The contract or purchase order between the person in the United
States and the foreign person:
   (1) Limits the use of the technical data to the manufacture of the
defense articles required by the contract or purchase order only; and
   (2) Prohibits the disclosure of the data to any other person except
subcontractors within the same country; and
   (3) Prohibits the acquisition of any rights in the data by any
foreign person; and
   (4) Provides that any subcontracts between foreign persons in the
approved country for manufacture of equipment for delivery pursuant to
the contract or purchase order contain all the limitations of this
paragraph (c); and
   (5) Requires the foreign person, including subcontractors, to
destroy or return to the person in the United States all of the
technical data exported pursuant to the contract or purchase order
upon fulfillment of their terms; and
   (6) Requires delivery of the defense articles manufactured abroad
only to the person in the United States or to an agency of the
U.S. Government; and
   (d) The person in the United States provides the Office of Defense
Trade Controls with a copy of each contract, purchase order or
subcontract for offshore procurement at the time it is accepted. Each
such contract, purchase order or subcontract must clearly identify the
article to be produced and must identify the license number or
exemption under which the technical data was exported; and
   (e) Licenses issued pursuant to this section must be renewed upon
their expiration if offshore procurement is to extend beyond the
period of validity of the license. If the technical data involved in
an offshore procurement arrangement is otherwise exempt from the
licensing requirements pursuant to &#167; 126.4 or &#167; 126.5 of
this subchapter, the DSP-5 referred to in the first sentence of this
section is not required. However, the exporter must comply with the
other requirements of this section. The exemptions under &#167; 125.4
of this subchapter may not be used to establish offshore procurement
arrangements.
  &#167; 124.14 -- Exports to warehouses or distribution points
outside the United States.
   (a) Agreements (e.g., contracts) between U.S. persons and foreign
persons for the warehousing and distribution of defense articles must
be approved by the Office of Defense Trade Controls before they enter
into force. Such agreements will be limited to unclassified defense
articles and must contain conditions for special distribution, end-use
and reporting. Licenses for exports pursuant to such agreements must
be obtained prior to exports of the defense articles unless an
exemption under &#167; 123.16(b)(1) of this subchapter is applicable.
   (b) Required Information. Proposed warehousing and distribution
agreements (and amendments thereto) shall be submitted to the Office
of Defense Trade Controls for approval. The following information must
be included in all such agreements:
   (1) A description of the defense articles involved including test
and support equipment covered by the U.S. Munitions List. This shall
include when applicable the military nomenclature, the Federal stock
number, nameplate data, and any control numbers under which the
defense articles were developed or procured by the
U.S. Government. Only those defense articles specifically listed in
the agreement will be eligible for export under the exemption in
&#167; 123.16(b)(1) of this subchapter.  [*39309]
   (2) A detailed statement of the terms and conditions under which
the defense articles will be exported and distributed;
   (3) The duration of the proposed agreement;
   (4) Specific identification of the country or countries that
comprise the distribution territory. Distribution must be specifically
limited to the governments of such countries or to private entities
seeking to procure defense articles pursuant to a contract with a
government within the distribution territory or to other eligible
entities as specified by the Office of Defense Trade
Controls. Consequently, any deviation from this condition must be
fully explained and justified. A nontransfer and use certificate
(DSP-83) will be required to the same extent required in licensing
agreements under &#167; 124.9(b).
   (c) Required statements. The following statements must be included
in all warehousing and distribution agreements:
   (1) "This agreement shall not enter into force, and may not be
amended or extended, without the prior written approval of the
Department of State of U.S.  Government."
   (2) "This agreement is subject to all United States laws and
regulations related to exports and to all administrative acts of the
United States Government pursuant to such laws and regulations.
   (3) "The parties to this agreement agree that the obligations
contained in this agreement shall not affect the performance of any
obligations created by prior contracts or subcontracts which the
parties may have individually or collectively with the
U.S. Government."
   (4) "No liability will be incurred by or attributed to the
U.S. Government in connection with any possible infringement of
privately owned patent or proprietary rights, either domestic or
foreign by reason of the U.S.  Government's approval of this
agreement."
   (5) "No export, sale, transfer, or other disposition of the defense
articles covered by this agreement is authorized to any country
outside the distribution territory without the prior written approval
of the Office of Defense Trade Controls of the U.S. Department of
State."
   (6) "The parties to this agreement agree that an annual report of
sales or other transfers pursuant to this agreement of the licensed
articles, by quantity, type, U.S. dollar value, and purchaser or
recipient shall be provided by (applicant or licensee) to the
Department of State." This clause must specify which party is
obligated to provide the annual report. Such reports may be submitted
either directly by the licensee or indirectly through the licensor,
and may cover calendar or fiscal years. Reports shall be deemed
proprietary information by the Department of State and will not be
disclosed to unauthorized persons. (See &#167; 126.10(b) of this
subchapter.)
   (7) (Licensee) agrees to incorporate the following statement as an
integral provision of a contract, invoice or other appropriate
document whenever the articles covered by this agreement are sold or
otherwise transferred:
   These commodities are authorized for export by the U.S. Government
only to (country of ultimate destination or approved sales
territory). They may not be resold, diverted, transferred,
transshipped, or otherwise be disposed of in any other country, either
in their original form or after being incorporated through an
intermediate process into other end-items, without the prior written
approval of the U.S. Department of State.
   (8) "All provisions in this agreement which refer to the United
States Government and the Department of State will remain binding on
the parties after the termination of the agreement."
   (9) Additional clause. Unless the articles covered by the agreement
are in fact intended to be distributed to private persons or entities
(e.g., sporting firearms for commercial resale, cryptographic devices
and software for financial and business applications), the following
clause must be included in all warehousing and distribution
agreements: "Sales or other transfers of the licensed article shall be
limited to governments of the countries in the distribution territory
and to private entities seeking to procure the licensed article
pursuant to a contract with a government within the distribution
territory, unless the prior written approval of the U.S. Department of
State is obtained."
   (d) Special clauses for agreements relating to significant military
equipment. With respect to agreements for the warehousing and
distribution of significant military equipment, the following
additional provisions must be included in the agreement:
   (1) A completed nontransfer and use certificate (DSP-83) must be
executed by the foreign end-user and submitted to the U.S. Department
of State before any transfer may take place.
   (2) The prior written approval of the U.S. Department of State must
be obtained before entering into a commitment for the transfer of the
licensed article by sale or otherwise to any person or government
outside the approved distribution territory.
   (e) Transmittal Letters. Requests for approval of warehousing and
distribution agreements with foreign persons must be made by
letter. The original letter and seven copies of the letter and seven
copies of the proposed agreement shall be submitted to the Office of
Defense Trade Controls. The letter shall contain:
   (1) A statement giving the applicant's Defense Trade Controls
registration number.
   (2) A statement identifying the foreign party to the agreement.
   (3) A statement identifying the defense articles to be distributed
under the agreement.
   (4) A statement identifying any U.S. Government contract under
which the equipment may have been generated, improved, developed or
supplied to the U.S.  Government, and whether the equipment was
derived from any bid or other proposal to the U.S. Government.
   (5) A statement that no classified defense articles or classified
technical data are involved.
   (6) A statement identifying any patent application which discloses
any of the subject matter of the equipment or related technical data
covered by an invention secrecy order issued by the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office.
   (f) Required clauses. The following statements must be made in the
letter of transmittal:
   (1) "If the agreement is approved by the Department of State, such
approval will not be construed by (applicant) as passing on the
legality of the agreement from the standpoint of antitrust laws or
other applicable statutes, nor will (the applicant) construe the
Department's approval as constituting either approval or disapproval
of any of the business terms or conditions between the parties to the
agreement."
   (2) "The (applicant) will not permit the proposed agreement to
enter into force until it has been approved by the Department of
State."
   (3) "(Applicant) will furnish the Department of State with one copy
of the signed agreement (or amendment thereto) within 30 days from the
date that the agreement is concluded, and will inform the Department
of its termination not less than 30 days prior to expiration. If a
decision is made not to conclude the proposed agreement, (applicant)
will so inform the Department within 60 days."  [*39310]


  PART 125-LICENSES FOR THE EXPORT OF TECHNICAL DATA AND CLASSIFIED
DEFENSE ARTICLES
  Sec.
  125.1 Exports subject to this part.
  125.2 Exports of unclassified technical data.
  125.3 Exports of classified technical data and classified defense
articles.
  125.4 Exemptions of general applicability.
  125.5 Exemptions for plant visits.
  125.6 Certification requirements for exemptions.
  125.7 Procedures for the export of classified technical data and
other classified defense articles.
  125.8 Filing of licenses for exports of unclassified technical data.
  125.9 Filing of licenses and other authorizations for exports of
classified technical data and classified defense articles.
   Authority: Sections 2 and 38, Pub. L. 90-629, 90 Stat. 744 (22
U.S.C. 2752, 2778); E.O. 11958, 42 FR 4311, 3 CFR, 1977 Comp. p.79; 22
U.S.C. 2658.
  &#167; 125.1 -- Exports subject to this part.
   (a) The controls of this part apply to the export of technical data
and the export of classified defense articles. Information which is in
the public domain (see &#167; 120.11 of this subchapter and &#167;
125.4(b)(13)) is not subject to the controls of this subchapter.
   (b) A license for the export of technical data and the exemptions
in &#167; 125.4 may not be used for foreign production purposes or for
technical assistance unless the approval of the Office of Defense
Trade Controls has been obtained.  Such approval is generally provided
only pursuant to the procedures specified in part 124 of this
subchapter.
   (c) Technical data authorized for export may not be reexported,
transferred or diverted from the country of ultimate end-use or from
the authorized foreign end-user (as designated in the license or
approval for export) or disclosed to a national of another country
without the prior written approval of the Office of Defense Trade
Controls.
   (d) The controls of this part apply to the exports referred to in
paragraph (a) of this section regardless of whether the person who
intends to export the technical data produces or manufactures defense
articles if the technical data is determined by the Office of Defense
Trade Controls to be subject to the controls of this subchapter.
   (e) The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to technical
data related to articles in Category VI(e) and Category XVI. The
export of such data is controlled by the Department of Energy and the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act of
1954, as amended, and the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Act of 1978.
  &#167; 125.2 -- Exports of unclassified technical data.
   (a) A license (DSP-5) is required for the export of unclassified
technical data unless the export is exempt from the licensing
requirements of this subchapter. In the case of a plant visit, details
of the proposed discussions must be transmitted to the Office of
Defense Trade Controls for an appraisal of the technical data. Seven
copies of the technical data or the details of the discussion must be
provided.
   (b) Patents. A license issued by the Office of Defense Trade
Controls is required for the export of technical data whenever the
data exceeds that which is used to support a domestic filing of a
patent application or to support a foreign filing of a patent
application whenever no domestic application has been filed. Requests
for the filing of patent applications in a foreign country, and
requests for the filing of amendments, modifications or supplements to
such patents, should follow the regulations of the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office in accordance with 37 CFR part 5. The export of
technical data to support the filing and processing of patent
applications in foreign countries is subject to regulations issued by
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office pursuant to 35 U.S.C.  184.
   (c) Disclosures. Unless otherwise expressly exempted in this
subchapter, a license is required for the oral, visual or documentary
disclosure of technical data by U.S. persons to foreign persons. A
license is required regardless of the manner in which the technical
data is transmitted (e.g., in person, by telephone, correspondence,
electronic means, etc.). A license is required for such disclosures by
U.S. persons in connection with visits to foreign diplomatic missions
and consular offices.
  &#167; 125.3 -- Exports of classified technical data and classified
defense articles.
   (a) A request for authority to export defense articles, including
technical data, classified by a foreign government or pursuant to
Executive Order 12356, successor orders, or other legal authority must
be submitted to the Office of Defense Trade Controls for approval. The
application must contain full details of the proposed transaction. It
should also list the facility security clearance code of all
U.S. parties on the license and include the Defense Investigative
Service cognizant security office of the party responsible for
packaging the commodity for shipment. A nontransfer and use
certificate (Form DSP-83) executed by the applicant, foreign
consignee, end-user and an authorized representative of the foreign
government involved will be required.
   (b) Classified technical data which is approved by the Office of
Defense Trade Controls either for export or reexport after a temporary
import will be transferred or disclosed only in accordance with the
requirements in the Department of Defense Industrial Security
Manual. Any other requirements imposed by cognizant U.S. departments
and agencies must also be satisfied.
   (c) The approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls must be
obtained for the export of technical data by a U.S. person to a
foreign person in the U.S. or in a foreign country unless the proposed
export is exempt under the provisions of this subchapter.
   (d) All communications relating to a patent application covered by
an invention secrecy order are to be addressed to the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (see 37 CFR 5.11).
  &#167; 125.4 -- Exemptions of general applicability.
   (a) The following exemptions apply to exports of unclassified
technical data for which approval is not needed from the Office of
Defense Trade Controls.  These exemptions, except for paragraph
(b)(13) of this section, do not apply to exports to proscribed
destinations under &#167; 126.1 of this subchapter or for persons
considered generally ineligible under &#167; 120.1(c) of this
subchapter. The exemptions are also not applicable for purposes of
establishing offshore procurement arrangements. If &#167; 126.8 of
this subchapter requirements are applicable, they must be met before
an exemption under this section may be used.  Transmission of
classified information must comply with the requirements of the
Department of Defense Industrial Security Manual and the exporter must
certify to the transmittal authority that the technical data does not
exceed the technical limitation of the authorized export.
   (b) The following exports are exempt from the licensing
requirements of this subchapter.
   (1) Technical data, including classified information, to be
disclosed pursuant to an official written request or directive from
the U.S. Department of Defense;
   (2) Technical data, including classified information, in
furtherance of a manufacturing license or technical assistance
agreement approved by the Department of State under part 124 of
[*39311] this subchapter and which meet the requirements of &#167;
124.3 of this subchapter;
   (3) Technical data, including classified information, in
furtherance of a contract between the exporter and an agency of the
U.S. Government, if the contract provides for the export of the data
and such data does not disclose the details of design, development,
production, or manufacture of any defense article;
   (4) Copies of technical data, including classified information,
previously authorized for export to the same recipient. Revised copies
of such technical data are also exempt if they pertain to the
identical defense article, and if the revisions are solely editorial
and do not add to the content of technology previously exported or
authorized for export to the same recipient;
   (5) Technical data, including classified information, in the form
of basic operations, maintenance, and training information relating to
a defense article lawfully exported or authorized for export to the
same recipient. Intermediate or depot-level repair and maintenance
information may be exported only under a license or agreement approved
specifically for that purpose;
   (6) Technical data, including classified information, related to
firearms not in excess of caliber .50 and ammunition for such weapons,
except detailed design, development, production or manufacturing
information;
   (7) Technical data, including classified information, being
returned to the original source of import;
   (8) Technical data directly related to classified information which
has been previously exported or authorized for export in accordance
with this part to the same recipient, and which does not disclose the
details of the design, development, production, or manufacture of any
defense article;
   (9) Technical data, including classified information, sent by a
U.S.  corporation to a U.S. person employed by that corporation
overseas or to a U.S.  Government agency. This exemption is subject to
the limitations of &#167; 125.1(b) and may be used only if:
   (i) The technical data is to be used overseas solely by
U.S. persons;
   (ii) If the U.S. person overseas is an employee of the
U.S. Government or is directly employed by the U.S. corporation and
not by a foreign subsidiary; and
   (iii) The classified information is sent overseas in accordance
with the requirements of the Department of Defense Industrial Security
Manual.
   (10) Disclosures of unclassified technical data in the U.S. by U.S.
institutions of higher learning to foreign persons who are their bona
fide and full time regular employees. This exemption is available only
if:
   (i) The employee's permanent abode throughout the period of
employment is in the United States;
   (ii) The employee is not a national of a country to which exports
are prohibited pursuant to &#167; 126.1 of this subchapter; and
   (iii) The institution informs the individual in writing that the
technical data may not be transferred to other foreign persons without
the prior written approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls;
   (11) Technical data, including classified information, for which
the exporter, pursuant to an arrangement with the Department of
Defense, Department of Energy or NASA which requires such exports, has
been granted an exemption in writing from the licensing provisions of
this part by the Office of Defense Trade Controls. Such an exemption
will normally be granted only if the arrangement directly implements
an international agreement to which the United States is a party and
if multiple exports are contemplated. The Office of Defense Trade
Controls, in consultation with the relevant U.S. Government agencies,
will determine whether the interests of the United States Government
are best served by expediting exports under an arrangement through an
exemption (see also paragraph (b)(3) of this section for a related
exemption);
   (12) Technical data which is specifically exempt under part 126 of
this subchapter; or
   (13) Technical data approved for public release (i.e., unlimited
distribution) by the cognizant U.S. Government department or agency or
Directorate for Freedom of Information and Security Review. This
exemption is applicable to information approved by the cognizant
U.S. Government department or agency for public release in any
form. It does not require that the information be published in order
to qualify for the exemption.
  &#167; 125.5 -- Exemptions for plant visits.
   (a) A license is not required for the oral and visual disclosure of
unclassified technical data during the course of a classified plant
visit by a foreign person, provided (1) the classified visit has
itself been authorized pursuant to a license issued by the Office of
Defense Trade Controls; or (2) the classified visit was approved in
connection with an actual or potential government-to-government
program or project by a U.S. Government agency having classification
jurisdiction over the classified defense article or classified
technical data involved under Executive Order 12356 or other
applicable Executive Order; and (3) the unclassified information to be
released is directly related to the classified defense article or
technical data for which approval was obtained and does not disclose
the details of the design, development, production or manufacture of
any other defense articles. In the case of visits involving classified
information, the requirements of the Defense Industrial Security
Manual (Department of Defense Manual 5220.22M) must be met.
   (b) The approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls is not
required for the disclosure of oral and visual classified information
to a foreign person during the course of a plant visit approved by the
appropriate U.S. Government agency if (1) the requirements of the
Defense Industrial Security Manual have been met, (2) the classified
information is directly related to that which was approved by the
U.S. Government agency, (3) it does not exceed that for which approval
was obtained, and (4) it does not disclose the details of the design,
development, production or manufacture of any defense articles.
   (c) A license is not required for the disclosure to a foreign
person of unclassified technical data during the course of a plant
visit (either classified or unclassified) approved by the Office of
Defense Trade Controls or a cognizant U.S. Government agency provided
the technical data does not contain information in excess of that
approved for disclosure. This exemption does not apply to technical
data which could be used for design, development, production or
manufacture of a defense article.
  &#167; 125.6 -- Certification requirements for exemptions.
   (a) To claim an exemption for the export of technical data under
the provisions of &#167;&#167; 125.4 and 125.5, an exporter must
certify that the proposed export is covered by a relevant paragraph of
that section. For &#167; 125.4, certification consists of marking the
package or letter containing the technical data: "22 CFR 125.4
(identify subsection) applicable." This certification must be made in
written form and retained in the exporter's files for a period of five
years. A Shippers Export Declaration is not required for [*39312]
exports of unclassified technical data (see &#167; 123.22 (d) of this
subchapter.
   (b) If a District Director of Customs or Postmaster is unavailable
at the time of export, or if the export is via oral, visual, or
electronic means, the exporter must also complete a written
certification as indicated in paragraph (a) of this section.
  &#167; 125.7 -- Procedures for the export of classified technical
data and other classified defense articles.
   (a) All applications for the export or temporary import of
classified technical data or other classified defense articles must be
submitted to the Office of Defense Trade Controls on Form DSP-85.
   (b) An application for the export of classified technical data or
other classified defense articles must be accompanied by seven copies
of the data and a completed Form DSP-83 (see &#167; 123.10 of this
subchapter). Only one copy of the data or descriptive literature must
be provided if a renewal of the license is requested. All classified
materials accompanying an application must be transmitted to the
Office of Defense Trade Controls in accordance with the requirements
of the Defense Industrial Security Manual (Department of Defense
Manual Number 5220.22-M).
  &#167; 125.8 -- Filing of licenses for exports of unclassified
technical data.
   (a) Licenses for the export of unclassified technical data must be
presented to the appropriate District Director of Customs or
Postmaster at the time of shipment or mailing. The District Director
of Customs or Postmaster will endorse and transmit the licenses to the
Office of Defense Trade Controls in accordance with the instructions
contained on the reverse side of the license.
   (b) If a license for the export of unclassified technical data is
used but not endorsed by U.S. Customs or a Postmaster for whatever
reason (e.g., electronic transmission, unavailability of Customs
officer or Postmaster, etc.), the person exporting the data must
self-endorse the license, showing when and how the export took
place. Every license must be returned to the Office of Defense Trade
Controls when the total value authorized has been shipped or when the
date of expiration has been reached, whichever occurs first.
  &#167; 125.9 -- Filing of licenses and other authorizations for
exports of classified technical data and classified defense articles.
   Licenses and other authorizations for the export of classified
technical data or classified defense articles will be forwarded by the
Office of Defense Trade Controls to the Defense Investigative Service
of the Department of Defense in accordance with the provisions of the
Department of Defense Industrial Security Manual. The Office of
Defense Trade Controls will forward a copy of the license to the
applicant for the applicant's information. The Defense Investigative
Service will return the endorsed license to the Office of Defense
Trade Controls upon completion of the authorized export or expiration
of the license, whichever occurs first.


  PART 126-GENERAL POLICIES AND PROVISIONS
  Sec.
  126.1 Prohibited exports and sales to certain countries.
  126.2 Temporary suspension or modification of this subchapter.
  126.3 Exceptions.
  126.4 Shipments by or for United States Government agencies.
  126.5 Canadian exemptions.
  126.6 Foreign-owned military aircraft and naval vessels, and the
Foreign Military Sales program.
  126.7 Denial, revocation, suspension or amendment of licenses and
other approvals.
  126.8 Proposals to foreign persons relating to significant military
equipment.
  126.9 Advisory opinions.
  126.10 Disclosure of information.
  126.11 Relation to other provisions of law.
  126.12 Continuation in force.
  126.13 Required information.
   Authority: Secs. 2, 38, 40, 42, and 71, Arms Export Control Act,
Pub. L. 90- 629, 90 Stat. 744 (22 U.S.C. 2752, 2778, 2780, and 2791,
and 2797); E.O. 11958, 42 FR 4311, E.O. 11322, 32 FR 119; 22
U.S.C. 2658.
  &#167; 126.1 -- Prohibited exports and sales to certain countries.
   (a) It is the policy of the United States to deny licenses, other
approvals, exports and imports of defense articles and defense
services, destined for or originating in certain countries. This
policy applies to: Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Byelarus,
Cambodia, Cuba, Estonia, Georgia, Iran, Iraq, Libya, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Mongolia, North Korea,
Romania, Russia, South Africa, Syria, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, Uzbekistan and Vietnam. This policy also applies to countries
with respect to which the United States maintains an arms embargo
(e.g., Burma, China, Liberia, Somalia, the Sudan, the former
Yugoslavia, and Zaire) or for whenever an export would not otherwise
be in furtherance of world peace and the security and foreign policy
of the United States. Comprehensive arms embargoes are normally the
subject of a State Department notice published in the Federal
Register. The exemptions provided in the regulations in this
subchapter, except &#167;&#167; 123.17 and 125.4(b)(13) of this
subchapter, do not apply with respect to articles originating in or
for export to any proscribed countries or areas.
   (b) Shipments. A defense article licensed for export under this
subchapter may not be shipped on a vessel, aircraft or other means of
conveyance which is owned or operated by, or leased to or from, any of
the proscribed countries or areas.
   (c) South Africa. South Africa is subject to an arms embargo and
thus to the policy specified in paragraph (a) of this
section. Exceptions may be made to this policy only if the Assistant
Secretary for Politico-Military Affairs determines that:
   (1) The item is not covered by United Nations Security Council
Resolution 418 of November 4, 1977; and
   (2) The item is to be exported solely for commercial purposes and
not for use by the armed forces, police, or other security forces of
South Africa or for any other similar purpose.
   (d) Terrorism. Exports to countries which the Secretary of State
has determined to have repeatedly provided support for acts of
international terrorism are contrary to the foreign policy of the
United States and are thus subject to the policy specified in
paragraph (a) of this section and the requirements of section 40 of
the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2780) and the Omnibus
Diplomatic Security and Anti-Terrorism Act of 1986 (22 U.S.C. 4801,
note). The countries in this category are: Cuba, Iran, Iraq, Libya,
North Korea and Syria. The same countries are identified pursuant to
section 6(j) of the Export Administration Act, as amended (50
U.S.C. App. 2405(j)).
   (e) Proposed sales. No sale or transfer and no proposal to sell or
transfer any defense articles, defense services or technical data
subject to this subchapter may be made to any country referred to in
this section (including the embassies or consulates of such a
country), or to any person acting on its behalf, whether in the United
States or abroad, without first obtaining a license or written
approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls. However, in
accordance with paragraph (a) of this section, it is the policy of the
Department of State to deny licenses and approvals in such cases. Any
person who knows or has reason to know of such a proposed or actual
sale, or transfer, of such articles, services or data must immediately
[*39313] inform the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
  &#167; 126.2 -- Temporary suspension or modification of this
subchapter.
   The Director, Office of Defense Trade Controls, may order the
temporary suspension or modification of any or all of the regulations
of this subchapter in the interest of the security and foreign policy
of the United States.
  &#167; 126.3 -- Exceptions.
   In a case of exceptional or undue hardship, or when it is otherwise
in the interest of the United States Government, the Director, Office
of Defense Trade Controls may make an exception to the provisions of
this subchapter.
  &#167; 126.4 -- Shipments by or for United States Government
agencies.
   (a) A license is not required for the temporary import, or
temporary export, of any defense article, including technical data or
the performance of a defense service, by or for any agency of the
U.S. Government (1) for official use by such an agency, or (2) for
carrying out any foreign assistance, cooperative project or sales
program authorized by law and subject to control by the President by
other means. This exemption applies only when all aspects of a
transaction (export, carriage, and delivery abroad) are effected by a
United States Government agency or when the export is covered by a
United States Government Bill of Lading. This exemption, however, does
not apply when a U.S.  Government agency acts as a transmittal agent
on behalf of a private individual or firm, either as a convenience or
in satisfaction of security requirements.  The approval of the Office
of Defense Trade Controls must be obtained before defense articles
previously exported pursuant to this exemption are permanently
transferred (e.g., property disposal of surplus defense articles
overseas) unless (i) the transfer is pursuant to a grant, sale, lease,
loan or cooperative project under the Arms Export Control Act or a
sale, lease or loan under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as
amended, or (ii) the defense articles have been rendered useless for
military purposes beyond the possibility of restoration.
   Note: Special definition. For purposes of this section, defense
articles exported abroad for incorporation into a foreign launch
vehicle or for use on a foreign launch vehicle or satellite that is to
be launched from a foreign country shall be considered a permanent
export.
   (b) This section does not authorize any department or agency of the
U.S.  Government to make any export which is otherwise prohibited by
virtue of other administrative provisions or by any statute.
   (c) A license is not required for the temporary import, or
temporary or permanent export, of any classified or unclassified
defense articles, including technical data or the performance of a
defense service, for end-use by a U.S.  Government Agency in a foreign
country under the following circumstances:
   (1) The export or temporary import is pursuant to a contract with,
or written direction by, an agency of the U.S. Government; and
   (2) The end-user in the foreign country is a U.S. Government agency
or facility, and the defense articles or technical data will not be
transferred to any foreign person; and
   (3) The urgency of the U.S. Government requirement is such that the
appropriate export license or U.S. Government Bill of Lading could not
have been obtained in a timely manner.
   (d) A Shipper's Export Declaration (SED), required under &#167;
123.22(c) of this subchapter, and a written statement by the exporter
certifying that these requirements have been met must be presented at
the time of export to the appropriate District Director of Customs or
Department of Defense transmittal authority. A copy of the SED and the
written certification statement shall be provided to the Office of
Defense Trade Controls immediately following the export.
  &#167; 126.5 -- Canadian exemptions.
   (a) District Directors of Customs and postmasters shall permit the
export or temporary import without a license of any unclassified
defense article or any unclassified technical data to Canada for
end-use in Canada by Canadian citizens or return to the United States,
or from Canada for end-use in the United States or return to a
Canadian citizen in Canada, with the exception of the articles or
related technical data listed in paragraph (b) of this section.
   (b) Exceptions. The exemptions of this section do not apply to the
following articles and related technical data:
   (1) Fully automatic firearms in Category I(a) which are not for
end-use by the Federal Government, or a Provincial or Municipal
Government of Canada;
   (2) Nuclear weapons strategic delivery systems and all components,
parts, accessories, attachments specifically designed for such systems
and associated equipment;
   (3) Nuclear weapon design and test equipment listed in Category
XVI;
   (4) Naval nuclear propulsion equipment listed in Category VI(e);
   (5) Aircraft listed in Category VIII(a);
   (6) Submersible and oceanographic vessels and related articles
listed in Category XX (a) through (d).
   (7) Technical data for use by a foreign national other than a
Canadian.
   (8) Unclassified technical data directly related to a classified
defense article.
   (c) Related requirements. The foregoing exemption from obtaining an
export license does not exempt an exporter from complying with the
requirements set forth in &#167; 123.15 of this subchapter or from
filing the Shipper's Export Declaration required by &#167; 123.22 of
this subchapter.
   (d) Part 124 agreements. The requirements of part 124 of this
subchapter must be complied with in the situations contemplated in
that part. For example, the except pursuant to an approved
manufacturing license agreement or technical assistance agreement.
  &#167; 126.6 -- Foreign-owned military aircraft and naval vessels,
and the Foreign Military Sales program.
   (a) A license from the Office of Defense Trade Controls is not
required if:
   (1)(i) The article or technical data to be exported was sold,
leased, or loaned by the Department of Defense to a foreign country or
international organization pursuant to the Arms Export Control Act or
the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, and
   (ii) The article or technical data was delivered to representatives
of such a country or organization in the United States; and
   (iii) The article or technical data is to be exported from the
United States on a military aircraft or naval vessel of that
government or organization or via the Defense Transportation Service
(DTS).
   (b) Foreign military aircraft and naval vessels. A license is not
required for the entry into the United States of military aircraft or
naval vessels of any foreign state if no overhaul, repair, or
modification of the aircraft or naval vessel is to be
performed. However, Department of State approval for overflight
(pursuant to the 49 U.S.C. 1508) and naval visits must be obtained
from the Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs, Office of International
Security Operations.
   (c) Procedures for the Foreign Military Sales Program. (1) District
Directors of Customs are authorized to permit the [*39314] export and
temporary import of classified and unclassified defense articles,
defense services and technical data without a license if the articles
or technical data were sold, leased or loaned by the U.S. Department
of Defense to foreign governments or international organizations under
the Foreign Military Sales (FMS) program of the Arms Export Control
Act. This procedure may be used only if a proposed export is:
   (i) Pursuant to an executed U.S. Department of Defense Letter of
Offer and Acceptance (DD Form 1513); and
   (ii) Accompanied by a properly executed DSP-94, or in the case of a
classified shipment, an approved Letter of Offer and Acceptance; and
   (iii) Made by the relevant foreign diplomatic mission of the
purchasing country or its authorized freight forwarder, provided that
the freight forwarder is registered with the Office of Defense Trade
Controls pursuant to part 122 of this subchapter, and, if classified
defense articles or technical data are involved, has the requisite
U.S. Government security clearance and a transportation plan has been
approved as in &#167; 126.6(a)(1), above and the defense articles or
technical data are shipped in compliance with the Department of
Defense Industrial Security Manual.
   (2) Filing and documents. corresponding authenticated DD Form 1513
and a Shipper's Export Declaration, must be filed with the District
Director of Customs at the port of exit prior to actual shipment. An
executed DD Form 1513 is one which has been signed by:
   (A) an authorized Department of Defense representative and
countersigned by the Comptroller, Defense Security Assistance Agency
(DSAA); and
   (B) by an authorized representative of the foreign government.
   (ii) SED or Outbound Manifest. The Shipper's Export Declaration or,
if authorized, the outbound manifest, must be annotated as follows:
   This shipment is being exported under the authority of Department
of State Form DSP-94. It covers FMS Case (case identification),
expiration date __________. 22 CFR 126.6 applicable. The
U.S. Government point of contact is __________, telephone number
__________.
  &#167; 126.7 -- Denial, revocation, suspension, or amendment of
licenses and other approvals.
   (a) Policy. Licenses or approvals shall be denied or revoked
whenever required by any statute of the United States (see
&#167;&#167; 127.6 and 127.10 of this subchapter). Any application for
an export license or other approval under this subchapter may be
disapproved, and any license or other approval or exemption granted
under this subchapter may be revoked, suspended, or amended without
prior notice whenever:
   (1) The Department of State deems such action to be in furtherance
of world peace, the national security or the foreign policy of the
United States, or is otherwise advisable; or
   (2) The Department of State believes that 22 U.S.C. 2778, any
regulation contained in this subchapter, or the terms of any
U.S. Government export authorization (including the terms of a
manufacturing license or technical assistance agreement, or export
authorization granted pursuant to the Export Administration Act, as
amended) has been violated by any party to the export or other person
having significant interest in the transaction; or
   (3) An applicant is the subject of an indictment for a violation of
any of the U.S. criminal statutes enumerated in &#167; 120.27 of this
subchapter; or
   (4) An applicant or any party to the export or the agreement has
been convicted of violating any of the U.S. criminal statutes
enumerated in &#167; 120.27 of this subchapter; or
   (5) An applicant is ineligible to contract with, or to receive a
license or other authorization to import defense articles or defense
services from, any agency of the U.S. Government; or
   (6) An applicant, any party to the export or agreement, any source
or manufacturer of the defense article or defense service or any
person who has a significant interest in the transaction has been
debarred, suspended, or otherwise is ineligible to receive an export
license or other authorization from any agency of the U.S. government
(e.g., pursuant to debarment by the Department of Commerce under 15
CFR part 388 or by the Department of State under part 127 or 128 of
this subchapter); or
   (7) An applicant has failed to include any of the information or
documentation expressly required to support a license application or
other request for approval under this subchapter or as required in the
instructions in the applicable Department of State form; or
   (8) An applicant is subject to sanctions under other relevant
U.S. laws (e.g., the Missile Technology Controls title of the National
Defense Authorization Act for FY 1991 (Pub. L. 101-510); the Chemical
and Biological Weapons Control and Warfare Elimination Act of 1991
(Pub. L. 102-182); or the Iran-Iraq Arms Non-Proliferation Act of 1992
(Pub. L. 102-484)).
   (b) Notification. The Office of Defense Trade Controls will notify
applicants or licensees or other appropriate United States persons of
actions taken pursuant to paragraph (a) of this section. The reasons
for the action will be stated as specifically as security and foreign
policy considerations permit.
   (c) Reconsideration. If a written request for reconsideration of an
adverse decision is made within 30 days after a person has been
informed of the decision, the U.S. person will be accorded an
opportunity to present additional information. The case will then be
reviewed by the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
   (d) Reconsideration of certain applications. Applications for
licenses or other requests for approval denied for repeated failure to
provide information or documentation expressly required will normally
not be reconsidered during the thirty day period following
denial. They will be reconsidered after this period only after a final
decision is made on whether the applicant will be subject to an
administrative penalty imposed pursuant to this subchapter. Any
request for reconsideration shall be accompanied by a letter
explaining the steps that have been taken to correct the failure and
to ensure compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (e) Special definition. For purposes of this section, the term
party to the export means:
   (1) The chief executive officer, president, vice-presidents, other
senior officers and officials (e.g., comptroller, treasurer, general
counsel) and any member of the board of directors of the applicant;
   (2) The freight forwarders or designated exporting agent of the
applicant; and
   (3) Any consignee or end-user of any item to be exported.
  &#167; 126.8 -- Proposals to foreign persons relating to significant
military equipment.
   (a) Certain proposals to foreign persons for the sale or
manufacture abroad of significant military equipment require either
the prior approval of, or prior notification to, the Office of Defense
Trade Controls.
   (1) Sale of significant military equipment: Prior approval
requirement. The approval of the Office of Defense Trade Controls is
required before a U.S.  person may make a proposal or presentation
designed to constitute a basis for a decision on the part of any
foreign person to purchase significant [*39315] military equipment on
the U.S. Munitions List whenever all the following conditions are met:
   (i) The value of the significant military equipment to be sold is $
14,000,000 or more; and
   (ii) The equipment is intended for use by the armed forces of any
foreign country other than a member of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, Australia, New Zealand, or Japan; and
   (iii) The sale would involve the export from the United States of
any defense article or the furnishing abroad of any defense service
including technical data; and
   (iv) The identical significant military equipment has not been
previously licensed for permanent export or approved for sale under
the Foreign Military Sales Program of the Department of Defense, to
any foreign country.
   (2) Sale of significant military equipment: Prior notification
requirement.  The Office Defense Trade Controls must be notified in
writing at least thirty days in advance of any proposal or
presentation concerning the sale of significant military equipment
whenever the conditions specified in paragraphs (a)(1) (i) through
(iii) of this section are met and the identical equipment has been
previously licensed for permanent export or approved for sale under
the FMS Program to any foreign country.
   (3) Manufacture abroad of significant military equipment: Prior
approval requirement. The approval of the Office of Defense Trade
Controls is required before a U.S. person may make a proposal or
presentation designed to constitute a basis for a decision on the part
of any foreign person to enter into any manufacturing license
agreement or technical assistance agreement for the production or
assembly of significant military equipment, regardless of dollar
value, in any foreign country, whenever:
   (i) The equipment is intended for use by the armed forces of any
foreign country; and
   (ii) The agreement would involve the export from the United States
of any defense article or the furnishing abroad of any defense service
including technical data.
   (b) Definition of proposal or presentation. The terms proposal or
presentation (designed to constitute a basis for a decision to
purchase and to enter into any agreement) mean the communication of
information in sufficient detail that the person communicating that
information knows or should know that it would permit an intended
purchaser to decide either to acquire the particular equipment in
question or to enter into the manufacturing license agreement or
technical assistance agreement. For example, a presentation which
describes the equipment's performance characteristics, price, and
probable availability for delivery would require prior notification or
approval, as appropriate, where the conditions specified in paragraph
(a) of this section are met. By contrast, the following would not
require prior notification or approval: Advertising or other reporting
in a publication of general circulation; preliminary discussions to
ascertain market potential; or merely calling attention to the fact
that a company manufactures a particular item of significant military
equipment.
   (c) Satisfaction of requirements. (1) The requirement of this
section for prior approval is met by any of the following:
   (i) A written statement from the Office of Defense Trade Controls
approving the proposed sale or agreement or approving the making of a
proposal or presentation.
   (ii) A license issued under &#167; 125.2 or &#167; 125.3 of this
subchapter for the export of technical data relating to the proposed
sale or agreement to the country concerned.
   (iii) A temporary export license issued under &#167; 123.5 of this
subchapter relating to the proposed sale or agreement for a
demonstration to the armed forces of the country of export.
   (iv) With respect to manufacturing license agreements or technical
assistance agreements, the application for export licenses pursuant to
the two preceding subparagraphs must state that they are related to
possible agreements of this kind.
   (2) The requirement of this section for prior notification is met
by informing the Office of Defense Trade Controls by letter at least
30 days before making the proposal or presentation. The letter must
comply with the procedures set forth in paragraph (d) of this section
and must identify the relevant license, approval, or FMS case by which
the identical equipment had previously been authorized for permanent
export or sale. The Office of Defense Trade Controls will provide
written acknowledgement of such prior notification to confirm
compliance with this requirement and the commencement of the 30-day
notification period.
   (d) Procedures. Unless a license has been obtained pursuant to
&#167; 126.8(c)(1) (ii) or (iii), a request for prior approval to make
a proposal or presentation with respect to significant military
equipment, or a 30-day prior notification regarding the sale of such
equipment, must be made by letter to the Office of Defense Trade
Controls. The letter must outline in detail the intended transaction,
including usage of the equipment involved and the country (or
countries) involved. Seven copies of the letter should be provided as
well as seven copies of suitable descriptive information concerning
the equipment.
   (e) Statement to accompany licensing requests. (1) Every
application for an export license or other approval to implement a
sale or agreement which meets the criteria specified in paragraph (a)
of this section must be accompanied by a statement from the applicant
which either:
   (i) Refers to a specific notification made or approval previously
granted with respect to the transaction; or
   (ii) Certifies that no proposal or presentation requiring prior
notification or approval has been made.
   (2) The Department of State may require a similar statement from
the Foreign Military Sales contractor concerned in any case where the
United States Government receives a request for a letter of offer for
a sale which meets the criteria specified in paragraph (a) of this
section.
   (f) Penalties. In addition to other remedies and penalties
prescribed by law or this subchapter, a failure to satisfy the prior
approval or prior notification requirements of this section may be
considered to be a reason for disapproval of a license, agreement or
sale under the FMS program.
   (g) License for technical data. Nothing in this section constitutes
or is to be construed as an exemption from the licensing requirement
for the export of technical data that is embodied in any proposal or
presentation made to any foreign persons.
  &#167; 126.9 -- Advisory opinions.
   Any person desiring information as to whether the Office of Defense
Trade Controls would be likely to grant a license or other approval
for the export of a particular defense article or defense service to a
particular country may request an advisory opinion from the Office of
Defense Trade Controls. These opinions are not binding on the
Department of State and are revocable. A request for an advisory
opinion must be made in writing and must outline in detail the
equipment, its usage, the security classification (if any) of the
articles or related technical data, and the country or countries
involved. An original and seven copies of the letter must be provided
along with seven copies of suitable descriptive information concerning
the defense article or defense service.  [*39316]
  &#167; 126.10 -- Disclosure of information.
   (a) Freedom of Information. Subchapter R of this title contains
regulations on the availability to the public of information and
records of the Department of State. The provisions of subchapter R
apply to such disclosures by the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
   (b) Determinations required by law. Section 38 of the Arms Export
Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778) provides that certain information
required by the Department of State in connection with the licensing
process may generally not be disclosed to the public unless certain
determinations relating to the national interest are made in
accordance with the procedures specified by that provision.
Determinations required by section 38(e) shall be made by the
Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs.
   (c) Information required under part 130. Part 130 of this
subchapter contains specific provisions on the disclosure of
information described in that part.
   (d) National Interest Determinations. In accordance with section
38(e) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(e)), the
Secretary of State has determined that the following disclosures are
in the national interest of the United States:
   (1) Furnishing information to foreign governments for law
enforcement or regulatory purposes; and
   (2) Furnishing information to foreign governments and other
agencies of the U.S. Government in the context of multilateral or
bilateral export regimes (e.g., the Missile Technology Control Regime,
the Australia Group, and CoCoM).
  &#167; 126.11 -- Relations to other provisions of law.
   The provisions in this subchapter are in addition to, and are not
in lieu of, any other provisions of law or regulations. The sale of
firearms in the United States, for example, remains subject to the
provisions of the Gun Control Act of 1968 and regulations administered
by the Department of the Treasury. The performance of defense services
on behalf of foreign governments by retired military personnel
continues to require consent pursuant to Part 3a of this
title. Persons who intend to export defense articles or furnish
defense services should consequently not assume that satisfying the
requirements of this subchapter relieves one of other requirements of
law.
  &#167; 126.12 -- Continuation in force.
   All determinations, authorizations, licenses, approvals of
contracts and agreements and other action issued, authorized,
undertaken, or entered into by the Department of State pursuant to
section 414 of the Mutual Security Act of 1954, as amended, or under
the previous provisions of this subchapter, continue in full force and
effect until or unless modified, revoked or superseded by the
Department of State.
  &#167; 126.13 -- Required information.
   (a) All applications for licenses (DSP-5, DSP-61, DSP-73, and
DSP-85), all requests for approval of agreements and amendments
thereto under part 124 of this subchapter, all requests for other
written authorizations, and all 30-day prior notifications of sales of
significant military equipment under &#167; 126.8(c) must include a
letter signed by a responsible official empowered by the applicant and
addressed to the Director, Office of Defense Trade Controls, stating
whether:
   (1) The applicant or the chief executive officer, president,
vice-presidents, other senior officers or officials (e.g.,
comptroller, treasurer, general counsel) or any member of the board of
directors is the subject of an indictment for or has been convicted of
violating any of the U.S. criminal statutes enumerated in &#167;
120.27 of this subchapter since the effective date of the Arms Export
Control Act, Public Law 94-329, 90 Stat. 729 (June 30, 1976);
   (2) The applicant or the chief executive officer, president,
vice-presidents, other senior officers or officials (e.g.,
comptroller, treasurer, general counsel) or any member of the board of
directors is ineligible to contract with, or to receive a license or
other approval to import defense articles or defense services from, or
to receive an export license or other approval from, any agency of the
U.S. Government;
   (3) To the best of the applicant's knowledge, any party to the
export as defined in &#167; 126.7(e) has been convicted of violating
any of the U.S. criminal statutes enumerated in &#167; 120.27 of this
subchapter since the effective date of the Arms Export Control Act,
Public Law 94-329, 90 Stat. 729 (June 30, 1976), or is ineligible to
contract with, or to receive a license or other approval to import
defense articles or defense services from, or to receive an export
license or other approval from any agency of the U.S. government; and
   (4) The natural person signing the application, notification or
other request for approval (including the statement required by this
subsection) is a citizen or national of the United States, has been
lawfully admitted to the United States for permanent residence (and
maintains such a residence) under the Immigration and Nationality Act,
as amended (8 U.S.C. 1101(a), section 101(a)20, 60 Stat. 163), or is
an official of a foreign government entity in the United States.
   (b) In addition, all applications for licenses must include, on the
application or an addendum sheet, the complete names and addresses of
all U.S.  consignors and freight forwarders, and all foreign
consignees and foreign intermediate consignees involved in the
transaction. If there are multiple consignors, consignees or freight
forwarders, and all the required information cannot be included on the
application form, an addendum sheet and seven copies containing this
information must be provided. The addendum sheet must be marked at the
top as follows: "Attachment to Department of State License From
(insert DSP-5, 61, 73, or 85, as appropriate) for Export of (insert
commodity) valued at (insert U.S. dollar amount) to (insert country of
ultimate destination)." The Office of Defense Trade Controls will
impress one copy of the addendum sheet with the Department of State
seal and return it to the applicant with each license. The sealed
addendum sheet must remain attached to the license as an integral part
thereof. District Directors of Customs and Department of Defense
transmittal authorities will permit only those U.S. consignors or
freight forwarders listed on the license or sealed addendum sheet to
make shipments under the license, and only to those foreign consignees
named on the documents.  Applicants should list all freight forwarders
who may be involved with shipments under the license to ensure that
the list is complete and to avoid the need for amendments to the list
after the license has been approved. If there are unusual or
extraordinary circumstances that preclude the specific identification
of all the U.S. consignors and freight forwarders and all foreign
consignees, the applicant must provide a letter of explanation with
each application.
   (c) In cases when foreign nationals are employed at or assigned to
security- cleared facilities, provision by the applicant of a
Technology Control Plan (available from the Defense Investigative
Service) will facilitate processing.


  PART 127-VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
  Sec.
  127.1 Violations.
  127.2 Misrepresentation and omission of facts.
  127.3 Penalties for violations.  [*39317]
  127.4 Authority of U.S. Customs Service officers.
  127.5 Authority of Defense Investigative Service.
  126.6 Seizure and forfeiture in attempts at illegal exports.
  127.7 Debarment.
  127.8 Interim suspension.
  127.9 Applicability of orders.
  127.10 Civil penalty.
  127.11 Past violations.
  127.12 Voluntary Disclosure.
   Authority: Secs. 2, 38 and 42, Pub. L. 90-629, 90 Stat. 744 (22
U.S.C. 2752, 2778, 2791); E.O. 11958, 42 FR 4311, 22 U.S.C. 401; 22
U.S.C. 2658.
  &#167; 127.1 -- Violations.
   (a) It is unlawful:
   (1) To export or attempt to export from the United States any
defense article or technical data or to furnish any defense service
for which a license or written approval is required by this subchapter
without first obtaining the required license or written approval from
the Office of Defense Trade Controls;
   (2) To import or attempt to import any defense article whenever a
license is required by this subchapter without first obtaining the
required license or written approval from the Office of Defense Trade
Controls;
   (3) To conspire to export, import, reexport or cause to be
exported, imported or reexported, any defense article or to furnish
any defense service for which a license or written approval is
required by this subchapter without first obtaining the required
license or written approval from the Office of Defense Trade Controls;
or
   (4) To violate any of the terms or conditions of licenses or
approvals granted pursuant to this subchapter.
   (b) Any person who is granted a license or other approval under
this subchapter is responsible for the acts of employees, agents, and
all authorized persons to whom possession of the licensed defense
article or technical data has been entrusted regarding the operation,
use, possession, transportation, and handling of such defense article
or technical data abroad. All persons abroad subject to
U.S. jurisdiction who obtain temporary custody of a defense article
exported from the United States or produced under an agreement
described in part 124 of this subchapter, and irrespective of the
number of intermediate transfers, are bound by the regulations of this
subchapter in the same manner and to the same extent as the original
owner or transferer.
   (c) A person with knowledge that another person is then ineligible
pursuant to &#167;&#167; 120.1(c) of this subchapter or 126.7 of this
chapter, is then subject to an order of debarment, or interim
suspension, may not, directly or indirectly, in any manner or
capacity, without prior disclosure of the facts to, and written
authorization from, the Office of Defense Trade Controls:
   (1) Apply for, obtain, or use any export control document as
defined in &#167; 127.2(b) for such debarred, suspended, or ineligible
person; or
   (2) Order, buy, receive, use, sell, deliver, store, dispose of,
forward, transport, finance, or otherwise service or participate in
any transaction which may involve any defense article or the
furnishing of any defense service for which a license or approval is
required by this subchapter for export, where such debarred,
suspended, or ineligible person may obtain any benefit therefrom or
have any direct or indirect interest therein.
   (d) No person may willfully cause, or aid, abet, counsel, demand,
induce, procure or permit the commission of any act prohibited by, or
the omission of any act required by 22 U.S.C. 2778, 22 U.S.C. 2779, or
any regulation, license, approval, or order issued thereunder.
  &#167; 127.2 -- Misrepresentation and omission of facts.
   (a) It is unlawful to use any export or temporary import control
document containing a false statement or misrepresenting or omitting a
material fact for the purpose of exporting any defense article or
technical data or the furnishing of any defense service for which a
license or approval is required by this subchapter. Any false
statement, misrepresentation, or omission of material fact in an
export or temporary import control document will be considered as made
in a matter within the jurisdiction of a department or agency of the
United States for the purposes of 18 U.S.C. 1001, 22 U.S.C. 2778 and
22 U.S.C. 2779.
   (b) For the purpose of this section, export or temporary import
control documents include the following:
   (1) An application for a permanent export or a temporary import
license and supporting documents.
   (2) Shipper's Export Declaration.
   (3) Invoice.
   (4) Declaration of destination.
   (5) Delivery verification.
   (6) Application for temporary export.
   (7) Application for registration.
   (8) Purchase order.
   (9) Foreign import certificate.
   (10) Bill-of-lading.
   (11) Airway bill.
   (12) Nontransfer and use certificate.
   (13) Any other document used in the regulation or control of a
defense article, defense service or technical data for which a license
or approval is required by this subchapter.
  &#167; 127.3 -- Penalties for violations.
   Any person who willfully:
   (a) Violates any provision of section 38 or section 39 of the Arms
Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2778 and 2779), or any undertaking
specifically required by part 124 of this subchapter; or
   (b) In a registration, license application or report required by
section 38 or section 39 of the Arms Export Control Act (22
U.S.C. 2278 and 2779) or by any rule or regulation issued under either
section, makes any untrue statement of a material fact or omits a
material fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the
statements therein not misleading, shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a fine or imprisonment, or both, as prescribed by 22 U.S.C.
2778(c).
  &#167; 127.4 -- Authority of U.S. Customs Service officers.
   (a) U.S. Customs Service officers may take appropriate action to
ensure observance of this subchapter as to the export or the attempted
export of any defense article or technical data, including the
inspection of loading or unloading of any vessel, vehicle, or
aircraft. This applies whether the export is authorized by license or
by written approval issued under this subchapter.
   (b) U.S. Customs Service officers have the authority to
investigate, detain or seize any export or attempted export of defense
articles or technical data contrary to this subchapter.
   (c) Upon the presentation to a Customs Officer of a license or
written approval authorizing the export of any defense article, the
customs officer may require the production of other relevant documents
and information relating to the proposed export. This includes an
invoice, order, packing list, shipping document, correspondence,
instructions, and the documents otherwise required by the U.S. Customs
Service.
  &#167; 127.5 -- Authority of the Defense Investigative Service.
   In the case of exports involving classified technical data or
defense articles, the Defense Investigative Service may take
appropriate action to ensure compliance with the Department of Defense
Industrial Security Manual.  Upon a request to the Defense
Investigative Service regarding the export of any classified defense
article or technical data, the Defense [*39318] Investigative Service
official or a designated government transmittal authority may require
the production of other relevant documents and information relating to
the proposed export.
  &#167; 127.6 Seizure and forfeiture in attempts at illegal exports.
   (a) An attempt to export from the United States any defense
articles in violation of the provisions of this subchapter constitutes
an offense punishable under section 401 of title 22 of the United
States Code. Whenever it is known or there is probable cause to
believe that any defense article is intended to be or is being or has
been exported or removed from the United States in violation of law,
such article and any vessel, vehicle or aircraft involved in such
attempt is subject to seizure, forfeiture and disposition as provided
in section 401 of title 22 of the United States Code.
   (b) Similarly, an attempt to violate any of the conditions under
which a temporary export or temporary import license was issued
pursuant to this subchapter or to violate the requirements of &#167;
123.2 of this subchapter also constitutes an offense punishable under
section 401 of Title 22 of the United States Code, and such article,
together with any vessel, vehicle or aircraft involved in any such
attempt is subject to seizure, forfeiture, and disposition as provided
in section 401 of title 22 of the United States Code.
  &#167; 127.7 -- Debarment.
   (a) In implementing section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act, the
Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs may
prohibit any person from participating directly or indirectly in the
export of defense articles, including technical data or in the
furnishing of defense services for which a license or approval is
required by this subchapter for any of the reasons listed below. Any
such prohibition is referred to as a debarment for purposes of this
subchapter. The Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military
Affairs shall determine the appropriate period of time for debarment,
which shall generally be for a period of three years.
   (b) Grounds. (1) The basis for a statutory debarment, as described
in paragraph (c) of this section, is any conviction for violating the
Arms Export Control Act (see &#167; 127.3 of this subchapter) or any
conspiracy to violate the Arms Export Control Act.
   (2) The basis for administrative debarment, described in part 128
of this subchapter, is any violation of 22 U.S.C. 2778 or any rule or
regulation issued thereunder when such a violation is of such a
character as to provide a reasonable basis for the Office of Defense
Trade Controls to believe that the violator cannot be relied upon to
comply with the statute or these rules or regulations in the future,
and when such violation is established in accordance with part 128 of
this subchapter.
   (c) Statutory Debarment. Section 38(g)(4) of the Arms Export
Control Act prohibits the issuance of licenses to persons who have
been convicted of violating the U.S. criminal statutes enumerated in
&#167; 120.27 of this subchapter.  Discretionary authority to issue
licenses is provided, but only if certain statutory requirements are
met. It is the policy of the Department of State not to consider
applications for licenses or requests for approvals involving any
person who has been convicted of violating the Arms Export Control Act
or convicted of conspiracy to violate that Act for a three year period
following pursuant to this policy. A list of persons who have been
convicted of such offenses and debarred for this reason shall be
published periodically in the Federal Register. Debarment in such
cases is based solely upon the outcome of a criminal proceeding,
conducted by a court of the United States, that established guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt in accordance with due process. The
procedures of part 128 of this subchapter are not applicable in such
cases.
   (d) Appeals. Any person who is ineligible pursuant to paragraph (c)
of this section may appeal to the Under Secretary of State for
International Security Affairs for reconsideration of the
ineligibility determination. The procedures specified in &#167; 128.13
of this subchapter are applicable in such appeals.
  &#167; 127.8 -- Interim suspension.
   (a) The Director of the Office of Defense Trade Controls is
authorized to order the interim suspension of any person when the
Director believes that grounds for debarment (as defined in &#167;
127.6 of this part) exist and where and to the extent the Director
finds that interim suspension is reasonably necessary to protect world
peace or the security or foreign policy of the United States.  The
interim suspension orders prohibit that person from participating
directly or indirectly in the export of any defense article or defense
service for which a license or approval is required by this
subchapter. The suspended person shall be notified in writing as
provided in &#167; 127.6(c) of this part (statutory debarment) or
&#167; 128.3 of this subchapter (administrative debarment), whichever
is appropriate. In both cases, a copy of the interim suspension order
will be served upon that person in the same manner as provided in
&#167; 128.3 of this subchapter. The interim suspension order may be
made immediately effective, without prior notice. The order will state
the relevant facts, the grounds for issuance of the order, and
describe the nature and duration of the interim suspension. No person
may be suspended for a period exceeding 60 days unless proceedings
under &#167; 127.6(c) of this part or under part 128 of this
subchapter, or criminal proceedings, are initiated before the
expiration of that period.
   (b) A motion or petition to vacate or modify an interim suspension
order may be filed at any time with the Under Secretary of State for
International Security Affairs. After a final decision is reached, the
Director of the Office of Defense Trade Controls will issue an
appropriate order disposing of the motion or petition and will
promptly inform the respondent accordingly.
  &#167; 127.9 -- Applicability of orders.
   For the purpose of preventing evasion, orders of the Assistant
Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs, debarring a person
under &#167; 127.6 and orders of the Director, Office of Defense Trade
Controls, suspending a person under &#167; 127.7 may be made
applicable to any other person who may then or thereafter (during the
term of the order) be related to the debarred person by affiliation,
ownership, control, position of responsibility, or other commercial
connection.  Appropriate notice and opportunity to respond to charges
will be given.
  &#167; 127.10 -- Civil penalty.
   (a) The Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs,
Department of State, is authorized to impose a civil penalty in an
amount not to exceed that authorized by 50 U.S.C. App. 2410(c) for
each violation of 22 U.S.C.  2778, or any regulation, order, license
or approval issued thereunder. This civil penalty may be either in
addition to, or in lieu of, any other liability or penalty which may
be imposed.
   (b) The Office of Defense Trade Controls may make:
   (1) The payment of a civil penalty under this section or
   (2) The completion of any administrative action pursuant to this
part 127 or 128 of this subchapter a prior condition for the issuance,
restoration, or continuing validity of any export license or other
approval.  [*39319]
  &#167; 127.11 -- Past violations.
   (a) Pursuant to section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act, licenses
or other approvals may not be granted to persons who have been
convicted of violating any of the U.S. criminal statutes enumerated in
&#167; 120.27 of this subchapter or who are ineligible to receive any
export licenses from any agency of the U.S.  government, subject to a
narrowly defined statutory exception. This provision establishes a
presumption of denial for licenses or other approvals involving such
persons. This presumption is applied by the Office of Defense Trade
Controls to all persons convicted or deemed ineligible in this manner
since the effective date of the Arms Export Control Act
(Pub. L. 94-329; 90 Stat. 729) (June 30, 1976).
   (b) Policy. An exception to the policy of the Department of State
to deny applications for licenses or other approvals that involve
persons described in paragraph (a) of this section shall not be
considered unless there are extraordinary circumstances surrounding
the conviction or ineligibility to export, and only if the applicant
demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Bureau of Politico-Military
Affairs, that the applicant has taken appropriate steps to mitigate
any law enforcement and other legitimate concerns, and to deal with
the causes that resulted in the conviction, ineligibility, or
debarment.  Any person described in paragraph (a) of this section who
wishes to request consideration of any application must explain, in a
letter to the Director, Office of Defense Trade Controls, the reasons
why the application should be considered. If the Bureau of
Politico-Military Affairs concludes that the application and written
explanation have sufficient merit, it shall consult with the Office of
the Legal Adviser and the Department of the Treasury regarding law
enforcement concerns, and may also request the views of other
departments, including the Department of Justice. If the Office of
Defense Trade Controls does grant the license or other approval,
subsequent applications from the same person need not repeat the
information previously provided but should instead refer to the
favorable decision.
   (c) Debarred persons. Persons debarred pursuant to &#167; 127.6(c)
(statutory debarment) may not utilize the procedures provided by this
section while the debarment is in force. Such persons may utilize only
the procedures provided by &#167; 127.7(d) of this part.
  &#167; 127.12 -- Voluntary Disclosures.
   (a) General policy. The Department strongly encourages the
disclosure of information to the Office of Defense Trade Controls by
persons, firms or any organization that believe they may have violated
any export control provision of the Arms Export Control Act, or any
regulations, order, license, or other authorization issued under the
Arms Export Control Act. Voluntary self- disclosure may be considered
a mitigating factor in determining the administrative penalties, if
any, that should be imposed by the Department.  Failure to report such
violation(s) may result in circumstances detrimental to U.S. national
security and foreign policy interests.
   (b) Limitations. (1) The provisions of this section apply only when
information is provided to the Office of Defense Trade Controls for
its review in determining whether to take administrative action under
part 128 of this subchapter concerning violation(s) of the export
control provisions of the Arms Export Control Act and these
regulations.
   (2) The provisions of this section apply only when information is
received by the Office of Defense Trade Controls for review prior to
such time that either the Department of State or any other agency,
bureau or department of the United States Government obtains knowledge
of either the same or substantially similar information from another
source and commenced an investigation or inquiry that involves that
information, and that is intended to determine whether the Arms Export
Control Act or these regulations, or any other license, order or other
authorization issued under the Arms Export Control Act has been
violated.
   (3) It is possible that the activity in question-despite voluntary
disclosure-might merit penalties, administrative actions, sanctions,
or referrals to the Department of Justice for consideration as to
whether criminal prosecution is warranted. In the latter case, the
Office of Defense Trade Controls will notify the Department of Justice
of the voluntary nature of the disclosure although the Department of
Justice is not required to give that fact any weight. The Office of
Defense Trade Controls has the sole discretion to consider whether
"voluntary disclosure," in context with other relevant information in
a particular case, should be a mitigating factor in determining what,
if any, administrative action will be imposed. Some of the mitigating
factors the Office of Defense Trade Controls may consider are:
   (i) Whether the transaction would have been authorized had proper
application been made;
   (ii) Why the violation(s) occurred;
   (iii) The degree of cooperation with the ensuing investigation;
   (iv) Whether the person or firm has instituted or improved an
internal compliance program to reduce the likelihood of future
violation(s);
   (v) Whether the person making the disclosure did so with the full
knowledge and authorization of the firm's senior management. (If not,
then a firm will not be deemed to have made a disclosure as covered in
this section.)
   (4) The provisions of this section do not, nor should they be
relied on, to create, confer, or grant any rights, benefits,
privileges, or protection enforceable at law or in equity by any
person, business, or entity in any civil, criminal, administrative, or
other matter.
   (c) Notification. (1) Any person or firm wanting to disclose
information that constitutes a voluntary self-disclosure should, in
the manner outlined below, initially notify the Office of Defense
Trade Controls as soon as possible after violation(s) are discovered
and then conduct a thorough review of all export- related transactions
where violation(s) are suspected.
   (2) Notification of violation(s) must be in writing and should
include the following information:
   (i) A precise description of the nature and extent of the
violation(s) (e.g., an unauthorized shipment, doing business with a
party denied U.S. export privileges, etc.);
   (ii) The exact circumstances surrounding the violation(s) (a
thorough explanation of why, when, where, and how the violation(s)
occurred);
   (iii) The complete identities and addresses of all individuals and
organizations, whether foreign or domestic, involved in the activities
giving rise to the violation(s);
   (iv) Export license numbers, if applicable;
   (v) U.S. Munitions List category and subcategory, product
descriptions, quantities, and characteristics of the commodities or
technical data involved;
   (vi) A description of any corrective actions already undertaken;
   (vii) The name and address of the person(s) making the disclosure
and a point of contact, if different, should further information be
needed.
   (3) Factors to be considered include, for example, whether the
violation(s) were intentional or inadvertent; the degree to which the
person or firm responsible for the violation(s) making the disclosure
was familiar with the [*39320] laws and regulations; and whether the
violator was the subject of prior administrative or criminal action
under the AECA. In addition to immediately providing written
notification, persons, firms, companies and organizations are strongly
urged to conduct a thorough review of all export- related transactions
where possible violation(s) are suspected.
   (d) Documentation. (1) The written disclosure should be accompanied
by copies of those documents that substantiate it. Where appropriate,
the documentation should include, but is not limited to:
   (i) Licensing documents (e.g., license applications, export
licenses and end- user statements);
   (ii) Shipping documents (e.g., shipper's export declarations,
airway bills and bills of lading);
   (iii) Any other relevant documents must be retained by the person
making the disclosure until the Office of Defense Trade Controls
requests them or until a final decision on the disclosed information
has been made.
   (e) Certification. A certification must be submitted stating that
all of the representations made in connection with the voluntary
self-disclosure are true and correct to the best of that person's
knowledge and belief. Certifications made by a firm, corporation or
any other organization should be executed by someone with the
authority to do so.
   (f) Oral presentations. It is generally not necessary to augment
the written presentation with an oral presentation. However, if the
person making the disclosure believes a meeting is desirable, a
request for one should be included with the written presentation.
   (g) Voluntary disclosures should be sent to:
   Compliance Analysis Division, PM/DTC, SA-6, room 200, Office of
Defense Trade Controls, Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs,
U.S. Department of State, Washington, DC 20522-0602.


  PART 128-ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
  Sec.
  128.1 Exclusion of functions from the Administrative Procedure Act.
  128.2 Presiding Official.
  128.3 Institution of administrative proceedings.
  128.4 Default.
  128.5 Answer and demand for oral hearing.
  128.6 Discovery.
  128.7 Prehearing conference.
  128.8 Hearings.
  128.9 Proceedings before and report of Presiding Official.
  128.10 Disposition of proceedings.
  128.11 Consent agreements.
  128.12 Rehearings.
  128.13 Appeals.
  128.14 Confidentiality of proceedings.
  128.15 Orders containing probationary periods.
  128.16 Extension of time.
  128.17 Availability of orders.
   Authority: Secs. 2, 38, 40, 42, and 71, Arms Export Control Act. 90
Stat. 744 (22 U.S.C. 2752, 2778, 2780, 2791, and 2797); E.O. 11958, 42
FR 4311: 22 U.S.C.  2658; E.O. 12291, 46 FR 1981.
  &#167; 128.1 -- Exclusion of functions from the Administrative
Procedure Act.
   The Arms Export Control Act authorizes the President to control the
import and export of defense articles and services in furtherance of
world peace and the security and foreign policy of the United
States. It authorizes the Secretary of State to make decisions on
whether licenses shall be granted, as well as to revoke, suspend or
amend licenses whenever the Secretary deems such action to be
advisable. The administration of the Arms Export Control Act is a
foreign affairs function and is thus encompassed within the meaning of
the military and foreign affairs exclusion of the Administrative
Procedure Act and is thereby expressly exempt from various provisions
of that Act. Because the exercising of the foreign affairs function,
including the decisions required to implement the Arms Export Control
Act, is highly discretionary, it is excluded from review under the
Administrative Procedure Act.
  &#167; 128.2 -- Presiding Official.
   The Presiding Official referred to in this part is the Presiding
Official of the International Trade Administration of the Department
of Commerce, as provided in 15 CFR 388.2. The Presiding Official is
authorized to exercise the powers and perform the duties provided for
in &#167;&#167; 127.6, 127.7 of this subchapter and &#167;&#167; 128.3
through 128.16.
  &#167; 128.3 -- Institution of administrative proceedings.
   (a) Charging letters. The Director, Office of Munitions Control,
with the concurrence of the Office of the Legal Adviser, Department of
State, may initiate debarment proceedings in accordance with &#167;
127.6 of this subchapter or civil penalties in accordance with &#167;
127.9 of this subchapter. Administrative proceedings shall be
initiated by means of a charging letter. The charging letter will
state the essential facts constituting the alleged violation and refer
to the regulatory or other provisions involved. It will give notice
that if the respondent to answer the charges with 30 days, as provided
in &#167; 128.5(a), and indicate that a failure to answer will be
taken as an admission of the truth of the charges. It will inform the
respondent that he or she is entitled to an oral hearing if a written
demand for one is filed with the answer or within 7 days after service
of the answer. The respondent will also be informed that he or she
may, if so desired, be represented by counsel of his or her choosing.
Charging letters may be amended from time to time, upon reasonable
notice.
   (b) Service. A charging letter is served upon a respondent:
   (1) If the respondent is a resident of the United States, when it
is mailed postage prepaid in a wrapper addressed to the respondent at
his or her last known address; or when left with the respondent or the
agent or employee of the respondent; or when left at the respondent's
dwelling with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing
herein; or
   (2) If the respondent is a non-resident of the United States, when
served upon the respondent by any of the foregoing means. If such
methods of service are not practicable or appropriate, the charging
letter may be tendered for service on the respondent to an official of
the government of the country wherein the respondent resides, provided
that there is an agreement or understanding between the United States
Government and the government of the country wherein the respondent
resident permitting this action.
  &#167; 128.4 -- Default.
   (a) Failure to answer. If the respondent fails to answer the
charging letter, the respondent may be held in default. The case shall
then be referred to the Presiding Official for consideration in a
manner as the Presiding Official may consider appropriate. Any order
issued shall have the same effect as an order issued following the
disposition of contested charges.
   (b) Petition to set aside defaults. Upon showing good cause, any
respondent against whom a default order has been issued may apply to
set aside the default and vacate the order entered thereon. The
petition shall be submitted in duplicate to the Assistant Secretary
for Politico-Military Affairs, U.S.  Department of State, 2201 C
Street, NW., Washington, DC 20520. The Director will refer the
petition to the Presiding Official for consideration and a
recommendation. The Presiding Official will consider the application
and may order a hearing and require the respondent to submit further
evidence [*39321] in support of his or her petition. The filing of a
petition to set aside a default does not in any manner affect an order
entered upon default and such order continues in full force and effect
unless a further order is made modifying or terminating it.
  &#167; 128.5 -- Answer and Demand for oral hearing.
   (a) When to answer. The respondent is required to answer the
charging letter within 30 days after service.
   (b) Contents of answer. An answer must be responsive to the
charging letter.  It must fully set forth the nature of the
respondent's defense or defenses. In the answer, the respondent must
admit or deny specifically each separate allegation of the charging
letter, unless the respondent is without knowledge, in which case the
respondent's answer shall so state and the statement shall operate as
a denial. Failure to deny or controvert any particular allegation will
be deemed an admission thereof. The answer may set forth such
additional or new matter as the respondent believes supports a defense
or claim of mitigation.  Any defense or partial defense not
specifically set forth in an answer shall be deemed waived. Evidence
offered thereon by the respondent at a hearing may be refused except
upon good cause being shown. If the respondent does not demand an oral
hearing, he or she shall transmit, within 7 days after the service of
his or her answer, original or photocopies of all correspondence,
papers, records, affidavits, and other documentary or written evidence
having any bearing upon or connection with the matters in issue. If
any such materials are in language other than English, translations
into English shall be submitted at the same time.
   (c) Submission of answer. The answer, written demand for oral
hearing (if any) and supporting evidence required by &#167; 128.5(b)
shall be in duplicate and mailed or delivered to the Office of EAR
Administration Proceedings, United States Department of Commerce, room
3810, 14th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC
20230. A copy shall be simultaneously mailed or delivered to the
Director, Office of Munitions Control, Department of State,
Washington, DC 20520.
  &#167; 128.6 -- Discovery.
   (a) Discovery by the respondent. The respondent, through the
Presiding Official, may request from the Office of Munitions Control
any relevant information, not privileged, that may be necessary or
helpful in preparing a defense. The Office of Munitions Control any
relevant information, not privileged, that may be necessary or helpful
in preparing a defense. The Office of Munitions Control may supply
summaries in place of original documents and may withhold information
from discovery if necessary to comply with any statute, executive
order or regulation requiring that the information not be disclosed.
The respondent may request the Presiding Officer to request any
relevant information, books, records, or other evidence, from any
other person or government agency so long as the request is reasonable
in scope and not unduly burdensome.
   (b) Discovery by the Office of Munitions Control. The Office of
Munitions Control or the Presiding Official may request from the
respondent admissions of facts, answers to interrogatories, the
production of books, records, or other relevant evidence, so long as
the request is relevant and material, reasonable in scope, and not
unduly burdensome.
   (c) Subpoenas. At the request of any party, the Presiding Official
may issue subpoenas, returnable before him, requiring the attendance
of witnesses and the production of books, records, and other
documentary or physical evidence determined by the Presiding Official
to be relevant and material to the proceedings, reasonable in scope,
and not unduly burdensome.
   (d) Enforcement of discovery rights. If the Office of Munitions
Control fails to provide the respondent with information in its
possession which is nototherwi
 available and which is necessary to the respondent's defense, the
Presiding Official may dismiss the charges on her or his own motion or
on a motion of the respondent. If the respondent fails to respond with
reasonable diligence to the requests for discovery by the Office of
Munitions Control or the Presiding Official, on her or his own motion
or motion of the Office of Munitions Control, and upon such notice to
the respondent as the Presiding Official may direct, may strike
respondent's answer and declare the respondent in default, or make any
other ruling which the Presiding Official deems necessary and just
under the circumstances. If a third party fails to respond to the
request for information, the Presiding Official shall consider whether
the evidence sought is necessary to a fair hearing, and if it is so
necessary that a fair hearing may not be held without it, the
Presiding Official shall dismiss the charges.
  &#167; 128.7 -- Prehearing conference.
   (a) The Presiding Official may, upon his own motion or upon motion
of any party, request the parties or their counsel to a prehearing
conference to consider (1) simplification of issues; (2) the necessity
or desirability of amendments to pleadings; (3) obtaining stipulations
of fact and of documents to avoid unnecessary proof; or (4) such other
matter as may expedite the disposition of the proceeding. The
Presiding Official will prepare a summary of the action agreed upon or
taken at the conference, and will incorporate therein any written
stipulations or agreements made by the parties. The conference
proceedings may be recorded magnetically or taken by a reporter and
transcribed, and filed with the Presiding Official.
   (b) If a conference is impracticable, the Presiding Official may
request the parties to correspond with him or her to achieve the
purposes of a conference.  The Presiding Official shall prepare a
summary of action taken as in the case of a conference.
  &#167; 128.8 -- Hearings.
   (a) A respondent who had not filed a timely written answer is not
entitled to a hearing, and the case may be considered by the Presiding
Official as provided in &#167; 128.4(a). If any answer is filed, but
no oral hearing demanded, the Presiding Official may proceed to
consider the case upon the written pleadings and evidence
available. The Presiding Official may provide for the making of the
record in such manner as the Presiding Official deems appropriate. If
respondent answers and demands an oral hearing, the Presiding
Official, upon due notice, shall set the case for hearing, unless a
respondent has raised in his answer no issues of material fact to be
determined. If respondent fails to appear at a scheduled hearing, the
hearing nevertheless may proceed in respondent's absence.  The
respondent's failure to appear will not affect the validity of the
hearing or any proceedings or action thereafter.
   (b) The Presiding Official may administer oaths and
affirmations. Respondent may be represented by counsel. Unless
otherwise agreed by the parties and the Presiding Official, the
proceeding will be taken by a reporter or by magnetic recording,
transcribed, and filed with the Presiding Official. Respondent may
examine the transcript and may obtain a copy upon payment of proper
costs.  [*39322]
  &#167; 128.9 -- Proceedings before and report of Presiding Official.
   (a) The Presiding Official may conform any part of the proceedings
before him or her to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The record
may be made available in any other administrative or other proceeding
involving the same respondent.
   (b) The Presiding Official, after considering the record, will
prepare a written report. The report will include findings of fact,
findings of law, a finding whether a law or regulation has been
violated, and the Presiding Official's recommendations. It shall be
transmitted to the Assistant Secretary for Politico-Military Affairs,
Department of State.
  &#167; 128.10 -- Disposition of proceedings.
   Where the evidence is not sufficient to support the charges, the
Director, Office of Munitions Control or the Presiding Official will
dismiss the charges.  Where the Presiding Official finds that a
violation has been committed, the Presiding Official's recommendation
shall be advisory only. The Assistant Secretary for Politico-Military
Affairs will review the record, consider the report of the Presiding
Official, and make an appropriate disposition of the case. The
Director may issue an order debarring the respondent from
participating in the export of defense articles or technical data or
the furnishing of defense services as provided in &#167; 127.6 of this
subchapter, impose a civil penalty as provided in &#167; 127.9 of this
subchapter or take such other action as the presiding Official deems
appropriate. Any debarment order will be effective for the period of
time specified therein and may contain such additional terms and
conditions as are deemed appropriate. A copy of the order together
with a copy of the Presiding Official's report will be served upon the
respondent.
  &#167; 128.11 -- Consent agreements.
   (a) The Office of Munitions Control and the respondent may, by
agreement, submit to the Presiding Official a proposal for the
issuance of a consent order.  The Presiding Official will review the
facts of the case and the proposal and may conduct conferences with
the parties and may require the presentation of evidence in the
case. If the Presiding Official does not approve the proposal, the
Presiding Official will notify the parties and the case will proceed
as though no consent proposal had been made. If the proposal is
approved, the Presiding Official will report the facts of the case
along with recommendations to the Assistant Secretary for
Politico-Military Affairs. If the Director does not approve the
proposal, the case will proceed as though no consent proposal has been
made. If the Director approves the proposal, an appropriate order may
be issued.
   (b) Cases may also be settled prior to service of a charging
letter. In such an event, a proposed charging letter shall be
prepared, and a consent agreement and order shall be submitted for the
approval and signature of the Assistant Secretary for
Politico-Military Affairs, and no action by the Presiding Official
shall be required. Cases which are settled may not be reopened or
appealed.
  &#167; 128.12 -- Rehearings.
   The Presiding Official may grant a rehearing or reopen a proceeding
at any time for the purpose of hearing any relevant and material
evidence which was not known or obtainable at the time of the original
hearing. A report for rehearing or reopening must contain a summary of
such evidence, and must explain the reasons why it could not have been
presented at the original hearing. The Presiding Official will inform
the parties of any further hearing, and will conduct such hearing and
submit a report and recommendations in the same manner as provided for
the original proceeding (described in &#167; 128.10).
  &#167; 128.13 -- Appeals.
   (a) Filing of appeals. An appeal must be in writing, and be
addressed to and filed with the Under Secretary of State for Security
Assistance, Science and Technology, Department of State, Washington,
DC 20520. An appeal from a final order denying export privileges or
imposing civil penalties must be filed within 30 days after receipt of
a copy of the order. If the Under Secretary cannot for any reason act
on the appeal, he or she may designate another Department of State
official to receive and act on the appeal.
   (b) Grounds and conditions for appeal. The respondent may appeal
from the debarment or from the imposition of a civil penalty (except
the imposition of civil penalties pursuant to a consent order pursuant
to &#167; 128.11) upon the ground: (1) That the findings of a
violation are not supported by any substantial evidence; (2) that a
prejudicial error of law was committed: or (3) that the provisions of
the order are arbitrary, capricious, or an abuse of discretion. The
appeal must specify upon which of these grounds the appeal is based
and must indicate from which provisions of the order the appeal is
taken.  An appeal from an order issued upon default will not be
entertained if the respondent has failed to seek relief as provided in
&#167; 128.4(b).
   (c) Matters considered on appeal. An appeal will be considered upon
the basis of the assembled record. This record consists of (but is not
limited to) the charging letter, the respondent's answer, the
transcript or magnetic recording of the hearing before the Presiding
Official, the report of the Presiding Official, the order of the
Assistant Secretary for Politico-Military Affairs, and any other
relevant documents involved in the proceedings before the Presiding
Official. The Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Science and
Technology may direct a rehearing and reopening before the Presiding
Official if he or she finds that the record is insufficient or that
new evidence is relevant and material to the issues and was not known
and was not available to the respondent at the time of the original
hearings.
   (d) Effect of appeals. The taking of an appeal will not stay the
operation of any order.
   (e) Preparation of appeals.-(1) General requirements. An appeal
shall be in letter form. The appeal and accompanying material should
be filed in duplicate, unless otherwise indicated, and a copy
simultaneously mailed or delivered to the Director, Office of
Munitions Control, Department of State, Washington, DC 20520.
   (2) Oral presentation. The Under Secretary for Security Assistance,
Science and Technology may grant the appellant an opportunity for oral
argument and will set the time and place for oral argument and will
notify the parties, ordinarily at least 10 days before the date set.
   (f) Decisions. All appeals will be considered and decided within a
reasonable time after they are filed. An appeal may be granted or
denied in whole or in part, or dismissed at the request of the
appellant. The decision of the Under Secretary for Security
Assistance, Science and Technology will be final.
  &#167; 128.14 -- Confidentiality of proceedings.
   Proceedings under this part are confidential. The documents
referred to in &#167; 128.17 are not, however, deemed to be
confidential Reports of the Presiding Official and copies of
transcripts or recordings of hearings will be available to parties
and, to the extent of their own testimony, to witnesses. All records
are available to any U.S. Government agency showing a proper interest
therein.  [*39323]
  &#167; 128.15 -- Orders containing probationary periods.
   (a) Revocation of probationary periods. A debarment or interim
suspension order may set a probationary period during which the order
may be held in abeyance for all or part of the debarment or suspension
period, subject to the conditions stated therein. The Director, Office
of Munitions Control, may apply, without notice to any person to be
affected thereby, to the Presiding Official for an order revoking
probation when it appears that the conditions of the probation have
been breached. The facts in support of the application will be
presented to the Presiding Official, who will report thereon and make
a recommendation to the Assistant Secretary for Politico-Military
Affairs. The latter will make a determination whether to revoke
probation and will issue an appropriate order.
   (b) Hearing-(1) Objections upon notice. Any person affected by an
application upon notice to revoke probation, within the time specified
in the notice, may file objections with the Presiding Official.
   (2) Objections to order without notice. Any person adversely
affected by an order revoking probation, without notice may request
that the order be set aside by filing his objections thereto with the
Presiding Official. The request will not stay the effective date of
the order or revocation.
   (3) Requirements for filing objections. Objections filed with the
Presiding Official must be submitted in writing and in duplicate. A
copy must be simultaneously submitted to the Office of Munitions
Control. Denials and admissions, as well as any mitigating
circumstances, which the person affected intends to present must be
set forth in or accompany the letter of objection and must be
supported by evidence. A request for an oral hearing may be made at
the time of filing objections.
   (4) Determination. The application and objections thereto will be
referred to the Presiding Official. An oral hearing, if requested,
will be conducted at an early convenient date, unless the objections
filed raise no issues of material fact to be determined. The Presiding
Official will report the facts and make a recommendation to the
Assistant Secretary for Politico-Military Affairs, who will determine
whether the application should be granted or denied and will issue an
appropriate order. A copy of the order and of the Presiding Official's
report will be furnished to any person affected thereby.
   (c) Effect of revocation on other actions. The revocation of a
probationary period will not preclude any other action concerning a
further violation, even where revocation is based on the further
violation.
  &#167; 128.16 -- Extension of time.
   The Presiding Official, for good cause shown, may extend the time
within which to prepare and submit an answer to a charging letter or
to perform any other act required by this part 128.
  &#167; 128.17 -- Availability of orders.
   All charging letters, debarment orders, orders imposing civil
penalties, probationary periods, and interim suspension orders are
available for public inspection in the Public Reading Room of the
Department of State.


  PART 129-[RESERVED]


  PART 130-POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, FEES AND COMMISSIONS
  Sec.  130.1 Purpose.
  130.2 Applicant.
  130.3 Armed forces.
  130.4 Defense articles and defense services.
  130.5 Fee or commission.
  130.6 Political contribution.
  130.7 Supplier.
  130.8 Vendor.
  130.9 Obligation to furnish information to the Office of Defense
Trade Controls.
  130.10 Information to be furnished by applicant or supplier to the
Office of Defense Trade Controls.
  130.11 Supplementary reports.
  130.12 Information to be furnished by vendor to applicant or
supplier.
  130.13 Information to be furnished to applicant, supplier or vendor
by a recipient of a fee or commission.
  130.14 Recordkeeping.
  130.15 Confidential business information.
  130.16 Other reporting requirements.
  130.17 Utilization of and access to reports and records.
   Authority: Sec. 39, Arms Export Control Act, 90 Stat. 767 (22
U.S.C. 2779); E.O. 11958, 42 FR 4311, 3 CFR, 1977 Comp. p.79; 22
U.S.C. 2658.
  &#167; 130.1 -- Purpose.
   Section 39(a) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2779)
provides that the Secretary of State shall prescribe regulations with
respect to reporting on certain payments relating to sales of defense
articles and defense services. The provisions of this part implement
that requirement. Definitions which apply to this part are contained
in &#167;&#167; 130.2 through 130.8.
  &#167; 130.2 -- Applicant.
   Applicant means any person who applies to the Office of Defense
Trade Controls for any license or approval required under this
subchapter for the export of defense articles or defense services
valued in an amount of $ 500,000 or more which are being sold
commercially to or for the use of the armed forces of a foreign
country or international organization. This term also includes a
person to whom the required license or approval has been given.
  &#167; 130.3 -- Armed forces.
   Armed forces means the army, navy, marine, air force, or coast
guard, as well as the national guard and national police, of a foreign
country. This term also includes any military unit or military
personnel organized under or assigned to an international
organization.
  &#167; 130.4 -- Defense articles and defense services.
   Defense articles and defense services have the meaning given those
terms in paragraphs (3), (4) and (7) of section 47 of the Arms Export
Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2794 (3), (4), and (7)). When used with
reference to commercial sales, the definitions in &#167;&#167; 120.6
and 120.9 of this subchapter apply.
  &#167; 130.5 -- Fee or commission.
   (a) Fee or commission means, except as provided in paragraph (b) of
this section, any loan, gift, donation or other payment of $ 1,000 or
more made, or offered or agreed to be made directly or indirectly,
whether in cash or in kind, and whether or not pursuant to a written
contract, which is:
   (1) To or at the direction of any person, irrespective of
nationality, whether or not employed by or affiliated with an
applicant, a supplier or a vendor; and
   (2) For the solicitation or promotion or otherwise to secure the
conclusion of a sale of defense articles or defense services to or for
the use of the armed forces of a foreign country or international
organization.
   (b) The term fee or commission does not include:
   (1) A political contribution or a payment excluded by &#167; 130.6
from the definition of political contribution:
   (2) A normal salary (excluding contingent compensation) established
at an annual rate and paid to a regular employee of an applicant,
supplier or vendor;
   (3) General advertising or promotional expenses not directed to any
particular sale or purchaser; or
   (4) Payments made, or offered or agreed to be made, solely for the
purchase by an applicant, supplier or vendor of specific goods or
technical, operational or advisory services, which [*39324] payments
are not disproportionate in amount with the value of the specific
goods or services actually furnished.
  &#167; 130.6 -- Political contribution.
   Political contribution means any loan, gift, donation or other
payment of $ 1,000 or more made, or offered or agreed to be made,
directly or indirectly, whether in cash or in kind, which is:
   (a) To or for the benefit of, or at the direction of, any foreign
candidate, committee, political party, political faction, or
government or governmental subdivision, or any individual elected,
appointed or otherwise designated as an employee or officer thereof;
and
   (b) For the solicitation or promotion or otherwise to secure the
conclusion of a sale of defense articles or defense services to or for
the use of the armed forces of a foreign country or international
organization. Taxes, customs duties, license fees, and other charges
required to be paid by applicable law or regulation are not regarded
as political contributions.
  &#167; 130.7 -- Supplier.
   Supplier means any person who enters into a contract with the
Department of Defense for the sale of defense articles or defense
services valued in an amount of $ 500,000 or more under section 22 of
the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C.  2762).
  &#167; 130.8 -- Vendor.
   Vendor means any distributor or manufacturer who, directly or
indirectly, furnishes to an applicant or supplier defense articles
valued in an amount of $ 500,000 or more which are end-items or major
components as defined in &#167; 121.8 of this subchapter. It also
means any person who, directly or indirectly, furnishes to an
applicant or supplier defense articles or services valued in an amount
of $ 500,000 or more when such articles or services are to be
delivered (or incorporated in defense articles or defense services to
be delivered) to or for the use of the armed forces of a foreign
country or international organization under:
   (1) A sale requiring a license or approval from the Office of
Defense Trade Controls under this subchapter; or
   (2) A sale pursuant to a contract with the Department of Defense
under section 22 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2762).
  &#167; 130.9 -- Obligation to furnish information to the Office of
Defense Trade Controls.
   (a)(1) Each applicant must inform the Office of Defense Trade
Controls as to whether applicant or its vendors have paid, or offered
or agreed to pay, in respect of any sale for which a license or
approval is requested:
   (i) Political contributions in an aggregate amount of $ 5,000 or
more, or
   (ii) Fees or commissions in an aggregate amount of $ 100,000 or
more.
  If so, applicant must furnish to the Office of Defense Trade
Controls the information specified in &#167; 130.10. The furnishing of
such information or an explanation satisfactory to the Director of the
Office of Defense Trade Controls as to why all the information cannot
be furnished at that time is a condition precedent to the granting of
the relevant license or approval.
   (2) The requirements of this paragraph do not apply in the case of
an application with respect to a sale for which all the information
specified in &#167; 130.10 which is required by this section to be
reported shall already have been furnished.
   (b) Each supplier must inform the Office of Defense Trade Controls
as to whether the supplier or its vendors have paid, or offered or
agreed to pay, in respect of any sale:
   (1) Political contributions in an aggregate amount of $ 5,000 or
more, or
   (2) Fees or commissions in an aggregate amount of $ 100,000 or
more.
  If so, supplier must furnish to the Office of Defense Trade Controls
the information specified in &#167; 130.10. The information required
to be furnished pursuant to this paragraph must be so furnished no
later than 30 days after the contract award to such supplier, or such
earlier date as may be specified by the Department of Defense. For
purposes of this paragraph, a contract award includes a purchase
order, exercise of an option, or other procurement action requiring a
supplier to furnish defense articles or defense services to the
Department of Defense for the purposes of section 22 of the Arms
Export Control Act (22 U.S.C.  2762).
   (c) In determining whether an applicant or its vendors, or a
supplier or its vendors, as the case may be, have paid, or offered or
agreed to pay, political contributions in an aggregate amount of $
5,000 or more in respect of any sale so as to require a report under
this section, there must be included in the computation of such
aggregate amount any political contributions in respect of the sale
which are paid by or on behalf of, or at the direction of, any person
to whom the applicant, supplier or vendor has paid, or offered or
agreed to pay, a fee or commission in respect of the sale. Any such
political contributions are deemed for purposes of this part to be
political contributions by the applicant, supplier or vendor who paid
or offered or agreed to pay the fee or commission.
   (d) Any applicant or supplier which has informed the Office of
Defense Trade Controls under this section that neither it nor its
vendors have paid, or offered or agreed to pay, political
contributions or fees or commissions in an aggregate amount requiring
the information specified in &#167; 130.10 to be furnished, must
subsequently furnish such information within 30 days after learning
that it or its vendors had paid, or offered or agreed to pay,
political contributions or fees or commissions in respect of a sale in
an aggregate amount which, if known to applicant or supplier at the
time of its previous communication with the Office of Defense Trade
Controls, would have required the furnishing of information under
&#167; 130.10 at that time. Any report furnished include a detailed
statement of the reasons why applicant or supplier did not furnish the
information at the time specified in paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of
this section, as applicable.
  &#167; 130.10 -- Information to be furnished by applicant or
supplier to the Office of Defense Trade Controls.
   (a) Every person required under &#167; 130.9 to furnish information
specified in this section in respect to any sale must furnish to the
Office of Defense Trade Controls:
   (1) The total contract price of the sale to the foreign purchaser;
   (2) The name, nationality, address and principal place of business
of the applicant or supplier, as the case may be, and, if applicable,
the employer and title;
   (3) The name, nationality, address and principal place of business,
and if applicable, employer and title of each foreign purchaser,
including the ultimate end-user involved in the sale;
   (4) Except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, a
statement setting forth with respect to such sale:
   (i) The amount of each political contribution paid, or offered or
agreed to be paid, or the amount of each fee or commission paid, or
offered or agreed to be paid;
   (ii) The date or dates on which each reported amount was paid, or
offered or agreed to be paid;
   (iii) The recipient of each such amount paid, or intended recipient
if not yet paid;
   (iv) The person who paid, or offered or agreed to pay such amount;
and
   (v) The aggregate amounts of political contributions and of fees or
[*39325] commission, respectively, which shall have been reported.
   (b) In responding to paragraph (a)(4) of this section, the
statement must:
   (1) With respect to each payment reported, state whether such
payment was in cash or in kind. If in kind, it must include a
description and valuation thereof. Where precise amounts are not
available because a payment has not yet been made, an estimate of the
amount offered or agreed to be paid must be provided;
   (2) With respect to each recipient, state:
   (i) Its name;
   (ii) Its nationality;
   (iii) Its address and principal place of business;
   (iv) Its employer and title; and
   (v) Its relationship, if any, to applicant, supplier, or vendor,
and to any foreign purchaser or end-user.
   (c) In submitting a report required by &#167; 130.9, the detailed
information specified in paragraph (a)(4) and (b) of this section need
not be included if the payments do not exceed:
   (1) $ 2,500 in the case of political contributions; and
   (2) $ 50,000 in the case of fees or commissions.
  In lieu of reporting detailed information with respect to such
payments, the aggregate amount thereof must be reported, identified as
miscellaneous political contributions or miscellaneous fees or
commissions, as the case may be.
   (d) Every person required to furnish the information specified in
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section must respond fully to each
subdivision of those paragraphs and, where the correct response is
none or not applicable," must so state.
  &#167; 130.11 -- Supplementary reports.
   (a) Every applicant or supplier who is required under &#167; 130.9
to furnish the information specified in &#167; 130.10 must submit a
supplementary report in connection with each sale in respect of which
applicant or supplier has previously been required to furnish
information if:
   (1) Any political contributions aggregating $ 2,500 or more or fees
or commissions aggregating $ 50,000 or more not previously reported or
paid, or offered or agreed to be paid by applicant or supplier or any
vendor;
   (2) Subsequent developments cause the information initially
reported to be no longer accurate or complete (as in the case where a
payment actually made is substantially different in amount from a
previously reported estimate of an amount offered or agreed to be
paid); or
   (3) Additional details are requested by the Office of Defense Trade
Controls with respect to any miscellaneous payments reported under
&#167; 130.10(c).
   (b) Supplementary reports must be sent to the Office of Defense
Trade Controls within 30 days after the payment, offer or agreement
reported therein or, when requested by the Office of Defense Trade
Controls, within 30 days after such request, and must include:
   (1) Any information specified in &#167; 130.10 required or
requested to be reported and which was not previously reported; and
   (2) The Defense Trade Control license number, if any, and the
Department or Defense contract number, if any, related to the sale.
  &#167; 130.12 -- Information to be furnished by vendor to applicant
or supplier.
   (a) In order to determine whether it is obliged under &#167; 130.9
to furnish the information specified in &#167; 130.10 with respect to
a sale, every applicant or supplier must obtain from each vendor, from
or through whom the applicant acquired defense articles or defense
services forming the whole or a part of the sale, a full disclosure by
the vendor of all political contributions or fees or commission paid,
by vendor with respect to such sale. Such disclosure must include
responses to all the information pertaining to vendor required to
enable applicant or supplier, as the case may be, to comply fully with
&#167;&#167; 130.9 and 130.10. If so required, they must include the
information furnished by each vendor in providing the information
specified.
   (b) Any vendor which has been requested by an applicant or supplier
to furnish an initial statement under paragraph (a) of this section
must, except as provided in paragraph (c) of this section, furnish
such statement in a timely manner and not later than 20 days after
receipt of such request.
   (c) If the vendor believes that furnishing information to an
applicant or supplier in a requested statement would unreasonably risk
injury to the vendor's commercial interests, the vendor may furnish in
lieu of the statement an abbreviated statement disclosing only the
aggregate amount of all political contributions and the aggregate
amount of all fees or commissions which have been paid, or offered or
agreed to be paid, or offered or agreed to be paid, by the vendor with
respect to the sale. Any abbreviated statement furnished to an
applicant or supplier under this paragraph must be accompanied by a
certification that the requested information has been reported by the
vendor directly to the Office of Defense Trade Controls. The vendor
must simultaneously report fully to the Office of Defense Trade
Controls all information which the vendor would otherwise have been
required to report to the applicant or supplier under this
section. Each such report must clearly identify the sale with respect
to which the reported information pertains.
   (d)(1) If upon the 25th day after the date of its request to
vendor, an applicant or supplier has not received from the vendor the
initial statement required by paragraph (a) of this section, the
applicant or supplier must submit to the Office of Defense Trade
Controls a signed statement attesting to:
   (i) The manner and extent of applicant's or supplier's attempt to
obtain from the vendor the initial statement required under paragraph
(a) of this section;
   (ii) Vendor's failure to comply with this section; and
   (iii) The amount of time which has elapsed between the date of
applicant's or supplier's request and the date of the signed
statement;
   (2) The failure of a vendor to comply with this section does not
relieve any applicant or supplier otherwise required by &#167; 130.9
to submit a report to the Office of Defense Trade Controls from
submitting such a report.
  &#167; 130.13 -- Information to be furnished to applicant, supplier
or vendor by a recipient of a fee or commission.
   (a) Every applicant or supplier, and each vendor thereof;
   (1) In order to determine whether it is obliged under &#167; 130.9
or &#167; 130.12 to furnish information specified in &#167; 130.10
with respect to a sale; and
   (2) Prior to furnishing such information, must obtain from each
person, if any, to whom it has paid, or offered or agreed to pay, a
fee or commission in respect of such sale, a timely statement
containing a full disclosure by such a person of all political
contributions paid, or offered or agreed to be paid, by it or on its
behalf, or at its direction, in respect of such sale. Such disclosure
must include responses to all the information required to enable the
applicant, supplier or vendor, as the case may be, to comply fully
with &#167;&#167; 130.9, 130.10, and 130.12.
   (b) In obtaining information under paragraph (a) of this section,
the applicant, supplier or vendor, as the case may be, must also
require each person to whom a fee or commission is paid, or offered or
agreed to be paid, to furnish from time to time such reports of its
political contributions as may be necessary to enable the applicant,
supplier or vendor, as the case may be, [*39326] to comply fully with
&#167;&#167; 130.9, 130.10, 130.11, and 130.12.
   (c) The applicant supplier or vendor, as the case may be, must
include any political contributions paid, or offered or agreed to be
paid, by or on behalf of, or at the direction of, any person to whom
it has paid, or offered or agreed to pay a fee or commission in
determining whether applicant, supplier or vendor is required by
&#167;&#167; 130.9, 130.11, and 130.12 to furnish information
specified in &#167; 130.10.
  &#167; 130.14 -- Recordkeeping.
   Each applicant, supplier and vendor must maintain a record of any
information it was required to furnish or obtain under this part and
all records upon which its reports are based for a period of not less
than five years following the date of the report to which they
pertain.
  &#167; 130.15 -- Confidential business information.
   (a) Any person who is required to furnish information under this
part may identify any information furnished hereunder which the person
considers to be confidential business information. No person,
including any applicant or supplier, shall publish, divulge, disclose,
or make known in any manner, any information so identified by a vendor
or other person unless authorized by law or regulation.
   (b) For purposes of this section, confidential business information
means commercial or financial information which by law is entitled to
protection from disclosure. (See, e.g., 5 U.S.C. 552(b) (3) and (4);
18 U.S.C. 1905; 22 U.S.C.  2778(e); Rule 26(c)(7), Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure.)
  &#167; 130.16 -- Other reporting requirements.
   The submission of reports under this part does not relieve any
person of any requirements to furnish information to any federal,
state, or municipal agency, department or other instrumentality as
required by law, regulation or contract.
  &#167; 130.17 -- Utilization of and access to reports and records.
   (a) All information reported and records maintained under this part
will be made available, upon request for utilization by standing
committees of the Congress and subcommittees thereof, and by United
States Government agencies, in accordance with section 39(d) of the
Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C.  2779(d)), and reports based upon
such information will be submitted to Congress in accordance with
sections 36(a)(8) and 36(b)(1) of that Act (22 U.S.C. 2776 (a)(8) and
(b)(1)).
   (b) All confidential business information provided pursuant to this
part shall be protected against disclosure to the extent provided by
law.
   (c) Nothing in this section shall preclude the furnishing of
information to foreign governments for law enforcement or regulatory
purposes under international arrangements between the United States
and any foreign government.
   Dated: July 12, 1993.
  Lynn E. Davis,
  Under Secretary for International Security Affairs.

</pre>
</html>
</DOC>