
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-16</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B041-46</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/intro.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130546 text/html 11661
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:05:36 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:08 GMT
Content-length: 11443
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>La Guardia Committee Report on Marijuana - Introduction</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<h1>INTRODUCTION </h1>

<p><b>E. H. L. Corwin, PhD, Secretary</b></p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>On September 13, 1938, The New York Academy of Medicine was
informed of Mayor LaGuardia's concern about the marihuana problem
and of his desire &quot;that some impartial body such as The New
York Academy of Medicine make a survey of existing knowledge on
this subject and carry out any observations required to determine
the pertinent facts regarding this form of drug addiction and the
necessity for its control.&quot; The Mayor's request was referred
to the Committee on Public Health Relations of the Academy, which
Committee on October 17, 1938, authorized the appointment of a
special subcommittee to study the Mayor's request. </p>

<p>This Subcommittee, consisting of Dr. George B. Wallace,
Chairman, Dr. E. H. L. Corwin, Secretary, and Drs. McKeen
Cattell, Leon H. Cornwall, Robert F. Loeb, Currier McEwen, B. S.
Oppenheimer, Charles Diller Ryan, and Dudley D. Shoenfeld,
reviewed the existing literature on the subject. On the basis of
this review, the Subcommittee could come to no conclusion
regarding the effect of marihuana upon the psychological and
physiological functions of the human being. Nor were attempts to
learn the extent of the use of marihuana in New York City any
more successful. A conference with representatives of the Police
Department, the Department of Education, the Department of
Correction, the Psychiatric Division of the Department of
Hospitals, the Court of Domestic Relations, the District
Attorney's office, and the Citizens Committee on the Control of
Crime served to emphasize the existing differences of opinion
regarding the extent of the use of marihuana in this city and its
relationship to crime. </p>

<p>The Subcommittee therefore came to the conclusion that, in
view of the possibility that marihuana smoking might constitute
an important social problem, it was time that a study of its
effects be made based upon well-established evidence, and
prepared an outline of methods of procedure for the study of the
problem. It recommended that such a study should be divided into
two parts: ( 1 ) a sociological study dealing with the extent of
marihuana smoking and the methods by which the drug is obtained;
in what districts and among what races, classes or types of
persons the use is most prevalent; whether certain social
conditions are factors in its use, and what relation there is
between its use and criminal or antisocial acts; and (2) a
clinical study to determine by means of controlled experiments
the physiological and psychological effects of marihuana on
different types of persons; the question as to whether it causes
physical or mental deterioration; and its possible therapeutic
effects in the treatment of disease or of other drug addictions. </p>

<p>The Committee on Public Health Relations adopted the report of
its Subcommittee and recommended to Mayor LaGuardia that he
appoint a special committee to carry out the proposed study.
Accordingly in January 1939 he appointed the Mayor's Committee on
Marihuana, composed of the members of the Subcommittee of the
Committee on Public Health Relations which recommended the study
and four ex-officio members: Dr. Peter F. Amoroso, First Deputy
Commissioner (later Commissioner) of Correction; Dr. Karl M.
Bowman, Director of the Psychiatric Division of the Department of
Hospitals; Dr. S. S. Goldwater, Commissioner of Hospitals- and
Dr. John L. Rich, Commissioner of Health. Upon his accession to
the commissionership of the Department of Hospitals, Dr. Willard
C. Rappleye succeeded Dr. Goldwater as a member of this
Committee. This Committee studied the broad outlines of the
proposed plans for about a year before work was actually begun. </p>

<p>At its first meeting in March 1939 two subcommittees were
appointed; one, consisting of Drs. Shoenfeld, Ryan, and Corwin,
to plan the sociological study, and the other, composed of Drs.
Cattell, Bowman, Cornwall, and Loeb, to work out the details of
the clinical study. Drs. Bowman and Wechsler were appointed as
special advisers for the clinical study and Dr. J. Murray Steele
and Dr. S. Bernard Wortis as the supervisors of this study. </p>

<p>The studies were made possible by the financial support of
three Foundations, the Friedsam Foundation, the New York
Foundation, and the Commonwealth Fund, each of which donated
$7,500. The whole amounts granted by the Friedsam Foundation and
the Commonwealth Fund and $5,000 of the New York Foundation's
grant were to be applied to the clinical study- the remaining
$2,500 given by the New York Foundation was earmarked for the
sociological study. The Research Council of the Department of
Hospitals undertook the financial supervision of the clinical
study and The New York Academy of Medicine that of the
sociological study. </p>

<p>The sociological study proceeded under the active direction of
Dr. Dudley D. Shoenfeld and was carried out by six police
officers who were trained by Dr. Shoenfeld as social
investigators. In acknowledgment of the great help rendered to
the Committee by these officers, the Committee passed the
following resolution at its meeting on March 18, 1941.<br>
</p>

<p>Now that the sociological study of the marihuana problem in
New York City has been completed, the Mayor's Committee on
Marihuana wishes to record its appreciation of the Mayor's
interest in this problem and his placing at the disposal of the
Committee the services of the Narcotic Squad Division of the
Police Department. Without the cooperation of Commissioner
Valentine, Inspector Curtayne, Lieutenant Cooper, Sergeant
Boylan, and Detective Loures, this study would have been
impossible. They helped in planning it and assigned to the
Committee six members of the Force, four men and two women, whose
intelligence, interest in the work, and desire to obtain the
facts of the situation were of invaluable aid in obtaining the
information on which the sociological report is based. The four
men and two women assigned to us made painstaking observations
and reports, acted as investigators and social workers and not as
police officers, and brought to the performance of this task a
native intelligence, specialized training, and civic interest.
The thanks of the Committee are due to them and through them to
their superiors.<br>
</p>

<p>The clinical study consisted of two parts; the medical,
including psychiatric, and the psychological. Dr. Karl M. Bowman
directed the medical and psychiatric part of this study and Dr.
David Wechsler the psychological part. The members of the
Committee closely supervised the work during the course of the
study. The staff of the clinical study included: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Samuel Allentuck, MD, Psychiatrist, who was in charge. </li>
    <li>Louis Gitzelter, MD </li>
    <li>Frank Anker, MD Assistant Physicians </li>
    <li>Robert S. Morrow, PhD </li>
    <li>Florence Halpern, MA </li>
    <li>Adolph G. Woltmann,MA Psychologists </li>
    <li>Miss Rose Horowitz, who was the secretary-stenographer
        and bookkeeper.<br>
    </li>
</ul>

<p>The Committee is indebted to the Department of Hospitals for
making available two small wards and office space in the Welfare
Hospital (now known as the Goldwater Memorial Hospital), to Dr.
Chrisman G. Scheri, the Superintendent of the hospital, and to
the laboratory staff of the Third Medical Division for their
assistance in the conduct of laboratory experiments.
Acknowledgment should also be made of the services of Dr. Robert
C. Batterman who interpreted the electrocardiograms and Dr. Hans
Strauss for the electroencephalographic work. Professor Walter R.
Miles of Yale University assisted in the planning of the
psychological part of the study. This whole undertaking would
have been impossible without the help and cooperation of Dr.
Peter F. Amoroso, of the Department of Correction, who, aside
from his services as a member of the Committee, was responsible
for arrangements for volunteers from among the prisoners of the
Riker's Island Penitentiary. Thanks are due also to the medical
staff of the Riker's Island Hospital for their assistance in the
narcotic addiction study. </p>

<p>At the suggestion of Dr. Cattell a pharmacological study was
done in the Department of Pharmacology of Cornell Medical School
by Dr. S. Loewe. Dr. W. Modell collaborated in this work. We are
indebted to Dr. Roger Adams, Professor of Chemistry at the
University of Illinois, and to Dr. H. J. Wollner, Consulting
Chemist of the United States Treasury Department, who supplied
some of the active principles of marihuana which were used in the
study. </p>

<p>The names of those who conducted the investigations are given
under the different chapters. Those sections of the report for
which no author is indicated have been written by the Chairman of
the Committee. </p>

<p>The tremendous task of compiling, editing, and revising the
reports was undertaken by Dr. George B. Wallace, the chairman of
the Committee, and Miss Elizabeth V. Cunningham of the staff of
the Committee on Public Health Relations of The New York Academy
of Medicine. They had the assistance of Dr. Dudley D. Shoenfeld,
who prepared the sociological report, Dr. David Wechsler, who
revised the psychological reports, and Dr. McKeen Cattell, who
edited the pharmacological report. </p>

<p>In the judgment of the Committee, this painstaking study
should be of considerable value from a scientific and social
viewpoint. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>