
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B20-264</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B015-215</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/colhemp1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043020 text/html 15022
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:30:12 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:43:02 GMT
Content-length: 14804
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Speech before the Colorado legislature on hemp</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hemp/hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3603" -->

<h1>Speech before the Colorado legislature </h1>

<p>This is a rough draft of a speech for the 1995 Agricultural
committee of the Colorado congress, which will be deciding on a
bill to re-classify industrial cannabis as legal. (below 1.3%
THC) </p>

<p>From DMartinCO@aol.comWed Feb 1 12:54:34 1995 </p>

<p>Date: Sun, 29 Jan 1995 17:24:51 -0500 </p>

<hr>

<p>Draft Testimony--1/26/94 </p>

<h2>Agronomy </h2>

<p>Hemp is an annual herbaceous plant that can grow to heights of
5-20 ft. during a 3-4 month growing cycle. It grows without
herbicides, and if grown in proper rotation, without pesticides.
Due to its fast rate of growth, hemp has very high initial
fertilizer requirements. However, up to 70% of the nutrients are
returned to the soil by falling leaves. Therefore, hemp is
overall less demanding on the soil than corn or wheat. </p>

<p>According to representatives from the CSU Ag. Dept, Colorado's
soil conditions match those preferred by hemp. Rainfall will be a
problem, especially during the first six weeks of growth, and so
it will be necessary to grow hemp under irrigation. However,
Colorado's highest yielding, most profitable crops are also grown
under irrigation, and hemp requires about the same amount of
water as corn (1-1.5 acre inches/week). </p>

<p>Hemp can be planted using current seeding equipment, and
harvested using standard hay mowing and baling equipment. In the
future, the development of specialized harvesting equipment will
be one of the many industries created by a new hemp industry. </p>

<p>After harvesting, the crop must be retted, the process by
which the glue that holds the fibers and hurds together, called
pectin, is broken down. In the near future, this can be done
using a process called dew retting. Hemp is simply left laying in
the field for 4-5 weeks while mother nature naturally decomposes
the pectin. In the future, retting facilities will be developed
to take advantage of various water retting methods that produce
better quality, more uniform fibers in less time. </p>

<p>Hemp yields approximately 3-7 tons of dry stem matter per
acre, and approximately 300-1000 lbs of seed per acre. </p>

<p>Hemp offers several benefits to the Colorado farmer. First, it
is an alternative cash crop that can earn around $400-1,200 per
acre. Hemp's natural weed suppression and resistance to pests
mean that farmers will not have to buy costly and harmful
pesticides and herbicides, a savings of $50-60/acre compared to
corn. Besides this, hemp leaves the field weed free and high in
nutrients for the next crop, further reducing costs INSERT CHART.
</p>

<p>Finally, hemp would serve as an ideal weed barrier for organic
farming. Industrial hemp plants are planted approximately 1-3
inches apart, which gives a plant density of around 150-650
plants/sq. yard. This close spacing </p>

<p>prevents branching, which means the plants grow a straight
stem about the size of a finger, with only a small canopy of
leaves at the top. To maximize fiber quality, the plants are
harvested when the male plants begin to pollinate All this means
that industrial hemp is unsuitable as a cover crop for marijuana.
Marijuana is planted with wide spacing to encourage branching. </p>

<p>The narrow spacing of industrial hemp means it is impossible
to enter a field without leaving a noticeable trail. Industrial
hemp is cut before flowering, while marijuana is harvested for
the flowers. Any marijuana plants growing in the hemp field would
be cut before they were worth anything. Male plants are
eliminated for marijuana cultivation, so pollen from male hemp
plants would destroy any nearby marijuana crop. As most police
agencies will tell you, corn is the preferred cover crop. </p>

<h2>Plant Description </h2>

<p>Industrial hemp produces three main raw materials: bast fiber,
which makes up approximately 20-25% of the stalk; hurds, the
woody core that makes up 75-80% of the stalk; and seeds. SHOW
CANADIAN STALKS </p>

<h2>Products </h2>

<p>It has been estimated that hemp could be used to produce
25-50,000 products. </p>

<p>SHOW PRODUCTS CHART. Here are a few: </p>

<p><b>Textiles:</b> Hemp fiber is one of the strongest natural
fibers on earth. These fibers can be used to make a wide range of
textile products, from fine linens to coarse canvas. In fact, the
word canvas is derived from cannabis. </p>

<p>In addition, hemp fiber is a perfect raw material for making
rope, twine and other types of cordage. </p>

<p>According to Pulp and Paper magazine, cotton is grown on
approximately 3% of the world's agricultural land, but accounts
for 11-15% of agricultural chemical use. In the US, it accounts
for 25-50% of chemical use. Hemp fibers are longer, stronger,
more absorbent and more mildew-resistant than cotton fibers. A
lightweight, more uniform hemp yarn is currently being developed,
which would allow production of hemp T-shirts. At the same time,
research is being conducted in Europe on hemp
&quot;cottonization,&quot; an organic process that converts hemp
fibers so they can be used in existing spinning and weaving
equipment. </p>

<p><b>Industrial applications</b> of hemp textiles show special
promise. Hemp fibers remain unchanged at extreme cold and warm
temperatures. According to the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
fabrics with at least 50% hemp block UV rays better than other
fabrics. </p>

<p>Several companies in the US currently produce textile
products, such as shirts, jeans, shorts, backpacks, wallets, etc.
from imported hemp fabric. Walt Disney Co. carries hemp products
for its Indiana Jones line. Esprit will soon begin offering hemp
clothes as part of its Ecollection. Deja Shoe, a company that
produces footwear made from recycled and earth-friendly
materials, will soon be offering hemp shoes, and 100% hemp
Converse All Stars are already available. </p>

<p>Currently, there is a shortage of wood fiber on the world
market. Prices for wood chips have more than doubled in the past
few years, and paper prices have increased significantly. At the
same time, demand for paper is also on the rise. These trends
will put increasing pressure on world forests. Many woods
products producers are beginning to search for alternative fiber
sources. Hemp hurds are an excellent wood substitute. </p>

<p><b>Paper:</b> In 1916, the USDA reported that hemp hurds could
produce four times as much paper per acre as trees. With
increased yields and improved technology, it may now be as high
as ten times as much per acre. Research is currently being
conducted on incorporating the whole stalk in the pulping
process, which would further increase hemp's advantages over
trees. Hurds contain only 10-20% lignin, the substance that binds
cells together. This is much lower than the lignin content of
trees. This makes hemp much easier to pulp than trees, resulting
in lower energy consumption and lower or no use of harmful
chemicals. It can also be pulped using hydrogen peroxide, which
eliminates the use of chlorine and the resulting release of
dioxin into our streams and rivers. </p>

<p>Since hemp paper is stronger, it can be recycled many more
times that tree paper. It will last hundreds or thousands of
years, while tree paper turns yellow and begins to disintegrate
in as little as 20 years. In other countries, hemp is often
blended into recycled paper or papers made from other plant
fibers to add strength. </p>

<p>Currently, all hemp paper sold in the US is manufactured
abroad, and must be imported, resulting in prices 2-3 times
higher than tree paper. Kimberly Clarke, an American Fortune 500
company, currently manufactures hemp paper for cigarettes and
Bibles in France, and much of the cigarette paper is sold to
American companies. Tree Free EcoPaper of Oregon imports paper
manufactured in China. They are in the process of building a mill
in Oregon that would create 400 new jobs, but without a domestic
hemp supply, raw materials will have to be imported, keeping
prices high. Germany's largest paper manufacturer has recently
converted two mills for hemp production. </p>

<p><b>Construction Materials:</b> Current research at the Washing
State Wood Composite Laboratory shows that medium density
fiberboard made from hemp are twice as strong as that made from
wood. Composites are the fastest growing sector of the
wood-products industry. C&amp;S Specialty Builders Supply is
conducting research on using hemp not only in fiberboard, but
also to make the binder for such composites. Currently, binders
are made using formaldehyde. </p>

<p>Hemp hurds could be used, either alone or blended with wood,
in existing mills with absolutely no changes to existing
equipment. Russia, Poland and other Eastern European countries
currently manufacture composite boards from hemp and other plant
materials. Gridcore International of California manufactures
structural panels made from 50% recycled paper and 50% recycled
cardboard. A 4' x 10' x 3/4&quot; Gridcore panel is not only
twice as strong as the same size sheet of plywood, but also
weighs half as much. They believe that blending in hemp would
make the panels even stronger. </p>

<p><b>Animal Bedding: </b>Hemp hurds also make an excellent
animal bedding. They are more absorbent than wood shavings, and
compost faster. </p>

<p><b>Plastics</b>: Hemp hurds are 50-77% cellulose, the basic
building block of plastics. Until the 1930's, hemp based
cellophane, celluloid and other products were common. Henry ford
used hemp to make car doors and fenders. </p>

<p>Today, hemp hurds could be used to make any type of plastic,
and can also be blended into recycled plastic. Cargill
manufactures a line of 100% plant-based plastic silverware. Plant
based plastics, such as shopping bags, are biodegradable, and
could be composted at home. </p>

<p><b>Hemp Seeds: </b>Hemp seeds are 20-25% protein, and one
handful provides an adult's daily minimum protein requirement.
Although soybeans are higher in total protein, these proteins are
complex, and are therefore difficult or impossible for some to
digest. The proteins found in hemp seed digest much easier. Hemp
seeds can be used to make non-dairy cheese, milk and ice cream,
and can be substituted for up to 1/4 of the flour in a recipe.
According to Udo Erasmus, author of Fats and Oils: The Complete
Guide to Fats and Oils in Health and Nutrition, &quot;hemp butter
puts peanut butter to shame for nutritional value.&quot; </p>

<p>Hemp seeds are also common in birdseed. Testimony by a
representative of the American Bird Seed Industry during the
hearings on the MTA resulted in the exemption for sterilized
seed. </p>

<p>Hemp seeds can be pressed for their oil, which ranges from
30-40% of the seed. Hemp oil is useful for a number of products.
Nutrition: At 81%, hemp seed oil is the richest known source of
cholesterol-fighting Essential Fatty Acids. hemp oil can be taken
alone as a dietary supplement, or used to make salad dressing or
other oil-based recipes. Flax oil, another oil sold as a dietary
supplement, is currently a $6 million/year industry. Hemp oil is
higher is EFA's, reportedly tastes better, and contains a third
EFA not found in flax oil. </p>

<p>Currently, it is legal to import sterilized seeds. However,
importing greatly increases production costs. Besides this, the
sterilization process harms the nutritional potential of the
seeds, and hastens rancidity </p>

<p><b>Personal Hygiene:</b> Hemp oils high content of EFA also
makes it ideal for making cosmetics. Today, most moisturizing
products are made from saturated oils. These oils are not
absorbed by the skin cells, but simply coat the surface and
prevent further moisture loss. Lotions that contain high EFA's
can be absorbed into the cells to help them heal. Many US
companies currently offer a wide range of hemp personal hygiene
products, including soaps, shampoos, moisturizers, salves and
massage oils. </p>

<p><b>Paints and Varnishes</b>: Until the 1930's, most paints
were made from hemp and linseed oils. Rather than simply coating
the surface, hemp oil soaks into wood to preserve it. During
testimony ate the MTA hearings, a representative of Sherwin
Williams reported that his company imported 135,000 pounds of
hemp oil, in addition to the hemp it produced on its Texas
plantation. Hemp paints could satisfy today's demand for
environmentally safe paints. </p>

<p><b>Other: </b>Seed oil can be easily combined with 15%
methanol to create a substitute for diesel fuel which burns 70%
cleaner than petroleum diesel. In fact, diesel fuel was
originally designed as a plant-based, not petroleum based, fuel.
hemp oil is also an ideal base for non-toxic printing inks. While
such inks are currently made from soybeans, hemp is higher in
both linoleic and linolenic acids, which means it requires less
processing and is a superior drying oil. Hemp seed oil also makes
a great all purpose lubricant. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hemp/hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3603" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>