
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-28</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B001-155</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/amhab/amhabc8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122031820 text/html 35213
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:18:09 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:33 GMT
Content-length: 34995
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter VIII Summary of Recommendations </h2>

<p>Based on its findings and the extended analysis, found
elsewhere in the report, (primarily in Chapters VI and VII), the
Commission makes the following recommendations: </p>

<p>General Recommendations </p>

<p>1. The ultimate goal of the Nation's drug policy is the
effective suppression of drug abuse in the United States. While
efforts to reduce the supply of drugs in this country, such as
interdiction and source country crop controls, indirectly advance
this goal, efforts to reduce the demand for drugs can make a more
direct contribution. For this reason, the Nation's drug policy
must emphasize more strongly efforts to reduce the demand for
drugs. </p>

<p>2. Because drug trafficking and abuse are the most serious
organized crime problems in America today, they must be addressed
at the highest levels of government. Therefore, the National Drug
Enforcement Policy Board (Board), under the direction of the
Attorney General, is and should continue to be responsible for
this country's drug policy. The mandate of the Board should be
interpreted, or expanded if necessary, to require the Board to
coordinate carefully efforts to reduce both drug demand and
supply to achieve this ultimate goal. The Board should evaluate
all programs undertaken pursuant to the national drug strategy in
terms of their contribution to this goal. In recognition of the
scope of the problem of international drug trafficking and the
extended national effort needed to combat it, the Attorney
General, as Chairman of the National Drug Enforcement Policy
Board, should depart from the current formulation of a National
Strategy on an annual basis, directing instead the formulation of
a long range national offensive against drug supply and demand,
including long term funding proposals. Such a program should
include an appropriate role for State and local agencies as a
complement to Federal efforts. State and local police agencies
should be trained and equipped to perform such a role. </p>

<p>3. The rigorous pursuit of the Nation's drug policy, as
proposed in this report, will not undermine its organized crime
policy. Indeed, the goals of the two policies substantially
overlap and therefore both can and must be implemented
simultaneously and aggressively. </p>

<p>4. The cost of this Nation's anti-drug efforts can be
subsidized to a great extent by the seizure and forfeiture of
drug traffickers' assets. That portion of the Federal
government's asset forfeiture fund derived from drug cases should
be devoted exclusively to anti-drug programs. Such a funding
mechanism should be made permanent through law, and the current
ceiling of $10 million should be eliminated. In the annual
Congressional appropriations process, these funds should be
allocated to participating agencies according to Congressional
findings, just as if the funds were appropriated. </p>

<p>5. Because of the international dimensions of drug
trafficking, the United Nations, in performance of its leadership
role in the international community, should sponsor the drafting
and promotion of a model International Controlled Substances Act,
identifying each and every drug which is trafficked to the
detriment of any single member nation. This model act should be
accompanied by a Model Mutual Legal Assistance and Extradition
Treaty, embodying the recognition that international drug
trafficking is a matter of profound international concern. In the
spirit of international cooperation, the Attorney General, as
Chairman of the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board, should
direct the creation of bilateral working groups, modeled on the
present Italian-American Working Group. </p>

<p>Interdiction </p>

<p>1. Within the overall structure of the National Drug
Enforcement Policy Board (the Board), the Vice President's role
as leader and coordinator of interdiction efforts should be
recognized, maintained, and strengthened. </p>

<p>2. A proper and realistic goal of our interdiction efforts
should be the maintenance of persistent pressure on drug
traffickers, both as a deterrent and as a symbol of national
determination. Operational and policy decisions should reflect
that measure of su cess and specifically reject any less
realistic or effective goal. </p>

<p>3. Both Congress and the Board should carefully evaluate the
technical capabilities and equipment of drug smugglers. To the
extent that law enforcement agencies' capabilities and equipment
are inferior to those of drug traffickers, immediate steps should
be taken to rectify the situation. </p>

<p>4. All Federal agencies having any responsibility for the
regulation of air, sea, or land travel into or out of the United
States should review their policies and practices and ensure that
no purpose other than the promotion of public safety is given
priority over the effort to combat drug trafficking. To this end,
the proposed &quot;Customs Enforcement Act of 1985&quot; should
be enacted promptly. </p>

<p>5. The Policy Board should carefully examine the regulatory
practices of the Federal Aviation Administration, particularly in
the field of aircraft modification, to determine whether
possibilities exist for more aggressive anti-smuggling efforts.
In addition, the Policy Board should carefully monitor the design
of the Federal Aviation Administration's approach radar system to
ensure that interdiction capabilities and opportunities are
maximized. </p>

<p>6. Diplomatic initiatives should be pursued immediately to
facilitate Customs pursuit of suspected airborne drug traffickers
into Mexican air space. Such efforts should be given the highest
priority in our bilateral relations with Mexico, including the
Western Hemisphere discussions agreed upon between the Presidents
of the United States and Mexico on January 3, 1986. </p>

<p>7. The Policy Board should thoroughly evaluate expanded use of
Coast Guard aviation capabilities in drug interdiction. </p>

<p>8. Congress should give careful consideration to user fees as
a means of supplementing the Coast Guard's budget. Fees should go
directly to the Coast Guard's budget rather than the general
Treasury. </p>

<p>9. Both the Policy Board and the Department of Defense should
continue to examine Navy assistance to Coast Guard interdiction
operations, with a view to expanding such assistance whenever and
wherever possible. Such expansion should be facilitated by
adoption of the broader military view of national security
advocated in this report. </p>

<p>10. Monies from the proposed permanent asset forfeiture fund
should be made available to the Customs Service for the
acquisition of necessary equipment, including but not limited to
the type of fast patrol boats recently deployed in Operation Blue
Lightning. </p>

<p>11. Joint Federal-State-local interdiction operations, such as
Operation Blue Lightning, should be refined and used wherever
feasible and desirable. </p>

<p>Intelligence </p>

<p>1. The Policy Board should take all necessary steps to ensure
that data concerning all aspects of both drug supply and demand
are adequately collected, analyzed, correlated and disseminated. </p>

<p>2. The Federal electronic surveillance statute should be
examined and amended to reflect existing technology. Existing
State laws should be similarly studied and changed where
necessary. Those States still without a statute permitting
court-ordered electronic surveillance should immediately enact
one, consistent with current technology. </p>

<p>3. The &quot;Mansfield Amendment&quot; to the Foreign
Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2291 (c)(l)) should be repealed
in its entirety. The concerns addressed by that legislation
should be incorporated in agency guidelines which provide
necessary flexibility while embodying the limits of permissible
U.S. agency conduct. </p>

<p>4. Data relating to assets forfeited to Federal, State and
local jurisdictions should be collected, analyzed, and
disseminated by the all source intelligence center discussed
elsewhere in this report. </p>

<p>5. Because of the importance of information about individuals
in drug treatment programs, the Federal government should again
require the States to participate in the Client Oriented Data
Acquisition Process. </p>

<p>6. Both the Household Survey on Drug Abuse and the High School
Senior Survey should over sample populations thought to be heavy
drug users. In addition, because questions about the nature of
drug transactions, e.g., the price paid and purity and quantity
of the drug purchased, could provide important information for
policy makers and enforcement officials, such questions should be
added to the Household and High School Senior Surveys. </p>

<p>Combined Intelligence and Interdiction </p>

<p>1. The Policy Board should take immediate steps to ensure that
the law enforcement and intelligence communities are thoroughly
familiar with each other's needs and capabilities. </p>

<p>2. Every agency involved in the interdict ion of drug
shipments or the apprehension of drug traffickers should have
ready access to all necessary intelligence gathered in source and
transshipment countries. To the extent that this requires
expansion or modification of existing practices, the Policy Board
should ensure that such change is pursued immediately. In
particular, the critical nature of real-time intelligence to
effective Customs operations at the border must be recognized,
and the Policy Board should take all necessary steps to ensure
that, under current Federal organization, such information from
all sources is being provided. </p>

<p>3. To the extent that the intelligence community under the
current Federal structure needs direction from the highest levels
of government concerning aggressive anti-drug actions, including
operations against the infrastructure of foreign drug-trafficking
organizations, such direction should be provided immediately. </p>

<p>4. The &quot;all-source intelligence and operations
center,&quot; now being considered by the National Drug
Enforcement Policy Board, should be pursued aggressively and
expeditiously. It should combine in a physically secure facility
the functions now being performed by EPIC and NNBIS, retaining
the current Vice Presidential direction and regional structure of
the latter for interdiction functions. Ft. Bliss, Texas, and
similar locations should be considered as possible sites for the
center. Its design, giving due consideration to the protection of
civil liberties, should provide specific roles for all pertinent
Department of Defense components and for all members of the
intelligence community, to the fullest extent Permitted by
Executive Order 12333, The design should also incorporate
specific foreign intelligence-gathering functions for other U.S.
Agencies, in order to maximize the acquisition of both strategic
and tactical data. Each Participating agency should be required
to present to the Policy Board its specific operational
guidelines for providing time-sensitive data to the center. The
center should also Include a uniform national system for
gathering and analyzing drug related data on various categories
of information, including arrests, seizures, convictions,
sentences, forfeitures, emergency room admissions, and deaths. A
similar system of compiling and analyzing financial data gathered
by all members of the intelligence community, as well as that
contained in all financial records now required by law to be kept
by any Federal agency, should also be included as an Integral
component of the center. Both data bases should be compiled and
maintained in a fashion that provides reliable, constant, and
uniform tracking, retrieval, and compilation for the purpose of
charting trends and profiles, as well as support for specific
operations whenever Possible. Access to all data compiled should
be available to appropriate State and local agencies, in addition
to Federal components, subject to Procedures necessary to ensure
the integrity of the information-sharing process. </p>

<p>5. Joint enforcement and intelligence operations by source and
transshipment countries should be encouraged, and careful,
resourceful analysis should be given to identify means of U.S.
funding of such operations. Consistent with other recommendations
in this report, participation in such operations by American
components should be promoted. </p>

<p>6. The Department of State should stress to Chiefs of Mission
at principal reporting posts and to all other cognizant
Departmental personnel the high priority attached to a
coordinated narcotics intelligence and interdiction strategy. </p>

<p>7. All necessary steps should be taken to ensure that Consular
officers can and do deny U.S. entry visas to individuals
suspected of drug trafficking. Subject to the informing agency's
safeguards of reliability, information provided by any agency of
the United States, without further corroboration, should be
sufficient to require such denial under the pertinent statute, 8
U.S.C. Section 1182 (a)(23). The Policy Board should promptly
establish guidelines for similar information-sharing on a
government-wide basis. </p>

<p>8. Both Congress and the Executive Branch should closely
examine the operations and cost effectiveness of drug-related
intelligence-gathering abroad. When and where justified by such
an examination, resources available for such operations should be
expanded. Particular attention should be paid to the critical
need for adequate foreign intelligence by the Customs Service in
performing its border interdiction function. </p>

<p>9. Coast Guard officers should be thoroughly integrated into
the Defense Attache system. </p>

<p>10. The definition of &quot;national security&quot; now
employed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff as their starting point in
mission determination is: </p>

<p>A collective term encompassing both national defense and
foreign relations of the United States. Specifically, the
condition provided by: </p>

<p>a. a military or defense advantage over any foreign national
or group of nations, or </p>

<p>b. a favorable foreign relations position, or </p>

<p>c. a defense posture capable of successfully resisting hostile
or destructive action from within or without, overt or covert. </p>

<p>The Joint Chiefs should be instructed by the highest levels of
government, through a National Security Decision Directive or by
other appropriate means, that &quot;hostile or destructive action
from within or without, overt or covert,&quot; as used in this
definition, shall include the airborne, amphibious, and overland
invasion of this country by drug smugglers. This policy is
already followed by the intelligence community, pursuant to
Executive Order 12333. All Department of Defense and component
operational decisions concerning interdiction of drug smugglers
should be made accordingly. </p>

<p>11. For the purposes of intelligence-gathering mission
planning, the Joint Chiefs of Staff should be given direction
from the highest levels of government that the Defense
Department's definition of &quot;foreign hostile action&quot; is
to be brought into accord with the view expressed in Executive
Order 12333, as described in the preceding recommendation. </p>

<p>12. Consistent with the foregoing definitions of
&quot;national security&quot; and &quot;foreign hostile
action,&quot; Department of Defense policies and practices, such
as existing interpretations of the Economy Act, 31 U.S.C. Section
1535, and exemptions to the Posse Comitatus Act, 10 U.S.C.
Section 371 et al., should be thoroughly re-examined. Unit
planning and deployment should be adjusted accordingly. </p>

<p>13. The Posse Comitatus Act, IS U.S.C. Section 1385, and its
1981 exemptions, now found at 10 U.S.C. Section 371 et seq,
should be consolidated in Title 18. The consolidated statute
should include a statement of purpose reflecting the view of
national security advocated here and promoting an accordingly
expansive interpretation of the statutory language, subject to
such limitations as are necessary to protect civil liberties. </p>

<p>14. The Policy Board, in accordance with Executive Orders
12333 and 12472, and with applicable National Security Decision
Directives, if any, should coordinate with appropriate agencies
and departments to ensure that a secure and interoperable,
interagency communications capability is available for
drug-related intelligence collection and dissemination in support
of interdiction and other anti-drug activities. The resources and
expertise of the National Security Agency should be fully
exploited to this end, and operational and communications
security should be given a high priority in the training and
operating procedures of all pertinent agencies. </p>

<p>Domestic Investigations and Prosecutions </p>

<p>1. Domestic drug law enforcement efforts directed at
high-level trafficking groups should be supplemented by and
integrated with enforcement efforts directed at lower-level
trafficking groups and street-level drug activity. Unless the
necessary supplementation and integration occur, the enforcement
effort at all levels will be undermined. </p>

<p>2. Although the enforcement efforts of Federal and State and
local law enforcement agencies cannot and should not be
completely independent, these agencies nevertheless have primary
areas of responsibility. The Federal law enforcement agencies
should concentrate their efforts on infiltrating and disrupting
high-level organized crime and other large trafficking
organizations. State and local law enforcement agencies on the
other hand should focus their resources on street-level drug
activity and on smaller and geographically-restricted trafficking
organizations. </p>

<p>3. Although Federal, State and local agencies have primary
areas of responsibility, the drug problem is a national one that
requires extensive and genuine coordination and cooperation among
all agencies. Those in charge of the agencies involved in
domestic drug law enforcement must constantly instill In their
agents the need for such coordination and cooperation, especially
with respect to the exchange of drug intelligence. Joint
operations, such as Operation Pressure Point, the New York Drug
Enforcement Task Force, and the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement
Task Force Program, have fostered this required spirit of
cooperation and coordination, and they should be undertaken
whenever appropriate, provided that they do not interfere with an
agency's primary mission. </p>

<p>4. The sophistication of high-level trafficking groups
requires an equivalent Federal response. Because of the variety
of investigative techniques used by participating Federal
agencies and their unique ability to exploit such tools as
electronic surveillance, the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act (RICO), the Continuing Criminal Enterprise
statutory provision (CCE), forfeiture, and currency transactions
reports, the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force (OCDETF)
Program is the Federal mechanism that is best equipped to respond
to and disrupt high-level organized crime trafficking groups. Its
operation should be supported strongly and its scope should be
expanded wherever feasible and desirable. </p>

<p>5. Because the OCDETF Program has been operational for more
than two years, the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board should
consider whether a lead Task Force agency should be designated.
As an alternative, the U.S. attorneys Involved should be given
greater policy authority with respect to the participating
agencies In order to improve still further the coordination that
has been achieved by the consensus-based decision-making
approach. If the latter approach is taken, the Board must take
steps to ensure uniform policies and priorities are recognized by
all United States Attorneys involved. </p>

<p>6. The heads of the agencies participating in the OCDETF
Program must continually and unambiguously reiterate their total
commitment to the success of the program. One simple way they can
do so is to ensure that their agents involved in the Program are
not affected adversely in any way with respect to career
advancement by their participation therein. </p>

<p>7. The components of Federal domestic law enforcement other
than the OCDE Task Forces should focus their resources on
organized crime trafficking groups that do not qualify for OCDETF
program treatment and on other large trafficking organizations,
which may or may not be multi-jurisdictional. </p>

<p>8. To eliminate jurisdictional disputes between the Federal
agencies involved in domestic law enforcement, to avoid
duplication of investigative efforts, and to increase the safety
of drug agents, the National Drug Enforcement Policy Board should
establish a system whereby agencies would be required to file
reports on whom they are investigating. If more than one agency
is investigating the same individual, the agencies involved would
be required to negotiate and to determine the best way for
proceeding with the investigation, subject to uniform Policy
Board guidelines. Such a reporting and control system should be
incorporated into the &quot;all source intelligence and
operations center&quot; recommended elsewhere in this report. </p>

<p>9. It is an appropriate time to consider whether the mission
of the Customs Service with respect to drug trafficking should be
expanded to include intelligence and law enforcement functions
beyond the borders and ports of entry within this country, where
appropriate, subject to the lead responsibility of the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA). </p>

<p>10. DEA should determine which chemicals currently used to
manufacture illicit drugs should be subject to reporting
requirements or placed in a Schedule established by the
Controlled Substances Act. This review should include a
consideration of which drugs are most abused, which have the most
serious consequences, which precursor chemicals are essential to
the production process, and which chemicals could feasibly be
regulated. In addition, DEA should identify the resources needed
for the computerization, analysis, and follow-up of reports
concerning chemicals selected for monitoring. </p>

<p>11. The research and development operations of Federal drug
law enforcement agencies should work closely with their field
agents to produce the equipment and tools necessary to defeat
traffickers. The expertise of the Central Intelligence and
National Security Agencies should be called upon to the fullest
extent possible and proper in this regard. </p>

<p>12. Although the drug problem is a national one, its immediate
effects are felt most at State and local levels. To respond
effectively to the drug problem, State and local jurisdictions
will have to increase expenditures for such critical resources as
prison facilities, increased manpower, and sophisticated
equipment. </p>

<p>13. States must provide their law enforcement agencies with
certain tools available to their Federal counterparts. Those
States, which do not already have such statutes, should consider
enacting legislation patterned after the following Federal
statutes: Bail Reform Act of 1984; the Racketeer Influenced and
Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Act; statutory use and derivative
use immunity for witnesses; statutory criminal and civil
forfeiture provisions; the Continuing Criminal Enterprise (CCE)
statute; Title III of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets
Act of 1968 (electronic surveillance); and the Currency and
Foreign Transactions Reporting Act. States should consider
adopting statewide grand juries in order to improve their
investigations of drug trafficking organizations, as well as
eliminating accomplice corroboration statutes or rules. </p>

<p>Foreign Assistance </p>

<p>1. Because drug trafficking and production are threats of such
magnitude to the stability of existing democracies, a primary
goal of the United States and its allies should be to enhance the
security of drug producing and transshipment regions. </p>

<p>2. As a part of its international responsibilities, the
National Drug Enforcement Policy Board should participate in the
President's annual decision whether to suspend aid to drug
producing or transshipment countries. The Board should examine
the drug control efforts made by each foreign nation and make a
suitable recommendation to the President for his ultimate
decision. </p>

<p>3. The willingness of a country to engage in and actively
implement drug-related extradition and mutual assistance treaties
should be a primary consideration in the ultimate U.S. policy
decision regarding foreign assistance to that country. </p>

<p>4. The Departments of State and Defense should continue their
programs of economic and security assistance with emphasis on
assisting those foreign governments making concerted efforts to
control their drug problems. </p>

<p>5. The United States should continue to help producer and
trafficking nations develop prevention and education programs
aimed at drug abuse within these countries. </p>

<p>Source Country Crop Control </p>

<p>1. In light of restrictions inherent in international crop
control efforts, the Board should initiate a thorough
cost/benefit analysis of the entire history of those efforts by
the United States. If justified by such an analysis, the
Department of State, through its Bureau of International
Narcotics Matters (BINM), should initiate or intensify crop
control and plant eradication programs selectively and
judiciously in those countries where the political and economic
climates make it probable that crop eradication programs will
succeed. </p>

<p>2. The Department of State should establish and present to the
Policy Board a specific formula for triggering the cut-off of
foreign aid provided for in the &quot;Diplomacy Against
Drugs&quot; amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act. </p>

<p>3. Narcotics Assistance Unit positions must be recognized by
the State Department as priority Foreign Service assignments. The
State Department should establish a select group of professional
Narcotics Officers to fill those positions, and should ensure
that those positions are fully integrated into the career
advancement structure within the Foreign Service. </p>

<p>4. BINM should expand the range of possibilities under
consideration as alternatives to illicit drug cultivation for
source country farmers and include such options as mining,
petroleum production, and light industry, where feasible. </p>

<p>Reducing Demand for Drugs </p>

<p>1. A thorough review of the current budgetary allotments for
anti-drug efforts, now contemplated by the National Drug
Enforcement Policy Board, should be placed at the top of the
agenda of the Board immediately. If that review indicates that
greater Federal resources should be devoted to programs to reduce
demand, the Board should pursue appropriate action without
hesitation. </p>

<p>2. A portion of the Federal government's asset forfeiture
fund, derived from drug cases, should be devoted to programs to
reduce demand in whatever proportion is indicated by the review
recommended above. Funding to reduce demand should include a
responsible contribution to the States for their own programs in
this area. However, any funding directed to the States should be
made contingent upon their vigorous pursuit of such programs, and
after a reasonable grace period, as determined by the Board or by
Congress, funding should be denied to any State failing this
requirement. Failure to enact State electronic surveillance
measures and asset forfeiture provisions, with the proceeds
thereof directed to anti-drug programs, should constitute per se
failure. </p>

<p>3. The President should direct the heads of all Federal
agencies to formulate immediately clear policy statements, with
implementing guidelines, including suitable drug testing
programs, expressing the utter unacceptability of drug abuse by
Federal employees. State and local governments and leaders in the
private sector should support unequivocally a similar policy that
any and all use of drugs is unacceptable. Government contracts
should not be awarded to companies that fail to implement drug
programs, Including suitable drug testing. No Federal, State, or
local government funds should go directly or indirectly to
programs that counsel &quot;responsible&quot; drug use or condone
illicit drug use in any way. Laws in certain States which
&quot;decriminalized&quot; the possession of marijuana constitute
a form of such condonation, and should be reconsidered. </p>

<p>4. States that have not already done so should enact and
enforce laws prohibiting the sale of drug paraphernalia. </p>

<p>5. The States should be required to report information about
their prevention and treatment programs to the National Institute
on Drug Abuse. With this information, and reports obtained from
private programs, NIDA will be better able to identify the best
prevention and treatment programs and to develop and disseminate
standards and guidelines for such programs to the States. The
States should, in turn, provide this information to all groups
engaged in prevention, treatment, and related research. </p>

<p>6. Consistent with identified measures of success, State
governments should establish credentialing standards for
prevention and treatment programs. They should further require
that all elementary, junior high, and high schools within the
State Include drug abuse prevention programs in their curricula,
designed in a manner consistent with such credentialing
standards. State funding should be made available to assure the
proper training of educators assigned to such programs. </p>

<p>7. Every employer, public and private, and public education
institutions at all levels should have clearly-stated policies
prohibiting drug use, possession of drugs, or being under the
influence of drugs on their premises. The consequences of
violating these prohibitions should be clearly explained. </p>

<p>8. Government and private sector employers who do not already
require drug testing of job applicants and current employees
should consider the appropriateness of such a testing program. </p>

<p>9. State and local law enforcement authorities should enforce
more vigorously the laws prohibiting possession of drugs, and
State legislatures should ensure that enforcement agencies have
the necessary resources to do so. Such resources can be funded in
large part, if not entirely, through effective asset forfeiture
programs. </p>

<p>10. Uniform and rational sentencing for drug offenses is
essential. Such a system should provide a sentence of probation
and a fine for a first offense involving mere possession of
drugs. The terms of probation should include a requirement to
remain drug-free to be verified, if necessary, through periodic
drug testing. A second offense for possession of drugs should
result in a jail sentence or mandatory treatment or fines or all
three. </p>

<p>11. The media and entertainment industries should carefully
review their portrayals of drug use and its consequences and
ensure their accuracy. </p>

<p>12. Health professionals should be thoroughly trained to
identify and counsel drug abusers. </p>

<p>13. Relying on the task force approach which law enforcement
officials have used successfully, parents, churches, schools,
civic organizations and business associations should form
community task forces to provide a unified front against drugs. </p>

<p>Conclusion </p>

<p>The recommendations made here have not been reached
carelessly. They are the result of months of concerted research
and analysis, documented in the body of the report. Although some
recommendations reach to the most fundamental levels of
government agency operation and community life, they have been
presented only after consideration of every identifiable option. </p>

<p>The depth of concern expressed in this report is not the
result of any preordained strategy. Rather, it reflects this
Commission's recognition, based on objective evidence, that we
are confronted with a national crisis. Every course of action,
including a failure to act at all, has a natural consequence. The
recommendations made here are those actions deemed most effective
in promoting a national campaign against drugs at all levels of
society.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>