
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B022-117</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1m.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123532 text/html 8348
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:35:26 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:56:48 GMT
Content-length: 8131
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Summary and Conclusions: Marihuana and Crime</h1>

<hr>

<p>The Commission's review of the available evidence bearing on
the relationship between marihuana use and criminal, aggressive
and delinquent behavior has yielded the following information. </p>

<p>The once prevalent belief among the general public and the
professional law enforcement, criminal justice and research
communities that marihuana causes crime, violence, aggression and
delinquency has moderated appreciably over the years. Recent
evidence indicates that increased attention has been devoted,
instead, to a possible statistical correlation rather than a
cause-effect relationship. </p>

<p>At present, however, considerable confusion and uncertainty
exists among both the general and professional publics, among
youth and adults, and among marihuana users and non-users about
the relationship between marihuana and criminal, aggressive or
delinquent behavior. The confusion and uncertainty stem from a
general lack of knowledge and understanding about the effects of
the drug, including its potential for physical addiction. Many
persons are still under the misapprehension that marihuana is
addicting and that crimes are committed in order to support a
drug &quot;habit.&quot; </p>

<p>In general, recent changes in public and professional opinion
have corresponded with and reflected the increased use of
marihuana, particularly within the middle class segment of
society; more direct observation of and professional experience
with the marihuana user; new and more enlightened information
about the drug and its effects; and concomitant changes in the
public image of the user. </p>

<p>There is no systematic empirical evidence, at least that drawn
from the American experience, to support the thesis that the use
of marihuana either inevitably or generally causes, leads to or
precipitates criminal, violent, aggressive or delinquent behavior
of a sexual or nonsexual nature. </p>

<p>Laboratory studies of effects have revealed no evidence to
show that marihuana's chemical properties are, by themselves,
capable of producing effects which can be interpreted as
criminogenic; that is, that marihuana is an independent cause of
criminal or aggressive behavior. If anything, the effects
observed suggest that marihuana may be more likely to neutralize
criminal behavior and to militate against the commission of
aggressive acts. </p>

<p>The research community has recently gathered considerable
evidence to show that marihuana and criminal, aggressive and
delinquent behavior are statistically and significantly
correlated when measured together in isolation from variables
which are related to marihuana use and other forms of antisocial
behavior. The data also show, however, that this statistical
association either attenuates significantly or disappears
completely when the proper statistical controls are applied. </p>

<p>In other words, the observed relationship between the, use of
marihuana and criminal, violent, aggressive and delinquent
behavior is spurious. It is dependent on such
extra-pharmacological factors as the age, race and education of
the user; the type of community in which he lives; his past
history of psychosocial maladjustment; and his involvement in a
criminal or delinquent subculture (use of other drugs; drug
buying and selling activities; associations with friends who also
use, buy and sell cannabis or other drugs). </p>

<p>To reiterate what Professor Goode has so cogently stated, </p>

<p><i>If there were truly a causal relationship between marihuana
use and crime, these disappearing correlations would not occur.
The application of sociological variables cannot wash out a
chemical reaction in the user</i> (1972:52). </p>

<p>To put it still another way, to believe that marihuana causes
criminal, violent, aggressive or delinquent behavior is to
confuse the effects of the drug with the people who use it. </p>

<p>From the perspective of marihuana's relationship to antisocial
behavior of a criminal or violent nature, the drug cannot be said
to constitute a significant threat to the public safety. If its
use, therefore, is to be discouraged, it must be discouraged on
grounds other than its role in the commission of criminal or
violent or delinquent acts. </p>

<p>The enormous increases in marihuana arrests over the past
several years are ample evidence that the police have taken
seriously their role of maintaining law and order with respect to
marihuana use and that they have responded to public pressure and
concern about the increase in marihuana use. Yet, in their
experience with the marihuana user they have been placed in the
unenviable position of having to enforce a law either disregarded
or discredited by large segments of the population they serve. </p>

<p>Over and over again they have seen their efforts in this
respect negated by the de jure or de facto modification, if not
nullification, of the laws against possession by prosecutors,
judges and even legislators. Their increasing frustration and
demoralization, therefore, at least with respect to the marihuana
user, is quite, understandable. </p>

<p>These other officials, however, are likewise placed in a
difficult position; for they, too, must enforce and apply the
criminal law, and they, too, must respond to public pressures and
concerns. In some instances, they have demonstrated particular
resistance to criminalizing the user and subjecting him to
criminal penalties which are deemed to be unwarranted if not
unwise. </p>

<p>In the case of marihuana, recent changes in law enforcement
practices with respect to the user have, in fact, reflected the
increased use and public tolerance of marihuana. The statutory
changes now taking place at the state and local levels are
further evidence of the trend toward greater public acceptance of
the user. In these instances, the laws and their enforcement were
altered because they no longer performed the symbolic function of
expressing society's disapproval of marihuana use.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>