
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B021-63</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/ncaddend.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123214 text/html 21264
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:32:07 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:47 GMT
Content-length: 21046
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding - Addendum</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse </b></p>

<h2>Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding </h2>

<p><b>Commissioned by President Richard M. Nixon, March, 1972</b>
</p>

<p><font size="5"><b>addendum<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The previous Chapter recommended a social policy oriented
toward the discouragement of marihuana use and presented a set of
proposals for the legal implementation of that policy. In
addition to these legal recommendations for federal, and state
action, the Commission believes certain other recommendations
should be presented for action. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Ancillary Recommendations</b> </p>

<p>These recommendations are presented in three categories: (1)
legal and law enforcement, (2) medical, and (3) other. Some of
these recommendations apply to other drugs as well and will be
discussed further in our second Report. However, we consider it
useful to make recommendations now so that policy planners can be
informed of the implications of what has been studied to date. </p>

<p>Foremost among the Commission's conclusions is a need for
consistency between federal and state laws affecting marihuana
distribution and use, and uniformity of marihuana laws among the
states. The administration of all marihuana laws must be mutally
reenforcing so that total governmental response to marihuana is
both equitable and understandable. </p>

<p><b>Legal and Law Enforcement Recommendations</b> </p>

<p><b>1. Federal</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES, ESPECIALLY
THE BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS AND THE BUREAU OF
CUSTOMS, SHOULD IMPROVE THEIR STATISTICAL REPORTING SYSTEMS SO
THAT POLICIES MAY BE PLANNED AND RESOURCES ALLOCATED ON THE BASIS
OF ACCURATE AND COMPREHENSIVE INFORMATION. </p>

<p>In an effort to obtain information relating to enforcement of
the marihuana laws including arrest, prosecution, sentencing and
conviction data, the Commission found that sufficient information
was available about prosecution and court action, but not about
the activities of the law enforcement agencies. We were
confronted by and large with inadequate statistical information
and little or no in-depth evaluation. </p>

<p>The statistical reporting procedures of the Bureau of
Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs and the Bureau of Customs are not
uniform, making it extremely difficult to assess the
effectiveness of the two principal drug enforcement agencies of
the Federal Government. The Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs keeps centralized files but the Bureau of Customs maintains
its files on a regional basis. In both Bureaus, statistical
information is kept only in its raw form; that is, number of
arrests, number of seizures and so on. Very little analysis
exists of the procedures leading to arrest, of the
characteristics of persons arrested, and of the law enforcement
strategies involved in the arrest. For law enforcement personnel
to understand more fully how they are carrying out their
functions so that internal assessments of particular policies can
be made, sophisticated statistics must be maintained. </p>

<p>Both the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs and the
Bureau of Customs are aware of these problems. Both were
extremely helpful to the Commission and its research staff in
seeking useful information from the mass of raw statistics.
However, the information from the available statistics is
incomplete and of limited utility for policy planning purposes. </p>

<p>In support of this priority recommendation, Congress is urged
to provide additional and adequate funding for this area, at the
same time requiring both agencies to utilize a common reporting
system so that information can be more easily shared between
them. </p>

<p>In addition, it is recommended that the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, in its Uniform Crime Reports, requests the state
agencies to identify marihuana cases separately from narcotic
cases and report them as a separate component. </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS
DRUGS SH0ULD INCREASE ITS TRAINING PROGRAMS OF STATE AND LOCAL
POLICE WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON THE TRAINING IN THE DETECTION OF
TRAFFICKING CASES. </p>

<p>The Commission's interviews with state and local police,
officials revealed a consistent desire to upgrade the quality of
their investigations. Since the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs, through its National Training Institute, has
been performing this task well, it is recommended that the funds
be granted by the Congress to extend the range of the educational
program offered and increase the number of persons trained. </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: INCREASED BORDER SURVEILLANCE, A TIGHTENING OF
BORDER PROCEDURES, AND A REALISTIC ERADICAT10N PROGRAM TO
DIMINISH THE SUPPLY OF DRUGS COMING INTO THE COUNTRY, COUPLED
WITH A MORE EFFECTIVE PROGRAM FOR DIMINISHING THE DOMESTIC
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION OF MARIHUANA, ARE REQUIRED. </p>

<p>The Commission, as part of its mandate, studied drug
trafficking patterns along the borders of the United States. An
analysis of border marihuana seizures was also made. The results
of both studies indicated that proportionately larger seizures
were made along the borders at locations where, there were no
manned checkpoints. The Commission therefore recommends that more
vigorous effort be made by federal agencies to interdict
smugglers along the entire border while continuing their efforts
at the formal checkpoints. </p>

<p>In discussions with representatives of other countries, a
common observation made by foreign officials has been this
country's somewhat indifferent attitude about the eradication of
our home-grown marihuana, an attitude that is not appreciated by
other countries wider pressure from the United States to destroy
their crops. Since this Administration has wisely made illicit
trafficking in all drugs a foreign policy priority, we recommend
that priority be supported by an equally assiduous effort to
eradicate marihuana within our borders. </p>

<p>We recommend further that preclearance procedures be
eliminated so that Customs personnel may more effectively control
smuggling of marihuana and other drugs. Preclearance is a
procedure whereby passengers and their baggage destined for the
United States are inspected by U.S. Customs, Immigration and
Agriculture officials prior to departure from a foreign location.
This practice is in effect in Bermuda, Montreal, Nassau, Toronto,
Vancouver, Winnipeg and the Virgin Islands. Other locations are
petitioning for the same privilege. </p>

<p>An inherent weakness in the preclearance procedure is that
Customs personnel stationed outside the United States have no
authority for search, seizure and arrest. This fact is well-known
to the professional smuggler who uses it to his advantage. Since
we have been informed that preclearance creates a gap in Customs'
interdiction process, reason dictates that the procedure be
eliminated in the interest of tighter control. </p>

<p><b>H. State</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: ALL STATES SHOULD ADOPT THE UNIFORM CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES ACT TO ACHIEVE UNIFORMITY WITH REGARD TO MARIHUANA AND
OTHER DRUG LAWS, WITH THE EXCEPTION THAT THE LEGAL RESPONSE TO
POSSESSION FOR ONE'S OWN USE BE UNIFORMLY ADOPTED IN ACCORDANCE
WITH OUR RECOMMENDATION IN CHAPTER V OF THIS REPORT. </p>

<p>As noted earlier, one of the greatest needs in the entire drug
area is uniformity of state laws with regard to structure and
penalties. While this recommendation applies to all drugs and not
just marihuana, we feel it essential to make this recommendation
now to help deemphasize the marihuana problem. Significant
differences in penalties among the states constitute a valid
source of irritation and conflict among various segments of our
population. In an age of high mobility, it is unconscionable that
penalties should vary so greatly in response, to the same
behavior. </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: EACH STATE SHOULD ESTABLISH A CENTRALIZED
COMPULSORY REPORTING AND RECORD-KEEPTNG AUTHORITY SO THAT
ADEQUATE AND ACCURATE STATISTICS OF ARRESTS, SENTENCES AND
CONVICTIONS ON A STATEWIDE BASIS ARE AVAILABLE. </p>

<p>Several states have systems for maintaining records of drug
arrests on a statewide basis. Accurate reporting and compilation
of these cases permit the state to assess accurately the impact
of law enforcement on drug offenders. The Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration of the Department of Justice should
assist the states to establish compulsory statistical reporting
centers so that individual state needs are met and a clearer
picture of the national trends can be, ascertained. Efficient
state record-keeping will have an additional benefit of
increasing the reliability of the Uniform Crime Reports compiled
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: THOSE STATES REQUIRING PHYSICIANS TO REPORT
DRUG USERS SEEKING MEDICAL ASSISTANCE SHOULD CHANGE SUCH
REQUIREMENTS TO INSURE THE CONFIDENTIALITY OF THE DRUG USER'S
IDENTITY, SO THAT PERSONS NEEDING MEDICAL HELP WILL FEEL FREE TO
SEEK IT. </p>

<p>Seventeen states* currently require physicians to report to a
government agency information on those persons treated by them
who are dependent on, or are habitual users of drugs. No common
pattern emerges among these states. </p>

<p>*California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, New Jersey, New Mexico. New York,
North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Virginia, Washington. </p>

<p>After reviewing these statutes, the Commission believes that
the disadvantages of maintaining such reporting systems outweigh
the benefits to society or the individual. Fear of disclosure to
the police discourages many persons front seeking needed medical
help. Furthermore, the requirement makes the physician an
informant and an agent of law enforcement. </p>

<p>While a need exists for reliable statistics regarding the
number and nature of those persons being treated, the Commission
does not feel that identification of the individual user is
necessary. We again emphasize that society should encourage
persons in need of medical attention to seek out authorized
practitioners without having to fear legal repercussions for such
action. </p>

<p><b>III. International</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: IF THE UNITED STATES SHOULD BECOME A SIGNATORY
OF THE PROPOSED PSYCHOTROPIC CONVENTION, WE RECOMMEND THAT
CANNABIS BE REMOVED FROM THE EXISTING SINGLE CONVENTION AND
CONSIDERATION BE GIVEN TO LISTING IT IN THE PSYCHOTROPIC
CONVENTION AMONG DRUGS WHICH HAVE SIMILAR EFFECTS. </p>

<p>Under the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, of which
the United States became a signatory in 1967, cannabis, with the
exception of its leaves and stems, is included with narcotic
drugs and cocaine. While that categorization had some
justification in 1961 when knowledge about marihuana was more,
limited, this justification no longer exists. More importantly,
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the psychoactive ingredient in
cannabis, is not included in the Single Convention and is
proposed for inclusion in the Psychotropic Convention. </p>

<p>The Commission sees little sense in having the potent
psychoactive ingredient in cannabis covered in one Convention and
the natural supplying data from its major foreign studies of
chronic cannabis users in Jamaica and Greece. For medical
research purposes, an analysis of data derived from populations
in other countries with 10, 20 or 30 years of experience with
heavy marihuana use will provide useful information about
probable consequences if the, incidence of marihuana use in the
United States were to continue and increase, and if more people
engaged in heavy, long term use. </p>

<p><b>IV. Therapeutic Uses</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: INCREASED SUPPORT OF STUDIES WHICH EVALUATE
THE EFFICACY OF MARIHIUANA TN THE TREATMENT OF PHYSICAL
IMPAIRMENTS AND DISEASE IS RECOMMENDED. </p>

<p>Historical references have been noted throughout the
literature referring to the use of cannabis products as
therapeutically useful agents. Of particular significance for
current research with controlled quality, quantity and
therapeutic settings, would be investigations into the treatment
of glaucoma, migraine, alcoholism and terminal cancer. The
NIMII-FDA Psychotomimetic Advisory Committee's authorization of
studies designed to explore the therapeutic uses of marihuana is
commended. </p>

<p><b>V. Community-Based Treatment</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: COMMUNITY-BASED TREATMENT FACILITIES SHOULD BE
PROMOTED IN CARlNG FOR PROBLEM DRUG USERS UTILIZING EXISTING
HEALTH CENTERS WHEN POSSIBLE AND APPROPRIATE. </p>

<p>In studying marihuana, the Commission has obtained information
about a number of treatment centers and services. The wide range
of agencies and the variety of goals and techniques present a
confusing array of services available to drug users, varying
widely in their effectiveness. Uniform criteria for evaluating
the &quot;success&quot; of these programs is urgently needed. </p>

<p>The medical members of the Commission believe that some of the
techniques being used may pose as much potential harm as good.
Many young people who are experiencing profound difficulties
resulting from the use of drugs may suppose they are being
treated and helped, when in reality they are not. In some cases,
the short-term benefit may be disruptive to the long-term welfare
of the individual. In the rush to provide treatment facilities,
many programs have been given impressive credentials without
meeting minimal medical standards. It is essential that treatment
facilities have, as their primary orientation, the well-being of
the individual under treatment. </p>

<p><b>VI. Training Programs</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: PUBLIC HEALTH COURSES ON THE SOCIAL ASPECTS OF
DRUG USE SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN THE CURRICULA OF THE SCHOOLS OF
THE HEALTH PROFESSIONS. </p>

<p>The Commission recommends that schools of the health
professions include in their curricula courses on the social,
public health and therapeutic aspects of drug use as appropriate
to the educational purpose of the individual school. The National
Survey indicated that the public views the family physician as an
important source of information about drugs. Next to school
personnel, physicians were mentioned most often in this
connection. Persons involved in the health professions must be
provided with information about nonmedical as well as the medical
aspects of drug use. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>Other Recommendations</b> </p>

<p><b>1. Reclassification of Cannabis</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: THE COMMISSION RECOGNIZES THAT SEVERAL STATE
LEGISLATURES HAVE IMPROPERLY CLASSIFIED MARIHUANA AS A NARCOTIC,
AND RECOMMENDS THAT THEY NOW REDEFINE MARIHUANA ACCORDING TO THE
STANDARDS OF THE RECENTLY ADOPTED UNIFORM CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
LAW. </p>

<p>Scientific evidence has clearly demonstrated that marihuana is
not a narcotic drug, and the law should properly reflect this
fact. Congress so recognized in the Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control Act of 1970, as did The Conference of
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws in the Uniform Controlled
Substances Law. </p>

<p>In those states where the Uniform Controlled Substances Law
has not yet been adopted, twelve of which continue to classify
marihuana as a &quot;narcotic&quot;, the Commission recommends
that the legislatures distinguish marihuana from the opiates and
list it in a separate category. The consequence of inappropriate
definition is that the public continues to associate marihuana
with the narcotics, such as heroin. The confusion resulting from
this improper classification helps to perpetuate prejudices and
misinformation about marihuana. </p>

<p><b>II. Information</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: A SINGLE FEDERAL AGENCY SOURCE SHOULD
DISSEMINATE INFORMATION AND MATERIALS RELATING TO MARIHUANA AND
OTHER DRUGS. THE NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSE FOR DRUG ABUSE
INFORMATION SHOULD BE CHARGED WITH THIS RESPONSIBILITY. </p>

<p>A great proliferation of drug information materials has
occurred in recent years. These, materials are currently
distributed by a number of federal agencies. Some of these
materials conflict with each other. The result is a confusion and
uncertainty on the part of the, public about the accuracy of all
these statements. The public should have one federal source from
which to obtain drug information. The National Clearinghouse for
Drug Abuse Information appears best suited to perform this task. </p>

<p><b>III. Education</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: THE SPECIAL ACTION OFFICE FOR DRUG ABUSE
PREVENTION IN THE WHITE HOUSE SHOULD BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
COORDINATION, DEVELOPMENT AND CONTENT REVIEW OF ALL
FEDERALLY-SUPPORTED DRUG EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS ANT) SHOULD ISSUE
A REPORT AS SOON AS POSSIBLE, EVALUATING EXISTING DRUG EDUCATION
MATERIALS. </p>

<p>The Commission has studied many programs of drug education
throughout the country. Some are irrelevant, others are poorly
designed, still others are misleading, and a good many of them
are, of questionable value. A few are excellent. The Federal
Government must provide assistance to the states and school
districts in this matter, and should provide the leadership in
developing sample programs in cooperation with educational
systems. An evaluation of existing programs by The Special Action
Office for Drug Abuse Prevention of the White House could be very
helpful in improving the standards of drug education. </p>

<p><b>IV. Voluntary Sector Participation</b> </p>

<p>RECOMMENDATION: THE COMMISSION NOTES THE SIGNIFICANT ROLE
PLAYED BY THE VOLUNTARY SEC TOR OF THE AMERICAN COMMUNITY IN
INFLUENCING THE SOCIAL, RELIGIOUS AND MORAL ATTITUDES OF OUR
NATION'S CITIZENS AND RECOMMENDS THAT THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR BE
ENCOURAGED TO TAKE AN ACTIVE ROLE IN SUPPORT OF OUR RECOMMENDED
POLICY OF DISCOURAGING THE USE OF MARIHUANA. </p>

<p>Already very active in drug education and prevention
activities, the social agencies, service clubs, church groups,
and other non-governmental bodies have, been extremely helpful in
attending to the difficult problems of drug abuse. The local and
personal nature of such organizations gives them an advantage
over state and federal governments in the development of
attitudes by our citizens. </p>

<p>The policy which we here recommend, indeed any policy which
might be recommended, will inevitably encounter widespread and
earnest objections. The fullest efforts of all citizens of good
will be required to attend to the, massive problem of drug abuse
in a calm, just, responsible and effective manner. The help of
the voluntary agencies in working toward this end is earnestly
invited and urgently needed.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>