
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-14</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B040-417</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/op/op1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130515 text/html 130112
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:04:45 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:52:31 GMT
Content-length: 129893
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Opium Problem - Chapter 1 - Extent</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/sch_OP_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="opmenu.htm">The
Opium Problem</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="58141" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM PROBLEM </h1>

<p><b>BY CHARLES E. TERRY AND MILDRED PELLENS</b> </p>

<p><b>1928</b> </p>

<p>CHAPTER I - EXTENT </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The number of individuals involved is probably what first
brings any problem to the attention of the public. It bears a
definite relationship to control and if it is demonstrated that a
problem is confined neither to a community nor to a section of
tile country, neither to one social group nor even to one race,
but is widespread and common to all, such facts should be used as
the basis for eliciting interest, for pointing out the need for
remedial measures, and for framing such measures. Likewise the
converse is true. A knowledge, therefore, of the extent of tile
problem with which we are concerned is a matter of importance and
should receive early consideration. </p>

<p>The attempts which we have made to secure an accurate estimate
of the number of chronic opium users in the United States at the
present time emphasize an unusual situation. We find estimates
varying all the way from a few thousand individuals to several
millions. One states that one hundred thousand to two hundred
thousand is the outside limit while another states that two
million or more is a conservative figure. The lay press, popular
magazines, and even scientific journals vary so widely in their
estimates of the number of sufferers from this condition that one
is justified in accepting none of them unreservedly and in
analyzing afresh all available means for the determination of the
actual facts. </p>

<p>It will be seen not only that no one is possessed of an
accurate knowledge as to the exact number of individuals
regularly using opium in this country today, but also that under
present conditions it is impossible to obtain such a figure.
There are several reasons why this is true. In the first place,
the fact that opium-using in any form is regarded by the general
public as alone a habit, vice, sign of weak will or dissipation
undoubtedly has caused the majority of users to conceal their
condition. This attitude presumably attributes to the individual
either a physical or mental inferiority the concealment of which
is quite natural. This factor applied before the problem ever
became a matter for official and legislative action and
undoubtedly became intensified when it was taken up officially
and the individuals desirous of solving it made their views the
basis of propaganda for control. With the advent of prohibitory
legislation and the consequent fear of legal involvement, it is
natural that even greater efforts were made by individuals
affected to conceal their condition. </p>

<p>Quite aside from this individual point of view is the fact
that only in cases where large doses of the drug are being
consumed can casual observation or even a fairly careful
examination determine the existence of the condition. There is a
popular belief extant that practically anyone can detect the
so-called &quot;dope fiend,&quot; that he is a miserable,
emaciated, furtive individual with pinpoint pupils, trembling
hands, sallow complexion and characterized by a varied group of
moral attributes, needing only to be observed to render
identification of the condition complete. As a matter of fact not
even one of these alleged characteristics need be present and it
is safe to say that in many cases only one or another of them
exists and by no means would suffice to give the ordinary
observer an idea of the true situation. It has been reported that
for many years husbands and wives, to say nothing of other
members of a family, have lived in complete ignorance of the
existence of this condition in one or the other and that quite
possibly the average physician, unaccustomed to dealing with the
condition, might have difficulty in determining its existence. </p>

<p>In view of what has been said it would seem quite evident that
there is no accurate knowledge as to the exact number of chronic
opium users in the country today, as it is apparent that, if the
condition is considered a physical, mental, or moral stigma and
if it is possible to conceal it from any but the most
scrutinizing examination unknown cases inevitably must exist.
This may be expected to continue as long as the present attitude
toward the user of these drugs exists with the social and
economic damage resulting from exposure, and the illicit traffic
offers a means of supply. That the illicit traffic exists to a
very marked degree we know; to suppose that the dangers of
disclosure are not appreciated by individual sufferers would be
to consider them lacking in ordinary intelligence. However, in
spite of the obvious difficulties in the way of an accurate
determination of the number of cases of chronic opium
intoxication, startling statements constantly are being made. </p>

<p>Although it is apparent that under present conditions the
difficulties in the way of arriving at exact knowledge or even an
estimate known to approach the number of opium users in the
United States are insurmountable, on a superficial examination
there would appear to be two methods available for attaining at
least a minimal figure. As it is common knowledge that opium is
not produced in this country and that therefore all opium used
must be imported, it is possible to secure through the proper
Government bureaus the quantity of opium legitimately imported.
By suitable calculations apparently it should be possible to
arrive at the total number of users, excluding those supplied by
the illicit traffic. Theoretically this could be accomplished by
subtracting from the amount imported for a given period the
amount exported and the amount used for therapeutic purposes not
connected with chronic opium intoxication and dividing the
resulting figure by the average amount consumed by the chronic
user for that period. This method has been used by some authors,
but there are several factors which vitiate the totals arrived
at. First, some writers have neglected to distinguish between
general importation figures and the figures dealing with
importations for consumption.* This at once makes for very
different totals as will be seen when it is stated that, for the
period of ten years 1911-1920 inclusive, these amounts differed
by about 400,000 pounds of opium. </p>

<p>*'General imports&quot; embrace imported articles entered at
the customs houses for immediate consumption and imported
articles entered for warehouse. &quot;Imports entered for
consumption&quot; embrace imported articles entered for immediate
consumption and imported articles withdrawn from warehouse for
consumption. </p>

<p>Another source of error enters in any attempt to allow for the
amount of opium and its derivatives employed for therapeutic
purposes not connected with chronic, opium intoxication. The
estimates as to the proportion of imported drug required for such
purposes have varied very widely and obviously where such large
figures are dealt with the resulting estimates vary considerably.
These allowances always seem to have been reached either in an
arbitrary fashion or upon a basis of incomplete facts. </p>

<p>Further so far as we know there has been made no study of a
sufficiently large and representative number of individual cases
under suitable conditions to permit of any definite statement as
to an average daily dose. For instance, it is well known that
certain cases continue for years on one or two grains or even a
fraction of a grain daily while others take such almost
unbelievable doses as eighty to one hundred or more grains a day.
Also, among a certain type, the amount stated as habitually
consumed by an individual may include the ration of one or more
other individuals unknown to the investigator. </p>

<p>As far as we know then there are two obstacles to the
determination through importation figures of a minimal figure for
the number of chronic opium users in this country at the present
time:-(1) the fact that the so-called &quot;legitimate
therapeutic needs&quot; are unknown and (2) the wholly
speculative nature of the &quot;average dose.&quot; In view of
these facts, all estimates as to the extent of this condition
based on importation figures however used are potentially
fallacious to such a great degree as to be practically valueless.
</p>

<p>The second method of determination is the employment of some
means for the taking of a census of opium users in a given
locality and adjusting it to the population of the country as a
whole. Aside from the fact that it would not include those users
who, by reason of their desire for concealment and consequent
dependence on illicit traffic for supply, could not be recorded
by<font size="1"> </font>such a survey undoubtedly would possess
a value not found in estimates based on importation figures in an
attempt to reach a minimal figure, inasmuch as it would be
definite and positive as far as it went. Of course, there is
possibility of error to a greater or less degree in this method.
The floating population, for example, cannot be disregarded, yet
this is a source of error common to every method of
census-taking. Further, local conditions such as population
composition, climate, race distribution, occupation, etc., are
influencing factors which tend to lessen the value of the
individual surveys as applied to the country as a whole.
Unfortunately, there have not been enough of these surveys made
in various sections to determine by comparison the degree to
which these factors operate. In what follows, the surveys which
we have reviewed and which represent investigations made in
different localities at different periods will be analyzed and
the features which tend to vitiate their application to the
country as a whole, for the period in which they were made, will
be pointed out. </p>

<p>'This factor does not enter into the early surveys which were
carried on when illicit traffic was unknown or practically
negligible. <br>
</p>

<p>Before examining the first definite figures of which we have
knowledge, contained in a survey reported by 0. Marshall in the
Annual Report of the Michigan State Department of Health of 1878,
it will be interesting to quote from some of the earliest authors
who refer to the extent of chronic opium intoxication in this
country. Their statements, however inexact, at least show that
the problem is by no means one of recent development but the
result, as we know it today, of a continuous growth probably
since Colonial days. What effect the war of the American
Revolution and that of 1812 had upon its spread we have not seen
indicated in any record we have consulted, but that the Civil War
gave it a considerable impetus seems definitely established.<br>
</p>

<p>Fitzhugh Ludlow-1867.3 </p>

<p>3 Ludlow, Fitzhugh-Harper's Magazine. August, 1867. </p>

<p>&quot;The habit is gaining fearful ground among our
professional men, the operatives in our mills, our weary serving
women, our fagged clerks, our former liquor drunkards, our very
day laborers, who a generation ago took gin. All our classes from
the highest to the lowest are yearly increasing their consumption
of the drug.&quot; </p>

<p>Horace Day-1868 <font size="1">.4 </font></p>

<p>4 Day, Horace-The Opium Habit. 1868. </p>

<p>&quot;The number of confirmed opium-eaters in the United
States is large, not less, judging from the testimony of
druggists in all parts of the country as well as from other
sources, than eighty to one hundred thousand . . . The events of
the last few years (Civil War) have unquestionably added greatly
to their number. Maimed and shattered survivors from a hundred
battlefields, diseased and disabled soldiers released from
hostile prisons, anguished and hopeless wives and mothers, made
so by the slaughter of those who were dearest to them, have
found, many of them, temporary relief from their sufferings in
opium.&quot; </p>

<p>Alonzo Calkins-1871.5 </p>

<p>Calkins calls attention to the increased use of opium in this
country from the year 1840. Basing his computations on the
importations of opium and the population figures for those years,
he reaches the following ratios of advance:<br>
</p>

<p><img src="op100001.gif" align="bottom" width="444" height="71">
</p>

<p>He gives in some detail the method by which he reaches these
figures which include &quot;a comparison of opinions given by
eighteen prominent apothecaries of New York City.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Such statistics,&quot; he asserts, &quot;fully presented
bear no equivocal interpretation.&quot; </p>

<p>Independent and collateral evidences, he believes, show that
&quot;opiummania, far from being restricted . . . to our cities .
. . is fast pervading the country-populations.&quot; </p>

<p>In the evidence he presents he quotes the following: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p><i>&quot;Thus addresses </i>the writer, a physician and
    druggist of a New England city, Dr. S. S.: 'In this town I
    began business twenty years since. The population then at
    10,000 has increased only inconsiderably, but my sales have
    advanced from 50 pounds of opium the first year to 300 pounds
    now; and of laudanum four times upon what was formerly
    required. About 50 regular purchasers come to my shop, and as
    many more, perhaps, are divided among the other three
    apothecaries in the place. Some country dealers also have
    their quotas of dependents.' Such is no solitary record. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>&quot;In the <i>Portland Press, </i>IM, a correspondent
    sounds the alarm-note in these words: 'Very few of our people
    are aware how many habitual consumers of opium among us a
    careful scrutiny would disclose. In the little village of
    Auburn (of the neighborhood) at least fifty such (as counted
    up by a resident apothecary) regularly purchase their
    supplies hereabouts; and the country grocers, too, not a few
    of them, find occasion for keeping themselves supplied with a
    stock.' Corroborative accounts dome in from New Jersey and
    Indiana, from Boston at one extreme and from St. Louis at
    another, and from the impoverished South as well. In the
    Mississippi Valley particularly the use of stimuli of every
    name is fearfully on the increase (Pitcher, Comstock).&quot; </p>
</blockquote>

<p>F. E. Oliver-1871.<br>
</p>

<p>In the third Annual Report of the State Board of Health,
Massachusetts, for the year 1871, there appears a chapter on the
use and abuse of opium written by this author. The writer
addressed the following questions to the physicians of
Massachusetts: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>1. Are preparations of opium used by the people except for
    the relief of Pain? </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>2. We would like to know whether the injurious use of
    opium has increased of late years, and if so, the causes of
    such increase? </p>
</blockquote>

<p>Unfortunately, these questions were not so framed as to elicit
the information which the author desired to obtain and, as he
himself states, the data secured are most incomplete although
suggestive. Less than one-half of the physicians addressed were
heard from, representing a little more than one-third of the
physicians of the state. In all 125 physicians replied, 40 of
these stating in answer to the first question that they knew of
no case of opium eating. The remaining 85 stated that the drug
was used to a greater or less extent in their respective
circuits. In many of the smaller towns where the
&quot;habit&quot; existed, the number of users was reported where
it could be ascertained, while in the returns from others such
terms as &quot;few,&quot; &quot;many&quot; and
&quot;several&quot; alone were given. In others again no mention
was made of numbers, so that the author was not able to arrive at
anything like an accurate computation. From the fragmentary data
so obtained the author states that the inference is unavoidable
that the &quot;opium habit&quot; is more or less prevalent in
many parts of the state and while it is impossible to estimate it
the number of users must be very considerable. </p>

<p>The writer further gives the following extract from a letter
received from Mr. S. Dana Hayes, one of the State Assayers: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>&quot;'In reply to your inquiries, it is my opinion that
    the consumption of opium in Massachusetts and New England is
    increasing more rapidly in proportion than the population.
    There are so many channels through which the drug may be
    brought into the State, that I suppose it would be almost
    impossible to determine how much foreign opium is used here;
    but it may easily be shown that the home production increases
    every year. Opium has been recently made from white poppies,
    cultivated for the purpose, in Vermont, New Hampshire and
    Connecticut, the annual production being estimated by
    hundreds of pounds, and this has generally been absorbed in
    the communities where it is made. It has also been brought
    here from Florida and Louisiana, while comparatively large
    quantities are regularly sent east from California and
    Arizona, where its cultivation is becoming an important
    branch of industry, ten acres of poppies being said to yield,
    in Arizona, twelve hundred pounds of opium.&quot;' <br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>&quot;'That which is not used where it is produced,
    including the shipments from California and the West,
    together with inferior and damaged parcels of foreign opium
    received and condemned at this port, is sent to Philadelphia,
    where it is converted into morphis. and its salts, and is
    thus distributed through the country! <font size="1">Pt a</font>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>In his letter Hayes comments further on the use of opium and
morphin in family remedies such as cough mixtures and liniments
and in the dangerous so-called &quot;cures&quot; or &quot;Relief
for Opium-Eaters&quot; preparations. </p>

<p>'D. M. R. Culbreth in his &quot;Materia Medica and
Pharmacology&quot;, 3rd edition, 1903, states: </p>

<p>&quot;During the Civil War opium was cultivated in Virginia,
Tennessee, South Carolina, Georgia, being planted in September
and collected in May.&quot; </p>

<p>In the 6th edition of the same work the author states that
this opium was of high narcotic content. </p>

<p>Oliver also quotes extracts from letters replying to his
question as to the increase in tile <i>use </i>of opium, some of
which are reproduced below: </p>

<p>&quot;Clarksburg-'I think it on the increase, because doctors
prescribe it more indiscriminately now than formerly, thus
establishing the habit with the patient! </p>

<p>Eastham-2 I think the use of opium has slightly increased,
mostly among females.' </p>

<p>Swampscott-2 The use of opium in its various forms has
materially increased within the last ten years! </p>

<p>Westfield---I have reason to believe this practice exceedingly
common among certain classes of people, who crave the effect of a
stimulant, but will not risk their reputation for temperance by
taking alcoholic beverages.' </p>

<p>Worcester-2 I have talked with some of our most intelligent
apothecaries, who tell me that the use of opium has greatly
increased, especially among women. The reasons which one gave are
these: The doctors are prescribing it more to their patients, and
thus the habit is acquired. There is also the desire for Some
form of stimulant. Alcoholic stimulants being prohibited, many
have resorted to the use of opium.' </p>

<p>Another gave it as his opinion that 'the use of opium in its
various preparations is increasing among the people as a
stimulant, and is now being used to an alarming extent. I believe
this to be due largely to the unpopularity and restricted use of
alcoholic liquors. I believe there is a natural craving for some
artificial stimulant with almost every human being, which is
greatly increased by the cares and perplexities of life, and
therefore is more apparent as age advances. This desire should be
satisfied by the milder and least injurious drinks, as beer,
light wines, etc.' </p>

<p>Another states: 'I think opium and its preparation are used to
a considerable extent as stimulants, and am inclined to the
opinion that such use is increasing and that such increase is
due, in some degree, to the excitements, suffering and mental
disquietude resulting from the late war! </p>

<p>Boston-Among 20 or 30 druggists consulted there was a
diversity of opinions many of them not selling opium without a
physician's order. The following statements are among the most
important: </p>

<p>'Believes the habit of opium eating diminishing, as he has
fewer calls than formerly! </p>

<p>'Has one customer who buys half an ounce at a time. The number
of calls is less than formerly. Has observed that veteran
soldiers who contracted the habit in army hospitals are still
addicted to opium.' </p>

<p>'In the experience of twenty-five years has observed no
decided increase in the habit of opium eating. Recognizes the
correlation in the abuse of opium and of alcohol. The opium habit
frequently begins in the use of opium medicinally. Veteran
soldiers, as a class, are addicted to it . . . ' </p>

<p>'Thinks the abuse is not uncommon in the community but that it
is les,9 in Boston than elsewhere. Would look for it rather among
professional men threat among the poorer classes.' </p>

<p>'From his own experiences, believes that the habit of opium
eating has increased within the last five years from 50 to 75 per
cent. Never sells the drug without physician's prescription but
has on an average five or six daily applications for some one of
its preparations. It is largely taken by prostitutes.' 'Has but
one customer and that a noted temperance lecturer.' </p>

<p>S. F. McFarland-1877.7 </p>

<p>' McFarland, S. F.-Opium inebriety and the hypodermic syringe.
Trans. New York State Medical Society, 1877. </p>

<p>&quot;If cases of opium inebriety occur as frequently in the
private practice of other physicians as they have in my own, it
is coining to be a serious matter, and a few words of caution,
against the indiscriminate use of so active a drug, may be
pardonable. </p>

<p>&quot;Since the introduction of the hypodermic syringe,
especially, there has been a noticeable increase in the
frequency, as well as the severity, of these cases; and I wish to
enter a protest against its imprudent use, and particularly
against leaving it in the hands of patients or their friends, to
be used at their discretion, or even allowing them to know that
they can use it, except in the greatest emergencies; for once in
their possession, and used for any considerable length of time,
they will seldom discontinue it, and will soon be inquiring where
they can get 'one of those things'. It is certainly a most
valuable instrument in the hands of the discreet practitioner,
and will reach cases which nothing else will, with a certainty
and promptness which is very satisfactory; but it is too potent
for evil, as well, to be trusted beyond his grasp. </p>

<p>&quot;By the hypodermic use of opium the habit is much more
rapidly produced than by taking it into the stomach, or by any
other method-a fact which should not be lost sight of.&quot;<br>
</p>

<p>0. Marshall-1878.8<br>
'Marshall, O. The opium habit in Michigan. Annual Report Michigan
State Board of Health. 1878. </p>

<p>Turning to a consideration of the early surveys, the one
already mentioned by 0. Marshall deserves first consideration, as
it was the earliest of which we have knowledge. While these
figures are obviously quite incomplete, they represent at least a
minimal extent and apparently can be depended upon as comprising
positive information as far as they go. For these reasons they
are of great importance to us today in seeking to arrive at a
true conception, first, of the probable influence of factors
other than illicit traffic and, second, of their possible
relationship to conditions of today. </p>

<p>Marshall begins his report with the following paragraph: </p>

<p>&quot;At a meeting of the State Board of Health in January,
1877, by a written communication, I called its attention to the
large number of opium-eaters in the vicinity of North Lansing,
giving many particulars relating to the opium habit as it exists
here. In complying with the request of the Board to prepare an
article for publication, I have extended the investigation to
other parts of the State, the result of which investigation is
here given.&quot; </p>

<p>From further observations the author realizes how impossible
it is to obtain complete and perfectly reliable information
concerning this condition. He states: </p>

<p>&quot;Those beat acquainted with its extent are the physician
and druggist. As a rule, the physician, although originally
responsible for many of the cases in his vicinity, is only aware
of them through his business relation with the druggist. The
latter, from whom the drug is obtained, from the fear of low of
trade, or, as some of them term it, a violation of confidential
business, are often unwilling to furnish any information with
regard to it.&quot; </p>

<p>Marshall sent two hundred circulars to prominent physicians
throughout the state asking for information in regard to the
opium &quot;habit&quot; in their localities and enclosing a
postal card with printed form for report of the number of men and
women using opium and morphin in each place. Marshall took care
to eliminate duplication of cases by addressing only one
physician in each locality and where reports from a physician
included figures from two or more druggists the lists were
compared and repeaters eliminated. To those, ninety-six replies
were received giving the number of morphin and opium users in
ninety-six cities, villages, and townships of the state. He says
in this connection: </p>

<p>&quot;From the supposed impossibility of getting reliable
information of the numbers in the larger cities, no circulars
were sent to Detroit, Grand Rapids or East Saginaw; and probably
from this cause no answers were received from many of the larger
cities of the State where circulars were sent.&quot; </p>

<p>The majority of the reports received by him include only those
persons with whom the physician personally was acquainted. This,
he points out, resulted in obtaining less complete information
than had the druggists themselves been addressed. This, he says,
is noticeable in the reports from two neighboring cities, one of
which gives the large number of one hundred sixteen, which number
was obtained after considerable effort by particular request,
while the other reports only one case. A druggist, however,
formerly in business in the latter city estimated the number of
opium users in that city at not less than sixty. From such facts
as these Marshall comes to the conclusion that only the minimal
number was obtained and that the actual number was probably
greater in many instances.<br>
<br>
We are including the complete table given in Marshall's report.
It is of peculiar interest because of the fact that urban, rural
and semirural communities were included and that the larger
cities of the state, in which the underworld and vicious element
naturally would be supposed to exist in the greatest degree, were
absent. The assumption therefore is that, whatever the cause for
the original use of the drug, the influence of vicious
association was relatively negligible. It is significant that
throughout his whole report no mention is made of illicit traffic
or of any source of supply other than that through physician and
druggist. </p>

<p>Marshall summarizes his findings as follows: </p>

<p>&quot;The total number of opium caters reported in the places
given is 1313; of these 803 are females, and 510 are males ...
The population of the cities and villages including the townships
in which they are situated, according to the State census of
1874, was 225,633. The population of the whole State at the same
time was 1,334,031. If the number of opium eaters, including
morphine eaters, in proportion to the population in the places
given holds good for the entire State, the total number of opium
caters, all classes, in the State would be 7,763. Taking every
degree of the habit into consideration, this estimate of the
number is probably not too large.&quot; </p>

<p>The smallest community from which figures were obtained had a
population of but 315, the largest a population of 10,235, the
average population of the 96 towns being 2350. In other words,
whatever the prevalence of the use of narcotic drugs obtained by
Marshall was, his facts were derived from small hamlets and towns
which scarcely could be dignified by the name of city even in the
time in which he wrote. These communities covered every section
of the state and presumably gave a true picture of it as a whole.
Obviously, as alreadk stated, underworld influences such as
prostitution, gambling, etc., largely can be eliminated. At the
time of this investigation communication was much more difficult
and less rapid than it is today; news was not so widely
disseminated and in an area of such an extent as that of the
state of Michigan, one must conclude that a situation of this
nature was caused by factors of common occurrence, by influences
shared alike by all communities rather than by artificial or
unusual influences operating in selected localities. If,
therefore, we find that Marshall's figures were based on
representative conditions common to all sections of the state, it
is reasonable to assume that they may be applied also to the
country as a whole. We may not assume, for instance, that the
distribution of painful disease, of insomnia, of nervousness, or
even of certain social proclivities and curiosity was peculiar to
Michigan and that in 1877 through some mischance its people, more
than those of other states, were subjected to pernicious
influences of this nature. Nor may we assume that the practice of
medicine was conducted along widely different lines in Michigan
from those elsewhere or that the druggists of Michigan were more
careless in the conduct of their business, less prone to make a
profitable sale or more blind to the harm resulting from this
traffic than those of other states. In other words, there would
seem no valid reason for not applying to the country as a whole
such figures as Marshall gives us in depicting the extent of
chronic opium intoxication in his state. Also the resulting
estimate for the country would be a minimal figure not only
because of the incompleteness of Marshall's returns but also
because of the absence in Michigan of certain influences which
would tend to increase the use of opium. At that time, as we know
from other sources, there were operating on both the Atlantic and
Pacific coasts influences that did not operate in Michigan, an
inland state. On the west coast there were such influences as the
maritime traffic with the Orient and the coolie labor imported
for railroad and other construction undertakings, while in New
England we have already seen poppy culture already was being
indulged in and shipments were being made to other states.<br>
</p>

<p>TABLE I </p>

<p>Showing the number of Opium and Morphine Eaters, with the
Number of Each Sex, Reported in 96 Cities, Villages and Townships
of the State, with the Population of Each Place, Including the
Township in which it is Situated, according to the State Census
of 1874. <br>
</p>

<p><img src="op100002.gif" align="bottom" width="453"
height="708"> </p>

<p><img src="op100003.gif" align="bottom" width="452"
height="479"> </p>

<p>As a<b> </b>preliminary to the application of Marshall's
figures to the State of Michigan as a<b> </b>whole, three things
must be borne in mind-first, the total omission of returns from
the larger cities, second, the fact which he himself brings out,
that information secured from the stated source, namely,
physicians, was less complete than would have been information
secured from druggists, and, third, the use by Marshall of
population figures for the year 1874 instead of 1877. </p>

<p>From the ninety-six communities heard from, as we have seen,
there were reported 1313 users of opium or morphin. For some
unknown reason Marshall employs in his computation the state
census figures of 1874 rather than an estimated figure for the
year 1877 in which the survey was made. The population of
Michigan, according to him, was in 1874, 1,334,031. Employing
this figure he comes to the conclusion that if the number of
opium and morphin users holds good for the entire state the total
number in the state would be 7,763. Taking into account the
natural rate of increase in population between the years 1874 and
1877, this figure would represent a slight overestimate, all
other things being equal. However, this is offset by other
factors such as the relative incompleteness of the information
received from physicians as compared with that received from
druggists and it is fair to assume that this is a<b> </b>minimal
figure. How great the error on the side of underestimation is, we
have no means of telling. </p>

<p>The fact that in one town, Monroe, the physician addressed
reported but one case while <b>a </b>druggist stated that there
were about sixty, is indicative possibly of a very great error in
Marshall's total figure and it must be remembered that the
druggists were in a much better position to know the truth than
were physicians. They supplied the drugs used and as a rule,
especially at the time of Marshall's investigation when counter
sales were legal and a matter of common practice, physicians were
called upon only by those opiate users seeking curative treatment
for their condition. It is, therefore, doubtful if the medical
profession at any time has been in a position to supply anything
like a complete list of these cases while the druggists from the
very nature of things in the past could have furnished this
information. </p>

<p>It is probable, therefore, that Marshall's figures are very
much more incomplete than even he himself believed and it is
quite possible that the actual number of cases in the towns and
cities of Michigan from which Marshall received his returns were
several times larger than his figures indicated. Be this as it
may, his total of 1313 cases represents definite and positive
information indicative of the widespread use of these drugs in
the State of Michigan over fifty years ago, long before the
development of an illicit traffic in opium and its preparations
with its resulting artificial impetus to the formation of new
cases. If applied to the country as a whole for the year in
question, 1874, this figure gives a total of 251,936. This is a
startling figure for the period in question and yet in all
probability well below the actual one and deserving of the most
careful consideration on the part of those who today, with the
undoubted existence of new and increasingly powerful factors at
work in the stimulation of the use of these drugs, seek to become
familiar with the extent of our present narcotic problem. </p>

<p>Further on in his report, Marshall introduces the importation
figures from 1850 to 1877. From these he estimates an average
importation figure for the year 1877. From information secured
from drug store sales he comes to the conclusion that the average
user consumes about three pounds of opium during the year.
Allowing one-fifth of the total importation for &quot;legitimate
therapeutic use&quot; and dividing the remainder by three he
arrives at a figure of 93,654 as the number of users in the
country as a whole. From this figure by suitable calculation he
obtains for the State of Michigan about 25.50 users. </p>

<p>Elsewhere we have pointed out some of the dangers of
calculating the number of users upon such a basis as this and in
Marshall's effort we have a good illustration of the fallacies
that enter. If we take Marshall's figure of 2550 for the State of
Michigan we obtain, as the proportion of the ninety-six towns and
cities from which lie received definite information as to the
number of opium users, the figure of 421 or but one-third of the
actual number of users positively known to exist in these
ninety-six communities. It is quite evident that in (Calculations
based on importation figures there enter very large errors which
it is impossible to determine or correct. It seems, therefore, we
repeat, that little or no dependence can be placed on estimates
arrived at in this manner and that fragmentary as have been the
various actual surveys they furnish data of far greater value for
purposes of generalization. </p>

<p>C. W. Earle-1880.9 </p>

<p>'Earle, C. W.-Tile opium habit. Chicago Med. Rev. 1880. </p>

<p>Earle made a study of the extent of the use of opium in
Chicago by interviewing a number of druggists in that city.
Although the figure of the number of users he obtained may not be
used in a statistical analysis, his work is a distinct
contribution as an indication of the prevalence of the use of the
drug at the time. The following is a quotation from his report: </p>

<p>&quot;In an article entitled 'The Impending Danger,' Dr.
Mattison, of Brooklyn, states that he is assured by both dealers
in the crude drug and manufacturers of the alkaloids, that
importation of opium is increasing rapidly every year, and that
the supply may become insufficient for the demand. The question
naturally suggesting itself is: What becomes of the vast amount
yearly brought to our shores?&quot; </p>

<p>Earle investigated fifty drug stores, asking questions as to
the number of customers, their age, nativity, kind of narcotic
used, quantity, etc. He reports: </p>

<p>&quot;The three divisions of the city were visited, and
localities inhabited by the different classes and nationalities
were thoroughly canvassed. I was greatly surprised to find that
druggists on the West Side were patronized to a greater extent
(excepting a few on Clark Street) than in any other part of the
city. Foreign druggists (German and Scandinavian), seem to
exhibit more conscientious scruples in regard to the trade than
our own nationality. I learned from some of these gentlemen that
in Denmark, and, if I mistake not, in Norway and Sweden, the
trade is absolutely forbidden. Fifty druggists have 235
customers, or an average of nearly five to each store.&quot; </p>

<p>J. M. Hull-1885. </p>

<p>An account of Hull's findings appears in the Biennial Report
of the State Board of Health of Iowa for 1985. This Biennial
Report covers a period of two years ending June 30, 1885, and it
is not quite clear from his article whether the investigation was
made in the latter half of 1883, during 1884 or in the first half
of 1885. In using his figures, therefore, we shall choose the
middle period and base our computations on the population figures
of 1884. </p>

<p>Hull begins his report with the following: </p>

<p>&quot;Although my paper on the opium habit is brief, and but a
small part of the sad story told, yet I am inclined to believe it
contains some facts regarding this rapidly increasing evil that
cannot fail to astonish even those who are well informed, and far
more those who have given the subject little or no attention. </p>

<p>&quot;Opium is today a greater curse than alcohol, and justly
claims a large number of helpless victims, which have not come
from the ranks of reckless men and fallen women, but the majority
of them are to be found among the educated and most honored and
useful members of society; and as to sex, we may count out the
prostitutes so much given to this vice, and still find females
far ahead so far as numbers are concerned. The habit in a vast
majority of cases is first formed by the unpardonable
carelessness of physicians, who are often too fond of using a
little syringe, or of relieving every ache and pain by the
administration of an opiate.&quot; </p>

<p>To fifteen hundred circulars sent to druggists in the state of
Iowa, requesting information on the subject, Hull received 123
replies reporting 235 users of opium in some form. Of these 86
were men and 129 women.10 The form of drug used was morphin, 129;
gum opium, 73; laudanum, 12; paregoric, 6; Dover's Powder, 3;
McMunn's Elixir, 4. As to the method of using the drug he states:
</p>

<p>&quot;While the drug is used less frequently by the hypodermic
method than by the mouth, the former method is gaining ground.
The habit may be formed about as readily one way as the other.
Those who use it by the mouth as a rule make the most rapid
progress, as the drug is easier taken, is free from pain, and
larger than the hypodermic dose.&quot; </p>

<p>He states that there were about 3,000 stores in Iowa where
opium was kept for sale and that if reports had come from all in
the same ratio it would have shown the number of users to have
been about 6,000. By actual computation on the above basis we get
5,732. Hull states, however, that his reports were mostly from
the small villages, very few coming from the cities where, he
states, the &quot;habit&quot; was far more common. He states
further: </p>

<p>&quot;From reliable information which I have been able to
secure from various sources, I feel safe in saying that there are
in this state over 10,000 people who are constantly under the
influence of an opiate and who are wholly unable by any effort of
the will to break the habit or even to abstain for 72
hours.&quot; </p>

<p>The estimated population of continental United States for 1884
was according to the U. S. Bureau of the Census 55,379,154 and
that of the State of Iowa for the same year was 1,742,084. </p>

<p>Using the lower figure of 5,732 obtained in the manner
described above, as<b> </b>the actual number of users in the
State of Iowa, we get 182,215<b> </b>chronic users for the
country as a whole for the year 1884. This must be by far an
underestimate as Hull himself states that he had good reason to
believe that there were over 10,000 in the state. </p>

<p>In considering estimates based on Hull's figure several points
should be borne in mind. First, Hull does not indicate the
population served by the 123<b> </b>stores reporting the 235
cases. Although he does state that there were about 3,000 stores
in Iowa where opium was kept, in assuming that the sales averaged
the same in different stores, there is the possibility of error.
Second, according to Hull's own statement most of the cases
reported were from small villages with very few coming from the
cities, where he states the &quot;habit&quot; was far more
common. With the usual vicious elements of city life eliminated,
one may assume that Hull's figures represent a minimal extent. </p>

<p>It is worthy of note that here again no mention is made of
illicit traffic. </p>

<p>B. H. Hartwell-1888.11 </p>

<p>' Hartwell, B. H. The sale and Use of Opium in Massachusetts.
Annual Report, Massachusetts State Board of Health, 1889.<br>
Hartwell made a<b> </b>survey in the State of Massachusetts, in
the report of which, unfortunately, he failed to give the
population figures on which the study was based. If these figures
were available it might be possible to compute the per capita
consumption. Although this cannot be done, we are giving below a
summary of that part of his survey dealing with extent as an
interesting side-light on conditions obtaining in that period. </p>

<p>Hartwell states that the investigation was undertaken in
accordance with the following &quot;resolve&quot; adopted by the
Legislature of 1888: </p>

<p>&quot;Resolved, That the State Board of Health be requested to
make an investigation concerning the sale and use of opium, in
various forms and preparations, with a view to ascertaining the
extent of the evils arising therefrom; whether such use and evils
are increasing, and, if so, the manner and cause thereof, and
what remedies for such evils may be proposed; and to report the
result of such investigation to the General Court.&quot; </p>

<p>Hartwell continues his report as follows: </p>

<p>&quot;This resolution was presumably an outcome of the
prevalent belief that the use of opium is increasing very
rapidly. An expos6 of the opium joints in Boston appeared in one
of the leading dailies in 1885; there have been frequent
allusions to the habit in other papers; a recent article,
claiming to be the result of years of study of the opium habit in
Boston, was published in one of our popular magazines, in which
the writer says that the habit 'is increasing rapidly! In these
and numerous other ways the public has been taught to believe
that the evil is widespread and extending. The large number of
opium habitues which seem to be among us, the novelty of this
form of stimulation, its secret character, the strong hold which
it has upon its victims, the horrible results arising therefrom,
especially from the habit of opium smoking,-all tend to keep the
subject prominently before the people, and to magnify the evil in
the public mind. To get at the facts concerning the use of opium
(the term opium will include all of its preparations), as far as
possible, is the object aimed at in this inquiry. This is beset
with many difficulties, from the very nature of things. There can
be no reliable statistics of the amount of opium used by the
medical profession, the laity, or by habitues, or the proportion
used by each. The most rigid inquiry into a habit as secret and
as easily practised as is this form of inebriety could not be
sufficiently accurate for mathematical calculation; approximation
only can be attained. </p>

<p>&quot;That a great deal of opium is used besides that
legitimately required for the relief of pain and treatment of
disease, is unquestionably true. The unwillingness of people to
bear pain, the habit of self-prescribing, the many facilities for
obtaining opium and its preparations from the regular dealers as
well as by means of proprietary medicines containing it, the
numerous ways by which a knowledge is gained of the method of
obtaining and taking the drug-all extend its use in the most
dangerous manner. </p>

<p>&quot;As the best means for forming an opinion of the amount
of opium used, and whether or not its use is increasing,
circulars were sent to many of the druggists and physicians of
the State; the questions asked and a synopsis of the answers
returned are given below. Some allowance must be made in
considering the returns, for the reason that opium habitues, from
fear of detection or a desire for secrecy, scatter their
purchases as much as possible; so that a druggist may easily get
an impression of an increased or decreased use of the drug, while
in reality the sales are going on elsewhere or have returned
after the rounds have been completed. So also the same habitual
users might be seen by different physicians, and counted several
times, or escape notice altogether, and thus convey a false idea
of the actual number. A circular containing five questions was
sent to druggists. Replies were received from about 600
druggists, representing 190 cities and towns, and embracing
nearly every city and town in the State where a druggist is
located. (There are about 150 towns in which no druggists
reside.) About one-fourth of the answers came from Boston, the
rest from other parts of that State. Many of the returned
circulars contained answers to all of the questions, others to
only part of them; hence the number varies in the different
questions. The questions and answers were as follows:- </p>

<p>&quot;I. What amounts of opium are sold by you per month, not
on the advice and prescription of a physician?&quot; </p>

<p>The answers numbering 512 to 541 showed the following: </p>

<p>(a) Crude opium, opium in pill or other solid form? </p>

<p>Sixty per cent. none-the remainder a few pills to 4 pounds. </p>

<p>(b) Liquid preparations; Tincture? </p>

<p>Twelve per cent. none; the remainder one gram to 32 pints;
other liquid preparations none to 40 pints. </p>

<p>(c) Morphia and its salts, in bulk, pill or powder? </p>

<p>Thirty-three per cent. none; the remainder % gr. to 8 oz.
morphia 2 to 500 morphia pills, mostly 1/8 grs. </p>

<p>(d) Other preparations very little. </p>

<p>&quot;2. Is the demand for opium and its salts increasing? 535
answers: 85 per cent., no; 8 per cent., yes; 5 per cent.,
decreasing; 2 per cent., do not know.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;For obvious reasons, circulars were also sent to many of
the physicians of the State who commenced practice before 1875.
About 260 replies were received, from 100 cities and towns out of
about 250 in which physicians reside. Eight questions were
submitted, which with the number and character of the answers,
were as follows: </p>

<p>&quot;1. From your own observation, is the use of opium and
its preparations increasing in the community in which you live?
225 answers: 66 per cent., no; 28 per cent., yes; 6 per cent., do
not know. </p>

<p>&quot;2. If such be the case, what is the probable cause of
such increase; this question called for answers only from those
who had answered the first question affirmatively; consequently,
but 75 of a miscellaneous character were received. Twenty per
cent., give the use of opium by physicians as the sole cause; 11
per cent., give this as the cause in part. Ease of obtaining
opium from druggists, duplication of prescriptions containing
opium, increased knowledge of its effects, excessive brain work,
desire for stimulation, fast living, comprise most of the
remaining answers. </p>

<p>&quot;3. Are diseases calling for the use of opium increasing?
209 answers: 84 per cent., no; 16 per cent., yes.&quot; </p>

<p>Although he believes, as can be seen from the above, that a
great deal of opium &quot;is used besides that legitimately
required for the relief of pain and the treatment of
disease,&quot; on the basis of his study, Hartwell concludes that
</p>

<p><font size="2">&quot; </font>. . . the use of opium is not
increasing in Massachusetts. In the large centres of population
there may be a slight increase from year to year. It is here that
excesses and crime of all kinds, if not increasing, are much more
common than in less populous districts. The better knowledge of
the uses and effects of the drug, by means of the greater
intercommunication of the people; the many facilities for
obtaining it; the general practice of writing prescriptions,
followed by unrestrained reduplication of them; the excitement of
business, leading to overwork and overtaxing of the mental
powers,-are conditions which are favorable to the increased use
of opium.&quot; </p>

<p>A. P. Ginnell-1900.12 </p>

<p>'Grinnell, A. P.-A review of drug consumption and alcohol as
found in proprietary medicine. Med. Leg. Jour., 1905.<br>
This author made a study of the consumption of drugs in the State
of Vermont and while he made no attempt to estimate the number of
opium users from it, a report of his study is interesting as an
indication of the use in Vermont at that time. There appears to
be no reason to believe that this report covers a community
influenced by any unusual factors but rather it represents a
normal distribution of drug users. </p>

<p>The author states: </p>

<p>&quot;Few people are aware of the enormous consumption of
narcotics or stimulating drugs. With the development of
pharmaceutical science and the consequent improvement and
facility in preparing drugs and alkaloids the market has grown
accordingly. More widespread knowledge concerning the effects and
special uses of opium, cocaine, quinine, Cannabis Indica, Chloral
and Heroin, ha's further stimulated the demand for these drugs,
until today the American people are confronted by a problem which
is only equaled in its magnitude by its terrible and appalling
aspects. </p>

<p>&quot;When we pause to consider the fearful inroads the
excessive and habitual use of these drugs make on the mentality,
physical health and general existence of those addicted to them,
we can easily appreciate what a serious menace to society a rapid
increase of drug habitues must inevitably mean. </p>

<p>&quot;It is hardly necessary to speak of the results of the
habitual and excessive use of narcotic drugs. Physicians, more
than any other class, realize the fearful ravages made on the
human system; and the large number of physical, moral and mental
wrecks they are constantly meeting who owe their condition
entirely to drug addiction, tells eloquently how extensive and
far-reaching the drug evil has become. Every alienist is daily
being brought face to face with the growing influence of certain
drugs on psychic abnormalities and degenerations, and the
insidious onset and progress of such conditions, when so
produced, cannot fail to impress us with the Medico-Legal
importance of the drug habit.&quot; </p>

<p>In order to secure information as to the consumption of
certain drugs, Grinnell wrote the druggists of the State asking
them for estimates of their monthly sales of the following drugs
and preparations: </p>

<p>&quot;Opium (gum or powder) </p>

<p>Morphine sulp. (powder or pills) </p>

<p>Dover powder </p>

<p>Paregoric (tinct. opii. camph.) </p>

<p>Laudanuin (tinct. opii) </p>

<p>Cocaine </p>

<p>Chloral </p>

<p>Indian hemp (Cannabis Indica) </p>

<p>Quinine (powder or pills)?&quot; </p>

<p>Of 130 druggists addressed 116 were heard from. He also
addressed 172 general stores which sold drugs in localities where
no drug stores existed and three wholesale druggists, but
obtained no satisfactory information from the latter. </p>

<p>He states that ninety per cent. of the physicians of Vermont
dispense their own drugs and that sales of these drugs to
physicians were not included in the figures supplied by
druggists. </p>

<p>He also states that the figures he secured could be multiplied
by five and be below the actual consumption inasmuch as they
include &quot;nothing in the composition of patent medicines or
cough medicines; nothing dispensed by physicians; nothing
dispensed by these three large manufactories-simply the regular
retail drug store businesses and the sales of the 160 general
stores.&quot; </p>

<p>From these two sources lie estimated 3,300,000 doses of opium
were sold every month-enough to supply &quot;one and one-half
doses of opium to every man and woman in the State of Vermont
above the age of 21 years, every day in the year.&quot; </p>

<p>The actual amounts sold by druggists as compiled by Grinnell
were as follows: </p>

<p>The above figures cover reports from 69 out of 344 towns, and
from 116 drug stores out of 130, but do not include amounts sold
in the general stores. </p>

<p>American Pharmaceutical Association-1902 13-1903. 14 <br>
</p>

<p><img src="op100004.gif" align="bottom" width="438" height="83">
</p>

<p>A committee of this organization, H. F. Hynson, Chairman,
reported on the replies received from pharmacists and physicians
in certain localities in response to queries sent by the
committee. The conclusion arrived at was to the effect that at
least five users of certain drugs, commonly known as
&quot;habit-forming&quot; but not opium alone, were known to
every pharmacist. From this it was estimated that there were at
least 200,000 in the country. </p>

<p>'Hynson, H. P.-Report of Committee on Acquirement of the Drug
Habit. Amer. Jour. Pharm. November, 1902. </p>

<p>In the following year the same Committee with E. G. Eberle as
chairman made a more extensive canvass of the situation through
letters to all sections of the United States and Canada. As a
result of the information so gathered, which dealt with cocaine
and other drugs as well as opium preparations, the Committee came
to certain conclusions, the most suggestive of which follow: </p>

<p>Eberle, E. G. Report of Committee on Acquirement of Drug
Habits. Amer. Jour. Pharm. October, 1903. </p>

<p>&quot;General reports indicate that the sale of narcotics is
not restricted to any section of the country, nor confined
exclusively to the fallen and lower class. Information comes from
several sources that in callings which demand many hours' work at
a time or the hours of night, cocaine is resorted to for
stimulation.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;We are confident that the use of narcotics is increasing
and that evil effects from it will come to succeeding
generations. While the increase is most evident with the lower
classes, the statistics of institutes devoted to the cure of
habitues show that their patients are principally drawn from
those in the higher walks of life.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Careful study of data personally collected and from
reliable sources forces the conclusion that the habitual use of
opium in its various forms is increasing and that this increase
is confined to no one class or occupation.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;While it has not been practicable to obtain exact
figures, it can be stated that the drug habit is alarmingly
increasing among the men of our army and navy. The number of men
using opium in the army has greatly increased since the
occupation of the Philippines, many 'opium smokers' acquiring the
habit there from Chinese or natives. The smoking of opium by the
men of the navy does not seem to be as prevalent as in the army,
gum opium 'pills' or morphine being the way in which the drug is
mostly used by sailors. Quite a number of enlisted men have been
discharged from both army and navy during the last year because
of their being detected as habitual users of opium or
morphine-probably several hundred per cent. more during the last
five years than for any ten years previous. To the best of the
writers knowledge-and he has carefully inquired into facts
-practically all the cases of drug habitues in both army and navy
arise from the men learning the habit from natives of foreign
countries or from lewd women and men in this country. Not a
single case of drug habit coming from the prescribing of an
opiate by a medical officer can be recalled, opium and allied
drugs being very guardedly and carefully used by army and navy
medical officers. A goodly percentage of the cases are men who
have acquired some drug habit prior to enlistment while a few-sad
to say-are from men of the hospital corps who drifted into the
habit from constant opportunity and handling of the baneful drug.
</p>

<p>&quot;At the present, it is calculated that there are over a
million opium smokers in the United States, the importation of
opium for smoking purposes being double that for medicinal uses,
amounting to more than 500,000 pounds last year, valued at
$3,000,000 1 &quot; </p>

<p>1 -C. E. Terry-1913.15<br>
'Terry, C. E.-Annual Report Board of Health, Jacksonville, Fla.,
1013, </p>

<p>In 1913 Terry, Health Officer of Jacksonville, Florida,
collected data relating to the extent of the problem in his city.
The figures were not dependent upon voluntary cooperation as in
the case of previous collections of such material, but were
secured through the operation of a local law which required,
besides the usual prohibition of sale of opium preparations by
druggists without physicians' prescriptions and the keeping of
records of all sales, two procedures which resulted in bringing
to the health office specific information relating to the extent
to which opium preparations were employed. The first of these
required physicians writing prescriptions containing more than
three grains of morphin or its equivalent in alkaloids or salts
of alkaloids of opium to send to the office of the health
department copies of such prescriptions together with the names
and addresses of the individuals for whom they were intended.
Second, it provided that the city health officer or other
physician in the employ of the city designated by him might give
to any user, upon the furnishing of satisfactory evidence of
habitual use, a prescription for as much of such drug as might be
deemed expedient. </p>

<p>Records were kept of all duplicate prescriptions sent in and
of all those issued at the health office. These prescriptions
were free and were designed to remove from druggists the
temptation of making counter sales on the plea that indigent
users or those of small means could not afford to pay for the
writing of a prescription in addition to the cost of the drug.
The law was enforced actively and both druggists and physicians
were watched carefully for violations. </p>

<p>No effort was made at this time to limit the use of these
drugs in the case of habitual users nor were they subjected to
such treatment as might be calculated to discourage them from
coming to the health department for a prescription. On the
contrary, during the operation of this law-a period of over two
years-they were supplied upon application. Treatment was offered
them from time to time and furnished to such as accepted the
offer. </p>

<p>Through the operation of this law there were recorded at the
health office during the year 1913, 541 persons using opium or
some preparation thereof or about .81 per cent. of the population
of Jacksonville. These were divided into 228 men and 313 women.
Of the men 188 were white and 40 colored; of the women 219 white
and 94 colored. The population of Jacksonville for 1913 as
estimated by the U. S. Bureau of the Census was 67,209. Of this
number 32,998 were whites and 34,211 colored. Applied to
continental United States on the basis of the estimated
population for 1913 of 97,163,330, the Jacksonville incidence
gives as the total for the country 782,118. </p>

<p>In interpreting these figures, however, it should be borne in
mind that while the percentage of whites using opium in
Jacksonville is much greater than that of blacks, the black
population in Jacksonville is very high compared to that of the
country as a whole. If, as is indicated by the Jacksonville
figures, the white race is more prone to use opium than the
negro, suitable correction will be necessary in generalizing from
the Jacksonville figures. As will be seen later, this same
predilection of the whites appears in Brown's figures of the
Tennessee studies. These two studies, however, are not sufficient
in our judgment to assume the establishment of such racial
tendencies as many other factors quite possibly may have
influenced these findings. </p>

<p>If, however, such racial tendencies as the Jacksonville and
Tennessee findings seem to indicate do exist, then in computing
the distribution of opium use in the country as a whole it will
be necessary to correct for the different race distribution
existing in Jacksonville as compared with continental United
States by applying the figures obtained in Jacksonville to the
white and black populations separately. </p>

<p>In 1913, the white population of continental United States was
86,580,278 and colored 10,583,052. Applying the Jacksonville
figures to the country as a whole, therefore, we get 1,109,340
total opium using population. This naturally is a larger figure
than the original crude figure of 782,118. </p>

<p>One source of possible error in figures of this kind exists in
the increase which may take place over the normal population of
users through the registration of transients. In the case of
Jacksonville, however, it would not seem that this was a large
factor inasmuch as the registration required either through
application to the health office or through the sending of
duplicate prescriptions by physicians was not required in nearby
states and cities at that time so that it was more difficult for
strangers to obtain the drug in Jacksonville than in other nearby
points. Whatever this error was, however, it is very much more
than offset by the omissions in registration which occurred in
the following ways. It was known to the health officer, for
instance, that certain business and professional men and other
individuals in high social standing who used the drug were never
registered but secured their supplies either by mail order from
distant points or through friendly physicians or druggists who
were willing to risk violating the law for them. Others through
the nature of their employment in drug stores or drug
manufacturing concerns were able easily to supply themselves,
while still others went to nearby points outside of the city
limits and hence beyond the operation of the ordinance to secure
their supply. </p>

<p>What part differences in race composition (other than negro),
economic, occupational and other sociologic factors may have
played in vitiating the Jacksonville figures for purposes of
generalization no one is in position to say at the present time,
as enough studies of the prevalence of this condition in other
sections of the country have not been made to justify claims
either for or against the existence of such influencing factors.
In view, however, of the facilities at hand for the collection of
the Jacksonville data, it is believed that they represent very
complete information. As in a consideration of Marshall's figures
for Michigan, it may be assumed that the distribution of painful
maladies and the methods of medical practice in Jacksonville did
not differ widely from those of other sections. In 1913, however,
the influence of prostitution and what is generally termed the
underworld obtained much more prominently in Jacksonville than in
the localities of Michigan with which Marshall's figures deal as
these were, it will be remembered, all small towns and villages.
In the case of the Jacksonville figures, therefore, we may assume
that the influence of vicious association was a more marked
factor than in the Michigan figures. </p>

<p>The illicit traffic in these drugs was practically negligible
in Jacksonville in 1913. One or two peddlers, it is true,
supplied certain women in the restricted district more as a
matter of convenience to these customers than because of any
large profits involved. The traffic could not have been lucrative
as free prescriptions were available to any user asking for them
and the price of the drug in the drug stores was in the
neighborhood of 60 cents for a drachra of morphin when sold in
original bottles or large fractions. With this price it is
evident that peddlers could not compete with profit. </p>

<p>Lucius P. Brown-1915.16 </p>

<p>' Brown, L. P.-Enforcement of the Tennessee Anti-Narcotic Law.
Amer. J. of Public Health, 1915, Vol. 5, No. 4. </p>

<p>Brown, the State Food and Drugs Commissioner of Tennessee,
reported on the results of the enforcement of the Tennessee
Anti-Narcotic Law passed in 1913. The law provided for the
refilling of prescriptions for persons using opium products
habitually &quot;in order to minimize suffering among this
unfortunate class, and to keep the traffic in the drug from
getting into underground and hidden channels.&quot; The law
provided that upon application to the Secretary of the State
Board of Health and the Pure Food and Drugs Inspector and upon
presentation of a certificate from the attending physician, the
name and address of the druggist and certain other data, an
individual might be granted permission to have a prescription for
an opium product refilled. This system brought a considerable
mass of data to the officials concerned. It should be noted in
explanation that an effort was made at every renewal of permit to
lessen the amount of the drug allowed. </p>

<p>After twelve months of operation there were on January 1,
1915, 2370 individuals registered under this system in the state
of Tennessee. Of these 784 were men and 1586 women. </p>

<p>In commenting on the accuracy of the registration Brown
states: </p>

<p>&quot;As to what proportion of the total addicts of Tennessee
are registered under this permissive system, guesses only can be
given. It seems safe to say that not over one-half of the addict
population is registered-possibly not over one fourth. Taking,
however, the lower figure, it would appear that there are in the
neighborhood of 5,000 addicts in Tennessee. The state has about
2.3 per cent. of the whole population of the United States. It is
an agricultural state, and consequently, living conditions appear
to be not so exhausting as in more thickly settled communities,
nor life as a rule, so intense. In order to get the whole number
in the United States, we may multiply our figure of 5,000 by 43.
This gives us about 215,000 addicts. Probably, however, in order
to allow for conditions in cities and, industrial communities, we
ought to add 25 per cent. to this number, giving not less than
269,000 addicts in the whole United States. In my opinion this is
a very conservative calculation. It shows by no means so many as
sensational writers appear to want us to believe, and while it
thus shows better conditions it is bad enough.&quot; </p>

<p>Brown points out that according to figures which he believes
to be fairly accurate not over ten per cent. of the cases were
colored. He says: </p>

<p>&quot;This is due in part to the fact that the average negro
avoids as far as possible any contact with an official, and to
the fact that the negro appears to use relatively less morphine,
and more cocaine than the white man.&quot; </p>

<p>This agrees with the race distribution in Jacksonville. If we
should take Brown's estimate of 5000 cases and distribute them
according to what he believes to be a race incidence actually
existing, namely 9070 white and 1070 negroes, we should reach a
different total for the country from that reached by Brown.
Making this correction and applying, on the basis of Brown's
estimate for Tennessee, the race incidence obtaining to the
country as a whole, we get 221,818 white users and 11,518 black
users or 233,336 as a total in the United States for 1913. If we
now add, as Brown suggests, 2517c &quot;in order to allow for
conditions in cities and industrial communities,&quot; we obtain
a total of 291,670 for the United States. Whether or not this
correction should be made has already been considered in our
discussion of the Jacksonville figures. We give it for what it is
worth with no claim that the race distribution of opium use in
these two localities typifies racial characteristics. </p>

<p>Such a generalization from the Tennessee figures indicates a
very much smaller total for the country than is obtained on the
basis of the Jacksonville figures, although these two
investigations were made within a year of each other. The
territory covered by the Tennessee law was very much larger than
in the case of Jacksonville and the machinery for enforcement
doubtless was less adequate. In Jacksonville, it must be
remembered, every physician and every druggist personally was
known to the health officer as were most of the opium users and
it is to be expected that on these accounts more complete
information could be secured than where, for the most part as in
the case of Tennessee, it was necessary to rely on correspondence
without the close personal touch possible in the smaller
territory. Brown himself questions the completeness of his
figures, stating that in his opinion they comprise a very
conservative estimate. </p>

<p>Which of these estimates is nearer the truth for the period in
question no one may state with certainty. It is noteworthy,
however, that Brown's figures applied to the country as a whole
give a figure but little in excess of that obtained on the basis
of the Michigan figures of 1877, about thirty-five years before
Brown's work. It scarcely is to be expected that with the
influences at work, which we shall note in the next chapter,
during this period of thirty-five years, there could have failed
to be a greater increase than is indicated by these two sets of
figures. </p>

<p>The estimates resulting from studies heretofore quoted
represent conditions of opium usage freer from artificial
influences of one kind or another than any that have been or will
be compiled dealing with later periods. Prior to this time there
was no federal law relating to the distribution of the drug and
but very few state laws which were at all rigidly enforced, so
that peddling of the drugs was not a marked factor in extending
their use. The usual causes mentioned, such as the employment of
opium and its products in medicine and self-prescribing for the
relief of pain and discomfort, the effect of education through
ill-considered articles in the lay press and magazines, fiction,
vicious or ignorant associations, and the influence of natural
tendencies to dissipation or to seek refuge under stress and
strain, were operating alone without the additional stimulation
of the illicit traffic which was a later development. Wherever,
therefore, the exact truth lies as to the number of chronic opium
users in the United States prior to the passage of the Harrison
Narcotic Act it represents what might be termed the normal for
the United States in contradistinction to an artificial or
fortuitous figure resulting in addition to the forementioned
causes from the perniciously active propaganda of the commercial
trader in opium preparations. </p>

<p>'The federal anti-narcotic law passed December 17, 1914. </p>

<p>Special Committee of Investigation appointed by the Secretary
of the Treasury-1918P </p>

<p>'Traffic in Narcotic Drugs--Report of Special Committee of
Investigation appointed March 25, 1918, by the Secretary of the
Treasury, June, 1919. Washington. 1919. </p>

<p>This Committee was unable to determine the exact number of
addicts in the United States, 'owing, as stated in the Report,
&quot;to the lack of laws and regulations making it compulsory
for the registration of addicts throughout the country or the
keeping of any records as to their identity.&quot; </p>

<p>The Committee believed, however, that a fairly accurate
estimate of their number can be made from the information which
it has obtained. </p>

<p>One source of information was a questionnaire addressed to all
physicians registered under the Harrison Narcotic Act, requesting
data as to the number of chronic users under treatment by them at
the time. The Committee reports as follows: </p>

<p>&quot;Replies were received from approximately 30 2/3 per cent
of the physicians registered in the different States, and these
showed that there were under treatment at that time a total of
73,150 addicts. On the basis of 100 per cent replies, if the same
average was maintained, there were under treatment at the time
this questionnaire was sent out a total of 237,655 addicts. The
following table&quot; shows in detail by States the number of
addicts reported under treatment, the percentage of replies
received from physicians, and the estimated number on the basis
of 100 per cent replies.&quot; </p>

<p>Another questionnaire was addressed to state, district, county
and municipal health officers, the results of which are given as
follows: </p>

<p>&quot;Questionnaire No. 4 was addressed to 3,023 State,
district, county and municipal health officers. To this
questionnaire 983 replies were received, or 33 per cent of the
total number sent out. Only 777 of these, or 26 per cent of the
total, contained any information of value to the committee.&quot;
</p>

<p>The Report summarizes as follows: </p>

<p>&quot;The number of addicts reported by the health officials
replying to questionnaire No. 4 was 105,887. As this number
represents the addicts reported by only 26 per cent of the health
officials, from which this information was requested, it may be
assumed that had all the health officials replied the total
number would have amounted to approximately 420,000. This number,
however, appears to be much too low, in view of the fact that the
physicians of the country are estimated to have had about 237,000
addicts under treatment during this same period, and only a small
portion of the total number of addicts present themselves for
treatment. Addicts of the &quot;underworld,&quot; for instance,
secure most of their supply through illicit channels and rarely,
if ever, consult a physician. </p>

<p><img src="op100005.gif" align="bottom" width="495"
height="681"> </p>

<p>&quot;It appears that a more accurate estimate of the total
number of addicts may be obtained from the data secured by those
investigators who have made an intensive study of drug addiction
in certain restricted communities. For example, the health
officer of Jacksonville, Fla., reported 887 1 addicts in that
city in 1913. This number represents 1.31 per cent of the
population. Upon this basis the total number of addicts in the
United States, in 1918, taking the estimated population as
106,000,000 would be 1,388,600. </p>

<p>&quot;In reply to questionnaire No. 4 sent to health officers
of States, counties, and municipalities, the health officer of
New York City reported a total of 103,000 addicts, which is
equivalent to 1.8 per cent of the population. On this basis,
there would be 1,9W,000 addicts in the United States. </p>

<p>&quot;Information in the hands of the committee indicates that
drug addiction is less prevalent in rural communities than in
cities or in congested centers. It would, therefore, be unfair to
estimate the number of addicts in the entire country on the basis
of the figures obtained for New York City. Furthermore, it is the
opinion of the committee that an estimate based on the number of
addicts in a small city like Jacksonville, Fla., would not be
representative for the entire country. Taking these facts into
consideration, the committee is of the opinion that the total
number of addicts in this country probably exceeds 1,000,000 at
the present time.&quot; </p>

<p>' This figure includes 346 cocaine users. </p>

<p>In reviewing the estimates arrived at on the basis of the
replies received to these questionnaires, there arises a question
as to what is meant by &quot;treatment.&quot; From a later
statement in the Report &quot;treatment&quot; here means
presumably the supplying of the drug by physicians, but we
believe that in replying to this question the average physician
would report only such cases as were under curative treatment. Be
this as it may, the propriety of estimating the number of cases
on the basis of 100% replies from physicians registered under the
Harrison Narcotic Act is open to question. It is stated in the
Report that thirty and two-thirds per cent. of the registered
physicians queried replied and that 73,150 cases were reported by
them as being under treatment. To assume that the resulting
figure of 237,655 calculated on -such a basis is a correct
estimate, is still not warranted. For such an estimate to be
accepted as a logical conclusion on the basis of 100% replies 'it
would have to be assumed that all groups of physicians registered
under the Harrison Narcotic Law answered in like proportion. But
it is natural to assume that nose and throat specialists,
oculists, obstetricians, gynecologists, surgeons and others not
occupied with general practice would not be interested to the
same degree in replying to the questionnaire. In all probability
the thirty and two-thirds per cent. physicians reporting include
a relatively greater proportion of those treating addiction cases
than those not reporting. Under these conditions the estimated
237,655 addicts is too high a figure. As a matter of fact,
however, the Committee appears not to accept this figure, anyway,
inasmuch as it ultimately reaches a speculative figure of
1,000,000, inclusive of cocaine users. </p>

<p>As to the estimates based on replies received from state,
county and municipal health officers of which the Committee
states only twenty six per cent. replied, we would call attention
to the fact that 103,000 were reported by the health commissioner
of New York City, with a balance of the twenty-six per cent.
reporting only 2887. This material was gathered in 1918. At that
time also nothing in the nature of a survey of chronic opium
users in New York City had been made. The narcotic clinic was not
opened until 1919 and this clinic disclosed but 7464 cases of
opium users. It is manifest therefore that the 103,000 reported
by the health commissioner in the previous year was wholly
speculative. It is also of interest to note that the health
commissioner of New York City a year or two later stated that
20,000 was an outside estimate for cases of chronic opium users
in New York City. </p>

<p>Here again, however, the Committee admits dissatisfaction with
the resulting estimate of 420,000, stating that the figure is too
low and ultimately arrives at an approximate figure of 1,000,000
including users of cocain. It is not apparent in the Report how
this figure is reached. </p>

<p>New York City Health Department Narcotic Clinic-April, 1919,
to January, 1920. </p>

<p>'Hubbard, S. D@The New York City Narcotic Clinic and differing
points of view on narcotic addiction. Monthly Bulletin, Dept. of
Health, City of New York, February 1920. </p>

<p>Hubbard 21 reports on the findings resulting from the data
gathered during the operation of this clinic over a period of
approximately nine months. This clinic was conducted in
co-operation with the New York State Department of Narcotic Drug
Control. In regard to the extent of opium usage in New York City,
Hubbard states: </p>

<p>&quot;The problem of narcotic addiction has been in the public
eye for some time, and the differing points of view regarding
narcotic addiction have been provocative of some very interesting
discussion. </p>

<p>&quot;In the Spring of last year, the Federal authorities
having made several raids on trafficking physicians and
druggists, an acute emergency was created whereby it was feared
by some that a panic of these miserable unfortunates would ensue.
These conditions caused the New York City Department of Health to
open a narcotic relief clinic in order to study and examine into
the subject of narcotic drug addiction. </p>

<p>Number of Drug Addicts in New York City </p>

<p>&quot;Many opinions regarding the prevalence and frequency of
drug addiction have been expressed. No doubt many of these
statements are far from true. We do not know who the addicts are,
nor how many there are of them, either here or elsewhere in this
country. Why? From opinions expressed, and from the literature on
this subject, we have been led to believe that addiction was
allocated with certain definite physical stigmata; pallor,
emaciation, nervousness, apprehension, sniffing, needle puncture
markings, and tattoo skin evidences; but in actual experience
with hundreds of acknowledged drug addicts, persons actually
seeking their drug supply, we find, like the weather indications,
all such signs failing. </p>

<p>&quot;There are drug addicts constitutionally inferior, and
superior; feeble-minded, and strong-minded; physically below, and
above par; morally inferior, and superior. No one class of
society seems, in our experience, to enjoy a monopoly in this
practice. Our opinions, therefore regarding the number of drug
addicts, here and elsewhere about this country, have very
naturally had to be revised. While it was the current opinion to
think that they existed in vast numbers estimated by some as one
per cent. of the community, and even two and three per cent by
others--we, today, think that this is greatly over-estimated. </p>

<p>&quot;It was formerly held that drug addiction was so general
and so frequent that if the law-the Harrison Act-was enforced, as
it should be, a panic would be created by the immense numbers of
addicts who would seek relief. </p>

<p>&quot;The efforts of the New York City Department of Health,
actuated and urged by the Commissioner of Health, Dr. Royal S.
Copeland, showed that this fear of the production of a panic was
a false one. Our efforts were given wide publicity, and the
co-operation of medical and scientific societies earnestly and
zealously sought to help solve this problem. It might be added
also that the raids initiated by the Federal
authorities--arresting illicit prescribers and
dispensers-together with the New York State Narcotic Commission
requiring registration of all addicts in this locality, have not
occasioned any undue excitement among these individuals. We,
naturally, must infer that the enormous number of drug addicts
supposed to exist, in this vicinity at least (and it was supposed
to be greater here than anywhere else) are mythical and untrue
and that therefore the fear of a panic of these miserable
unfortunates was negative.&quot; </p>

<p>In his conclusion, Hubbard states: </p>

<p>&quot;The estimate of 1% of our population addicted to the use
of narcotic indulgence as a habit-addiction-is very likely
greatly exaggerated.&quot; </p>

<p>In his general statistics Hubbard gives as the number of users
registered during the operation of the clinic (about nine
months), 7464 of which 5882 were men and 1582 were women.
Applying the incidence indicated for New York City by the number
registered at the clinic, we obtain for the country as a whole
140,554 for the year 1919. </p>

<p>A number of factors combined to make the registration at the
New York City clinic incomplete. In the first place attendance
was voluntary. Further in New York City it was required that not
more than a twenty-four hour supply be furnished the addict, so
that it was necessary for individuals to visit their physicians
or the clinic daily in order to secure the drug legitimately.
This requirement tended to influence those for whom it was
impossible or too inconvenient to leave their business or work to
seek their supply from the illicit traffic or from legitimate
sources outside of the jurisdiction of this ruling. The number
registered, therefore, represents only those who, because of
difficulties in securing their supply by reason of the cost of
prescriptions or because the drug was sold more cheaply at the
clinic than at the retail drug store in spite of the twenty-four
hour ruling chose to attend the clinic. </p>

<p>Also there were several other factors operating, to keep
certain classes of users away from the clinic. First there was
the inconvenience of the crowded condition of the clinic where
applicants were required to stand outside in lines a block or
more long in any weather waiting their turn to be examined and
otherwise attended to. Second, there was the fixing of an
arbitrary dosage and then the enforced reduction by an arbitrary
amount. Third, it was required that a considerable amount of
personal information having nothing to do with their addiction,
such its the name of their employers and their addresses, be
supplied and that the photograph of the patient be attached to
the registration card. </p>

<p>Drug peddling in New York City was very rife at the time of
the operation of the clinic, and every opportunity was offered
those who could afford to pay the prices charged by the illicit
traffickers in drugs to secure their supplies without submitting
to the requirements of the twenty-four hour supply provisions or
registration at the clinic. </p>

<p>Narcotic Drug Control Commission-New York-1920 .22 </p>

<p>'Second Report of the Narcotic Control Commission. 1920. </p>

<p>Referring to the number of users in New York State,
Commissioner Herrick says: </p>

<p>&quot;I think a safe and conservative approximation would be
39,000. The records of the Department show in round numbers
13,000 registered addicts. This number is composed of those who
obtain habit-forming drugs through legitimate sources, that is,
directly from a doctor or on prescriptions issued by a doctor,
filled by a druggist, or from the different clinics established
throughout the State. To these figures should be added twice the
number, which is an approximation of the users who obtain drugs
from peddlers, or other illicit sources. Of course, this latter
figure, as I have stated, is only an approximation. I base it on
the percentage of addicts among the great number with whom I have
personally conferred, who have admitted that they obtained their
drugs from peddlers or other illicit sources. Between four-fifths
and two-thirds of the registered addicts are located in the city
of Greater New York, and the remaining fraction is scattered
throughout the rest of the State. The larger the center of
population the greater the percentage of addicts.&quot; </p>

<p>When applied to the country as a whole, Herrick's estimate of
39,000 addicts in New York State yields a figure of 396,978. </p>

<p>If Commissioner Herrick's statement that between four-fifths
and two-thirds of the registered users were located in the city
of Greater New York is correct, we have from 10,400 to 8,666 in
the Greater City by using his figure of &quot;in round numbers
13,000&quot; for the state as a whole or several thousand more
than were registered at the clinic. </p>

<p>It should be pointed out that however far Hubbard's figure
falls short of the actual number of users in New York by reason
of the forementioned factors, it is at least 500 too low if our
interpretation of the Commissioner's report is correct. According
to his statement, the Department of Narcotic Drug Control issued
exemptions for certain individuals who were not required to
register. The number of these exemptions was 500 in the
beginning, but later was reduced to 300. In attempting to
generalize, therefore, from the New York City clinic figures we
must bear in mind the apparently marked incompleteness of these
figures. The figure of 7,464 however, as a minimum, is a figure
of importance and of itself presents a serious problem, however
far it may come from indicating the actual conditions. </p>

<p>Los Angeles Clinic-1920. </p>

<p>In Los Angeles a narcotic clinic was operated from March 8 to
August 17, 1920-a period of a little over five months-at which
time, according to the report of the medical head, W. H. Bucher,
the clinic was closed by federal orders. During this brief period
there were registered at the clinic 582 persons-389 men and 193
women. In addition, knowledge was had of 37 individuals who were
not registered and given the drug because they were not working,
had previous undesirable records or gave insufficient evidence of
being chronic users. The exact number, therefore, of users was
unknown to the clinic authorities. In the case of Los Angeles as
in New York all opium users were not required to come to the
clinic and register nor were records kept of cases handled by
outside physicians. Another factor which tended to influence the
situation in Los Angeles and which did not obtain in like degree
in other localities where clinics were operated was the proximity
of this city to Mexico. Tile constant smuggling of the drug
furnished easy sources of supply to those who wished to avoid
registration at the clinic. </p>

<p>Taking, however, the Los Angeles figures as indicated by the
clinic registration for what they are worth, we find at least a
minimum of 564 known chronic opium users, giving an incidence
rate of about .1 70'. On the basis of the Los Angeles figure
there would be in the United States a total of 102,005 for 1920.
It will also be remembered that the Los Angeles clinic was in
operation for but five months, while in Jacksonville and
Tennessee registration of narcotic users covered a much longer
period. </p>

<p>'In using the phrase &quot;normal incidence&quot; as
indicating the cases of chronic opium usage caused through
medical practice, self-medication and constitutional make-up but
exclusive of cases stimulated by such artificial influences as
underworld association, illicit traffic, etc., we would not be
understood as meaning that the normal as at present existing is
an irreducible figure. We believe only that it is an actual
figure existing as of this time-the present period in medical
practice and lay knowledge-that with better medical education and
a more widespread dissemination among the laity of the facts of
chronic opium intoxication this &quot;normal&quot; in the future
materially will be lessened.<br>
</p>

<p>Shreveport, Louisiana, Clinic-1919-1923. </p>

<p>In many respects the next figures to be considered possess a
unique value. They were supplied by W. P. Butler, medical
director of the narcotic clinic at Shreveport, Louisiana, and
include the cases of chronic opium intoxication in the city of
Shreveport and Caddo Parish in which Shreveport is located,
comprising thus a territory including both urban and rural
population. Further they represent only resident cases.
Transients, non-residents or those who were induced possibly to
seek Shreveport because of the opportunity for attending a clinic
and profiting by treatment have all been eliminated by Dr. Butler
through his intimate personal knowledge of the circumstances
surrounding each case. The size of Shreveport, its relative
isolation from populous centres, the absence of large industries
and manufactories would all tend to minimize underworld
influences as etiologic factors of importance. For the most part
these cases represent those arising from the prescribing of these
drugs by physicians, from self-medication and that element which
everywhere, even without unusual opportunity or artificial
incitement, tends to seek adventure, stimulation or solace
through the use of narcotics. In other words, Butler's figures
represent more nearly than any others in our possession what
might be termed a normal incidence 23as existing in a community
where unusual exciting causes have not existed. </p>

<p>Further it should be remembered in considering these figures
that the operation of this clinic continued without interruption
for a period of nearly four years, from May 3, 1919, to February
10, 1923. This is a longer period of existence than has been
comprised in the life of any other narcotic clinic. The methods
employed by Butler, differing in several particulars from those
employed elsewhere in similar work and the support from local
officials, physicians and public combined to make this unusual
period of existence possible in view of the attitude of the
Bureau of Internal Revenue in regard to the operation of narcotic
clinics. </p>

<p>The local educational influence of the clinic undoubtedly was
very great in Shreveport and the adjoining rural districts, which
fact must not be lost sight of in attempting to generalize from
the Shreveport figures. Not only the very great majority of all
cases were handled personally by Dr. Butler and his staff-only a
very few remained in the hands of private physicians-but the
nature of the work was so thoroughly understood and so widely
endorsed by the local medical profession that it could not have
failed to have a deterrent effect upon the ill-advised, careless
or unnecessary prescribing and administering of opium
preparations in the ordinary practice of medicine. Therefore,
there must have been an influence during the operation of the
clinic tending to lessen rather than to increase the number of
new cases usually arising from and attributable to the unwise use
of opium by the practicing physician at large. In other words,
there appear to have been no artificial stimulating influences
toward narcotism but, on the contrary, there were present
influences which tended distinctly to lessen the formation of new
cases. </p>

<p>Also it should be noted that . during the operation of the
clinic the illicit traffic was reduced to the minimum if not
wholly eradicated. This matter received the particular attention
of the Bureau of Internal Revenue whose agents repeatedly visited
Shreveport and noted the conditions under which the clinic
operated. According to Butler, they stated to him as their
personal opinion that the drug was very scarce on the streets of
Shreveport; one agent made several attempts at different times to
buy the drug or to have it bought, but was unsuccessful. </p>

<p>It would-appear, therefore, that one may generalize with less
chance of error, at least on the side of exaggeration, from the
Shreveport figures than from those of any other locality. Further
in such generalizations we have a more nearly accurate portrayal
of the extent of the use of opium preparations in this country
arising from what we may term the more natural causes,-causes
inherent in all communities in which medicine is practiced,
painful illness is experienced and predisposing constitutional
tendencies do not exist in excess or are not influenced unduly by
artificial conditions-than in other generalizations. </p>

<p>In other communities, especially in the metropolitan centres
and industrial cities where racial, social and economic factors
lead to congested living conditions and tend to stimulate the
vicious employment of opium preparations for purposes solely of
dissipation, where prostitution is considerably more prevalent
and where peddling is highly profitable, we should expect a very
material increase in the underworld or vicious element among the
drug-using population as a whole. In addition to this, where
public and professional attention has not been continuously and
for a relatively long period directed at constructive effort
toward the elimination of this evil, we should not look for <i>n </i>decrease
in the drug-using population resulting from an increased caution
on the part of members of the medical profession. Whatever the
effect of these two influences in the causation of chronic opium
intoxication in such large centres as we have referred to here or
elsewhere, the cases attributable to them must be considered as
an increment in excess of those normally existing in these
communities and resulting from such widespread and omnipresent
causes as those apparently responsible and chiefly operative in
Shreveport. </p>

<p>The Shreveport incidence, therefore, of opium users for the
population at large may well be considered a minimum. </p>

<p>Had Butler not eliminated the non-resident and transient
cases, the cases recorded at the Shreveport clinic since its
inception would be 1,237. This figure, Dr. Butler states,
includes transients, residents, non-residents, and all those
dispensed to one time or more and comprises all cases handled by
the clinic from the date of its opening to February, 1923. In the
case of Shreveport, however, where the collection of information
has been made with unusual care and over a considerable period,
it has been possible for those in charge of the work to eliminate
artificial or unusual conditions and to determine with exactness
the true resident incidence. Butler reports this figure to be
371, which covers exclusively those residents registered and
cared for during a period of nearly four years. This figure,
however, cannot be used for the determination of the addiction
incidence in Shreveport, and for purposes of comparison with
other surveys for three reasons: First, it covers a period of
more than one year, while in the Tennessee, Jacksonville, Los
Angeles and other figures heretofore considered the numbers dealt
with surveys made during one calendar year; second, the figure is
a strictly resident figure, whereas the figures of the other
cities deal with the crude population; third, in Shreveport the
narcotic clinic and the hospital facilities for treatment
undoubtedly attracted addicts from other sections of the country,
as the figure of 1,237 given above indicates. Therefore, Doctor
Butler has supplied us with the number of addicts treated and
registered during one calendar year of the clinic, 1920. The
total number of cases treated in this year was 542, but into this
figure enters the error incident to the fact that numbers of
individuals came to Shreveport throughout the period of the
clinic because of the clinic and its facilities. In an attempt to
correct for this source of error, it was possible for Doctor
Butler to subdivide these 542 cases into residents and
non-residents, the basis for the former being residence in Caddo
Parish for a period of one year prior to registration at the
clinic. The resident figure for 1920 is 211, the non-resident
figure is 331. None of these figures unfortunately permits of
comparison with the figures dealing with addiction incidence in
other communities, inasmuch as these latter figures have included
the general run of population usually present in a community,
residents and transients, but they did not include-and there was
no reason why they should include-individuals especially
attracted because of a local situation having to do with the
special handling of opium addicts. The true number which would be
typical of Shreveport lies somewhere between the strict resident
figure of 211 and the exaggerated figure of 642. The resident
figure gives to Shreveport an opium user rate of .25%. Applied to
continental United States it would furnish a total of 264,276 for
1920. From what already has been said of the conditions under
which the Shreveport figures were obtained-the elimination of
non-residents, transients, drug traffickers-and from the absence
of unusual exciting causes which would<b> </b>lead to the
formation of any considerable percentage of vicious or underworld
cases, it is at once apparent that this figure represents a
minimum and must be considerably below the real number. For we
may not minimize without danger of serious underestimation what,
is so often reported by local and federal authorities throughout
the country as a powerful influence in the causation of this
condition in the younger age groups of both sexes, particularly
of males, namely, the etiologic factor comprised in under-world
associations and the instinct of the illicit trafficker. </p>

<p>In the preceding pages we have utilized such figures as we
have found available in an effort to show the extent of this
problem. These figures have been in sonic cases incomplete, and
in others, for one reason or another, subject to doubt or
controversy. Unfortunately a sufficient number of local surveys
at any given period has not been made to furnish material for a
reliable cross-section of the country. Conditions existing in one
section may be attacked with at least a show of justice when
applied to others. Population composition, occupation, and even
climate, to say nothing of many other sociologic influences, tend
to vitiate generalizations made from local data of this kind. </p>

<p>For comparison we are giving in the following table the
findings of the surveys suitable for purposes of generalization
together with certain computations based thereon. The other
surveys of which we have record are too incomplete or for one
reason or another too inconclusive to warrant their use as bases
for general estimates. </p>

<p>A more recent estimate 24<b> </b>of the number of addicts in
the United States is that of Lawrence Kolb and A. G. Du Mez of
the United States Public Health Service. While not based on an
original survey of a community or section of the country, the
estimate of these authors is of interest as a result of their
analysis of certain recent surveys and other data. In their
introduction they state: </p>

<p>'Kolb, Lawrence, and A. G. Du Mez---'The Prevalence and Trend
of Drug Addiction in the United States and Factors Influencing
It.&quot; Public Health Reports--May 28, 1924. </p>

<p>&quot;It is realized that it is impossible at the present time
to make an exact count of the persons addicted to narcotics in
the United States in an individual State, or even in one of our
larger cities, because of the social and legal factors tending to
make addiction a secret practice. It is believed, however, that
it is possible, by utilizing all of the information now
available, to delimit the number by certain maximum and minimum
figures. With this object in view, a number of the more important
narcotic surveys made in recent years were analyzed; also the
reports made by agents of the Bureau of Internal Revenue and
other persons on the narcotic clinics conducted in different
parts of the country; statistics on the dose of addiction, world
production of narcotics, and the quantities imported into this
country were compiled and studied; and numerous physicians in
different parts of the country were interviewed in person to
ascertain the number of addicts they were treating in the course
of their practice. The results of these analyses and studies
follow:&quot; </p>

<p>After their analysis of the surveys and clinic reports, they
conclude as follows: </p>

<p>&quot;In summing up it may be stated that according to Brown's
survey, 215,000 was approximately the number of addicts in the
United States in 1915. The New York City, the Treasury
Department, and the clinic surveys were made four or five years
later. An objection to making a general application of the New
York City survey is that the sex and age distribution of addicts
shown by it does not obtain throughout the country. This was
probably due in part to the fact already referred to, namely,
that young addicts are attracted to large cities, and conditions
exist in them which cause a delinquent type of addiction; and it
is also due in part to the fact that some of the older addicts
were being taken care of by physicians and were not counted when
the survey was made. Just how far these two factors balance each
other is not known, but the 140,600 indicated by the New York
City survey in 1920 shows a reduction over the 1915 figures. The
clinic surveys made at the same time or a year later took in
nearly all sections of the country and comprised a more
representative group of population. These surveys show 104,300
addicts.' The Pennsylvania figures, collected over a period of
five years and ending about a year after the clinics were closed,
show approximately 109,250 addicts in the United States in 1922
when the actual count of 9,000 is used. The Army rate is
undoubtedly too low for the particular group surveyed, and for
reasons already given for estimating addiction in the population
as a whole. The 1918 Treasury Department survey shows 237,655
addicts and apparently contains an indeterminate error of
exaggeration, as already pointed out. The highest estimate based
on any unrevised survey is 269,000; the lowest, exclusive of the
Army survey, is 104,300. These figures may therefore be accepted
as the maximum and minimum numbers for the period 1915 to 1922;
but from what has been brought out relative to the surveys it
would seem that somewhat less than 215,000 is more nearly correct
for the beginning and about 110,000 the approximate number for
the end of the period.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="op100006.gif" align="bottom" width="452"
height="324"> </p>

<p>The second part of their report is a consideration of the
estimated number of addicts &quot;based on dosage and available
supplies.&quot; Using as a basis for their computations an
average daily dose of six grains of morphin sulphate, which they
state they obtained as a result of their studies, the authors
show in tabular form in ten-year periods in the next table the
number of addicts who would be supplied if all of the opium
entered for consumption were used for addicts. </p>

<p>They state: </p>

<p>&quot;These figures are given for a period prior to the time
when restrictions were placed on the traffic in opium, and there
was no incentive to the smuggling trade as there is to-day. It is
therefore believed that at no time have there been more than
246,000 opium addicts in the United States.&quot; </p>

<p>' A press release from the Narcotic Division of the
Prohibition Unit, Bureau of Internal Revenue, dated May 4, 1924,
states: &quot;It is estimated that there are upwards of 500,000
drug addicts in the United States . . . . .. </p>

<p>Following the same reasoning in regard to the total world
production of opium these authors conclude that at this rate
&quot;the total annual production of opium, exclusive of that
produced in the countries of the Far East, if used entirely for
the satisfaction of addiction, would supply only about 566,000
addicts.&quot; </p>

<p>It is necessary to emphasize, as the authors themselves have
pointed out, how impossible it is to obtain accurate statistics
on the world opium production. The data upon which the above
estimate of 566,000 was based were obtained from statistics
compiled by the Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium of the
League of Nations who the authors state, &quot;admits that the
figures given are only estimates in the majority of cases.&quot;
Further it should- be remembered that the annual production
figures vary from year to year and an estimate based on the
figures for one year-the above estimate of 566,000 is based on
the production figures of 1922-is true for that year alone,
granting that the figures are correct, and may be quite different
from those based on figures of other years. </p>

<p><img src="op100007.gif" align="bottom" width="456"
height="347"> </p>

<p>They continue: </p>

<p>&quot;It has been shown that at no time have the annual
importations of narcotic drugs into this country been greater
than would be necessary to supply 264,000 addicts, assuming that
they were used in their entirety for the satisfaction of
addiction. No one contends that they were so used, but it has
been asserted that at least 75 per cent of the quantities
imported are used for this purpose. It is believed that a fairly
accurate estimate of the amounts used for the satisfaction of
addiction subsequent to 1909, when the entry of smoking opium was
prohibited, can be obtained by using the import statistics given
in Tables 2 and 3. </p>

<p>&quot;For the four-year period, 1920-1923, the importations of
opium amounted to 144,805 pounds annually. For this same period
5,282 ounces of opium alkaloids were imported annually. The
narcotic division of the Bureau of Internal Revenue estimates
that not over 15 per cent of these quantities get into
illegitimate channels. Making these deductions it may be assumed
that 123,084 pounds of opium and 4,490 ounces of opium alkaloids
are required annually to supply the legitimate medicinal needs of
the country, including the needs of many old and incurable
addicts now being supplied by physicians, which number is
constantly decreasing. By subtracting these amounts from the
amounts imported annually for the decade 1910 to 1919 we obtain
242,971 pounds of opium and 22,653 ounces of opium alkaloids. </p>

<p>&quot;These quantities would supply approximately 100,000
addicts for a year. Making similar computations for coca leaves
and coca leaf alkaloids, it is found that approximately 9,000
addicts could be supplied with the quantities which were formerly
imported in excess of what has been imported in recent years.
This would make a total of 109,000 addicts who, prior to 1915,
could have obtained their supplies of narcotics from the
quantities imported legally. In view of the limited supplies of
medicinal opium available in the world and the rigid control of
narcotics exercised by this country, it is highly improbable that
the combined quantities available to addicts in 1919 and 1920
from smuggled sources and from leakage through legitimate
channels were more than sufficient to supply the number
(109,000). This is probably too high, in view of the reduction
which has been shown, but if we add to this figure the number of
aged and incurable addicts who received their supplies through
legitimate channels, the total number of addicts in this country
for the period stated was probably somewhere between 120,000 and
140,000, which is in keeping with the figures arrived at from the
surveys and clinic reports. </p>

<p>&quot;That the quantities of narcotics smuggled into this
country are in all likelihood not as great as is believed by
some, is shown by the quantities reported as falling into the
possession of the Bureau of Internal Revenue in the enforcement
of the narcotic laws. For the year ending June 30, 1922, the
total quantity, including opium and coca leaves, preparations
containing opium and coca leaves, the alkaloids of opium and
cocaine, and preparations containing these alkaloids, was only
4,447 pounds. In 1923 it was 542 pounds.&quot; </p>

<p>In connection with the above statements, we should like to
point out that in our opinion a decrease in the amount of drug
confiscated does not necessarily indicate a decrease in
smuggling. The report of the Special Committee of the Treasury
Department, 1918, states that </p>

<p>&quot;in recent years, especially since the enactment of the
Harrison law, the traffic by 'underground' channels has increased
enormously, and at the present time it is believed to be equally
as extensive as that carried on in a legitimate manner!&quot; How
much of this traffic found its source of supply in smuggling and
to what extent the activities of the federal bureau charged with
the enforcement of the law have diminished smuggling operations
since 1918, we are unable to say. However, we believe that the
significance of the above statement should be considered. </p>

<p>Earlier in this chapter we have. pointed out the
undesirability of attempting to make an estimate of the number of
addicts based on the amount of the drug available for consumption
and the average daily dose. We again wish to point out the
present lack of data, at least in our experience, which would
warrant the acceptance of any figure as a representative average
daily dose for addicts. </p>

<p>From their interviews with physicians the authors conclude as
follows: </p>

<p>&quot;Confirmation of the estimates based on the supplies of
narcotics available and on the findings of the various surveys as
to the number of addicts and the trend of narcotic addiction in
the United States is furnished by the experience of physicians as
related to us. We have interviewed physicians from all parts of
the United States and it is unusual to find one who has an addict
among his patients. Few besides those who have contact with penal
institutions and sanitariums meet any great number. Many
physicians still occasionally see a transient addict who drops in
and begs for a dose, but this, too, is growing rare. Some of the
physicians who have been practicing for years in small towns and
rural communities speak of addicts they have cured by the aid of
the Harrison law or who have, without outside assistance, cured
themselves. Some of them are taking care of one or more old or
incurable cases but from the information they give it seems that
new cases of addiction are not arising to take the place of the
old ones who die. </p>

<p>&quot;The accuracy of our observation is Supported by the
findings of Dr. Carleton Simon, special deputy police
commissioner in charge of the narcotic division of the police
department of New York City, who sent out a questionnaire to the
physicians in New York State. Of the 7,599 physicians who
replied, only 52 per cent reported that they were treating
addicts in 1922.&quot; </p>

<p>Two questions arise as to the justification of the above
deductions based on interviews with physicians throughout the
country; first, were a sufficient and representative number of
physicians interviewed to portray a fair picture of existing
conditions; and second, is it reasonable to expect that the
majority of addicts under present conditions place themselves in
the hands of physicians? In regard to the latter question we
believe that for reasons pointed out in the following chapter the
tendency of the physician is to avoid contact with the problem of
addiction. </p>

<p>As a final conclusion in regard to the present number of
addicts, the authors state: </p>

<p>&quot;The evidence seems to show that a maximum estimate for
the number of addicts in the United States at the present time
would be 150,000. The estimates based on actual counts and on the
available supplies of narcotics, together with conditions
reported by the physicians interviewed, point to about 110,000,
which number is believed to be nearly correct.&quot; </p>

<p>In general, a review of the material already covered in this
chapter will show it in the above study in the first place
certain surveys have not been taken into consideration and in the
second place, incorrect deductions have been drawn from two of
the official reports cited. Among the first may be named the
Jacksonville, Fla., survey made in 1913, about a year before the
Tennessee study. A consideration of the earlier surveys may have
been omitted because of the supposed existence of different
influencing factors by reason of time. In regard to this point we
believe that however different conditions may be at the present
time, the changes have not been great enough to eliminate
completely the significance of these early figures. </p>

<p>In regard to the second point, namely the incorrect
deductions, it is true that there actually were reported only
73,150 addicts in the survey made by the special committee of the
Treasury Department, 1918, which on the basis of 100 per cent
replies would yield 237,655 addicts under treatment in the entire
country. The report from which they take this figure has already
been considered above. The figure which they quote is not given
in the original report as the committee's estimate of the total
number of addicts in the country, but only as the estimated
number of addicts under treatment by physicians during the period
when the survey was made, as the report states, I............
only a small portion of the total number of addicts presented
themselves for treatment. Addicts of the 'underworld', for
instance, secure most of their supply through illicit channels
and rarely, if ever, consult a physician.&quot; Further, had Kolb
and Du Mez employed the figures resulting from queries sent to
health officials they would have reached a total for the country
of 420,000 addicts, which figure, the committee's report states,
&quot;appears to be much too low in view of the fact that the
physicians of the country are estimated to have bad about 237,000
addicts under treatment during the same period.&quot; Further on
the report of the Treasury Department, after considering the
errors potentially residing in all of the -figures presented,
both from general and local sources, reaches the following
conclusion: &quot;Taking these facts into consideration, the
committee is of the opinion that the total number of addicts in
this country probably exceeds 1,000,000 at the present time,'-a
statement which Kolb and Du Mez did not take into account. Again,
these authors quoted only the lower figures and lost sight of the
final estimate of the number of addicts in the state of New York
made by Commissioner Herrick in his report of the work of the
Narcotic Control Commission when he states: </p>

<p>&quot;I think a safe and conservative approximation would be
39,000. The records of the Department show in round numbers
13,000 registered addicts. This number is composed of those who
obtain habit-forming drugs through legitimate sources, that is,
directly from a doctor or on prescriptions issued by a doctor,
filled by a druggist, or from the different clinics established
throughout the State. To these figures should be added twice the
number, which is an approximation of the users who, obtain drugs
from peddlers, or other illicit sources. Of course, this latter
figure, as I have stated, is only an approximation. I base it on
the percentage of addicts among the great number with whom I have
personally conferred, who have admitted that they obtained their
drugs from peddlers or other illicit sources.&quot; </p>

<p>The importance of these estimates in relation to their use as
a basis for further estimates or comparisons is obvious. </p>

<p>Finally in view of the various considerations pointed out in
regard to the above study, we cannot agree that the ultimate
estimate of 110,000 is warranted. While we on the one hand
deplore unjustifiable, sensational exaggerations, on the other,
we recognize the danger of basing maximal estimates on selected
data. </p>

<p>One other method of arriving at a satisfying conclusion as to
the extent of this problem exists. It is quite remote from what
we may terra the mathematical procedure, and, while neither
specific in its application nor concerned with actual numbers,
includes presumptive evidence of such importance and brings into
consideration such deeprooted human attributes and such
well-known characteristics as to render it, perhaps, the most
important method of all, while, parodoxical as it may seem, the
least definite. We refer to a review of the growth </p>

<p>in the use of opium through the many and varied motives as
presented and revealed by available historic record. That there
has been a continuous, marked increase in the consumption of
opium and its products in the United States, at least through
1915, is shown in the following table of importations. The supply
has but filled the demand. Tile conclusion is inevitable that the
number of chronic users, for one reason or another, steadily has
been increasing, as upon the basis of the therapeutic use of
these drugs alone-in the treatment of disease other than that of
chronic opium intoxication-such an increase would have been
impossible. In 1915 two things occurred simultaneously, the
importations decreased and the illicit traffic began to develop.
This doubtless was due chiefly to the fact that chronic users,
because of the restrictions placed upon physicians and
pharmacists in the handling of these drugs, sought their supplies
from underworld sources. It does not mean necessarily that the
consumption of opium has decreased. </p>

<p>Inasmuch as this comprises a study of the development of the
problem of chronic opium intoxication we shall take it up in a
separate chapter, tracing its progress through the early
unrestricted use and popularity of opium to relieve pain in that
period of medical enlightenment when attention was directed at
symptoms rather than cause, the ignorance of the dangers of
continued use, the discovery of its value for therapeutic uses,
the influence of such writings as De Quincey's and others of his
day, the introduction and widespread use of the hypodermic
syringe, the influence of the Civil War and other wars, the
practice of opium smoking, the influence of the patent medicine
industry, the discovery and use of heroin, the illicit traffic
which has grown up since the enactment of anti-narcotic laws and
the general lack of interest and laxness in medical teachings and
practice in the employment of opium preparations. </p>

<p>RESUME </p>

<p>The period covered in the foregoing material dates from the
earliest time in which this problem in the United States appears
to have received individual or public recognition up to the
present time. From beginning to end the material is fragmentary.
Altogether very few surveys have been made and those that do
exist are more or less imperfect due to one or another vitiating
factor. Incompleteness seems to be an outstanding feature of
practically all surveys. This may be explained by the nature of
the problem and the prevailing early and present attitudes toward
the individuals affected, as a result of which they are not
inclined to reveal their condition. Other influences tending to
render the surveys already made inapplicable to generalization
are community variations such as race composition, method of
conducting survey, method of registration, classes represented in
survey, attitude and experience of investigators, etc. Moreover,
singularly enough, in spite of a growing interest evinced in the
problem as a result of the enactment of the Harrison Narcotic
Act, the results of several of the earlier investigations appear
better adapted to generalization than most of those made public
since the enforcement of this law. In consideration of the above
factors it must be concluded that we do not know the total number
of opiate users in the United States today. </p>

<p><img src="op100008.gif" align="bottom" width="452"
height="681"> </p>

<p><img src="op100009.gif" align="bottom" width="451"
height="680"> </p>

<p>Whatever their inaccuracies, these surveys and estimates
indicate sufficiently clearly the existence of a major
medico-social problem to make the denial of the existence of a
general situation far more dangerous than its affirmation. As a
matter of fact, it is not necessary to know the exact number of
users or even the minimal extent, to realize that there are a
large number in the country and that the problem is serious.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_OP_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="opmenu.htm">The
Opium Problem</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="58141" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>