
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-52</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B035-248</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/child6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064413 text/html 83582
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:43:57 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:30:34 GMT
Content-length: 83363
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LSD, My Problem Child · The Mexican Relatives of LSD </title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Albert Hofmann">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<hr>
<center>

<h3>6. The Mexican Relatives of LSD </h3>
</center>

<hr>

<h4>The Sacred Mushroom <i>Teonanácatl</i> </h4>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Late in 1956 a notice in the daily paper caught my
interest. Among some Indians in southern Mexico, American
researchers had discovered mushrooms that were eaten in religious
ceremonies and that produced an inebriated condition accompanied
by hallucinations. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Since, outside of the mescaline cactus found also
in Mexico, no other drug was known at the time that, like LSD,
produced hallucinations, I would have liked to establish contact
with these researchers, in order to learn details about these
hallucinogenic mushrooms. But there were no names and addresses
in the short newspaper article, so that it was impossible to get
further information. Nevertheless, the mysterious mushrooms,
whose chemical investigation would be a tempting problem, stayed
in my thoughts from then on. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As it later turned out, LSD was the reason that
these mushrooms found their way into my laboratory, with out my
assistance, at the beginning of the following year. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Through the mediation of Dr. Yves Dunant, at the
time director of the Paris branch of Sandoz, an inquiry came to
the pharmaceutical research management in Basel from Professor
Roger Heim, director of the Laboratoire de Cryptogamie of the
Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris, asking whether we
were interested in carrying out the chemical investigation of the
Mexican hallucinogenic mushrooms. With great joy I declared
myself ready to begin this work in my department, in the
laboratories for natural product research. That was to be my link
to the exciting investigations of the Mexican sacred mushrooms,
which were already broadly advanced in the ethnomycological and
botanical aspects. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; For a long time the existence of these magic
mushrooms had remained an enigma. The history of their
rediscovery is presented at first hand in the magnificent
two-volume standard work of ethnomycology, <i>Mushrooms, Russia
and History</i> (Pantheon Books, New York, 1957), for the
authors, the American researchers Valentina Pavlovna Wasson and
her husband, R. Gordon Wasson, played a decisive role in this
rediscovery. The following descriptions of the fascinating
history of these mushrooms are taken from the Wassons' book. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The first written evidence of the use of
inebriating mushrooms on festival occasions, or in the course of
religious ceremonies and magically oriented healing practices, is
found among the Spanish chroniclers and naturalists of the
sixteenth century, who entered the country soon after the
conquest of Mexico by Hernando Cortés. The most important of
these witnesses is the Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahagun,
who mentions the magic mushrooms and describes their effects and
their use in several passages of his famous historical work, <i>Historia
General de tas Cosas de Nueva Espana</i>, written between the
years 1529 and 1590. Thus he describes, for example, how
merchants celebrated the return home from a successful business
trip with a mushroom party: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Coming at the very first, at the time of feasting, they
    ate mushrooms when, as they said, it was the hour of the
    blowing of the flutes. Not yet did they partake of food; they
    drank only chocolate during the night. And they ate mushrooms
    with honey. When already the mushrooms were taking effect,
    there was dancing, there was weeping.... Some saw in a vision
    that they would die in war. Some saw in a vision that they
    would be devoured by wild beasts.... Some saw in a vision
    that they would become rich, wealthy. Some saw in a vision
    that they would buy slaves, would become slave owners. Some
    saw in a vision that they would commit adultery [and so]
    would have their heads bashed in, would be stoned to
    death.... Some saw in a vision that they would perish in the
    water. Some saw in a vision that they would pass to
    tranquillity in death. Some saw in a vision that they would
    fall from the housetop, tumble to their death. . . . All such
    things they saw.... And when [the effects of] the mushroom
    ceased, they conversed with one another, spoke of what they
    had seen in the vision. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In a publication from the same period, Diego Duran,
a Dominican friar, reported that inebriating mushrooms were eaten
at the great festivity on the occasion of the accession to the
throne of Moctezuma II, the famed emperor of the Aztecs, in the
year 1502. A passage in the seventeenth-century chronicle of Don
Jacinto de la Serna refers to the use of these mushrooms in a
religious framework: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>And what happened was that there had come to [the village]
    an Indian . . . and his name was Juan Chichiton . . . and he
    had brought the red-colored mushrooms that are gathered in
    the uplands, and with them he had committed a great
    idolatry.... In the house where everyone had gathered on the
    occasion of a saint's feast . . . the <i>teponastli</i> [an
    Aztec percussion instrument] was playing and singing was
    going on the whole night through. After most of the night had
    passed, Juan Chichiton, who was the priest for that solumn
    rite, to all of those present at the fiesta gave the
    mushrooms to eat, after the manner of Communion, and gave
    them <i>pulque</i> to drink. . . so that they all went out of
    their heads, a shame it was to see. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; In Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs, these
    mushrooms were described as <i>teo-nancatl</i>, which can be
    translated as &quot;sacred mushroom.&quot; </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There are indications that ceremonial use of such
mushrooms reaches far back into pre-Columbian times. So-called
mushroom stones have been found in El Salvador, Guatemala, and
the contiguous mountainous districts of Mexico. These are stone
sculptures in the form of pileate mushroom, on whose stem the
face or the form of a god or an animal-like demon is carved. Most
are about 30 cm high. The oldest examples, according to
archaeologists, date back to before 500 B.C. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; R. G. Wasson argues, quite convincingly, that there
is a connection between these mushroom stones and <i>teonanácatl</i>.
If true, this means that the mushroom cult, the magico-medicinal
and religious-ceremonial use of the magic mushrooms, is more than
two thousand years old. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; To the Christian missionaries, the inebriating,
vision- and hallucination-producing effects of these mushrooms
seemed to be Devil's work. They therefore tried, with all the
means in their power, to extirpate their use. But they succeeded
only partially, for the Indians have continued secretly down to
our time to utilize the mushroom <i>teonanácatl</i>, which was
sacred to them. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Strange to say, the reports in the old chronicles
about the use of magic mushrooms remained unnoticed during the
following centuries, probably because they were considered
products of the imagination of a superstitious age. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; All traces of the existence of &quot;sacred
mushrooms&quot; were in danger of becoming obliterated once and
for all, when, in 1915, an American botanist of repute, Dr. W. E.
Safford, in an address before the Botanical Society in Washington
and in a scientific publication, advanced the thesis that no such
thing as magic mushrooms had ever existed at all: the Spanish
chroniclers had taken the mescaline cactus for a mushroom! Even
if false, this proposition of Safford's served nevertheless to
direct the attention of the scientific world to the riddle of the
mysterious mushrooms. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It was the Mexican physician Dr. Blas Pablo Reko
who first openly disagreed with Safford's interpretation and who
found evidence that mushrooms were still employed in
medicinal-religious ceremonies even in our time, in remote
districts of the southern mountains of Mexico. But not until the
years 19338 did the anthropologist Robert J. Weitlaner and Dr.
Richard Evans Schultes, a botanist from Harvard University, find
actual mushrooms in that region, which were used there for this
ceremonial purpose; and only in 1938 could a group of young
American anthropologists, under the direction of Jean Bassett
Johnson, attend a secret nocturnal mushroom ceremony for the
first time. This was in Huautla de Jiménez, the capital of the
Mazatec country, in the State of Oaxaca. But these researchers
were only spectators, they were not permitted to partake of the
mushrooms. Johnson reported on the experience in a Swedish
journal (<i>Ethnological Studies</i> 9, 1939). <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Then exploration of the magic mushrooms was
interrupted. World War II broke out. Schultes, at the behest of
the American government, had to occupy himself with rubber
production in the Amazon territory, and Johnson was killed after
the Allied landing in North Africa. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It was the American researchers, the married couple
Dr. Valentina Pavlovna Wasson and her husband, R. Gordon Wasson,
who again took up the problem from the ethnographic aspect. R. G.
Wasson was a banker, vice-president of the J. P. Morgan Co. in
New York. His wife, who died in 1958, was a pediatrician. The
Wassons began their work in 1953, in the Mazatec village Huautla
de Jiménez, where fifteen years earlier J. B. Johnson and others
had established the continued existence of the ancient Indian
mushroom cult. They received especially valuable information from
an American missionary who had been active there for many years,
Eunice V. Pike, member of the Wycliffe Bible Translators. Thanks
to her knowledge of the native language and her ministerial
association with the inhabitants, Pike had information about the
significance of the magic mushrooms that nobody else possessed.
During several lengthy sojourns in Huautla and environs, the
Wassons were able to study the present use of the mushrooms in
detail and compare it with the descriptions in the old
chronicles. This showed that the belief in the &quot;sacred
mushrooms&quot; was still prevalent in that region. However, the
Indians kept their beliefs a secret from strangers. It took great
tact and skill, therefore, to gain the confidence of the
indigenous population and to receive insight into this secret
domain. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the modern form of the mushroom cult, the old
religious ideas and customs are mingled with Christian ideas and
Christian terminology. Thus the mushrooms are often spoken of as
the blood of Christ, because they will grow only where a drop of
Christ's blood has fallen on the earth. According to another
notion, the mushrooms sprout where a drop of saliva from Christ's
mouth has moistened the ground, and it is therefore Jesus Christ
himself who speaks through the mushrooms. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The mushroom ceremony follows the form of a
consultation. The seeker of advice or a sick person or his or her
family questions a &quot;wise man&quot; or a &quot;wise
woman,&quot; a <i>sabio</i> or <i>sabia,</i> also named <i>curandero</i>
or <i>curandera,</i> in return for a modest payment. <i>Curandero</i>
can best be translated into English as &quot;healing
priest,&quot; for his function is that of a physician as well as
that of a priest, both being found only rarely in these remote
regions. In the Mazatec language the healing priest is called <i>co-ta-ci-ne</i>,
which means &quot;one who knows.&quot; He eats the mushroom in
the framework of a ceremony that always takes place at night. The
other persons present at the ceremony may sometimes receive
mushrooms as well, yet a much greater dose always goes to the <i>curandero</i>.
The performance is executed with the accompaniment of prayers and
entreaties, while the mushrooms are incensed briefly over a
basin, in which <i>copal</i> (an incense-like resin) is burned.
In complete darkness, at times by candlelight, while the others
present lie quietly on their straw mats, the curandero, kneeling
or sitting, prays and sings before a type of altar bearing a
crucifix, an image of a saint, or some other object of worship.
Under the influence of the sacred mushrooms, the <i>curandero</i>
counsels in a visionary state, in which even the inactive
observers more or less participate. In the monotonous song of the
<i>curandero,</i> the mushroom <i>teonanácatl </i>gives its
answers to the questions posed. It says whether the diseased
person will live or die, which herbs will effect the cure; it
reveals who has killed a specific person, or who has stolen the
horse; or it makes known how a distant relative fares, and so
forth. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The mushroom ceremony not only has the function of
a consulation of the type described, for the Indians it also has
a meaning in many respects similar to the Holy Communion for the
believing Christian. From many utterances of the natives it could
be inferred that they believe that God has given the Indians the
sacred mushroom because they are poor and possess no doctors and
medicines; and also, because they cannot read, in particular the
Bible, God can therefore speak directly to them through the
mushroom. The missionary Eunice V. Pike even alluded to the
difficulties that result from explaining the Christian message,
the written word, to a people who believe they possess a
means&#151;the sacred mushrooms of course - to make God's will
known to them in a direct, clear manner: yes, the mushrooms
permit them to see into heaven and to establish communication
with God himself. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Indians' reverence for the sacred mushrooms is
also evident in their belief that they can be eaten only by a
&quot;clean&quot; person. &quot;Clean&quot; here means
ceremonially clean, and that term among other things includes
sexual abstinence at least four days before and after ingestion
of the mushrooms. Certain rules must also be observed in
gathering the mushrooms. With non-observance of these
commandments, the mushrooms can make the person who eats it
insane, or can even kill. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Wassons had undertaken their first expedition
to the Mazatec country in 1953, but not until 1955 did they
succeed in overcoming the shyness and reserve of the Mazatec
friends they had managed to make, to the point of being admitted
as active participants in a mushroom ceremony. R. Gordon Wasson
and his companion, the photographer Allan Richardson, were given
sacred mushrooms to eat at the end of June 1955, on the occasion
of a nocturnal mushroom ceremony. They thereby became in all
likelihood the first outsiders, the first whites, ever permitted
to take <i>teonanácatl</i>. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the second volume of <i>Mushrooms, Russia and
History,</i> in enraptured words, Wasson describes how the
mushroom seized possession of him completely, although he had
tried to struggle against its effects, in order to be able to
remain an objective observer. First he saw geometric, colored
patterns, which then took on architectural characteristics. Next
followed visions of splendid colonnades, palaces of supernatural
harmony and magnificence embellished with precious gems,
triumphal cars drawn by fabulous creatures as they are known only
from mythology, and landscapes of fabulous luster. Detached from
the body, the spirit soared timelessly in a realm of fantasy
among images of a higher reality and deeper meaning than those of
the ordinary, everyday world. The essence of life, the ineffable,
seemed to be on the verge of being unlocked, but the ultimate
door failed to open. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This experience was the final proof, for Wasson,
that the magical powers attributed to the mushrooms actually
existed and were not merely superstition. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In order to introduce the mushrooms to scientific
research, Wasson had earlier established an association with
mycologist Professor Roger Heim of Paris. Accompanying the
Wassons on further expeditions into the Mazatec country, Heim
conducted the botanical identification of the sacred mushrooms.
He showed that they were gilled mushrooms from the family <i>Strophariaceae,</i>
about a dozen different species not previously described
scientifically, the greatest part belonging to the genus <i>Psilocybe.</i>
Professor Heim also succeeded in cultivating some of the species
in the laboratory. The mushroom <i>Psilocybe mexicana</i> turned
out to be especially suitable for artificial cultivation. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Chemical investigations ran parallel with these
botanical studies on the magic mushrooms, with the goal of
extracting the hallucinogenically active principle from the
mushroom material and preparing it in chemically pure form. Such
investigations were carried out at Professor Heim's instigation
in the chemical laboratory of the Museum National d'Histoire
Naturelle in Paris, and work teams were occupied with this
problem in the United States in the research laboratories of two
large pharmaceutical companies: Merck, and Smith, Kline and
French. The American laboratories had obtained some of the
mushrooms from R. G. Wasson and had gathered others themselves in
the Sierra Mazateca. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As the chemical investigations in Paris and in the
United States turned out to be ineffectual, Professor Heim
addressed this matter to our firm, as mentioned at the beginning
of this chapter, because he felt that our experimental experience
with LSD, related to the magic mushrooms by similar activity,
could be of use in the isolation attempts. Thus it was LSD that
showed <i>teonanácatl</i> the way into our laboratory. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As director of the department of natural products
of the Sandoz pharmaceutical-chemical research laboratories at
that time, I wanted to assign-the investigation of the magic
mushrooms to one of my coworkers. However, nobody showed much
eagerness to take on this problem because it was known that LSD
and everything connected with it were scarcely popular subjects
to the top management. Because the enthusiasm necessary for
successful endeavors cannot be commanded, and because the
enthusiasm was already present in me as far as this problem was
concerned, I decided to conduct the investigation myself. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Some 100 g of dried mushrooms of the species <i>Psilocybe
mexicana, </i>cultivated by Professor Heim in the laboratory,
were available for the beginning of the chemical analysis. My
laboratory assistant, Hans Tscherter, who during our decade-long
collaboration, had developed into a very capable helper,
completely familiar with my manner of work, aided me in the
extraction and isolation attempts. Since there were no clues at
all concerning the chemical properties of the active principle we
sought, the isolation attempts had to be conducted on the basis
of the effects of the extract fractions. But none of the various
extracts showed an unequivocal effect, either in the mouse or the
dog, which could have pointed to the presence of hallucinogenic
principles. It therefore became doubtful whether the mushrooms
cultivated and dried in Paris were still active at all. That
could only be determined by experimenting with this mushroom
material on a human being. As in the case of LSD, I made this
fundamental experiment myself, since it is not appropriate for
researchers to ask anyone else to perform self-experiments that
they require for their own investigations, especially if they
entail, as in this case, a certain risk. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In this experiment I ate 32 dried specimens of <i>Psilocybe
mexicana,</i> which together weighed 2.4 g. This amount
corresponded to an average dose, according to the reports of
Wasson and Heim, as it is used by the <i>curanderos</i>. The
mushrooms displayed a strong psychic effect, as the following
extract from the report on that experiment shows: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Thirty minutes after my taking the mushrooms, the exterior
    world began to undergo a strange transformation. Everything
    assumed a Mexican character. As I was perfectly well aware
    that my knowledge of the Mexican origin of the mushroom would
    lead me to imagine only Mexican scenery, I tried deliberately
    to look on my environment as I knew it normally. But all
    voluntary efforts to look at things in their customary forms
    and colors proved ineffective. Whether my eyes were closed or
    open, I saw only Mexican motifs and colors. When the doctor
    supervising the experiment bent over me to check my blood
    pressure, he was transformed into an Aztec priest and I would
    not have been astonished if he had drawn an obsidian knife.
    In spite of the seriousness of the situation, it amused me to
    see how the Germanic face of my colleague had acquired a
    purely Indian expression. At the peak of the intoxication,
    about 1 1/2 hours after ingestion of the mushrooms, the rush
    of interior pictures, mostly abstract motifs rapidly changing
    in shape and color, reached such an alarming degree that I
    feared that I would be torn into this whirlpool of form and
    color and would dissolve. After about six hours the dream
    came to an end. Subjectively, I had no idea how long this
    condition had lasted. I felt my return to everyday reality to
    be a happy return from a strange, fantastic but quite real
    world to an old and familiar home. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This self-experiment showed once again that human
beings react much more sensitively than animals to psychoactive
substances. We had already reached the same conclusion in
experimenting with LSD on animals, as described in an earlier
chapter of this book. It was not inactivity of the mushroom
material, but rather the deficient reaction capability of the
research animals vis-à-vis such a type of active principle, that
explained why our extracts had appeared inactive in the mouse and
dog. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Because the assay on human subjects was the only
test at our disposal for the detection of the active extract
fractions, we had no other choice than to perform the testing on
ourselves if we wanted to carry on the work and bring it to a
successful conclusion. In the self-experiment just described, a
strong reaction lasting several hours was produced by 2.4 g dried
mushrooms. Therefore, in the sequel we used samples corresponding
to only one-third of this amount, namely 0.8 g dried mushrooms.
If these samples contained the active principle, they would only
provoke a mild effect that impaired the ability to work for a
short time, but this effect would still be so distinct that the
inactive fractions and those containing the active principle
could unequivocally be differentiated from one another. Several
coworkers and colleagues volunteered as guinea pigs for this
series of tests.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Psilocybin and Psilocin </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; With the help of this reliable test on human
subjects, the active principle could be isolated, concentrated,
and transformed into a chemically pure state by means of the
newest separation methods. Two new substances, which I named
psilocybin and psilocin, were thereby obtained in the form of
colorless crystals. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; These results were published in March 1958 in the
journal <i>Experientia</i>, in collaboration with Professor Heim
and with my colleagues Dr. A. Brack and Dr. H. Kobel, who had
provided greater quantities of mushroom material for these
investigations after they had essentially improved the laboratory
cultivation of the mushrooms. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Some of my coworkers at the time&#151;Drs. A. J.
Frey, H. Ott, T. Petrzilka, and F. Troxler&#151;then participated
in the next steps of these investigations, the determination of
the chemical structure of psilocybin and psilocin and the
subsequent synthesis of these compounds, the results of which
were published in the November 1958 issue of <i>Experientia</i>.
The chemical structures of these mushroom factors deserve special
attention in several respects. Psilocybin and psilocin belong,
like LSD, to the indole compounds, the biologically important
class of substances found in the plant and animal kingdoms.
Particular chemical features common to both the mushroom
substances and LSD show that psilocybin and psilocin are closely
related to LSD, not only with regard to psychic effects but also
to their chemical structures. Psilocybin is the phosphoric acid
ester of psilocin and, as such, is the first and hitherto only
phosphoric-acid-containing indole compound discovered in nature.
The phosphoric acid residue does not contribute to the activity,
for the phosphoric-acid-free psilocin is just as active as
psilocybin, but it makes the molecule more stable. While psilocin
is readily decomposed by the oxygen in air, psilocybin is a
stable substance. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Psilocybin and psilocin possess a chemical
structure very similar to the brain factor serotonin. As was
already mentioned in the chapter on animal experiments and
biological research, serotonin plays an important role in the
chemistry of brain functions. The two mushroom factors, like LSD,
block the effects of serotonin in pharmacological experiments on
different organs. Other pharmacological properties of psilocybin
and psilocin are also similar to those of LSD. The main
difference consists in the quantitative activity, in animal as
well as human experimentation. The average active dose of
psilocybin or psilocin in human beings amounts to 10 mg (0.01 g);
accordingly, these two substances are more than 100 times less
active than LSD, of which 0.1 mg constitutes a strong dose.
Moreover, the effects of the mushroom factors last only four to
six hours, much shorter than the effects of LSD (eight to twelve
hours). <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The total synthesis of psilocybin and psilocin,
without the aid of the mushrooms, could be developed into a
technical process, which would allow these substances to be
produced on a large scale. Synthetic production is more rational
and cheaper than extraction from the mushrooms. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Thus with the isolation and synthesis of the active
principles, the demystification of the magic mushrooms was
accomplished. The compounds whose wondrous effects led the
Indians to believe for millennia that a god was residing in the
mushrooms had their chemical structures elucidated and could be
produced synthetically in flasks. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Just what progress in scientific knowledge was
accomplished by natural products research in this case?
Essentially, when all is said and done, we can only say that the
mystery of the wondrous effects of <i>teonanácatl </i>was
reduced to the mystery of the effects of two crystalline
substances&#151;since these effects cannot be explained by
science either, but can only be describe.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>A Voyage into the Universe of the Soul with Psilocybin </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; The relationship between the psychic effects of
psilocybin and those of LSD, their visionaryhallucinatory
character, is evident in the following report from <i>Antaios,</i>
of a psilocybin experiment by Dr. Rudolf Gelpke. He has
characterized his experiences with LSD and psilocybin, as already
mentioned in a previous chapter, as &quot;travels in the universe
of the soul.&quot;</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Where Time Stands Still </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; (10 mg psilocybin, 6 April 1961, 10:20) </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>After ca. 20 minutes, beginning effects: serenity,
    speechlessness, mild but pleasant dizzy sensation, and
    &quot;pleasureful deep breathing.&quot; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 10:50 Strong! dizziness, can no longer
    concentrate . <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 10:55 Excited, intensity of colors: everything
    pink to red. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 11:05 The world concentrates itself there on
    the center of the table. Colors very intense. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; 11:10 A divided being, unprecedented&#151;how
    can I describe this sensation of life? Waves, different
    selves, must control me. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Immediately after this note I went outdoors,
    leaving the breakfast table, where I had eaten with Dr. H.
    and our wives, and lay down on the lawn. The inebriation
    pushed rapidly to its climax. Although I had firmly resolved
    to make constant notes, it now seemed to me a complete waste
    of time, the motion of writing infinitely slow, the
    possibilities of verbal expression unspeakably paltry -
    measured by the flood of inner experience that inundated me
    and threatened to burst me. It seemed to me that 100 years
    would not be sufficient to describe the fullness of
    experience of a single minute. At the beginning, optical
    impressions predominated: I saw with delight the boundless
    succession of rows of trees in the nearby forest. Then the
    tattered clouds in the sunny sky rapidly piled up with silent
    and breathtaking majesty to a superimposition of thousands of
    layers&#151;heaven on heaven&#151;and I waited then expecting
    that up there in the next moment something completely
    powerful, unheard of, not yet existing, would appear or
    happen - would I behold a god? But only the expectation
    remained, the presentiment, this hovering, &quot;on the
    threshold of the ultimate feeling.&quot; . . . Then I moved
    farther away (the proximity of others disturbed me) and lay
    down in a nook of the garden on a sun-warmed wood
    pile&#151;my fingers stroked this wood with overflowing,
    animal-like sensual affection. At the same time I was
    submerged within myself; it was an absolute climax: a
    sensation of bliss pervaded me, a contented happiness&#151;I
    found myself behind my closed eyes in a cavity full of
    brick-red ornaments, and at the same time in the &quot;center
    of the universe of consummate calm.&quot; I knew everything
    was good&#151;the cause and origins of everything was good.
    But at the same moment I also understood the suffering and
    the loathing, the depression and misunderstanding of ordinary
    life: there one is never &quot;total,&quot; but instead
    divided, cut in pieces, and split up into the tiny fragments
    of seconds, minutes, hours, days, weeks, and years: there one
    is a slave of Moloch time, which devoured one piecemeal; one
    is condemned to stammering, bungling, and patchwork; one must
    drag about with oneself the perfection and absolute, the
    togetherness of all things; the eternal moment of the golden
    age, this original ground of being&#151;that indeed
    nevertheless has always endured and will endure
    forever&#151;there in the weekday of human existence, as a
    tormenting thorn buried deeply in the soul, as a memorial of
    a claim never fulfilled, as a fata morgana of a lost and
    promised paradise; through this feverish dream
    &quot;present&quot; to a condemned &quot;past&quot; in a
    clouded &quot;future.&quot; I understood. This inebriation
    was a spaceflight, not of the outer but rather of the inner
    man, and for a moment I experienced reality from a location
    that lies somewhere beyond the force of gravity of time. <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; As I began again to feel this force of gravity,
    I was childish enough to want to postpone the return by
    taking a new dose of 6 mg psilocybin at 11:45, and once again
    4 mg at 14:30. The effect was trifling, and in any case not
    worth mentioning. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Mrs. Li Gelpke, an artist, also participated in
this series of investigations, taking three self-experiments with
LSD and psilocybin. The artist wrote of the drawing she made
during the experiment: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Nothing on this page is consciously fashioned. While I
    worked on it, the memory (of the experience under psilocybin)
    was again reality, and led me at every stroke. For that
    reason the picture is as many-layered as this memory, and the
    figure at the lower right is really the captive of its
    dream.... When books about Mexican art came into my hands
    three weeks later, I again found the motifs of my visions
    there with a sudden start.... </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I have also mentioned the occurrence of Mexican
motifs in psilocybin inebriation during my first self-experiment
with dried Psilocybe mexicana mushrooms, as was described in the
section on the chemical investigation of these mushrooms. The
same phenomenon has also struck R. Gordon Wasson. Proceeding from
such observations, he has advanced the conjecture that ancient
Mexican art could have been influenced by visionary images, as
they appear in mushroom inebriation.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>The &quot;Magic Morning Glory&quot; <i>Ololiuhqui</i> </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; After we had managed to solve the riddle of the
sacred mushroom <i>teonanácatl</i> in a relatively short time, I
also became interested in the problem of another Mexican magic
drug not yet chemically elucidated, <i>ololiuhqui</i>. <i>Ololiuhqui</i>
is the Aztec name for the seeds of certain climbing plants <i>(Convolvulaceae)</i>
that, like the mescaline cactus <i>peyotl </i>and the <i>teonanácatl</i>
mushrooms, were used in pre-Columbian times by the Aztecs and
neighboring people in religious ceremonies and magical healing
practices. <i>Ololiuhqui </i>is still used even today by certain
Indian tribes like the Zapotec, Chinantec, Mazatec, and Mixtec,
who until a short time ago still led a genuinely isolated
existence, little influenced by Christianity, in the remote
mountains of southern Mexico. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; An excellent study of the historical, ethnological,
and botanical aspects of <i>ololiuhqui</i> was published in 1941
by Richard Evans Schultes, director of the Harvard Botanical
Museum in Cambridge, Massachusetts. It is entitled &quot;A
Contribution to Our Knowledge of <i>Rivea corymbosa,</i> the
Narcotic <i>Ololiuqui</i> of the Aztecs.&quot; The following
statements about the history of <i>ololiuhqui </i>derive chiefly
from Schultes's monograph. [Translator's note: As R. Gordon
Wasson has pointed out, &quot;<i>ololiuhqui</i>&quot; is a more
precise orthography than the more popular spelling used by
Schultes. See <i>Botanical Museum Leaflets Harvard University</i>
20: 161-212, 1963.] <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The earliest records about this drug were written
by Spanish chroniclers of the sixteenth century, who also
mentioned <i>peyotl</i> and <i>teonanácatl.</i> Thus the
Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahagun, in his already cited
famous chronicle <i>Historia General de las Cosas de Nueva
Espana,</i> writes about the wondrous effects of <i>ololiuhqui:</i>
&quot;There is an herb, called <i>coatl xoxouhqui</i> (green
snake), which produces seeds that are called <i>ololiuhqui.</i>
These seeds stupefy and deprive one of reason: they are taken as
a potion.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We obtain further information about these seeds
from the physician Francisco Hernandez, whom Philip II sent to
Mexico from Spain, from 1570 to 1575, in order to study the
medicaments of the natives. In the chapter &quot;On <i>Ololiuhqui</i>&quot;
of his monumental work entitled <i>Rerum Medicarum Novae
Hispaniae Thesaurus seu Plantarum, Animalium Mineralium
Mexicanorum Historia,</i> published in Rome in 1651, he gives a
detailed description and the first illustration of <i>ololiuhqui</i>.
An extract from the Latin text accompanying the illustration
reads in translation: &quot;<i>Ololiuhqui,</i> which others call <i>coaxihuitl</i>
or snake plant, is a climber with thin, green, heart-shaped
leaves.... The flowers are white, fairly large.... The seeds are
roundish. . . . When the priests of the Indians wanted to visit
with the gods and obtain information from them, they ate of this
plant in order to become inebriated. Thousands of fantastic
images and demons then appeared to them....&quot; Despite this
comparatively good description, the botanical identification of <i>ololiuhqui</i>
as seeds of <i>Rivea corymbosa</i> (L.) Hall. f. occasioned many
discussions in specialist circles. Recently preference has been
given to the synonym <i>Turbina corymbosa</i> (L.) Raf. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; When I decided in 1959 to attempt the isolation o
the active principles of <i>ololiuhqui,</i> only a single report
on chemical work with the seeds of <i>Turbina corymbosa</i> was
available. It was the work of the pharmacologist C. G. Santesson
of Stockholm, from the year 1937. Santesson, however, was not
successful in isolating an active substance in pure form. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Contradictory findings had been published about the
activity of the <i>ololiuhqui</i> seeds. The psychiatrist H.
Osmond conducted a self-experiment with the seeds of <i>Turbina
corymbosa </i>in 1955. After the ingestion of 60 to 100 seeds, he
entered into a state of apathy and emptiness, accompanied by
enhanced visual sensitivity. After four hours, there followed a
period of relaxation and well-being, lasting for a longer time.
The results of V. J. Kinross-Wright, published in England in
1958, in which eight voluntary research subjects, who had taken
up to 125 seeds, perceived no effects at all, contradicted this
report. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Through the mediation of R. Gordon Wasson, I
obtained two samples of <i>ololiuhqui</i> seeds. In his
accompanying letter of 6 August 1959 from Mexico City, he wrote
of them: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>. . . The parcels that I am sending you are the following:
    . . . <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; A small parcel of seeds that I take to be <i>Rivea
    corymbosa,</i> otherwise known as ololiuqui well-known
    narcotic of the Aztecs, called in Huautla &quot;la semilla de
    la Virgen.&quot; This parcel, you will find, consists of two
    little bottles, which represent two deliveries of seeds made
    to us in Huautla, and a larger batch of seeds delivered to us
    by Francisco Ortega &quot;Chico,&quot; the Zapotec guide, who
    himself gathered the seeds from the plants at the Zapotec
    town of San Bartolo Yautepec.... </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The first-named, round, light brown seeds from
Huautla proved in the botanical determination to have been
correctly identified as <i>Rivea (Turbina) corymbosa,</i> while
the black, angular seeds from San Bartolo Yautepec were
identified as <i>Ipomoea violacea</i> L. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; While <i>Turbina corymbosa</i> thrives only in
tropical or subtropical climates, one also finds <i>Ipomoea
violacea</i> as an ornamental plant dispersed over the whole
earth in the temperate zones. It is the morning glory that
delights the eye in our gardens in diverse varieties with blue or
blue-red striped calyxes. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Zapotec, besides the original <i>ololiuhqui</i>
(that is, the seeds of <i>Turbina corymbosa</i>, which they call <i>badoh</i>),
also utilize <i>badoh negro,</i> the seeds of <i>Ipomoea violacea</i>.
T. MacDougall, who furnished us with a second larger consignment
of the last-named seeds, made this observation. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; My capable laboratory assistant Hans Tscherter,
with whom I had already carried out the isolation of the active
principles of the mushrooms, participated in the chemical
investigation of the <i>ololiuhqui</i> drug. We advanced the
working hypothesis that the active principles of the <i>ololiuhqui</i>
seeds could be representatives of the same class of chemical
substances, the indole compounds, to which LSD, psilocybin, and
psilocin belong. Considering the very great number of other
groups of substances that, like the indoles, were under
consideration as active principles of <i>ololiuhqui</i>, it was
indeed extremely improbable that this assumption would prove
true. It could, however, very easily be tested. The presence of
indole compounds, of course, may simply and rapidly be determined
by colorimetric reactions. Thus even traces of indole substances,
with a certain reagent, give an intense blue-colored solution. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We had luck with our hypothesis. Extracts of <i>ololiuhqui</i>
seeds with the appropriate reagent gave the blue coloration
characteristic of indole compounds. With the help of this
colorimetric test, we succeeded in a short time in isolating the
indole substances from the seeds and in obtaining them in
chemically pure form. Their identification led to an astonishing
result. What we found appeared at first scarcely believable. Only
after repetition and the most careful scrutiny of the operations
was our suspicion concerning the peculiar findings eliminated:
the active principles from the ancient Mexican magic drug <i>ololiuhqui</i>
proved to be identical with substances that were already present
in my laboratory. They were identical with alkaloids that had
been obtained in the course of the decades-long investigations of
ergot; partly isolated as such from ergot, partly obtained
through chemical modification of ergot substances. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Lysergic acid amide, lysergic acid
hydroxyethylamide, and alkaloids closely related to them
chemically were established as the main active principles of <i>ololiuhqui</i>.
(See formulae in the appendix.) Also present was the alkaloid
ergobasine, whose synthesis had constituted the starting point of
my investigations on ergot alkaloids. Lysergic acid amide and
lysergic acid hydroxyethylamide, active principles of <i>ololiuhqui</i>,
are chemically very closely related to lysergic acid diethylamide
(LSD), which even for the non-chemist follows from the names. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Lysergic acid amide was described for the first
time by the English chemists S. Smith and G. M. Timmis as a
cleavage product of ergot alkaloids, and I had also produced this
substance synthetically in the course of the investigations in
which LSD originated. Certainly, nobody at the time could have
suspected that this compound synthesized in the flask would be
discovered twenty years later as a naturally occurring active
principle of an ancient Mexican magic drug. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After the discovery of the psychic effects of LSD,
I had also tested lysergic acid amide in a self-experiment and
established that it likewise evoked a dreamlike condition, but
only with about a tenfold to twenty-fold greater dose than LSD.
This effect was characterized by a sensation of mental emptiness
and the unreality and meaninglessness of the outer world, by
enhanced sensitivity of hearing, and by a not unpleasant physical
lassitude, which ultimately led to sleep. This picture of the
effects of LA-111, as lysergic acid amide was called as a
research preparation, was confirmed in a systematic investigation
by the psychiatrist Dr. H. Solms. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; When I presented the findings of our investigations
on <i>ololiuhqui</i> at the Natural Products Congress of the
International Union for Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) in
Sydney, Australia, in the fall of 1960, my colleagues received my
talk with skepticism. In the discussions following my lecture,
some persons voiced the suspicion that the <i>ololiuhqui</i>
extracts could well have been contaminated with traces of
lysergic acid derivatives, with which so much work had been done
in my laboratory. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There was another reason for the doubt in
specialist circles concerning our findings. The occurrence in
higher plants (i.e., in the morning glory family) of ergot
alkaloids that hitherto had been known only as constituents of
lower fungi, contradicted the experience that certain substances
are typical of and restricted to respective plant families. It is
indeed a very rare exception to find a characteristic group of
substances, in this case the ergot alkaloids, occurring in two
divisions of the plant kingdom broadly separated in evolutionary
history. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Our results were confirmed, however, when different
laboratories in the United States, Germany, and Holland
subsequently verified our investigations on the <i>ololiuhqui</i>
seeds. Nevertheless, the skepticism went so far that some persons
even considered the possibility that the seeds could have been
infected with alkaloid-producing fungi. That suspicion, however,
was ruled out experimentally. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; These studies on the active principles of <i>ololiuhqui</i>
seeds, although they were published only in professional
journals, had an unexpected sequel. We were apprised by two Dutch
wholesale seed companies that their sale of seeds of <i>Ipomoea
violacea</i>, the ornamental blue morning glory, had reached
unusual proportions in recent times. They had heard that the
great demand was connected with investigations of these seeds in
our laboratory, about which they were eager to learn the details.
It turned out that the new demand derived from hippie circles and
other groups interested in hallucinogenic drugs. They believed
they had found in the <i>ololiuhqui</i> seeds a substitute for
LSD, which was becoming less and less accessible. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The morning glory seed boom, however, lasted only a
comparatively short time, evidently because of the undesirable
experiences that those in the drug world had with this
&quot;new&quot; ancient inebriant. The <i>ololiuhqui</i> seeds,
which are taken crushed with water or another mild beverage,
taste very bad and are difficult for the stomach to digest.
Moreover, the psychic effects of <i>ololiuhqui</i>, in fact,
differ from those of LSD in that the euphoric and the
hallucinogenic components are less pronounced, while a sensation
of mental emptiness, often anxiety and depression, predominates.
Furthermore, weariness and lassitude are hardly desirable effects
as traits in an inebriant. These could all be reasons why the
drug culture's interest in the morning glory seeds has
diminished. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Only a few investigations have considered the
question whether the active principles of <i>ololiuhqui</i> could
find a useful application in medicine. In my opinion, it would be
worthwhile to clarify above all whether the strong narcotic,
sedative effect of certain <i>ololiuhqui</i> constituents, or of
chemical modifications of these, is medicinally useful. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; My studies in the field of hallucinogenic drugs
reached a kind of logical conclusion with the investigations of <i>ololiuhqui</i>.
They now formed a circle, one could almost say a magic circle:
the starting point had been the synthesis of lysergic acid
amides, among them the naturally occurring ergot alkaloid
ergobasin. This led to the synthesis of lysergic acid
diethylamide, LSD. The hallucinogenic properties of LSD were the
reason why the hallucinogenic magic mushroom <i>teonanácatl</i>
found its way into my laboratory. The work with <i>teonanácatl</i>,
from which psilocybin and psilocin were isolated, proceeded to
the investigation of another Mexican magic drug, <i>ololiuhqui</i>,
in which hallucinogenic principles in the form of lysergic acid
amides were again encountered, including ergobasin&#151;with
which the magic circle closed.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>In Search of the Magic Plant &quot;Ska María Pastora&quot;
in the Mazatec Country </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; R. Gordon Wasson, with whom I had maintained
friendly relations since the investigations of the Mexican magic
mushrooms, invited my wife and me to take part in an expedition
to Mexico in the fall of 1962. The purpose of the journey was to
search for another Mexican magic plant. Wasson had learned on his
travels in the mountains of southern Mexico that the expressed
juice of the leaves of a plant, which were called <i>hojas de la
Pastora </i>or <i>hojas de </i>María<i> Pastora,</i> in Mazatec <i>ska
Pastora</i> or <i>ska </i>María<i> Pastora </i>(leaves of the
shepherdess or leaves of Mary the shepherdess), were used among
the Mazatec in medico-religious practices, like the <i>teonanácatl</i>
mushrooms and the <i>ololiuhqui</i> seeds. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The question now was to ascertain from what sort of
plant the &quot;leaves of Mary the shepherdess&quot; derived, and
then to identify this plant botanically. We also hoped, if at all
possible, to gather sufficient plant material to conduct a
chemical investigation on the hallucinogenic principles it
contained.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Ride through the Sierra Mazateca </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; On 26 September 1962, my wife and I accordingly
flew to Mexico City, where we met Gordon Wasson. He had made all
the necessary preparations for the expedition, so that in two
days we had already set out on the next leg of the journey to the
south. Mrs. Irmgard Weitlaner Johnson, (widow of Jean B. Johnson,
a pioneer of the ethnographic study of the Mexican magic
mushrooms, killed in the Allied landing in North Africa) had
joined us. Her father, Robert J. Weitlaner, had emigrated to
Mexico from Austria and had likewise contributed toward the
rediscovery of the mushroom cult. Mrs. Johnson worked at the
National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City, as an expert on
Indian textiles. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After a two-day journey in a spacious Land Rover,
which took us over the plateau, along the snow-capped
Popocatépetl, passing Puebla, down into the Valley of Orizaba
with its magnificent tropical vegetation, then by ferry across
the Popoloapan (Butterfly River), on through the former Aztec
garrison Tuxtepec, we arrived at the starting point of our
expedition, the Mazatec village of Jalapa de Diaz, lying on a
hillside. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There we were in the midst of the environment and
among the people that we would come to know in the succeeding 2
1/2 weeks. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There was an uproar upon our arrival in the
marketplace, center of this village widely dispersed in the
jungle. Old and young men, who had been squatting and standing
around in the half-opened bars and shops, pressed suspiciously
yet curiously about our Land Rover; they were mostly barefoot but
all wore a <i>sombrero.</i> Women and girls were nowhere to be
seen. One of the men gave us to understand that we should follow.
him. He led us to the local president, a fat <i>mestizo</i> who
had his office in a one-story house with a corrugated iron roof.
Gordon showed him our credentials from the civil authorities and
from the military governor of Oaxaca, which explained that we had
come here to carry out scientific investigations. The president,
who probably could not read at all, was visibly impressed by the
large-sized documents equipped with official seals. He had
lodgings assigned to us in a spacious shed, in which we could
place our air mattresses and sleeping bags. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I looked around the region somewhat. The ruins of a
large church from colonial times, which must have once been very
beautiful, rose almost ghostlike in the direction of an ascending
slope at the side of the village square. Now I could also see
women looking out of their huts, venturing to examine the
strangers. In their long, white dresses, adorned with red
borders, and with their long braids of blue-black hair, they
offered a picturesque sight. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We were fed by an old Mazatec woman, who directed a
young cook and two helpers. She lived in one of the typical
Mazatec huts. These are simply rectangular structures with
thatched gabled roofs and walls of wooden poles joined together,
windowless, the chinks between the wooden poles offering
sufficient opportunity to look out. In the middle of the hut, on
the stamped clay floor, was an elevated, open fireplace, built up
out of dried clay or made of stones. The smoke escaped through
large openings in the walls under the two ends of the roof. Bast
mats that lay in a corner or along the walls served as beds. The
huts were shared with the domestic animals, as well as black
swine, turkeys, and chickens. There was roasted chicken to eat,
black beans, and also, in place of bread, <i>tortillas</i>, a
type of cornmeal pancake that is baked on the hot stone slab of
the hearth. Beer and tequila, an <i>Agave</i> liquor, were
served. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Next morning our troop formed for the ride through
the Sierra Mazateca. Mules and guides were engaged from the
horsekeeper of the village. Guadelupe, the Mazatec familiar with
the route, took charge of guiding the lead animal. Gordon,
Irmgard, my wife, and I were stationed on our mules in the
middle. Teodosio and Pedro, called Chico, two young fellows who
trotted along barefoot beside the two mules laden with our
baggage, brought up the rear. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It took some time to get accustomed to the hard
wooden saddles. Then, however, this mode of locomotion proved to
be the most ideal type of travel that I know of. The mules
followed the leader, single file, at a steady pace. They required
no direction at all by the rider. With surprising dexterity, they
sought out the best spots along the almost impassable, partly
rocky, partly marshy paths, which led through thickets and
streams or onto precipitous slopes. Relieved of all travel cares,
we could devote all our attention to the beauty of the landscape
and the tropical vegetation. There were tropical forests with
gigantic trees overgrown with twining plants, then again
clearings with banana groves or coffee plantations, between light
stands of trees, flowers at the edge of the path, over which
wondrous butterflies bustled about.... We made our way upstream
along the broad riverbed of Rio Santo Domingo, with brooding heat
and steamy air, now steeply ascending, then again falling. During
a short, violent tropical downpour, the long broad ponchos of
oilcloth, with which Gordon had equipped us, proved quite useful.
Our Indian guides had protected themselves from the cloudburst
with gigantic, heart-shaped leaves that they nimbly chopped off
at the edge of the path. Teodosio and Chico gave the impression
of great, green hay cricks as they ran, covered with these
leaves, beside their mules. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Shortly before nightfall we arrived at the first
settlement, La Providencia ranch. The patron, Don Joaquin Garcia,
the head of a large family, welcomed us hospitably and full of
dignity. It was impossible to determine how many children, in
addition to the grown-ups and the domestic animals, were present
in the large living room, feebly illuminated by the hearth fire
alone. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Gordon and I placed our sleeping bags outdoors
under the projecting roof. I awoke in the morning to find a pig
grunting over my face. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After another day's journey on the backs of our
worthy mules, we arrived at Ayautla, a Mazatec settlement spread
across a hillside. En route, among the shrubbery, I had delighted
in the blue calyxes of the magic morning glory <i>Ipomoea
violacea</i>, the mother plant of the <i>ololiuhqui</i> seeds. It
grew wild there, whereas among us it is only found in the Garden
as an ornamental plant. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We remained in Ayautla for several days. We had
lodging in the house of Doña Donata Sosa de García. Doña
Donata was in charge of a large family, which included her ailing
husband. In addition, she presided over the coffee cultivation of
the region. The collection center for the freshly picked coffee
beans was in an adjacent building. It was a lovely picture, the
young Indian woman and girls returning home from the harvest
toward evening, in their bright garments adorned with colored
borders, the coffee sacks carried on their backs by headbands.
Doña Donata also managed a type of grocery store, in which her
husband, Don Eduardo, stood behind the counter. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the evening by candlelight, Doña Donata, who
besides Mazatec also spoke Spanish, told us about life in the
village; one tragedy or another had already struck nearly every
one of the seemingly peaceful huts that lay surrounded by this
paradisiacal scenery. A man who had murdered his wife, and who
now sits in prison for life, had lived in the house next door,
which now stood empty. The husband of a daughter of Doña Donata,
after an affair with another woman, was murdered out of jealousy.
The president of Ayautla, a young bull of a mestizo, to whom we
had made our formal visit in the afternoon, never made the short
walk from his hut to his &quot;office&quot; in the village hall
(with the corrugated iron roof) unless accompanied by two heavily
armed men. Because he exacted illegal taxes, he was afraid of
being shot to death. Since no higher authority sees to justice in
this remote region, people have recourse to self-defense of this
type. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Thanks to Doña Donata's good connections, we
received the first sample of the sought-after plant, some leaves
of <i>hojas de la Pastora,</i> from an old woman. Since the
flowers and roots were missing, however, this plant material was
not suitable for botanical identification. Our efforts to obtain
more precise information about the habitat of the plant and its
use were also fruitless. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The continuation of our journey from Ayautla was
delayed, as we had to wait until our boys could again bring back
the mules that they had taken to pasture on the other side of Rio
Santo Domingo, over the river swollen by intense downpours. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After a two-day ride, on which we had passed the
night in the high mountain village of San Miguel-Huautla, we
arrived at Rio Santiago. Here we were joined by Doña Herlinda
Martinez Cid, a teacher from Huautla de Jiménez. She had ridden
over on the invitation of Gordon Wasson, who had known her since
his mushroom expeditions, and was to serve as our Mazatec and
Spanish-speaking interpreter. Moreover, she could help us,
through her numerous relatives scattered in the region, to pave
the way to contacts with <i>curanderos</i> and <i>curandera</i>s
who used the <i>hojas de la Pastora</i> in their practice.
Because of our delayed arrival in Rio Santiago, Doña Herlinda,
who was acquainted with the dangers of the region, had been
apprehensive about us, fearing we might have plunged down a rocky
path or been attacked by robbers. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Our next stop was in San José Tenango, a
settlement lying deep in a valley, in the midst of tropical
vegetation with orange and lemon trees and banana plantations.
Here again was the typical village picture: in the center, a
marketplace with a half-ruined church from the colonial period,
with two or three stands, a general store, and shelters for
horses and mules. We found lodging in a corrugated iron barracks,
with the special luxury of a cement floor, on which we could
spread out our sleeping bags. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the thick jungle on the mountainside we
discovered a spring, whose magnificent fresh water in a natural
rocky basin invited us to bathe. That was an unforgettable
pleasure after days without opportunities to wash properly. In
this grotto I saw a hummingbird for the first time in nature, a
blue-green, metallic, iridescent gem, which whirred over great
liana blossoms. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The desired contact with persons skilled in
medicine came about thanks to the kindred connections of Doña
Herlinda, beginning with the curandero Don Sabino. But he
refused, for some reason, to receive us in a consultation and to
question the leaves. From an old <i>curandera</i>, a venerable
woman in a strikingly magnificent Mazatec garment, with the
lovely name Natividad Rosa, we received a whole bundle of
flowering specimens of the sought-after plant, but even she could
not be prevailed upon to perform a ceremony with the leaves for
us. Her excuse was that she was too old for the hardship of the
magical trip; she could never cover the long distance to certain
places: a spring where the wise women gather their powers, a lake
on which the sparrows sing, and where objects get their names.
Nor would Natividad Rosa tell us where she had gathered the
leaves. They grew in a very, very distant forest valley. Wherever
she dug up a plant, she put a coffee bean in the earth as thanks
to the gods. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We now possessed ample plants with flowers and
roots, which were suitable for botanical identification. It was
apparently a representative of the genus Salvia, a relative of
the well-known meadow sage. The plants had blue flowers crowned
with a white dome, which are arranged on a panicle 20 to 30 cm
long, whose stem leaked blue. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Several days later, Natividad Rosa brought us a
whole basket of leaves, for which she was paid fifty pesos. The
business seemed to have been discussed, for two other women
brought us further quantities of leaves. As it was known that the
expressed juice of the leaves is drunk in the ceremony, and this
must therefore contain the active principle, the fresh leaves
were crushed on a stone plate, squeezed out in a cloth, the juice
diluted with alcohol as a preservative, and decanted into flasks
in order to be studied later in the laboratory in Basel. I was
assisted in this work by an Indian girl, who was accustomed to
dealing with the stone plate, the <i>metate</i>, on which the
Indians since ancient times have ground their corn by hand. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; On the day before the journey was to continue,
having given up all hope of being able to attend a ceremony, we
suddenly made another contact with a <i>curandera</i>, one who
was ready &quot; to serve us .&quot; A confidante of Herlinda's,
who had produced this contact, led us after nightfall along a
secret path to the hut of the <i>curandera</i>, lying solitary on
the mountainside above the settlement. No one from the village
was to see us or discover that we were received there. It was
obviously considered a betrayal of sacred customs, worthy of
punishment, to allow strangers, whites, to take part in this.
That indeed had also been the real reason why the other healers
whom we asked had refused to admit us to a leaf ceremony. Strange
birdcalls from the darkness accompanied us on the ascent, and the
barking of dogs was heard on all sides. The dogs had detected the
strangers. The <i>curandera</i> Consuela García, a woman of some
forty years, barefoot like all Indian women in this region,
timidly admitted us to her hut and immediately closed up the
doorway with a heavy bar. She bid us lie down on the bast mats on
the stamped mud floor. As Consuela spoke only Mazatec, Herlinda
translated her instructions into Spanish for us. The <i>curandera</i>
lit a candle on a table covered with some images of saints, along
with a variety of rubbish. Then she began to bustle about busily,
but in silence. All at once we heard peculiar noises and a
rummaging in the room-did the hut harbor some hidden person whose
shape and proportions could not be made out in the candlelight?
Visibly disturbed, Consuela searched the room with the burning
candle. It appeared to be merely rats, however, who were working
their mischief. In a bowl the <i>curandera</i> now kindled <i>copal</i>,
an incense-like resin, which soon filled the whole hut with its
aroma. Then the magic potion was ceremoniously prepared. Consuela
inquired which of us wished to drink of it with her. Gordon
announced himself. Since I was suffering from a severe stomach
upset at the time, I could not join in. My wife substituted for
me. The <i>curandera</i> laid out six pairs of leaves for
herself. She apportioned the same number to Gordon. Anita
received three pairs. Like the mushrooms, the leaves are always
dosed in pairs, a practice that, of course, has a magical
significance. The leaves were crushed with the <i>metate</i>,
then squeezed out through a fine sieve into a cup, and the <i>metate</i>
and the contents of the sieve were rinsed with water. Finally,
the filled cups were incensed over the <i>copal</i> vessel with
much ceremony. Consuela asked Anita and Gordon, before she handed
them their cups, whether they believed in the truth and the
holiness of the ceremony. After they answered in the affirmative
and the very bitter-tasting potion was solemnly imbibed, the
candles were extinguished and, lying in darkness on the bast
masts, we awaited the effects. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After some twenty minutes Anita whispered to me
that she saw striking, brightly bordered images. Gordon also
perceived the effect of the drug. The voice of the <i>curandera</i>
sounded from the darkness, half speaking, half singing. Herlinda
translated: Did we believe in Christ's blood and the holiness of
the rites? After our &quot;creemos&quot; (&quot;We
believe&quot;), the ceremonial performance continued. The <i>curandera</i>
lit the candles, moved them from the &quot;altar table&quot; onto
the floor, sang and spoke prayers or magic formulas, placed the
candles again under the images of the saints-then again silence
and darkness. Thereupon the true consultation began. Consuela
asked for our request. Gordon inquired after the health of his
daughter, who immediately before his departure from New York had
to be admitted prematurely to the hospital in expectation of a
baby. He received the comforting information that mother and
child were well. Then again came singing and prayer and
manipulations with the candles on the &quot;altar table&quot; and
on the floor, over the smoking basin. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; When the ceremony was at an end, the <i>curandera</i>
asked us to rest yet a while longer in prayer on our bast mats.
Suddenly a thunderstorm burst out. Through the cracks of the beam
walls, lightning flashed into the darkness of the hut,
accompanied by violent thunderbolts, while a tropical downpour
raged, beating on the roof. Consuela voiced apprehension that we
would not be able to leave her house unseen in the darkness. But
the thunderstorm let up before daybreak, and we went down the
mountainside to our corrugated iron barracks, as noiselessly as
possible by the light of flashlights, unnoticed by the villagers,
but dogs again barked from all sides. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Participation in this ceremony was the climax of
our expedition. It brought confirmation that the <i>hojas de la
Pastora</i> were used by the Indians for the same purpose and in
the same ceremonial milieu as <i>teonanácatl</i>, the sacred
mushrooms. Now we also had authentic plant material, not only
sufficient for botanical identification, but also for the planned
chemical analysis. The inebriated state that Gordon Wasson and my
wife had experienced with the <i>hojas</i> had been shallow and
only of short duration, yet it had exhibited a distinctly
hallucinogenic character. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; On the morning after this eventful night we took
leave of San José Tenango. The guide, Guadelupe, and the two
fellows Teodosio and Pedro appeared before our barracks with the
mules at the appointed time. Soon packed up and mounted, our
little troop then moved uphill again, through the fertile
landscape glittering in the sunlight from the night's
thunderstorm. Returning by way of Santiago, toward evening we
reached our last stop in Mazatec country, the capital Huautla de
Jiménez. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; From here on, the return trip to Mexico City was
made by automobile. With a final supper in the Posada Rosaura, at
the time the only inn in Huautla, we took leave of our Indian
guides and of the worthy mules that had carried us so
surefootedly and in such a pleasant way through the Sierra
Mazatec. The Indians were paid of, and Teodosio, who also
accepted payment for his chief in Jalapa de Diaz (where the
animals were to be returned afterward), gave a receipt with his
thumbprint colored by a ballpoint pen. We took up quarters in
Dona Herlinda's house. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A day later we made our formal visit to the <i>curandera</i>
María Sabina, a woman made famous by the Wassons' publications.
It had been in her hut that Gordon Wasson became the first white
man to taste of the sacred mushrooms, in the course of a
nocturnal ceremony in the summer of 1955. Gordon and María
Sabina greeted each other cordially, as old friends. The <i>curandera</i>
lived out of the way, on the mountainside above Huautla. The
house in which the historic session with Gordon Wasson had taken
place had been burned, presumably by angered residents or an
envious colleague, because she had divulged the secret of <i>teonanácatl</i>
to strangers. In the new hut in which we found ourselves, an
incredible disorder prevailed, as had probably also prevailed in
the old hut, in which half-naked children, hens, and pigs bustled
about. The old <i>curandera</i> had an intelligent face,
exceptionally changeable in expression. She was obviously
impressed when it was explained that we had managed to confine
the spirit of the mushrooms in pills, and she at once declared
herself ready to &quot; serve us&quot; with these, that is, to
grant us a consultation. It was agreed that this should take
place the coming night in the house of Doña Herlinda. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the course of the day I took a stroll through
Huautla de Jiménez, which led along a main street on the
mountainside. Then I accompanied Gordon on his visit to the
Instituto Nacional Indigenista. This governmental organization
had the duty of studying and helping to solve the problems of the
indigenous population, that is, the Indians. Its leader told us
of the difficulties that the &quot;coffee policy&quot; had caused
in the area at that time. The president of Huautla, in
collaboration with the Instituto Nacional Indigenista had tried
to eliminate middlemen in order to shape the coffee prices
favorably for the producing Indians. His body was found,
mutilated, the previous June. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Our stroll also took us past the cathedral, from
which Gregorian chants resounded. Old Father Aragon, whom Gordon
knew well from his earlier stays, invited us into the vestry for
a glass of tequila.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>A Mushroom Ceremony </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; As we returned home to Herlinda's house toward
evening, María Sabina had already arrived there with a large
company, her two lovely daughters, Apolonia and Aurora (two
prospective <i>curandera</i>s), and a niece, all of whom brought
children along with them. Whenever her child began to cry,
Apolonia would offer her breast to it. The old curandero Don
Aurelio also appeared, a mighty man, one-eyed, in a
black-and-white patterned serape (cloak). Cacao and sweet pastry
were served on the veranda. I was reminded of the report from an
ancient chronicle which described how <i>chocolatl</i> was drunk
before the ingestion of <i>teonanácatl</i>. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After the fall of darkness, we all proceeded into
the room in which the ceremony would take place. It was then
locked up-that is, the door was obstructed with the only bed
available. Only an emergency exit into the back garden remained
unlatched for absolute necessity. It was nearly midnight when the
ceremony began. Until that time the whole party lay, in darkness
sleeping or awaiting the night's events, on the bast mats spread
on the floor. María Sabina threw a piece of <i>copal</i> on the
embers of a brazier from time to time, whereby the stuffy air in
the crowded room became somewhat bearable. I had explained to the
<i>curandera</i> through Herlinda, who was again with the party
as interpreter, that one pill contained the spirit of two pairs
of mushrooms. (The pills contained 5.0 mg synthetic psilocybin
apiece.) <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; When all was ready, María Sabina apportioned the
pills in pairs among the grown-ups present. After solemn smoking,
she herself took two pairs (corresponding to 20 mg psilocybin).
She gave the same dose to Don Aurelio and her daughter Apolonia,
who would also serve as <i>curandera</i>. Aurora received one
pair, as did Gordon, while my wife and Irmgard got only one pill
each. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; One of the children, a girl of about ten, under the
guidance of María Sabina, had prepared for me the juice of five
pairs of fresh leaves of <i>hojas de la Pastora</i>. I wanted to
experience this drug that I had been unable to try in San José
Tenango. The potion was said to be especially active when
prepared by an innocent child. The cup with the expressed juice
was likewise incensed and conjured by María Sabina and Don
Aurelio, before it was delivered to me. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; All of these preparations and the following
ceremony progressed in much the same way as the consultation with
the <i>curandera</i> Consuela Garcia in San José Tenango. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After the drug was apportioned and the candle on
the &quot;altar&quot; was extinguished, we awaited the effects in
the darkness. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Before a half hour had elapsed, the <i>curandera</i>
murmured something; her daughter and Don Aurelio also became
restless. Herlinda translated and explained to us what was wrong.
María Sabina had said that the pills lacked the spirit of the
mushrooms. I discussed the situation with Gordon, who lay beside
me. For us it was clear that absorption of the active principle
from the pills, which must first dissolve in the stomach, occurs
more slowly than from the mushrooms, in which some of the active
principle already becomes absorbed through the mucous membranes
during chewing. But how could we give a scientific explanation
under such conditions? Rather than try to explain, we decided to
act. We distributed more pills. Both <i>curandera</i>s and the
curandero each received another pair. They had now each taken a
total dosage of 30 mg psilocybin. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After about another quarter of an hour, the spirit
of the pills did begin to yield its effects, which lasted until
the crack of dawn. The daughters, and Don Aurelio with his deep
bass voice, fervently answered the prayers and singing of the <i>curandera</i>.
Blissful, yearning moans of Apolonia and Aurora, between singing
and prayer, gave the impression that the religious experience of
the young women in the drug inebriation was combined with
sensual-sexual feelings. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In the middle of the ceremony María Sabina asked
for our request. Gordon inquired again after the health of his
daughter and grandchild. He received the same good information as
from the <i>curandera</i> Consuela. Mother and child were in fact
well when he returned home to New York. Obviously, however, this
still represents no proof of the prophetic abilities of both <i>curandera</i>s.
<br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Evidently as an effect of the <i>hojas</i>, I found
myself for some time in a state of mental sensitivity and intense
experience, which, however, was not accompanied by
hallucinations. Anita, Irmgard, and Gordon experienced a euphoric
condition of inebriation that was influenced by the strange,
mystical atmosphere. My wife was impressed by the vision of very
distinct strange line patterns. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; She was astonished and perplexed, later, on
discovering precisely the same images in the rich ornamentation
over the altar in an old church near Puebla. That was on the
return trip to Mexico City, when we visited churches from
colonial times. These admirable churches offer great cultural and
historical interest because the Indian artists and workmen who
assisted in their construction smuggled in elements of Indian
style. Klaus Thomas, in his book <i>Die kunstlich gesteuerte
Seele</i> [The artificially steered mind] (Ferdinand Enke Verlag,
Stuttgart, 1970), writes about the possible influence of visions
from psilocybin inebriation on Meso-American Indian art:
&quot;Surely a cultural-historical comparison of the old and new
creations of Indian art . . . must convince the unbiased
spectator of the harmony with the images, forms and colors of a
psilocybin inebriation.&quot; The Mexican character of the
visions seen in my first experience with dried Psilocybe mexicana
mushrooms and the drawing of Li Gelpke after a psilocybin
inebriation could also point to such an association. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As we took leave of María Sabina and her clan at
the crack of dawn, the <i>curandera</i> said that the pills had
the same power as the mushrooms, that there was no difference.
This was a confirmation from the most competent authority, that
the synthetic psilocybin is identical with the natural product.
As a parting gift I let María Sabina have a vial of psilocybin
pills. She radiantly explained to our interpreter Herlinda that
she could now give consultations even in the season when no
mushrooms grow. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; How should we judge the conduct of María Sabina,
the fact that she allowed strangers, white people, access to the
secret ceremony, and let them try the sacred mushroom? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; To her credit it can be said that she had thereby
opened the door to the exploration of the Mexican mushroom cult
in its present form, and to the scientific, botanical, and
chemical investigation of the sacred mushrooms. Valuable active
substances, psilocybin and psilocin, resulted. Without this
assistance, the ancient knowledge and experience that was
concealed in these secret practices would possibly, even
probably, have disappeared without a trace, without having borne
fruit, in the advancement of Western civilization. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; From another standpoint, the conduct of this <i>curandera</i>
can be regarded as a profanation of a sacred custom-even as a
betrayal. Some of her countrymen were of this opinion, which was
expressed in acts of revenge, including the burning of her house.
<br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The profanation of the mushroom cult did not stop
with the scientific investigations. The publication about the
magic mushrooms unleashed an invasion of hippies and drug seekers
into the Mazatec country, many of whom behaved badly, some even
criminally. Another undesirable consequence was the beginning of
true tourism in Huautla de Jiménez, whereby the originality of
the place was eradicated. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Such statements and considerations are, for the
most part, the concern of ethnographical research. Wherever
researchers and scientists trace and elucidate the remains of
ancient customs that are becoming rarer, their primitiveness is
lost. This loss is only more or less counterbalanced when the
outcome of the research represents a lasting cultural gain. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; From Huautla de Jiménez we proceeded first to
Teotitlán, in a breakneck truck ride along a half-paved road,
and from there went on a comfortable car trip back to Mexico
City, the starting point of our expedition. I had lost several
kilograms in body weight, but was overwhelmingly compensated in
enchanting experiences. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The herbarium samples of <i>hojas de la Pastora</i>,
which we had brought with us, were subjected to botanical
identification by Carl Epling and Carlos D. Jativa at the
Botanical Institute of Harvard University in Cambridge,
Massachusetts. They found that this plant was a hitherto
undescribed species of <i>Salvia</i>, which was named <i>Salvia</i>
<i>divinorum</i> by these authors. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The chemical investigation of the juice of the
magic sage in the laboratory in Basel was unsuccessful. The
psychoactive principle of this drug seems to be a rather unstable
substance, since the juice prepared in Mexico and preserved with
alcohol proved in self-experiments to be no longer active. Where
the chemical nature of the active principle is concerned, the
problem of the magic plant <i>ska María Pastora</i> still awaits
solution.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<hr width="50%">

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; So far in this book I have mainly described my
scientific work and matters relating to my professional activity.
But this work, by its very nature, had repercussions on my own
life and personality, not least because it brought me into
contact with interesting and important contemporaries. I have
already mentioned some of them&#151;Timothy Leary, Rudolf Gelpke,
Gordon Wasson. Now, in the pages that follow, I would like to
emerge from the natural scientist's reserve, in order to portray
encounters which were personally meaningful to me and which
helped me solve questions posed by the substances I had
discovered. </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <a href="child7.html"><p>Chapter 7</a> <!--webbot
    bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
    tag="BODY" startspan --><p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a>
    | <a href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
    href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>
    <p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
    href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
    href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
    <!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="63531" --> </p>
</blockquote>
</body>
<!--
 This file is transmitted under the "Fair Use" rulings regarding the 1976 Copyright Act for NON-profit academic and general information purposes. -->
</html>
</DOC>