
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B030-185</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065306 text/html 20371
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:52:55 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:27 GMT
Content-length: 20152
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Chapter 4</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>4.&nbsp; &nbsp; The sound of one hand clapping</h2>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A spark touches off an explosion. But the explosion
is not simply a product or property of the spark. If one opens a
window and looks at the view, one does not equate the view with
the window; one does not suppose that the window <i>caused</i>
the view. In the same sense, LSD has been described as a chemical
key which opens some window in the mind. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Similarly, electric shock may awaken a mental
patient to the &quot;reality&quot; of the common-sense world, but
nobody will say that the common-sense world is a product of the
shock. By the same token, it could be argued that LSD awakens
normal men to a still greater reality&#151;and that it does so by
means of a chemical shock which liberates the mind from ingrained
thought patterns based on verbal abstractions and the
memory-forethought habit. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Our normal mode of thinking can be described as
survival-thinking. We see a traffic signal, and we think
&quot;stop&quot; rather than &quot;pretty red light.&quot;
Furthermore, since our mind is designed to act upon things, we
normally limit our perception to those things we wish to act
upon. This is known as attention, a form of consciousness in
which awareness is brought to a sharp but limited focus; we see
what we have to see, and we see it the way we need to see it.
Both abstraction (&quot;stop&quot;) and attention are designed
for action, and so we view the world in terms of our action upon
it. Along these same lines, Huxley described the brain and
nervous system as a &quot;reducing valve&quot; which receives the
flood of sensory input and filters out all that which is not
necessary for action, and therefore for survival; were it not for
this, we could not function in the world as we know it. To
function, we must deceive ourselves as to the actual nature of
reality&#151;a form of adaptation which LSD researcher Willis W.
Harman has termed cultural hypnosis. &quot;We are all hypnotized
from infancy,&quot; wrote Harman, who went on to propose that
this was just another way in which to describe enculturation. We
accept suggestions from the environment&#151;from our parents and
society&#151;and these suggestions shape the manner of our
perception; finally, we perceive things in a state of hypnosis:
not as they are, but as we are told to see them. Thus the child
first sees the traffic signal as a pretty red light, which it is;
but soon he learns to see it another way&#151;as an
abstraction&#151;or else is run down by a truck. And so it must
be. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Genius, however, has been defined as looking at
things in just a slightly different way. Perhaps the truth of the
matter is that genius looks at things more as they actually are:
the genius is not completely hypnotized but only partly so.
Reality is still reality, after all, and it does no harm perhaps
to steal an occasional glance at it, if only to satisfy ourselves
that it still exists. LSD presumably allows us to do this by
breaking the trance; it enables us, in Huxley's term, to become
Mind at Large. The reducing valve is shut down, attention is
scattered, and we are back again in the real world&#151;happy and
helpless. Comparing survival awareness and psychedelic awareness,
Orientalist Alan W. Watts has suggested the analogy of a
spotlight and a floodlight, and the analogy may be an apt one; it
is true that the psychedelic subject often will focus his
attention for long periods upon some object of delight&#151;a
flower, perhaps, or a crack in a wall&#151;but as Watts put it,
this is an unprogrammed mode of attention in which one looks <i>at</i>
things rather than <i>for</i> things: the world is not chopped
into pieces for purposes of action or cause-and-effect analysis.
In any case, LSD from this point of view is simply a
trance-breaking snap of the fingers&#151;and the same applies to
any chemical agent which might be involved in ordinary religious
experience. The chemical does not determine the experience, it
merely permits it. In this connection, we may read a certain
significance into one of the LSD cultist's familiar expressions,
&quot;turned on.&quot; We turn on a radio and hear an orchestra
playing <i>Vienna Bonbons</i>, and of course the music was there
in the room all the time, and the music would be there even if
the radio were not; the radio simply allows us to hear the music.
The comparison is all the more valid if, as indicated earlier,
LSD in fact does quit the brain after triggering its chain of
metabolic processes, and it may be significant in this connection
that some cultists say they have learned to turn on without
drugs. And finally there is an interesting piece of evidence that
has come to us all the way from Japan. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; To produce the sudden insight called <i>satori</i>,
many Zen Buddhists in Japan contemplate a
&quot;mind-murdering&quot; form of riddle called the <i>koan</i>.
(What is the sound of one hand clapping? What was your original
face before you were born?) These riddles of course defy logic,
and that is just what they are supposed to do; they are designed
to break down the rational intellect, just as LSD does, and thus
provide the student with a new viewpoint. If asked to explain
ultimate reality, a Zen master might kick a ball&#151;or slap his
pupil in the face. And the idea is that ultimate reality has
nothing to do with words or logic: it is raw existence in the
here and now. <i>Satori</i> is in fact remarkably similar to
psychedelic experience, if not indeed identical, and it is
produced by a form of shock which is neither chemical nor
electrical but intellectual&#151;or at least mental. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Still, the non-physical explanations of psychedelic
experience raise many questions. If psychedelics simply awaken a
subject to reality, why does the subject invariably return to his
trance-state after a predictable interval? Why will another
chemical terminate an experience? And what of psychosomatic
medicine? Doesn't it suggest the possibility at least that Zen
Buddhists and self-starting cultists have developed a capacity to
influence their metabolism: that they somehow initiate a
biochemical reaction which in turn initiates their experience?
The issue of chemistry cannot be avoided, it seems; psychedelic
cultists and religionists alike should be prepared to face
squarely the possibility or even probability that their
metaphysical systems are in fact inexorably linked to
biochemistry. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This is not a new question; it is one of those very
old questions we referred to earlier. And it revolves around the
musty dispute between the materialists, who say that the soul or
psyche is just an aspect or property of the material body,
nothing more, and the dualistic idealists, who make a clear
distinction between spirit on the one hand and matter on the
other. According to the idealists, the soul merely inhabits the
body, and it survives the body after death. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; William James met the problem head on more than six
decades ago in <i>The Varieties of Religious Experience</i>. He
wrote sardonically: &quot;Medical materialism finishes up Saint
Paul by calling his vision on the road to Damascus a discharging
lesion of the occipital cortex, he being an epileptic.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; James himself had participated in experiments with
nitrous oxide (laughing gas). This turn-of-the-century
psychedelic produced what James referred to as the anesthetic
revelation, and far from convincing him that religion was mere
chemistry, it indicated to James that there were unfathomed
realms of consciousness which &quot;forbid a premature closing of
our accounts with reality.&quot; James scoffed at
&quot;superficial medical talk&quot; about hypnoid states, and he
asserted that medical materialism was &quot;altogether illogical
and inconsistent.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Why? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; If <i>all</i> states of mind are caused by some
organic condition, then one &quot;could as easily argue that the
liver determines the dicta of the sturdy atheist as decisively as
it does those of the Methodist.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The sturdy atheist has yet to answer that, but what
about the Methodist? With its obvious capacity to alter states of
consciousness, LSD might appear to make hash of dualistic
idealism. Even if it does, however, materialism is by no means
the only option that remains. An alternative can be found within
orthodox tradition, and this is the alternative offered by Thomas
Aquinas. One hesitates to speak for a saint, but it does seem
entirely likely that Saint Thomas would have no trouble
reconciling religious conviction with LSD or the
adrenochrome-adrenolutin hypothesis. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Dualistic idealism derives from Plato and has been
passed on to us by Saint Augustine and Descartes, among others.
But Thomistic philosophy rejects it and proposes instead the
unitary idealism of Aristotle. This affirms the reality of both
the spiritual and the material, but it does not insist that they
be viewed antagonistically&#151;or indeed as separate entities.
One might as easily distinguish the warmth of the sun from the
sun. Mendelssohn's <i>Violin Concerto in E Minor</i> is no less
beautiful because it issues from catgut and horsehair. One does
not say, &quot;It's merely catgut&quot; or &quot;It's simply
horsehair.&quot; Nor does one listen to Fischer-Dieskau singing
Schubert and say, &quot;It's nothing more than epiglottis, after
all.&quot; In the same sense, the human personality implied for
Saint Thomas a combination of mind and matter, body and soul. He
acknowledged a physiological factor in dreams, moods, insanity.
He did believe that a certain spiritual element survives after
bodily death; but he considered this soul without its body an
insignificant phantom, and he held that human personality, as
opposed to this phantom, is an indivisible union of spirit and
matter. This view has serious implications for personal
immortality, as we shall see later. But it also provides a
framework for a religious interpretation of psychedelic
phenomena. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The supposed necessity for religion to insist upon
a soul-body dichotomy traces back to that original sin of the
I-It mind, dualism. And it also reflects a primitive line of
reasoning which Sir James Frazer described in The Golden Bough:
&quot;As the savage commonly explains the processes of inanimate
nature by supposing that they are produced by living beings
working in or behind the phenomena, so he explains the phenomena
of life itself. If an animal lives and moves, it can only be, he
thinks, because there is a little animal inside which moves it:
if a man lives and moves, it can only be because he has a little
man or animal inside who moves him. The animal inside the animal,
the man inside the man, is the soul.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Thus the Huron Indians supposed the soul had a head
and body, arms and legs; for the Nootka the soul was a little
fellow who stood erect inside the head, and whenever he fell
over, you lost your senses; for many primitives the soul was a
manikin exactly resembling its possessor, and it was proper to
speak of fat souls and thin souls, or long souls and short souls.
The soul could escape through the natural openings of the body;
the Marquesans therefore would hold the mouth and nose of a dying
person, and the Wakelbura of Australia would stick hot coals in
the ears of a corpse to allow themselves a running start before
the dead man's ghost took after them. The soul also could escape
in sleep and wander about, so the children of Transylvania were
instructed to sleep with their mouths shut, and it was bad form
to awaken anybody suddenly&#151;or worse yet, to move the body of
a sleeper. In Bombay it was tantamount to murder to alter the
appearance of a sleeper, painting a man's face perhaps or adding
mustaches to a slumbering woman. Such notions may well amuse us,
but one might ask how they differ in essence from the basic
assumption of dualistic idealism. That assumption has always been
difficult to defend, and there is perhaps no compelling reason
for us to defend it. The proposition that spirit <i>is</i> a
property of matter has assumed importance only because the
dualists have been so outspoken in their insistence that spirit
is <i>not</i> a property of matter. Once you grant the former
proposition, it loses all its force as an anti-religious
argument. That chorus of &quot;merely&quot; and
&quot;simply&quot; and &quot;nothing more than&quot; becomes
about as meaningful as the &quot;nevermore&quot; which Poe's
raven was trained to repeat. We do not even know, really, what
matter actually <i>is</i>, and as far as Thomism is concerned,
for example, LSD apparently does nothing to destroy the religious
premise&#151;as James defined it. If anything, it strengthens the
premise. From this point of view, it matters not that mystical
experience has a chemical aspect. To say that it is physical as
well as psychical is to say nothing at all. &quot;Of course it
is,&quot; Saint Thomas might well reply. &quot;And what of
that?&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In fact, some theologians and scientists alike
regard LSD as a kind of telescope with which to scan the
deep-space regions of the spirit: a discovery which will enable
man to gain a far greater understanding of his religious
instinct. Now mysticism can be produced in the laboratory. It can
be analyzed under experimental conditions with proper controls.
And some have predicted this could lead to an eventual
reconciliation of science and religion: to a science of religions
if not a scientific religion or indeed a religious science. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; That could be a bit optimistic, and it might appear
to patronize religion. Considering their contrary viewpoints, it
might be asked whether the rational is suited to study the
instinctive any more than the instinctive is suited to study the
rational. But perhaps there is some hope for an accommodation. As
religions professor G. Ray Jordan, Jr., put it, there is a chance
at least that intensive research with LSD &quot;might do much to
provide empirical proof of a primary beingness in some sense
conscious which is the mystical or intuitive base and perhaps
goal of man's religious aspirations and behavior.&quot; That goes
directly to the heart of the matter: the possibility that there
is such a thing as absolute Being (not to be confused, by the
way, with a Being) and that this gives life its direction and
purpose. Absolute Being in this sense means an ultimate nature,
either realized or potential&#151;as an oak tree has the ultimate
nature of an oak tree (realized), and an acorn has the ultimate
nature of an oak tree (potential). If it could be demonstrated
that absolute Being exists in the universe, this would of course
knock the existentialist props from Sartre's basic proposition.
(Incidentally, it is interesting to note that Sartre once
participated in a mescaline experiment under psychiatric
supervision, and he did not like it at all, as Masters and
Houston report the incident in their excellent study, <i>The
Varieties of Psychedelic Experience</i>. When Simone de Beauvoir
telephoned the hospital to ask how he was doing, Sartre told her
unhappily he was fighting a losing battle with a devilfish. ) <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As for the common future of science and religion,
there is another possibility, and it was suggested long ago in <i>The
Golden Bough</i>. Sir James considered science a natural
outgrowth of religion, and in fact he traced a line of
development from magic to religion to science. As Sir James saw
it, magic was actually a primitive form of science; it was based
on the assumption that there were immutable laws to the universe
and that man could control them. Thus magicians fearlessly
ordered the gods about, threatening to kill them or bash their
heads if they did not obey. But there was a fatal flaw to magic,
and this lay &quot;not in its general assumption of a sequence of
events, determined by law, but in its total misconception of the
nature of the particular laws.&quot; In the course of time the
wiser magicians realized their spells were not working, and they
concluded the gods must be running the show after all. Thus the
Age of Magic became the Age of Religion; the magicians became
priests, and they prayed to the gods they had sought to command.
The point is that magic preceded religion &quot;and that man
essayed to bend nature to his wishes by the sheer force of spells
and enchantments before he strove to coax and mollify a coy,
capricious, or irascible deity by the soft insinuation of prayer
and sacrifice.&quot; But then man discovered new laws, and these
truly seemed to work; the priests became proud magicians again,
and the Age of Religion became the Age of Science. Sir James
thought this was well and good, as it should be. But he added: <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; &quot;Yet the history of thought should warn us
against concluding that because the scientific theory of the
world is the best that has yet been formulated, it is necessarily
complete and final.... In the last analysis magic, religion, and
science are nothing but theories of thought; and as science has
supplanted its predecessors, so it may hereafter be itself
superseded by some more perfect hypothesis, perhaps by some
totally different way of looking at the phenomena . . . of which
we in this generation can form no idea.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Today's magicians have found perhaps that their
spells do not work quite as they had hoped. Members of the drug
movement in turn may find Sir James's words prophetic, suggesting
that psychedelic insight can supersede both science and religion
as we presently understand them. Certainly the cultists imagine
that they have just the thing Sir James indicated might be
necessary: a totally different way of looking at phenomena. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Curiously perhaps, scientists have seemed somewhat
more receptive to the idea than have religionists. Among the
latter, there are those who deny that psychedelics offer any
insight into the actual nature of deity or cosmos. </p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | <a
    href="braden5.htm">Chapter 5</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>