
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-45</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B003-159</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc9a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133821 text/html 28237
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:38:13 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:26:08 GMT
Content-length: 28019
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Recommendations for the Regulation of Selected Chemicals
and Con</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Consultant Paper: Recommendations for the Regulation of
Selected Chemicals and Controlled Substance Analogs </h2>

<p>By Frank Monastero. Submitted: September 1985. Frank Monastero
retired in 1985, having served as the Chief of Operations of the
Drug Enforcement Administration. </p>

<p>As we can see from media reports, cocaine has fast become the
nation's number one drug abuse problem. The supply of cocaine
coming from South America has reached overwhelming proportions.
In 1985 alone the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) estimates
seizures will reach 50,000 pounds, and this, of course, does not
account for that part of the supply that ultimately reaches the
more than 20 million regular users. </p>

<p>Another facet of the drug abuse problem, which could grow as
rapidly if not addressed promptly, is that of controlled
substance analogs, known as &quot;designer drugs.&quot; These are
clandestinely produced substances not covered by the Controlled
Substances Act because of their chemical structure. </p>

<p>Most drugs, including those manufactured illicitly, are
produced at least in part from commercially available chemicals.
The purpose of this paper is to examine the feasibility and
desirability of regulating certain of these chemicals. It will
also analyze how to curtail illicit production and examine what
legal mechanism would be effective to control the manufacture of
synthetic analogs (designer drugs), produced for illicit
purposes. </p>

<p>Cocaine abused in the United States has its origin from the
coca bush, a very hardy plant, grown in certain areas of South
and Central America. As in the case with almost all drugs,
whether produced from plants or totally synthetic, one or more
precursors, reagents or solvents is used in the process. These
chemicals are defined as follows: a precursor is a raw material
used in the production of a controlled substance that becomes
part of the finished product; a reagent reacts chemically with
one or more precursors but does not become part of the finished
product; a solvent, which does not react chemically with a
precursor or reagent and does not become part of the finished
product, is used to dissolve solid precursors or reagents, to
dilute reaction mixtures, and to separate and purify other
chemicals. For example, a precursor for cocaine is coca leaves, a
reagent is sulfuric acid, and a solvent used in the manufacturing
process is acetone. With respect to methamphetamine, a precursor
is phenyl-2-propanone, a reagent is sulfuric acid, and a solvent
is methanol. It is important to understand that, in the case of
these and other controlled substances, there are many other
precursors, reagents and solvents, which can easily be
substituted to produce the same final product. </p>

<p>With some exceptions only the final product drug itself, is a
controlled substance. Many of the chemicals used to produce or
refine illicit drugs are needed in industry to produce a myriad
of items and are produced in tremendous quantities. Controlling
their distribution would, in most cases, be impossible and
probably undesirable because of the cost alone. Acetone, for
instance, which is used as a solvent in processing opium and coca
leaves, is used to make paints, lubricants, pharmaceuticals,
cosmetics and agricultural products. </p>

<p>Although controlling all precursors, reagents and solvents
used to manufacture illicit drugs is neither desirable nor
feasible, the idea of controlling certain chemicals has merit. In
fact, some chemicals are now subject to regulation. Piperidine is
a precursor to the controlled substance phencyclidine, commonly
known as PCP, which can have serious physical and psychological
consequences when abused. Piperidine is subject to reporting
requirements under the Controlled Substances Act, although its
possession and distribution are not subject to penalties, as is
the case with the possession and distribution of PCP. Forms
recording the sale of piperidine and the purchaser's name must be
maintained for two years. Anyone who sells piperidine must report
the sale. This reporting procedure allows DEA to monitor sales of
piperidine and to investigate those sales recognized as
suspicious by either DEA or the seller. As a result of concerted
efforts begun in late 1984, DEA has seized four clandestine PCP
laboratories and has located at least ten operations that
received chemicals from legitimate channels by posing as
legitimate businesses. In one case a manufacturer shipped a
substantial amount of piperidine to a &quot;chemical
company&quot; over an extended period, all in good faith based on
the company's name. A check of the address by DEA showed it to be
an auto repair shop. </p>

<p>Precursors, reagents and solvents are used to manufacture many
drugs, including synthetic analogs, drugs so close in structure
to controlled substances that they create virtually the same
effect for the user. These are not covered under the Controlled
Substances Act because of minor differences in molecular
structure. Synthetic analogs, commonly known as &quot;designer
drugs,&quot; pose particular health threats. </p>

<p>The production of controlled substance analogs,
pharmacologically active, chemically related substances, to avoid
the laws regulating controlled substances, was first observed in
the mid-1960's with the synthesis of amphetamine analogs of
mescaline, such as MDA and others. Some of this group of
hallucinogenic amphetamines sold on the illicit market were
brought under the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, a predecessor to
the Controlled Substances Act. Others in the group were
subsequently controlled under the Controlled Substances Act after
its passage in 1970. Later three PCP analogs were controlled. </p>

<p>The process of designing analogs is, therefore, not new, and
the formulas are not primarily a phenomenon of clandestine
laboratories. Most of these drugs were developed by legitimate
pharmaceutical chemists in search of better medicinal agents
through the testing of numerous analogs of a parent compound. It
is not surprising, therefore, that some of their precursors have
names such as N-(1-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl)-aniline (for
fentanyl) or N-[1-(2-phenylisopropyl)]-4-piperidinone-4-one (for
alpha-methylfentanyl). These analogs, in many cases, mimic the
qualitative actions of the original compound but may vary in
potency or duration of action. Thus, there is a need to deal both
with the problem of chemicals used in the production of illicit
drugs and with the problem of controlled substance analogs. </p>

<p>Factors Affecting the Regulation of Chemicals </p>

<p>There are in excess of 200 precursors, reagents and solvents
used in the production of the 37 most commonly abused substances.
Among these are amphetamines, barbiturates, cocaine, Diazepam,
hash oil, heroin, LSD, MDA, PCP and methaqualone. In considering
what should be regulated two factors are most significant: (1)
How common is the chemical interest? (2) How great is the
workload to track the needed information? Each situation must be
examined individually, if the objective is to reach an ultimate
solution for each drug. </p>

<p>It is quickly apparent that there is no ultimate, universal
solution to absolute chemical control for all drugs. Acetone and
ether, although widely used, are subject to tracing. Piperidine,
less available commercially, is easily synthesized. The first
conclusion might well be that if the source of the chemical is
known and that source will identify and report suspicious sales,
the investigator will be able to pursue the investigation.
Obviously, this will not help when all chemicals can be obtained
from illicit sources. But when the source will provide assistance
or at least when sales information is available for review,
tracing can be attempted. </p>

<p>The problem then becomes one of resources. How much
information can be reviewed and how many people are available to
pursue leads. These are very significant factors to consider. If,
indeed, all chemicals used in the production of controlled
substances were reported it is unlikely the responsible agency
could cull the most suspicious orders, let alone investigate
them. The computer input itself would be substantial.
Furthermore, the drug abuse situation is constantly changing, and
a chemical, not of interest today, might be a prime target as a
new drug emerges. </p>

<p>Case Study: Ether </p>

<p>Because cocaine abuse is a serious problem in the United
States at this time and because an increasing number of cocaine
laboratories are being seized, it is important to examine the
chemical control of cocaine. To refine coca, dried leaves are
moistened with an alkaline solution, such as lime water, sodium
or potassium carbonate. The moistened leaves are soaked in
kerosene, which extracts cocaine and similar compounds. The
kerosene is extracted with aqueous sulfuric acid, and the acid
neutralized with limestone or lime. After the cocaine
precipitates and is removed by filtering, it becomes coca paste.
To become cocaine base, the paste is dissolved in a solution of
sulfuric acid, and a solution of potassium permanganate is added
to aridize impurities. The solution is filtered to remove
impurities and manganese oxides. Anmoniun hydroxide is added to
the filtrate, and the precipitate is collected and dried, forming
the base. The base is dissolved in acetone or ether and filtered
to remove insoluble material. Concentrated hydrochloric acid is
added in acetone along with ether. Cocaine hydrochloride will
crystallize from this solution and is collected by filtration and
dried. The ratio of base to cocaine hydrochloride is one to one. </p>

<p>Because ether and acetone are readily available in the United
States, traffickers recognized the advantage of processing here,
and the number of base to hydrochloride laboratories seized
increased steadily from 3 in 1980 to 21 in 1984; as of mid-1985,
there were already 25. </p>

<p>Six reagents are used to refine cocaine: ammonia, hydrochloric
acid, lime, limestone, potassium carbonate, potassium
permanganate and sulfuric acid. The four solvents used are
acetone, ethanol, ether and kerosene. These could be targets for
monitoring or control. However, after considering the
availability and usage of each chemical, the possible targets can
be narrowed to acetone and ether. As mentioned earlier, acetone
has a number of legitimate uses. An estimated 2.5 billion pounds
is produced each year in the United States, a commercial value of
about $400 million. </p>

<p>There are 12 major U.S. producers and over 40 foreign sources.
Although usually produced from petroleum or synthesized from
benzene, there are other processes to produce it. Nonetheless,
acetone, in fact, was selected as a target, and the targeting did
produce results. Ether, likewise, has broad use, with a U.S.
production estimate of over 60 million pounds, but with only five
U.S. producers and seven major foreign sources. Ether, therefore,
represents, and did turn out to be, an even better target. </p>

<p>Early in 1982 a project was undertaken to determine how much
ether was being shipped to Colombia and to what, if any,
legitimate uses it was put. Colombia was selected because,
although most of the coca is grown in Bolivia and Peru, most of
the cocaine processing laboratories were known to be in Colombia.
The Colombian government determined that thousands of gallons of
ether were being imported annually, but that there was virtually
no legitimate need for it. Most of the ether was imported from
the Federal Republic of Germany and the United States. Through
liaison with those ether manufacturers and distributors who would
cooperate, hundreds of barrels of the chemical were tracked to
clandestine laboratories deep in the Amazon jungles of Colombia.
Many of these labs were destroyed and thousands of pounds of
cocaine were seized. In the celebrated Tranquilandia raid in
March 1984, 10,000 kilograms of cocaine paste and base were
seized and destroyed, along with thousands of barrels of
chemicals. Through court testimony and media attention, cocaine
producers have, no doubt, become aware of the detection
techniques used to locate laboratories, and they are or will take
action to avoid detection. Opportunities for a continuing supply
of ether exist through unscrupulous manufacturers and
distributors and through clandestine production from ethanol.
However, the program has been useful and demonstrates the
effectiveness of the monitoring approach. </p>

<p>Case Study: P2P </p>

<p>In addition to tracking chemicals, such as ether, another
approach is to bring certain chemicals under the Controlled
Substances Act. For experience with this approach, it is
important to examine methamphetamine and one of its precursors,
phenyl-2-propanone (P2P). Domestic methamphetamine production is
significant. In fact, during a 45 month period beginning in
September 1981, more than 50 percent of the 751 clandestine
laboratories seized by DEA were methamphetamine labs. In order to
control clandestine methamphetamine production, P2P was placed in
Schedule II of the Controlled Substance Act on February 11, 1980.
P2P is an immediate precursor (used in the step just prior to
completion) in the most desirable synthesis and was, therefore, a
good choice for targeting. Furthermore, with the exception of its
use as a cleaning solution, most of its uses are in connection
with pharmaceutical manufacturing. Annual production in the U.S.
is estimated to be about 10,000 pounds, with only two principal
domestic producers and nine foreign sources. Full control of P2P
under the Control Substances Act resulted in a significant
increase in the number of clandestine methamphetamine laboratory
operators synthesizing P2P. More than 75 percent of the
laboratories seized after passage were refluxing phenylacetic
acid and acetic anhydride with sodium acetate or pyridine. In
addition, one laboratory was synthesizing phenylacetic acid as
well. </p>

<p>Recommendations for Action </p>

<p>(1) That legislation be enacted requiring the reporting of all
sales of selected chemicals used in the production of controlled
substances, subject to public notice by the Administrator of DEA
that a particular chemical was selected for such control. This
would create a requirement similar to that affecting piperidine;
however, reporting would only be required for those chemicals
specified for a particular period of time. The requirement should
apply to the importing and exporting of the specified chemicals. </p>

<p>(2) That legislation be enacted to empower the Administrator
of DEA or some other appropriate authority to identify and add
new chemicals to the list of those requiring reporting, as it
becomes known they are being used for the production of
controlled substances. </p>

<p>(3) That DEA identify the resources needed for the
computerization, analysis and follow up on reporting and that
those resources be acquired through the budget process. </p>

<p>Controlled Substance Analogs </p>

<p>As previously stated, the controlled substance analog problem
is not new. However, their wider illicit use and the greater
recognition of their use has heightened concern. There have been
three major types of analogs available in the United States:
analogs of PCP, analogs of amphetamine and methamphetamine having
hallucinogenic properties, and the newer trend, analogs of
fentanyl and meperidine. There are, of course, hazards common to
all three groups. They are likely to contain toxic impurities.
Dosage is not consistent, i.e., one dose of a substance is likely
to contain a different amount of the active ingredient than
another. As a result, a single dose could contain a lethal amount
of the drug in question. Because they are analogs, they may well
produce toxic effects not caused by their parent drug. Another
critical consideration associated with designer drugs is the
difficulty of identifying them in the body. Recent testimony at a
Senate hearing indicated there are now only two laboratories in
the country, capable of identifying certain &quot;designer
drugs&quot; in body fluids, because standards for identifying the
drugs are not widely available. This creates two serious
problems: (1) Without the ability to detect and determine what
drugs are being used on the street it is impossible to even
identify that a problem exists let alone judge its magnitude; and
(2) without being able to determine positively what drugs has
been ingested, it is impossible to identify the correct antidote,
which in many cases could be a matter of life and death. </p>

<p>The Situation in More Detail </p>

<p>PCP was originally developed in the early 1950's as an
anesthetic for humans, but it was soon limited to veterinary use
because of its adverse side effects. Licit production ceased in
1978, and PCP is controlled in Schedule I of the Controlled
Substances Act, as are three of its analogs. They now are
recognized as having no medical use. The National Institute on
Drug Abuse has identified 35 other analogs, but none has
presented an abuse problem as far as is known. </p>

<p>Many analogs of amphetamine and methamphetamine are known to
have hallucinogenic affects. One receiving considerable media
attention recently, known on the street as &quot;Ecstasy,&quot;
is MDMA or 3,4-methylene dioxymethamphetamine from the parent
compound MDA. Its psychopharmacological effects are similar to
those of MDA, altered consciousness, increased acoustic, visual
and tactile sensory perceptions and mild intoxication. There is
considerable concern among some experts that MDMA is likely to
cause damage to the serotonergic system, which has to do with
regulating sleep, mood, sexual activity and sensitivity to
aversive stimuli. The conclusion is based on research indicating
that MDA can selectively destroy serotonergic nerve terminals in
the rat brain. First recognized in the illicit traffic by DEA in
1970, MDMA was proposed for control under the Controlled
Substances Act in July 1984 because of increasing incidents of
discovery. However, because of rapidly mounting evidence of abuse
since then and possible serious neurological damage, the
emergency provisions contained in the Comprehensive Crime Control
Act of 1984 were used, and the drug was controlled as of July 1,
1985. </p>

<p>Fentanyl is widely used by the medical community as an
analgesic and anesthetic. It was first marketed in the United
States for this purpose in 1968 and is the most popular analgesic
used in surgical procedures in this country. There are likely
several hundred fentanyl analogs, many with pharmacological
properties similar to heroin or morphine but far more powerful.
The alpha-methyl analog was the first synthetic analog drug
recognized in the illicit traffic and was associated with
overdose deaths in California in 1979. Sold on the streets as
synthetic heroin, or &quot;China White,&quot; it was placed in
Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act in September 1981,
substantially eliminating its appearance in the illicit traffic.
DEA has identified seven additional fentanyl analogs in the
illicit traffic since then, however. Interestingly, two analogs
have not been recognized in the scientific literature. </p>

<p>There are two dramatic concerns related to the fentanyl
analogs: (1) their potency; and (2) their production/profit
margin. This second element will be of obvious importance to
traditional organized crime elements. Three methyl-fentanyl, the
latest analog to appear in the illicit market, is 3,000 times as
potent as morphine and has already been responsible for over a
dozen overdose deaths in the San Francisco Bay area alone. This
is the highest rate of fentanyl related deaths to date. Dosages
for fentanyl analogs are measured in micrograms and are likely to
be less than 1 percent of the dosage unit sold to the user. The
Drug Enforcement Administration has estimated that one kilogram
of fentanyl analog could be manufactured for under $2,000 and
that this amount might equal as many as 50 million dosage units,
with a street value exceeding one billion dollars. </p>

<p>Meperidine, a synthetic narcotic used to control pain, is
frequently used by heroin users when the street supply of heroin
is low. Meperidine, known more commonly by its trade name
&quot;Demerol,&quot; is in the Controlled Substances Act,
Schedule II. Two analogs of meperidine have been found in current
use. The first apparent MPPP (1-Methyl-4-Propionoxy piperidine)
abuse came to light in 1976 when a young man synthesized what he
thought was the analog for his own use. He soon sought treatment
for symptoms of Parkinson's disease. In revealing his drug use he
provided the formula and procedures he had used. Subsequent
analysis revealed he had, in fact, created MPTP. Additional
research by a National Institute of Health grantee showed that
MPTP had produced the Parkinson's type symptoms. MPPP was first
identified by a DEA laboratory in 1982; and samples of MPPP have
been discovered to contain the neurotoxic byproduct MPTP, formed
during the synthesis of MPPP. The neurological damage produced by
MPTP is irreversible and apparently worsens with time. The State
of California has identified more than 500 people who have used
MPTP; many users thought it was a new synthetic heroin. Twenty of
those involved have been permanently crippled. A group of seven
young addicts, who appeared at a California medical center
several years ago with symptoms resembling advanced Parkinson's
disease, were unable to move or talk. Treatment with
anti-Parkinson's therapy was, according to California
authorities, probably life saving, yet the patients continued to
be severely handicapped, requiring medication every one to three
hours just to be able to eat and drink. </p>

<p>The other meperidine analog with effects similar to heroin is
PePAP (l-(2-Phenylethyl)-4-Acetyloxpiperidine). The analgesic
potency of PePAP, measured in rodents, is described as from 12 to
72 times the potency of meperidine itself. This analog has so far
been discovered in California, although a clandestine laboratory
operation in Texas may have been attempting the process but did
not succeed. </p>

<p>Proposed Legislation </p>

<p>As mentioned at the outset of this discussion, unless the
specific chemical makeup of the substance being abused can be
determined by all laboratories regularly engaged in the analysis
of substances being abuse, serious problems could go unrecognized
for long periods, even years. Those who examine for and record
overdose deaths and injuries must likewise be able to determine
the abused substance involved. Further, that information must be
collected and analyzed at a central point. There is currently
only a limited mechanism for this collection (the NIDA DAWN
system). When a situation needing attention is discovered,
enforcement authorities must be empowered to act quickly. This
means that a mechanism must exist by which these &quot;designer
drugs&quot; can be controlled under the Controlled Substances Act
and appropriate State laws. The Comprehensive Crime Control Act
of 1984 does contain such a provision. Under that statute the
Administrator of DEA can bring a drug under Schedule I for up to
one year, with a six month extension where justified, and on
emergency basis, while the normal control mechanism is in
progress. The Administrator must decide that such scheduling is
necessary to avoid an imminent hazard to public safety. Control
of the substances occurs 30 days after public notice. The
efficacy of this legislation is yet undetermined, since it was
only first used in the Spring of 1985. </p>

<p>On July 16, 1985, a bill was introduced in the U.S. Senate, S.
1437, known as the &quot;Designer Drug Enforcement Act of
1985.&quot; This proposed legislation would make it a felony to
manufacture or distribute a designer drug for human consumption.
The proposed act, which would amend the Controlled Substance Act,
reads in part &quot;(31) The term 'designer drug' as used in
section 403A means a substance other than a controlled substance
that has a chemical structure substantially similar to that of a
controlled substance in Schedule I or II.&quot; During a Senate
hearing on the legislation by the Subcommittee on Children,
Family and Drugs and Alcoholism, July 25, 1985, both the DEA
Administrator and the Administrator of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse
and Mental Health Administration, supported the bill. </p>

<p>Recommended Actions </p>

<p>(1) That DEA provide assistance to the States in acquiring
laboratory standards for use in identifying &quot;designer
drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>(2) That legislation be enacted requiring the reporting by
anyone authorized to sign a death certificate, to an appropriate
Federal authority (perhaps the Public Health Service) of deaths
caused wholly or in part from the ingestion of any substance. </p>

<p>(3) That legislation be enacted requiring the reporting to an
appropriate Federal authority (DEA) by all laboratories
performing drug analysis for law enforcement purposes: (a) the
total amount of each controlled substance as defined in the
Controlled Substances Act, received for analysis each calendar
year, and (b) immediate notice of the receipt of samples of any
substance suspected of being or found to be a &quot;designer
drug&quot; as defined in the proposed bill. </p>

<ol>
    <li>That DEA formulate model &quot;designer drug&quot;
        legislation for the States as has been done for other
        aspects of the drug abuse problem. </li>
</ol>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>