
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-45</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B034-46</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/asap/cmb1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070107 text/html 12204
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:00:53 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:34:39 GMT
Content-length: 11986
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Prescribing Controlled Substances For Pain</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_asap_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="asapmain.htm"><font size="3">ASAP - American Society for
Action on Pain</font></a><font size="2"> </font></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43622" -->

<h2>A STATEMENT BY THE MEDICAL BOARD OF CALIFORNIA: </h2>

<h2>PRESCRIBING CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES FOR PAIN </h2>

<p>On May 6 the Medical Board formally adopted the following
statement on &quot;Prescribing For Pain Management.&quot; </p>

<p>It is the first formal statement of its kind in the nation
made by a licensing board. </p>

<p>This statement was adopted after a year of testimony at
hearings held by the Board's Task Force on Appropriate
Prescribing and a day-long &quot;Summit,&quot; sponsored by
Governor Wilson, involving scores of experts from around the
country. </p>

<p>At the Board's July 28-29 meeting the members will consider
formal adoption of a set of guidelines based on this policy
statement. The guidelines. once adopted, will be published in the
October Action Report and other publications read by physicians. </p>

<p>Introduction </p>

<p>The 1993 report of the Medical Board to the Governor signalled
a new beginning in the history of medical regulation in
California. An important part of this initiative is
implementation of the recommendations made by the Board's Task
Force on Appropriate Prescribing, chaired by Jacquelin Trestrail,
M.D. </p>

<p>The Task Force was established to look into
&quot;malprescribing,&quot; one of the fastest growing categories
of physician discipline. The Board continues to be concerned that
controlled substances are subject to abuse by individuals who
seek them for their mood altering and other psychological
effects, rather than for legitimate medical purposes. </p>

<p>The Board is also concerned about effective pain management
and the appropriate medical use of controlled substances. During
the Task Force's public meetings, the members heard testimony
that some physicians avoid prescribing controlled substances,
including the &quot;triplicate&quot; drugs, for patients with
intractable pain for fear of discipline by the Board. The Task
Force recommended that the Board take a pro-active approach to
emphasize to all California physicians that it supports
prescribing of opioid analgesics (narcotics) and other controlled
substances when medically indicated for the treatment of pain,
including intractable pain. After careful review of this matter,
the Board concurs with the following statement. </p>

<p>This statement is consistent with good medical practice,
protection of public health and consumer interests, with
international treaties, federal and California law, including the
California Intractable Pain Treatment Act. </p>

<p>THE PAIN PROBLEM </p>

<p>The Board recognizes that pain, whether due to trauma,
surgery, cancer and other diseases, is often undertreated.
Minorities, women, children, the elderly and people with HIV/AIDS
are at particular risk for under treatment of their pain.
Unrelieved pain has a harsh and sometimes disastrous impact on
the quality of life of people and their families. </p>

<p>While some progress is being made to improve pain and symptom
management, the Board is concerned that a number of factors
continue to interfere with effective pain management These
include the low priority of pain management in our health care
system, incomplete integration of current knowledge into medical
education and clinical practice, lack of knowledge among
consumers about pain management, exaggerated fears of opioid side
effects and addiction, and fear of legal consequences when
controlled substances are used. </p>

<p>PAIN MANAGEMENT SHOULD BE A HIGH PRIORITY IN CALIFORNIA </p>

<p>Principles of quality medical practice dictate that citizens
of California who suffer from pain should be able to obtain the
relief that is currently available. The Board believes that the
appropriate application of current knowledge and treatments would
greatly improve the quality of life for many California citizens,
and could also reduce the morbidity and the costs that are
associated with uncontrolled pain. </p>

<p>In addition to making this statement, the Board will take a
number of steps to help make effective pain management a reality
in California. The Board has provided information to all state
physicians about new clinical practice guidelines for pain
management that have been prepared by a panel of experts
supported by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. The
Board also co-sponsored and participated in the March 18, 1994
Pain Management and Appropriate Prescribing Summit in conjunction
with the Department of Consumer Affairs on removing impediments
to appropriate prescribing of controlled substances for effective
pain management. Further, the Board will develop guidelines to
help physicians avoid investigation if they appropriately
prescribe controlled substances for pain management. </p>

<p>THE APPROPRIATE ROLE OF OPIOID ANALGESICS </p>

<p>There are numerous drug and non-drug treatments that are used
for the management of pain and other symptoms. The proper
treatment of any patient's pain depends upon a careful diagnosis
of the etiology of the pain, selection of appropriate and cost
effective treatments, and ongoing evaluation of the results of
treatment. Opioid analgesics and other controlled substances arc
useful for the treatment of pain, and are considered the
cornerstone of treatment of acute pain due to trauma, surgery and
chronic pain due to progressive diseases such as cancer. Large
doses may be necessary to control pain if it is severe. Extended
therapy may be necessary if the pain is chronic. </p>

<p>The Board recognizes that opioid analgesics can also be useful
in the treatment of patients with intractable non-malignant pain
especially where efforts to remove the cause of pain or to treat
it with other modalities have failed. The pain of such patients
may have a number of different etiologies and may require several
treatment modalities. In addition, the extent to which pain is
associated with physical and psychosocial impairment varies
greatly. Therefore, the selection of a patient for a trial of
opioid therapy should be based upon a careful assessment of the
pain as well as the disability experienced by the patient
Continuation of opioid therapy should be based on the physician's
evaluation of the results of treatment, including the degree of
pain relief, changes in physical and psychological functioning,
and appropriate utilization of health care resources. Physicians
should not hesitate to obtain consultation from legitimate
practitioners who specialize in pain management. </p>

<p>The Board recommends that physicians pay particular attention
to those patients who misuse their prescriptions, particularly
when the patient or family have a history of substance abuse that
could complicate pain management The management of pain in such
patients requires extra care and monitoring, as well as
consultation with medical specialists whose area of expertise is
substance abuse or pain management </p>

<p>The Board believes that addiction should be placed into proper
perspective. Physical dependence and tolerance are normal
physiologic consequences of extended opioid therapy and are not
the same as addiction. Addiction is a behavioral syndrome
characterized by psychological dependence and aberrant drug
related behaviors. Addicts compulsively use drugs for nonmedical
purposes despite harmful effects-, a person who is addicted may
also be physically dependent or tolerant. Patients with chronic
pain should not be considered addicts or habitues merely because
they are being treated with opioids. </p>

<p>PAIN MANAGEMENT, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND THE LAW </p>

<p>The laws and regulations of the federal government and the
State of California impose special requirements for the
prescribing of controlled substances, including requirements as
to the form of the prescription document, so as to prevent harm
to the public health that is caused when prescription drugs are
diverted to non-medical uses. For example, it is illegal to
prescribe controlled substances solely to maintain narcotic
addiction. However, federal and California law clearly recognize
that it is a legitimate medical practice for physicians to
prescribe controlled substances for the treatment of pain,
including intractable pain. </p>

<p>The Medical Board will work with the Drug Enforcement
Administration, the Bureau of Narcotic Enforcement, the Office of
the Attorney General, the Board of Pharmacy and its own
investigators in an attempt to develop policy and guidelines
based on the physician's diagnosis and treatment program rather
than amounts of drugs prescribed. </p>

<p>Concerns about regulatory scrutiny should not make physicians
who follow appropriate guidelines reluctant to prescribe or
administer controlled substances, including Schedule 11 drugs,
for patients with a legitimate medical need for them. A physician
is not subject to Board action when prescribing in the regular
course of his or her profession to one under the physician's
treatment for a pathology or condition and where the prescription
is issued after a good faith examination and where there is
medical indication for the drug. Good faith prescribing requires
an equally good faith history, physical examination and
documentation. </p>

<p>The Medical Board may identify a pattern of controlled
substance use that merits further examination. A private,
courteous and professional inquiry can usually determine whether
the physician is in good faith appropriately prescribing for
patients, or whether an investigation is necessary. The Board
will judge the validity of prescribing based on the physician's
diagnosis and treatment of the patient and whether the drugs
prescribed by the physician are appropriate for that condition,
and will not act on the basis of predetermined numerical limits
on dosages or length of drug therapy. </p>

<p>The Board hopes to replace practitioners' perception of
inappropriate regulatory scrutiny with recognition of the Board's
commitment to enhance the quality of life of patients by
improving pain management while, at the same time, preventing the
diversion and abuse of controlled substances. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_asap_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="asapmain.htm"><font size="3">ASAP - American Society for
Action on Pain</font></a><font size="2"> </font></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43622" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>