
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B005-114</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/histdrug.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033308 text/html 35954
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:32:59 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:39:35 GMT
Content-length: 35736
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The History of The Drug Laws</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<h2></h2>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/at-work.gif" align="BOTTOM">The History
of the Drug Laws </h2>

<p> This page, when completed, will contain a brief history of
the major events which have brought us to the current state of
affairs with our drug policy. Readers are invited to submit
verifiable historical items which might be included in the
library. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM"><a
href="shrthist.htm">A Short History of the Drug Laws</a>, by the
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM"><a
href="../HISTORY/histsum.htm">A Summary of Historical Events</a> </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">The
Ancient History of Drugs </h3>

<h4>Hemp </h4>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>Natural History 96(12) {Dec. 1987} &quot;How Carthage Lost
the Sea,&quot;</b> concerning the wreck of a 3rd century B.C.
Carthaginian shipwreck discovered off the town of Marsala in
western Sicily. Author Honor Frost notes (pp. 61-63): </p>

<p> The most surprising discovery, however, was the stems of a
grass whose yellow color stood out among the dunnage (the layer
of branches that protected the bottom of the hull from ballast
stones). There was so much of this plant material that we could
do no more than bag random samples for analysis at the Jodrell
Laboratory, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew...after excavating two
basketfuls of them, we made a special request for their
identification. The answer was, probably Cannabis sativa. The
doubt was due to the decay of the minute hairs that would have
differentiated these stems from two other plants: hops and
stinging nettles. Given the choice, I accept cannabis: baskets of
stinging nettles seem improbable and there is no record of Punic
hop cultivation, whereas Herodotus, writing in the fifth century
B.C., already refers to cannabis smoking. </p>

<p> Caroline T. Miller suggested in a follow-up letter
(&quot;Letters&quot;, _Natural History_ 97(7) {July 1988}) that
the cannabis found was likely the remains of extra sails/rigging
material (since hemp was a commonly-used material for this
purpose). This was refuted in an editor's note (ibid.) wherein
was noted: </p>

<p> According to Honor Frost...rope was found on the ship, but
all of it was made, not from hemp, but from a type of grass. The
two small baskets of cannabis on board would not have been
suitable or sufficient for rope making. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> Bhang (cannabis) and charas (hash) were first used in India
in rituals honoring the god Siva, who gave cannabis to mankind. </p>

<p> Contrary to popular belief, American Indians did not use
cannabis or it's derivatives, rather, they smoked a distinctive
blend of tobacco and other selected leaves and bark commonly
called kinnikinnik. </p>

<p> 1 part tobacco </p>

<p> 1 part sumac leaves </p>

<p> seasoned with the inner bark of either a willow or dogwood
tree. </p>

<p> The word 'tobacco' actually means 'pipe'. Europeans mistook
it to mean the pipes contents. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> 'They also have a tree,' the ancient text reads, 'which bears
the strangest produce. When they are met together in companies
they throw some of it upon the fire round which they are sitting,
and presently, by the mere smell of the fumes which it gives out
in burning, they grow drunk, as the Greeks do with wine. More of
the fruit is then throw on the fire, and, their drunkenness
increasing, they often jump up and begin to dance and sing. Such
is the account which I have heard of these people.' </p>

<p> This excerpt, taken from Herodotus' account of a certain
Scythian tribe, was written in the fifth century B.C. </p>

<p> Today, many archeologists and anthropologists believe it was
Indian hemp or cannabis sativa that Herodotus called 'the
strangest produce'. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> Cocaine </p>

<p> The Opiates </p>

<p> Alcohol </p>

<p> Tobacco </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">The 1700's
</h3>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>From Licit &amp; Illicit Drugs, by Consumer Reports, p.
403:</b> </p>

<p> ...In 1762, &quot;Virginia awarded bounties for hemp culture
and manufacture, and imposed penalties upon those who did not
produce it.&quot; </p>

<p> George Washington was growing hemp at Mount Vernon three
years later--presumably for its fiber, though it has been argued
that Washington was also concerned to increase the medicinal or
intoxicating potency of his marijuana plants.* </p>

<p> The asterisk footnote: </p>

<p> * The argument depends on a curious tradition, which may or
may not be sound, that the quality or quantity of marijuana resin
(hashish) is enhanced if the male and female plants are separated
*before* the females are pollinated. There can be no doubt that
Washington separated the males and the females. Two entries in
his diary supply the evidence: </p>

<p> May 12-13 1765: &quot;Sowed Hemp at Muddy hole by
Swamp.&quot; </p>

<p> August 7, 1765: &quot;--began to seperate (sic) the Male from
the Female Hemp at Do--rather too late.&quot; </p>

<p> George Andrews has argued, in <b>The Book of Grass: An
Anthology of Indian Hemp</b> (1967), that Washington's August 7
diary entry &quot;clearly indicates that he was cultivating the
plant for medicinal purposes as well for its fiber.&quot; [7] He
might have separated the males from the females to get better
fiber, Andrew concedes--but his phrase &quot;rather too
late&quot; suggests that he wanted to complete the separation
*before the female plants were fertilized*--and this was a
practice related to drug potency rather than to fiber culture. </p>

<hr>

<p> &quot;Coffee houses in England became the centres for a
certain intelligentsia and social set. There was so much argument
and discussion in the houses that spies returned to King Charles
with black stories of the seditious nature of those places. He
was advised, and attempted to have them closed. One year there
was a royal order to that effect, but within 11 days it was
withdrawn because lawyers pointed out that it curbed the basic
rights of man. The King then countered with a heavy tax on the
drink sold publicly, which resulted in a situation like some
other similar governmental prohibitions, tremendous ingenuity
being expended to reduce the tax burden and still allow coffee
for the houses.&quot; </p>

<p> Wellman, F. L. 1961. Coffee: Botany, Cultivation, and
Utilization. </p>

<p> Interscience Publ., New York. p23. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">The 1800's
</h3>

<p> Hemp </p>

<p> The Opiates </p>

<p> Cocaine Invented - 1845 </p>

<p> The Effect of the Civil War </p>

<p> The rise in the use of morphine </p>

<p> The rise in patent medicines </p>

<hr>

<p> Following her husbands assassination, Mary Todd Lincoln is
treated with cannabis while institutionalized for her nervous
condition. (Not a quote.) </p>

<p> Meeley, M.E. Jr. and R.G. McMyrtry.1983. The Insanity File:
The Case of Mary Todd Lincoln. Southern Ill. Univ. Press. </p>

<hr>

<h4>The First American Anti-Drug Law </h4>

<p> The first American anti-drug law was an 1875 San Francisco
ordinance which outlawed the smoking of opium in opium dens. It
was passed because of the fears that Chinese men were luring
white women to their &quot;ruin&quot; in opium dens. Cultural
studies of the time showed that opium dens occupied a place in
Chinese culture roughly comparable to the position that saloons
occupied in white culture. That is, most patrons went to them on
the weekends, partook of the intoxicants and went back to their
work the following Monday, with no apparent interference in their
work. There were opium addicts, of course, but, on balance, the
addiction problem didn't seem to be any worse than addiction
problems with alcohol. The usage patterns in general seemed to be
comparable to the usage patterns of alcohol. </p>

<p> The real source of the prejudice against opium smoking was
the racial prejudice against the Chinese. Opium smoking was a
peculiarly Chinese custom. White people took their own fair share
of opium in concoctions such as laudunum and any number of other
over the counter drugs, in liquid, powder, or pill form. It was
only the smoking of opium which was outlawed because that was
associated with the Chinese. History records that, like most of
the drug laws to follow it, the ordinance was massively
unsuccessful. </p>

<p> The San Francisco ordinance was followed by Federal
legislation in 1888 aimed at keeping the Chinese out of the opium
trade and placing certain restrictions on smoking opium. Again,
the laws were directed specifically at racial groups and the
perceived habits of those racial groups, not the drug itself.
Under these laws, there were no restrictions on whites engaged in
the opium trade. </p>

<p> Racial prejudice at the time ran to levels which would be
difficult to imagine today. One of the newspapers of the time
records the story of a group of white men who got drunk and got
in an argument over whether Chinese and Indians (Native
Americans) were really the same race. To test their theory, they
captured a Chinese man and a Native American and took them both
to the river and threw them in. The Chinese man drowned, while
the Native American swam to shore and escaped. On that basis,
they concluded that they were not of the same race. The newspaper
did not mention that anyone was punished as a result of the
incident. </p>

<p> Sources -- Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs,
1972 </p>

<hr>

<p> &quot;A few plants such as the potato, tomato, poppy and hemp
seem to have the power of growing with equal luxuriance under
almost any climatic condition, changing or modifying some
important function as if to adapt themselves to the altered
circumstance. As remarked, hemp is perhaps the most notable
example of this; hence, it produces a valuable fibre in Europe,
while showing little or no tendency to produce the narcotic
principle which in Asia constitutes its chief value. &quot; </p>

<p> Watt, George. 1889. Dictionary of the Economic Products of
India. Calcutta 2:105. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>The Racial Roots of our Drug Laws</b> </p>

<p> COCAINE: </p>

<p> One article in the New York Times even went so far as to say
that cocaine made blacks shoot better, that it would
&quot;increase, rather than interfere with good marksmanship...
The record of the 'cocaine nigger' near Asheville, who dropped
five men dead in their tracks, using only one cartridge for each,
offers evidence that is sufficiently convincing.&quot;(1) A
Literary Digest article claimed that &quot;most of the attacks
upon white women of the South are the direct result of the
cocaine-crazed Negro brain.&quot;(2) When Coca-Cola removed
cocaine from their drink, it was not out of concern for their
customers' health. It was to please their Southern market, which
&quot;feared blacks getting cocaine in any form.&quot;(3) The
racism went beyond blacks. When &quot;every Jew peddler in the
South carries the stuff,&quot;(4) inciting blacks to rape white
women, what choice did we have but prohibition? </p>

<p> HEROIN </p>

<p> Labor organizations played a big role in anti-Oriental
feeling. The leader of the AFL was particularly fond of bringing
up fears of Chinese opium peddlers raping young American boys and
girls: </p>

<p> According to Hill, &quot;Gompers [Samuel Gompers, President
of the American Federation of Labor 1886-1924, except for one
year] conjures up a terrible picture of how the Chinese entice
little white boys and girls into becoming 'opium fiends.'
Condemned to spend their days in the back of laundry rooms, these
tiny lost souls would yield up their virgin bodies to their
maniacal yellow captors. &quot;What other crimes were committed
in those dark fetid places,&quot; Gompers writes, &quot;when
these little innocent victims of the Chinamen's wiles were under
the influence of the drug, are almost too horrible to imagine...
There are hundreds, aye, thousands, of our American girls and
boys who have acquired this deathly habit and are doomed,
hopelessly doomed, beyond the shadow of redemption.&quot;(5) </p>

<p> Some of the original laws are particularly telling. In 1887,
Congress forbade *Chinese* to import opium, but not Americans. In
1890, they extended this law to allow opium manufacture only to
Americans. In 1909, they banned *smoking* opium.(9) Smoking the
drug (rather than drinking it) was considered
&quot;Chinese&quot;. </p>

<p> In 1901, Congress forbade the sale of opium and alcohol
&quot;to aboriginal tribes and uncivilized races&quot;, and later
extended this to include &quot;uncivilized elements in America
itself and in its territories, such as Indians, Alaskans, the
inhabitants of Hawaii, railroad workers, and immigrants at ports
of entry.&quot;(7) </p>

<p> In 1902, an American Pharmaceutical Association report said,
&quot;If the Chinaman cannot get along without his 'dope,' we can
get along without him.&quot;(8) </p>

<p> In Idaho, they took a separate route towards protecting
Whites from Chinese: In their 1887 statute, they explicitly made
it illegal for &quot;any white person&quot; to frequent a house
where opium was smoked.(10) </p>

<p> Oregon's legislators were quite honest: &quot;Smoking opium
is not our vice, and therefore, it may be that this legislation
proceeds more from a desire to vex and annoy the 'Heathen
Chinese' in this respect than to protect the people from the evil
habit.&quot;(12) </p>

<p> Harry J. Anslinger, head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics,
continued this campaign well into the twentieth century, accusing
Red China of planning a &quot;long range dope-and-dialectic
assault on America and its leaders&quot;.(11) </p>

<p> MARIJUANA </p>

<p> Marijuana prohibition started in the Southwest, where
&quot;the dirty greasers grow&quot;, as sung by soldiers under
General Pershing.(13) A Texas police captain summed up the
problem: under marijuana, Mexicans became &quot;very violent,
especially when they become angry and will attack an officer even
if a gun is drawn on him. They seem to have no fear, I have also
noted that under the influence of this weed they have enormous
strength and that it will take several men to handle one man
while under ordinary circumstances one man could handle him with
ease.&quot;(14) </p>

<p> According to the Butte Montana Standard, in 1927, &quot;When
some beet field peon takes a few traces of this stuff... he
thinks he has just been elected president of Mexico, so he starts
out to execute all his political enemies.&quot;(15) </p>

<p> The American Coalition, an anti-foreigner group, stated
&quot;Marihuana, perhaps now the most insidious of our narcotics,
is a direct by-product of unrestricted Mexican immigration.
Easily grown, it has been asserted that it has recently been
planted between rows in a California penitentiary garden. Mexican
peddlers have been caught distributing sample marihuana cigarets
to school children. Bills for our quota against Mexico have been
blocked mysteriously in every Congress since the 1924 Quota Act.
Our nation has more than enough laborers.&quot;(16) </p>

<p> According to the Missionary Educator Movement, &quot;The use
of marihuana is not uncommon in the colonies of the lower class
of Mexican immigrants. This is a native drug made from what is
sometimes called the 'crazy weed.' The effects are high
exhilaration and intoxication, followed by extreme depression and
broken nerves. [Police] officers and Mexicans both ascribe many
of the moral irregularities of Mexicans to the effects of
marihuana.&quot;(17) </p>

<p> The very name marihuana was introduced at this time to make
it sound Mexican--some interests didn't even realize that
marihuana and hemp were the same plant. Lobbyists for the
birdseed industry, for example, arrived with barely enough time
to get an exemption, because they hadn't realized that marihuana
was what they were putting in their seed(18), and Eric
Partridge's Dictionary of Slang says &quot;hemp&quot; is a slang
word for marijuana, since &quot;it resembles that
plant&quot;.&quot; </p>

<p> _______________________________ </p>

<p> 1)Dr. Edward H. Williams, &quot;Negro Cocaine 'Fiends' Are a
New Southern Menace,&quot; </p>

<p> The New York Times, Feb. 8, 1914. </p>

<p> 2)Dr. Christopher Koch, Literary Digest, March 28, 1914, p.
687. </p>

<p> 3)Richard Ashley, Cocaine: Its History, Uses and Effects, p.
60. </p>

<p> 4)&quot;The Growing Menace of the Use of Cocaine,&quot; New
York Times, August 2, 1908. </p>

<p> 5)Dr. Thomas Szasz, Our Right to Drugs, quoting a 1988 USA
Today poll (38%) and </p>

<p> a 1992 National Institute on Drug Abuse report (44%). Both
agree on the 12%. </p>

<p> 6)Herbert Hill, Anti-Oriental Agitation, Society, 10:43-54,
1973; p. 51 </p>

<p> 7)Andrew Sinclair, Era of Excess, p. 33 </p>

<p> 8)ibid, p. 17 </p>

<p> 9)Lawrence Kolb, Drug Addiction, pp. 145-146 </p>

<p> 10)Ronald Hamowy, ed, Dealing With Drugs, p. 12 </p>

<p> 11)ibid, Arnold S. Trebach, p. 159-161 </p>

<p> 12)Quoted in R.J. Bonnie and C.H. Whitebread, The Marihuana
Conviction </p>

<p> (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1974), p. 14.
</p>

<p> 13)Quoted in P. Jacobs and S. Landau, eds, To Serve the Devil
(New York: </p>

<p> Vintage, 1971), 1:241. </p>

<p> 14)Quoted in Ernest L. Abel, Marihuana: The First 12,000
Years, p. 207 </p>

<p> 15)ibid, p. 208 </p>

<p> 16)ibid, p. 211 </p>

<p> 17)Quoted in J. Helmer, Drugs and Minority Oppression (New
York: Seabury </p>

<p> Press, 1975), p. 63 </p>

<p> 18)Abel, op. cit., p. 244 </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">1900 to
1914 </h3>

<p> <b>Prior to 1905 - Unregulated sales.</b> </p>

<p> Opium was included in the USA cost of living index in 1904.
The going price was $4/pound (adjusted by CPI that becomes about
$55/pound in current terms). </p>

<p> 1905 - Increasing consumer awareness of contents of products.
Coca-Cola removes cocaine from their drink. Pepsi-Cola follows </p>

<p> The Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906 requires contents of
products to be on the label and to be pure. As a result, drug
abuse starts a steady drop which lasts almost ten years. </p>

<p> The Prohibitionist Movement </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">1914 to
1920 </h3>

<p> The Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914 </p>

<p> Few members of Congress would have dreamed that they were
passing what would later be considered a general drug prohibition
law. - Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs. </p>

<p> Alcohol Prohibition </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">1920 to
1932 </h3>

<p> The Experience of Prohibition </p>

<p> The Wickersham Commission Report </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">1933 to
1937 </h3>

<p> The End of Prohibition </p>

<h4>The Outlawing of Hemp </h4>

<p> In the ensuing story, one name stands above all the others in
importance. That name is Harry Anslinger. More than any other
single person, Harry Anslinger is responsible for our marijuana
laws and much of our drug policy today. In order to properly
understand the reasons for our drug laws as they are today, it is
necessary to understand the motives and the evidence behind
Anslinger's campaign for the drug laws. Listed below are some
excerpts from a few of the better books on this subject. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>reprinted from &quot;Marijuana in America: a scientific
confrontation&quot;</b> </p>

<p> by Dr. William D. Drake Jr. </p>

<p> Harry Anslinger was placed in charge of the treasury
department's finger-in-the-dike operation to halt liquor
smuggling in 1926. in 1926, not by coincidence, the first
anti-marijuana stories began to appear in mass-circulation
newspapers, and the yellow press had a lot of fun trying out
marijuana's front-page possibilities. the first successful
anti-marijuana campaign in the country, was waged by the morning
and evening papers of New Orleans. While the editors of these
papers did hedge their bets with the sure fire winner of racism,
the central point of their stories was that all them niggers had
found a new way to get at your (white) kids, and the secret
weapon they used was stuff called muggles (marijuana slang name).
</p>

<p> Whether or not the treasury department simulated the first
scare stories is a moot point. what did happen is that as a
result of the &quot;anti-muggles&quot; drive, local legislation
was passed swiftly in New Orleans. Interestingly enough, it was
legislation which equated marijuana, in terms of penalties, with
rape &amp; murder, the two crimes most feared &amp; fantasized at
the time by whites in their non-relations with blacks. </p>

<p> Moreover, Harry Anslinger &amp; the anti-alcohol police
bureaus, without authorization and exceeding their statutory
authority, began circularizing sympathetic newspaper reprints of
such stories. as anti-marijuana press campaigns spread, more
&amp; more local legislation was enacted to protect the
citizenry. By the time that prohibition drew to a close, an
awareness of the new drug menace had been generated among the
people, and the Treasury responded in 1930 by creating a special
Bureau of Narcotics. Harry Anslinger was appointed as
commissioner. </p>

<p> With a commendable sense of tidiness, the narcotics bureau
under Anslinger moved through the thirties reprinting articles
here, giving out insider interviews there, ALL aimed toward the
elevation of marijuana into a narcotic. This seems to have been
motivated by the fact that there were not enough people who were
into cocaine or opiates to give the bureau the kind of business
it needed to expand its budget and influence. It was the same
sort of game which Hoover played with the communist menace in the
forties &amp; fifties, and with crime in the streets in the
sixties, to expand his F.B.I. operations. but the tactics of the
narcotics bureau, while superficially crude, displayed a subtle
understanding of the workings of the federal system which is the
hallmark of talented bureaucrats in the search for power &amp;
security. Rather than expose their backsides by lobbying directly
in Congress for anti-marijuana legislation--an approach which
could be looked upon as a power grab by their jealous competitors
among federal agencies--the narcotics bureau simply stimulated
the growth of a tangled web of local level anti-marijuana
legislation, and then, about 1935, began pointing out the need
for unifying legislation on the federal level. Within two years
the bureau was home free: The Marijuana Tax Stamp Act of 1937, a
piece of unifying legislation if there ever was one, was passed
virtually unopposed by Congress. </p>

<p> After this move, Harry Anslinger continued his career until
his retirement grabbing more and more Washington power and
status. prior to his death many years later, he was also seen as
a prime mover in Joe McCarthy's similar power grab campaign
against the communists in America's workplace. At one point
McCarthy credited Anslingers style and background as an
inspirational force behind McCarthy's own political climb. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>THE ANSLINGER ERA (c) Copyright 1983 by Peter Stafford</b>
A year of considerable importance to this history is 1930, when
Treasury Secretary Andrew W. Mellon appointed his niece's cousin
Commissioner of the newly created U.S. Narcotics Bureau. Harry J.
Anslinger reigned as Commissioner for three decades. Anslinger
was to the inhibition of _Cannabis_ use what Andrew Comstock had
at the turn of the century been to the inhibition of American
sexual freedom. Although not particularly concerned about
marijuana when he took office, he soon became obsessed with
&quot;the evils&quot; of this weed, seeing a curse for humanity
in the leaves and flowers of the _Cannabis_ plant. </p>

<p> Fear about this largely unknown substance had already been
stirred up, especially in the southwestern states, where it was
used mainly by blacks and Mexicans. Prohibitions against
nonmedical usage had been enacted in California (1915), Texas
(1919), Louisiana (1924), and New York (1927). In the mid-1930s,
Anslinger did his best to escalate the fear into hysteria.
Drawing on his experience as a journalist with a stacatto,
sensationalist style, he came out with &quot;Marihuana, the
Assassin of Youth,&quot; the first in a series of articles and
books recounting the horrors committed under the weed's
influence: murder, suicide, seduction of schoolchildren by
&quot;friendly strangers.&quot; (All of his examples have since
been refuted.) </p>

<p> Once Anslinger got going, he showed little interest as
Commissioner in any news about the drug unless it could be worked
into his atrocity file on &quot;the Killer Drug,&quot; which he
claimed was &quot;a powerful narcotic in which lurks Murder!
Insanity! Death!&quot; The nation's papers loved it. By 1937,
forty-six of the forty-eight states had banned marijuana. </p>

<p> Anslinger abandoned his earlier hopes for federal
prohibition, because even he had come to doubt the
constitutionality of such a law. Someone suggested that the U.S.
might impose a &quot;transfer tax&quot; to be collected by the
U.S. Treasury. Nonpayment of the tax would constitute a felony.
In the ensuing congressional hearings, the Narcotics Bureau took
a firm line; Anslinger even told legislators, &quot;You smoke a
joint and you're likely to kill your brother.&quot; In all of the
testimony, only one person raised any substantive objection to
the Anslinger proposal. Dr. William Woodward, a legislative
counsel for the American Medical Association, argued that
_Cannabis_ in medical preparations had not been abused and that
the new provisions would cause hardship for doctors. He was
quickly hooted down. House hearings concluded with no significant
changes in the proposed bill, which then sailed through the
Senate. In August 1937, FDR, who had come into office on a
platform of repealing Prohibition, signed the Marihuana Tax Act.
In addition to imposing the tax requirement, the law also
declared _Cannabis_ a narcotic. The new penalties for its use or
distribution were five to twenty years for a first offense, ten
to forty for a second. </p>

<p> ... </p>

<p> After retiring from the Narcotics Bureau, the indefatigable
Anslinger went on to head the American delegation to the U.N.
concerned with drug use. By 1961, he managed in this capacity to
get sixty nations to sign a &quot;Uniform Drug Convention,&quot;
which pledged to end _Cannabis_ use within twenty-five years.
Signing nations can, however, drop out by request. Shortly after,
serious efforts to legalize marijuana usage got underway in the
West. </p>

<p> --Stafford, Peter, PSYCHEDELICS ENCYCLOPEDIA, 1983. Tarcher. </p>

<p> ISBN 0-87477-231-1. pp 166-168. </p>

<p> The Marijuana Tax Act </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h4>Harry Anslinger &amp; the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 </h4>

<p> <b>cited in a NIDA publication</b> </p>

<hr>

<p> &quot;...For Anslinger, the moral entrepreneur, 1936 should
have been a year of victory. In EVERY state the marihuana menace
was subjected to statutory control. But for Anslinger, the
bureaucrat, 1936 seems to have been another year of defeat. His
budgetary appropriation remained near a low point that had not
been seen in over a decade, which to some extent reflected the
general economic conditions of the time.... </p>

<p> &quot;Again in 1937 Anslinger, the moralist, would be
expected first to convince the general public that marihuana use
was evil and immoral, while Anslinger, the bureaucrat, would be
more concerned with attaining passage of legislation which would
increase the Bureau's powers and then proceed to generate
environmental support for these powers. In fact, the latter
occured. The great bulk of Bureau-inspired publicity came after
the Act, not before. </p>

<p> &quot;Faced with a steadily decreasing budget, the Bureau
responded as any organization might react: it tried to appear
more necessary, and it tried to increase its scope of operations.
As a result of this response, the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 was
passed.&quot; <cite>The FBN and marihuana -- Dickson, Bureaucracy
and morality, &quot;Social Problems&quot; (1968), pp. 152-155.</cite>
</p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>Marijuana--Assassin of Youth.</b> </p>

<p> <b>by H. J. Anslinger U.S. Commissioner of Narcotics. first
published by &quot;the American Magazine&quot; in 1937.</b> </p>

<p> Not long ago the body of a young girl lay crushed on the
sidewalk after a plunge from a Chicago apartment window. Everyone
called it suicide, but actually it was murder. the killer was a
narcotic known to America as marijuana, and to history as
hashish. Used in the form of cigarettes, it is comparatively new
to the United States and as dangerous as a coiled rattlesnake.
How many murders, suicides, and maniacal deeds it causes each
year, especially among the young, can only be conjectured. In
numerous communities it thrives almost unmolested, largely
because of official ignorance of its effects. Marijuana is the
unknown quantity among narcotics. no one knows, when he smokes
it, whether he will become a philosopher, a joyous reveler, a mad
insensate, or a murderer. The young girl's story is typical. she
had heard the whisper which has gone the rounds of American youth
about a new thrill, a cigarette with a &quot;real kick&quot;
which gave wonderful reactions and no harmful aftereffects. With
some friends she experimented at an evening smoking party. The
results were weird. Some of the party went into paroxysms of
laughter, others of mediocre musical ability became almost
expert; the piano dinned constantly. Still others found
themselves discussing weighty problems with remarkable clarity.
The girl danced without fatigue throughout a night of
inexplicable exhilaration. Other parties followed, finally there
came a gathering at a time when the girl was behind in her
studies and greatly worried. Suddenly, as she was smoking, the
thought of a solution to her school problems came. Without
hesitancy she walked to a window and leaped to her death. Thus
madly can marijuana &quot;solve&quot; one's difficulties. </p>

<p> It gives few warnings of what it intends to do to the human
brain. Last year a young marijuana addict was hanged in Baltimore
for criminal assault on a ten year old girl. In Chicago, two
marijuana smoking boys murdered a policeman. In Florida, police
found a youth staggering about in a human slaughterhouse. With an
ax he had killed his father, mother, two brothers, and a sister.
He had no recollection of having committed this multiple crime.
Ordinarily a sane, rather quiet young man, he had become crazed
from smoking marijuana. In at least two dozen comparatively
recent cases of murder or degenerate sex attacks, marijuana
proved to be a contributing cause. In Ohio a gang of seven
marijuana addicts, all less than 20, were caught after a series
of 38 holdups. the boys story was typical of conditions in many
cities. One of them said they first learned about
&quot;reefers&quot; in high school, buying the cigarettes at
hamburger stands, and from peddlers who hung around the school.
He told of &quot;booth joints&quot; where you could get a
marijuana cigarette and a sandwich for a quarter, and of the
shabby apartments of women who provided the cigarettes and rooms
where boys and girls might smoke them together. His recollection
of the crimes he had committed was hazy. &quot;when you get to
'floating', it's hard to keep track of things. If I had killed
somebody on one of those jobs, I'd never had known it. Sometimes
it was over before I realized that I'd been out of my room.&quot;
It is the useless destruction of the youth which is so
heartbreaking to all of us who labor in the field of narcotics
suppression. </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">1941 to
1945 - </h3>

<h4>World War II - Hemp for Victory </h4>

<p> Despite the fact that production of hemp (marijuana) had been
effectively outlawed in 1937, when World War II came along, the
Government suddenly discovered they needed it for basics such as
rope for suchs, and other cordage purposes. As a result, they
encouraged farmers to grow hemp (marijuana) in industrial
quantities and even granted them exemption from military duty if
they did. To encourage farmers to grow hemp (marijuana), the
Department of Agriculture produced a film titled &quot;Hemp For
Victory.&quot; This film will soon be coming to these pages in
the form of still frames of each of the significant scenes, and
the full text of the narration. </p>

<p> The LaGuardia Commission </p>

<p> The studies leading to the La Guardia Report in New York in
the early 1940s recorded nine psychotic outbreaks, of varying
duration, among a sample of 200 studied intensely. Most of these
were found to be cases of already psychotic personalities, and
one of the psychiatrists involved in the study wrote, in 1942,
'Marijuana will not produce a psychosis de novo in a
well-integrated stable person.' </p>

<p> The team who observed New York's marijuana smokers for the
period found them to be a rather passive, peaceful, and friendly
group, distinctly not prone to violence (though above average
perpetrators of petty crimes). </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">1946 -
1960 </h3>

<p> Communism and Drugs </p>

<p> Some New Questions Arise </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">1960 to
1980 </h3>

<p> The rise of the &quot;drug culture&quot; </p>

<p> The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs </p>

<p> The National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">1980 to
the Present </h3>

<p> Reagan's War on Drugs </p>

<p> A Change in the Wind </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>