
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-54</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B010-200</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/resourc.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040905 text/html 7915
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:08:59 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:01 GMT
Content-length: 7698
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Sources of Information on Drug Policy Reform</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<h1></h1>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p>Sources of Information </p>

<h2>The Consumer's Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs </h2>

<p> The Consumer's Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs is
perhaps the best-written overall view of the drug issue. It was
published in 1972 and some of the information is a little dated
but it still gives a very good picture of how we got into the
present situation. It also contains a lot of information on the
medical problems associated with illegal drugs including a
chapter on famous drug addicts. It also contains a very good list
of references which can be used as a starting point for further
research. It can be found in most good local libraries. </p>

<h2>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse </h2>

<p> The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse, published in 1973, is the largest study ever conducted by
the Federal Government on the drug issue. It is remarkable
because it was formed by President Nixon who hand-picked every
member of the commission because they agreed with his views on
drugs. Furthermore, the commission refused to even hear testimony
from advocates of legalization or decriminalization. Despite
this, they concluded that our current policy was doomed to
failure and some form of decriminalization was the only
acceptable approach. It is contained in several large volumes and
can be found in the better libraries, such as university research
libraries. </p>

<h2>Clearinghouse and Data Center for Drugs and Crime </h2>

<p> Current information on drugs and crime can be obtained
through the Clearinghouse and Data Center for Drugs and Crime
data at 1-800-666-3332. This is a Federal facility which provides
information free to anyone who wants it, including a long list of
books on drugs and crime statistics. The primary bible of crime
statistics for the Federal Government is the Sourcebook of
Criminal Justice Statistics, published every year. This book
contains several hundred pages of crime statistics including
state by state breakdowns, racial breakdowns, charts, graphs, and
other information. The book is available through the
Clearinghouse above, or through any branch of the Government
Printing Office. The cost is either free or about $20.00,
depending upon how you can get it. </p>

<p> The Clearinghouse also operates a free research service which
will look up the answers to specific questions or help you
compile information on a particular issue. They are generally
very helpful and will lead you to a lot of other good sources of
information. </p>

<h2>The Bureau of Justice Statistics </h2>

<p> The Bureau of Justice Statistics maintains an electronic
bulletin board which gives online access to a lot of the Federal
crime statistics. The BBS number is 301-738-8895 (8-N-1) 300 to
2400 baud. It is up 24 hours a day. Further information on the
BBS can be obtained by calling 1-800-732-3277 </p>

<h2><a name="DDE_LINK1">National Institute on Drug Abuse</a> </h2>

<p> 5600 Fishers Lane </p>

<p> Rockville, MD 20857 </p>

<p> NIDA clearinghouse </p>

<p> 800-729-6686 </p>

<p> The National Institute on Drug Abuse publishes a series of
research monographs every year summarizing the research on drugs
in the previous year. There is a wide variety of information
published every year, including everything from short summaries
of research projects to full-blown analyses of different aspects
of the drug problem. Included in these monographs are the current
statistics for drug deaths and other drug-related health problems
(also available through the Clearinghouse above). Interesting
items include a 1979 publication called &quot;Themes in Drug
Prohibition&quot; which details the rationale and propaganda
which has been used through the years to promote the drug war.
Let it suffice to say that the information is not flattering to
the drug warriors by any means. Another interesting piece is the
1988 study on drugs and violence which concluded that
drug-related violence increased directly as drug law enforcement
increased. The information is contained in several volumes which
often take up five shelves or more in a typical small library.
Many libraries, particularly better libraries, will contain
fairly sizeable collections of the NIDA information. </p>

<h2>The Emperor Wears No Clothes </h2>

<p> The Emperor Wears No Clothes, by Jack Herer contains a lot of
good information about the history and commercial and industrial
uses of hemp (marijuana). It contains a lot of amazing facts
which are sure to make you the life of any party with a Reagan
Republican in attendance. It costs about $14.95 and is available
from High Times Books, 1-800-858-2665. </p>

<h2>The Drug Hang-Up </h2>

<p> The Drug Hang-Up by Rufus King is an excellent history of
drug prohibition in the United States written by someone who was
a drug policy reform activist in 1951. When you read the book, it
is apparent why Mr. King became an activist. He could not stand
the outright fraud perpetrated by the drug warriors. It is
available in many local libraries or you can write to Mr. King at
1101 17th St. NW, Washington, DC 20036. It costs about $20.00. </p>

<h2>Hemp For Victory </h2>

<p> Hemp For Victory is a fifteen minute film made by the US
Federal Government to encourage farmers to grow marijuana during
World War II. Very interesting stuff. It is $14.95, available
from High Times Books, 1-800-858-2665. </p>

<h2>CSAP national resource center </h2>

<p> The CSAP national resource center offers another source of
Federal Government statistics on drug related issues:
1-800-354-8824 </p>

<h2>The Office of Minority Health </h2>

<p> The Office of Minority Health offers facts and figures on
health issues in the minority communities, some of which are
drug-related. 1-800-444-6472 </p>

<h2>AIDS </h2>

<p> Information on AIDS can be obtained at: 1- 800-458-5231 </p>

<h2>Bureau of the Census </h2>

<p> The Bureau of the Census offers statistics and facts on the
population at large, which is good for making overall statistical
comparison. Some of the information is available on CD-ROM for
easier access. 1-800-777-0978 </p>

<h2>Government Printing Office </h2>

<p> The Government Printing Office can supply (for a small fee,
usually) any documents published by the Federal Government.
1-202-783-3238 </p>

<h2>The National Center for State Courts </h2>

<p> The National Center for State Courts can supply information
regarding the status and problems of state courts. They are
located in Williamsburg, VA, and their number is: 804-253-2000. </p>

<h2>The National Center for Institutions and Alternatives </h2>

<p> The National Center for Institutions and Alternatives has a
lot of information regarding prisons and alternatives to prison.
703-684-0373 </p>

<h2>Data Resources of the National Institute Of Justice, 4th
Edition </h2>

<p> (Resource Directory). Wiersema, B., Huang, W.S.W., Loftin, C.
</p>

<p> 1990. 287 pp. NCJ 122224. Free. </p>

<p> This book contains a summary of the data resources of the
Department of Justice. A good place to start to answer most
questions. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>