
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-66</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-182</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hemp4v.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043852 text/html 9781
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:38:41 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:48:34 GMT
Content-length: 9564
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp for Victory transcript By the US Department of
Agriculture - 1942</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<h2>HEMP FOR VICTORY </h2>

<p><b>By the US Department of Agriculture </b></p>

<p><b>-- 1942 --</b> </p>

<p>This is the transcript of the film done by the USDA to
encourage farmers to grow hemp (marijuana) during World War II,
because it was a vital resource for such uses as ropes, heavy
cloth, etc. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Long ago when these ancient Grecian temples were new, hemp was
already old in the service of mankind. For thousands of years,
even then, this plant had been grown for cordage and cloth in
China and elsewhere in the East. For centuries prior to about
1850 all the ships that sailed the western seas were rigged with
hempen rope and sails. </p>

<p>For the sailor, no less than the hangman, hemp was
indispensable. A 44-gun frigate like our cherished Old Ironsides
took over 60 tons of hemp for rigging, including an anchor cable
25 inches in circumference. The Conestoga wagons and prairie
schooners of pioneer days were covered with hemp canvas. Indeed
the very word canvas comes from the Arabic word for hemp. In
those days hemp was an important crop in Kentucky and Missouri.
Then came cheaper imported fibers for cordage, like jute, sisal
and Manila hemp, and the culture of hemp in America declined. </p>

<p>But now with Philippine and East Indian sources of hemp in the
hands of the Japanese, and shipment of jute from India curtailed,
American hemp must meet the needs of our Army and Navy as well as
of our Industry. In 1942, patriotic farmers at the government's
request planted 36,000 acres of seed hemp, an increase of several
thousand percent. The goal for 1943 is 50,000 acres of seed hemp.
</p>

<p>In Kentucky much of the seed hemp acreage is on river bottom
land such as this. Some of these fields are inaccessible except
by boat. Thus plans are afoot for a great expansion of a hemp
industry as a part of the war program. This film is designed to
tell farmers how to handle this ancient crop now little known
outside Kentucky and Wisconsin. </p>

<p>This is hemp seed. Be careful how you use it. For to grow hemp
legally you must have a federal registration and tax stamp. This
is provided for in your contract. Ask your county agent about it.
Don't forget. </p>

<p>Hemp demands a rich, well-drained soil such as is found here
in the Blue Grass region of Kentucky or in central Wisconsin. It
must be loose and rich in organic matter. Poor soils won't do.
Soil that will grow good corn will usually grow hemp. </p>

<p>Hemp is not hard on the soil. In Kentucky it has been grown
for several years on the same ground, though this practice is not
recommended. A dense and shady crop, hemp tends to choke out
weeds. Here's a Canada thistle that couldn't stand the
competition, dead as a dodo. Thus hemp leaves the ground in good
condition for the following crop. </p>

<p>For fiber, hemp should be sewn closely, the closer the rows,
the better. These rows are spaced about four inches. This hemp
has been broadcast. Either way it should be sewn thick enough to
grow a slender stalk. Here's an ideal stand: the right height to
be harvested easily, thick enough to grow slender stalks that are
easy to cut and process. </p>

<p>Stalks like these here on the left wield the most fiber and
the best. Those on the right are too coarse and woody. For seed,
hemp is planted in hills like corn. Sometimes by hand. Hemp is a
dioecious plant. </p>

<p>The female flower is inconspicuous. But the male flower is
easily spotted. In seed production after the pollen has been
shed, these male plants are cut out. These are the seeds on a
female plant. Hemp for fiber is ready to harvest when the pollen
is shedding and the leaves are falling. </p>

<p>In Kentucky, hemp harvest comes in August. Here the old
standby has been the self-rake reaper, which has been used for a
generation or more. Hemp grows so luxuriantly in Kentucky that
harvesting is sometimes difficult, which may account for the
popularity of the self-rake with its lateral stroke. A modified
rice binder has been used to some extent. This machine works well
on average hemp. Recently, the improved hemp harvester, used for
many years in Wisconsin, has been introduced in Kentucky. This
machine spreads the hemp in a continuous swath. It is a far cry
from this fast and efficient modern harvester, that doesn't stall
in the heaviest hemp. </p>

<p>In Kentucky, hand cutting is practicing in opening fields for
the machine. In Kentucky, hemp is shucked as soon as safe, after
cutting, to be spread out for retting later in the fall. </p>

<p>In Wisconsin, hemp is harvested in September. Here the hemp
harvester with automatic spreader is standard equipment. Note how
smoothly the rotating apron lays the swaths preparatory to
retting. </p>

<p>Here it is a common and essential practice to leave headlands
around hemp fields. These strips may be planted with other crops,
preferably small grain. Thus the harvester has room to make its
first round without preparatory hand cutting. The other machine
is running over corn stubble. When the cutter bar is much shorter
than the hemp is tall, overlapping occurs. Not so good for
retting. The standard cut is eight to nine feet. </p>

<p>The length of time hemp is left on the ground to ret depends
on the weather. The swaths must be turned to get a uniform ret.
When the woody core breaks away readily like this, the hemp is
about ready to pick up and bind into bundles. Well-retted hemp is
light to dark grey. </p>

<p>The fiber tends to pull away from the stalks. The presence of
stalks in the bough-string stage indicates that retting is well
underway. When hemp is short or tangled or when the ground is too
wet for machines, it's bound by hand. A wooden bucket is used.
Twine will do for tying, but the hemp itself makes a good band.
When conditions are favorable, the pickup binder is commonly
used. The swaths should lie smooth and even with the stalks
parallel. The picker won't work well in tangled hemp. After
binding, hemp is shucked as soon as possible to stop further
retting. </p>

<p>In 1942, 14,000 acres of fiber hemp were harvested in the
United States. The goal for the old standby cordage fiber, is
staging a strong comeback. This is Kentucky hemp going into the
dryer over mill at Versailles. </p>

<p>In the old days braking was done by hand. One of the hardest
jobs known to man. Now the power braker makes quick work of it.
Spinning American hemp into rope yarn or twine in the old
Kentucky river mill at Frankfort, Kentucky. Another pioneer plant
that has been making cordage for more than a century. All such
plants will presently be turning out products spun from
American-grown hemp: twine of various kinds for tying and
upholster's work; rope for marine rigging and towing; for hay
forks, derricks, and heavy duty tackle; light duty firehose;
thread for shoes for millions of American soldiers; and parachute
webbing for our paratroopers. </p>

<p>As for the United States Navy, every battleship requires
34,000 feet of rope. Here in the Boston Navy Yard, where cables
for frigates were made long ago, crews are now working night and
day making cordage for the fleet. In the old days rope yarn was
spun by hand. The rope yarn feeds through holes in an iron plate.
This is Manila hemp from the Navy's rapidly dwindling reserves.
When it is gone, American hemp will go on duty again: hemp for
mooring ships; hemp for tow lines; hemp for tackle and gear; hemp
for countless naval uses both on ship and shore. Just as in the
days when Old Ironsides sailed the seas victorious with her
hempen shrouds and hempen sails. Hemp for victory. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>