
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B32-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B047-26</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132024 text/html 54706
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:20:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:51:21 GMT
Content-length: 54488
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>CHAPTER 1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE
ABUSE AND ADDICTION </b> </p>

<p> <b>US Government Office of Technology Assessment</b> </p>

<p> October 18, 1994 </p>

<p> <b>CHAPTER 1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY </b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> The abuse of licit and illicit drugs represents a major
public health problem in the United States. The costs to society
of such abuse include thousands of premature deaths annually due
to drug-related illnesses, accidents, and homicides; economic
costs related to health care, criminal justice, and lost
productivity; and the mental and physical pain suffered by
millions of Americans. Many ills plaguing the nation
today--including the AIDS epidemic, increased crime and violence,
and homelessness--in some cases, may be linked to individuals'
physical dependence on a variety of abusable substances. The
consequences of substance abuse and addiction have been felt by
people within every economic, social, racial, religious, and
political boundary. </p>

<p> What are the root causes of substance abuse and addiction?
Why and how does addiction occur? Who are the substance abusers?
What factors lead to addiction? What are the implications for
prevention and treatment? </p>

<hr>

<p> <b>ROOT CAUSES </b> </p>

<p> The Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) was asked to
identify the root causes of substance abuse and addiction. The
term root causes has been used in political discussions and
debate. To some, root causes of substance abuse and addiction are
framed in a moral context, in which decisions related to use,
abuse, and addiction are the responsibility primarily of
individuals. To others, root causes include a multitude of social
and economic problems, such as homelessness, poverty, and racism.
Many people have strongly held opinions as to what constitutes
the general root causes of substance abuse and addiction in
populations, but no consensus exists about the specific root
causes of substance abuse and addiction for particular
individuals. </p>

<p> The OTA report has four parts: necessary preconditions,
individual factors, community contexts, and policy options. The
first part, Necessary Preconditions, focuses on several factors
that are necessary for substance abuse and addiction to occur.
The second part, Individual Factors, focuses on risk and
protective factors in individuals that are thought to influence
substance use, abuse, and addiction. The third part, Community
Contexts, looks at how risk and protective factors play out in
subcultures and in major activity settings (home, school,
workplace, and recreation). The fourth part, Policy Options
addresses a range of legislative issues and options for Congress.
</p>

<hr>

<p> <b> NECESSARY PRECONDITIONS </b> </p>

<p> No single or general set of variables explains the misuse of
alcohol and other drugs for every individual; in other words
there are no &quot;root causes&quot; for substance abuse that
universally apply to everyone. Nevertheless, OTA has identified
three major sets of necessary preconditions that must be present
in order for substance abuse and addiction to occur: </p>

<ul>
    <li>biology and pharmacology, </li>
    <li>availability, and </li>
    <li>use and transitions to abuse and dependency. </li>
</ul>

<p> <b> Biology and Pharmacology </b> </p>

<p> The first major set of preconditions includes biological and
pharmacological factors, without which drug abuse and dependency
would be impossible. Underlying all alcohol and drug problems are
the actions and effects that drugs of abuse exert on the brain.
It is important to understand how drugs work in the brain, why
certain drugs have the potential for being abused, and what, if
any, biological differences exist among individuals in their
susceptibility to abuse drugs. </p>

<p> A wide range of psychoactive substances have the potential
for abuse (see box 1-1). The possession and use of several
substances (e.g., marijuana, heroin, cocaine) are illegal in all
50 states. Other addictive substances (e.g., tobacco and alcohol)
may be legally purchased, possessed, and consumed by many
Americans. Some abusable substances (e.g., a wide range of
prescription drugs) are available on a restricted basis, usually
by a physician's order, while others (e.g., inhalants) may be
legally purchased, possessed, and consumed by anybody. </p>

<p> Biological factors that contribute to substance abuse and
addiction fall into two groups: the effects drugs of abuse exert
on the individual in general, and the biological status of
specific individuals taking drugs. The effects the drugs exert
can be either acute or chronic and will vary depending on the
drug and its route of administration. Most drugs of abuse
influence the brain's reward system. The pleasurable sensations
that drug use can produce reinforce drug-seeking and drug-taking
behaviors. These actions differ with different drugs; thus, some
substances have greater potential for abuse and addiction than
others. While growing evidence suggests that the brain reward
system plays a role in the reinforcing properties of most drugs
of abuse, the precise mechanisms involved are complex and have
yet to be completely described (see figures 1-1 and 1-2). </p>

<p> Prolonged or chronic use of a substance or substances can
produce both biological and behavioral changes (some long-
lasting). Biological changes can include sensitization and/or
tolerance to a substance and, if use is discontinued, withdrawal
(see box 1-2). Behavioral changes also occur with continued drug
use. An individual's drug-craving, drug- seeking, and drug-taking
behaviors are reinforced through neuroadaptive changes in the
brain's reward system. </p>

<p> Environmental cues also play a large role in drug-seeking and
drug-taking behavior. On encountering certain environmental
stimuli (i.e., specific locations, smells, tastes), drug-craving
and drug withdrawal symptoms have been reported by former drug
users who have been drug-free for months and even years. </p>

<p> Through family, twin, and adoption studies, most researchers
agree that genetic factors play some part in the acquisition of
alcohol problems and, although less clear, other drug problems.
However, no conclusive evidence has been found to explain
precisely what is inherited or the overall importance of this
inherited material. It has been hypothesized that numerous genes
(as opposed to one) interact in complex ways, and expression of
those genes are affected by a myriad of environmental factors.
Thus, the presence or absence of a genetic factor neither ensures
nor protects against drug addiction. </p>

<p> <b> Availability </b> </p>

<p> The second set of preconditions for drug abuse and dependency
includes availability. A person cannot become a drug abuser
unless a drug is physically available. In addition, however,
availability is affected by social norms (e.g., factors within
the community conducive to drug use, including level of parental
or guardian supervision, lack of consequences for alcohol and
drug offenses, lack of alternative activities, and portrayals of
alcohol and other drug use by friends and the media as a
glamorous and healthy activity), prices (economic availability),
and personal values (subjective availability) (see table 1-1). </p>

<p> The primary focus of U.S. antidrug policy has been to attack
the physical availability of illicit drugs through law
enforcement efforts aimed at disrupting the production,
transport, and sale of drugs. While this focus has increased
drug-related arrests--nearly half of newly sentenced federal
inmates in 1991 were imprisoned on drug charges--illicit drugs
are still widely available. </p>

<p> Marketing techniques for both licit and illicit drugs can
alter social, economic, and subjective availability. Key
components of marketing include the promotion and advertising of
particular product lines to appeal to particular subpopulations
of the consuming public, development of a product line that can
be targeted to subpopulations within the larger community of
consumers, pricing strategies to attract new buyers, and
identification of retail outlets for sales. </p>

<p> Federal law regulates the merchandising of licit yet abusable
substances such as tobacco, alcohol, and prescription drugs by
placing a variety of restrictions on how such products may be
marketed. Despite current restrictions, debate continues as to
whether and how a variety of legal drugs should be marketed. </p>

<p> <b> Use and Transitions to Abuse and Dependency </b> </p>

<p> The third set of preconditions for drug abuse and addiction
is drug use, including the progression to heavier and more
harmful use. A person cannot become drug-dependent without first
using a drug and then progressing to more harmful levels of use.
Researchers have focused on stages in the progression of drug use
in several ways. They have studied stages in the initiation of
the use of different drugs, finding a sequence that moves from
the use of cigarettes and wine or beer, to the use of marijuana,
then hard liquor, and finally other illicit drugs. Because most
individuals who use drugs do not go on to abuse drugs, and
because the use of drugs at one level does not guarantee the use
of drugs at a higher level, these stages are descriptive but not
predictive. </p>

<p> Initiation is the first step in the progression to more
serious levels of drug use. Because drug use often begins during
adolescence, most drug use research has focused on drug use
initiation among adolescents. However, many individuals who
initiate drug use do not progress to harmful drug use. Also, the
factors associated with such progression may often differ from
the factors associated with initiation. Thus, the focus on the
initiation of drug use during adolescence is not sufficient for
an understanding of the progression from use to abuse and
dependency. </p>

<p> In addition to initiation, research has focused on other
identifiable stages in the full cycle of drug use and abuse,
including continuation of drug use, maintenance and progression
of drug use within a class of drugs, progression in drug use
across drug classes, and regression, cessation, and relapse
cycles. Research has also been done on the co- occurrence and
possible sequences in drug abuse and other problem behaviors,
with some studies finding that problem behaviors often precede
the onset of drug abuse. </p>

<p> <b> INDIVIDUAL FACTORS </b> </p>

<p> Much of the research on substance abuse and addiction has
focused on identifying individual risk factors for alcohol and
other drug use, specifically among adolescents and young adults
(see table 1-2). Risk factors have been identified as those
cognitive, psychological, attitudinal, social, pharmacological,
physiological, and developmental characteristics that foster
initiation of drug and alcohol use and/or abuse by an individual.
Protective factors are those characteristics that reduce the risk
of substance use and abuse and promote positive development, such
as appropriate role models, involvement in positive peer groups,
and a positive self-image and outlook for the future. </p>

<p> Because no individual risk or protective factor can be
categorized as a root cause of substance abuse and addiction, a
full analysis of each individual factor is beyond the scope of
this report. However, an overview of selected factors highlights
associations often present in substance abuse and addiction. </p>

<p> <b> Demographic </b> </p>

<p> <b> Age </b> </p>

<p> The preponderance of substance abuse research points to the
fact that children who use alcohol and other drugs before the age
of 15 have a greater likelihood of becoming problem alcohol and
other drug users, versus those youth who begin use at a later
age. </p>

<p> While most substance use and abuse occur during the
adolescent and young-adult years, older persons are not immune to
the addictive powers of these substances. For example, among
women, alcohol problems tend to appear on average several years
later than they do among men (although this trend may be
reversing). For black males, problem drinking patterns typically
occur after age 30, versus ages 18 to 25 for white males. </p>

<p> Although substance abuse problems are not exclusive to
adolescence, most prevention programs currently target youth. The
importance of these types of programs is obvious--to prevent or
decrease the use of alcohol, tobacco, cigarettes, and other drugs
by youth. Yet, adults can also be exposed to stressful life
situations, such as unemployment, divorce, or death of a spouse
or child, which could contribute to substance abuse problems. The
adult population presents unique and often overlooked challenges
for the planning and implementation of substance abuse prevention
programs. </p>

<p> <b> Gender </b> </p>

<p> Historically, the vast majority of biological and behavioral
studies were conducted on male participants; women substance
abusers were not commonly included in research studies. A
distorted picture emerged, in which women were assumed to misuse
the same substances, and for the same reasons, as men. Within the
past 10 to 20 years, however, some researchers have focused on
the causes and consequences of substance abuse problems among
women, and are beginning to report differences based on gender.
Basic gaps in knowledge remain, however, regarding substance use
and abuse among women. Until these gaps are addressed, the
inaccurate and misleading practice of transferring data garnered
from studies on men to women is likely to continue. </p>

<p> <b> Race and Ethnicity </b> </p>

<p> Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been linked
with, and often blamed for, many of the substance abuse problems
within the United States (see box 1-3). Certainly, many urban
areas have high concentrations of minorities, and within many of
these areas the prevalence of substance abuse may be high. Often
overlooked, however, is the prevalence of substance abuse
problems in suburban and rural areas throughout the United
States. In the minds of many, the link between minority
populations and rampant substance abuse is inaccurate and
derogatory. </p>

<p> Adolescent research has documented substantial racial and
ethnic differences in substance use among high school seniors. On
average, licit and illicit substance use is highest among Native
American Indian youth, somewhat lower among white and Hispanic
youth, substantially lower among black youth, and lowest among
Asian youth. However, such findings do not include populations
most likely to be excluded from self-reporting studies (e.g.,
high school dropouts). </p>

<p> Until recently, much of the analysis of substance use and/or
abuse data has concentrated on the relationship between the use
of a substance and one or two variables such as race and
ethnicity and/or educational level. Often a positive association
was found between minority populations and the use or abuse of
certain substances. While statistically correct, these analyses
can be simplistic and misleading. Clearly many risk and
protective factors interact to produce substance use and abuse.
If the majority of these variables are excluded from the
analysis, a skewed picture may arise as to the importance of
certain variables as risk factors for substance use and abuse.
Additionally, to simplify the data collection, racial and ethnic
categories are often broad. The most popular groupings are black,
white non- Hispanic, Hispanic, and other. While each of these
categories contains many distinct cultures, gross generalizations
are commonly made. </p>

<p> Race and ethnicity have not been shown to be either
biological or genetic risk factors for substance use or abuse. To
date, the preponderance of investigative studies has focused on
racial and ethnic differences in response specifically to
alcohol. Few studies have been completed on differences in racial
and ethnic biological responses to other licit or illicit drugs. </p>

<p> <b> Economic </b> </p>

<p> Are poor individuals at greater risk of developing problems
related to substance abuse? While a relatively straight forward
question, its resolution is hampered by the fact that poverty is
difficult to define and drawing conclusions concerning an
individual's potential for future substance abuse based on one or
two variables such as family income or educational level is
overly simplistic and deceptive. </p>

<p> In recent years, attention has been paid to the plight of the
urban poor, many of whom are minorities. These inner- city
communities are often riddled with high rates of crime, violence,
unemployment, and inadequate social and medical services. For
individuals living in these localities, the consequences of these
problems are serious and far reaching. </p>

<p> To assess poverty and its relationship to substance abuse
problems, some researchers have used the federal guidelines for
poverty, while others employ measures of socioeconomic status
(SES) such as educational level and household income. To date,
the largest and most comprehensive analysis of SES variables and
substance use has been accomplished by the National Institute on
Drug Abuse (NIDA). While the analysis revealed associations
between certain characteristics and patterns of substance use, it
did not reveal causality. From this analysis, a straightforward
&quot;yes or no&quot; response to the initial question linking
poverty to increased individual risk for substance use or abuse
is clearly impossible. The NIDA analysis demonstrated that the
type and quantity of an individual's substance use is correlated
with a variety of both individual as well as geographic
characteristics. Furthermore, while the NIDA study was the
largest and most comprehensive to date, some segments of the
population (e.g., homeless, dropouts, institutionalized), many of
whom were possible alcohol and drug abusers, were excluded from
the survey. </p>

<p> <b> Psychosocial and Behavioral </b> </p>

<p> Many of the identified risk and protective factors relate to
psychological, social, and behavioral characteristics. Conditions
such as aggressiveness, delinquency, and mental disorders are
often linked with substance abuse and addiction. Experiences such
as physical and sexual abuse have also been identified as
potential risk factors. While relatively little research has been
accomplished on protective factors, several elements identified
within the resiliency literature, as well as religiosity and
spirituality, have been associated with decreased substance use. </p>

<p> However, the presence or absence of specific risk factors
neither predicates nor guarantees protection from substance
abuse. In addition, consensus is lacking within the substance
abuse field as to the importance, interaction, or order of the
factors. </p>

<p> <b> COMMUNITY CONTEXTS </b> </p>

<p> A growing body of research is focusing on factors and
interventions relevant to the onset and prevention of substance
use, abuse, and dependency in the four principal community
activity settings--homes and families, schools and peers,
workplaces, and recreational settings. </p>

<p> In framing prevention programs with divergent populations,
researchers are attempting to better understand qualitative as
well as quantitative research methods, and the variety of
settings in which substance abuse and addiction can take place
and can be combated (see box 1-4). </p>

<p> Despite the promise of community-based research, several
problems exist. First, much of the research does not address
substance abuse and addiction per se, but rather risk and
protective factors that can lead to a number of outcomes,
including substance abuse and addiction. Second, research studies
vary widely in methodology, making it difficult to draw
scientifically valid conclusions. Third, rigorous evaluation of
many prevention research programs is missing, leaving the
effectiveness of such programs open to debate. </p>

<p> <b> Homes and Families </b> </p>

<p> Although American society expects families in their homes to
take the lead in dealing with substance abuse and other problem
behaviors, families in this country generally receive only
limited support in protecting themselves against substance abuse.
This situation may result in part from the belief that most
nuclear families can raise their children largely independently
and therefore do not need outside support, and in part from the
belief that teens and young adults are more influenced by their
peers. The first belief, however, is not supported by
long-standing practices in most societies, where extended
families and life-long neighbors have traditionally helped raise
children (although in the United States many parents do not have
access to these additional child-rearing resources because of
urbanization, high technology, and family mobility). And the
second belief is being questioned by growing evidence that
certain parenting practices and family intervention programs can
significantly reduce the risk of substance abuse among
adolescents and young adults. </p>

<p> A growing body of research has identified risk and protective
factors that may be particularly relevant in home and family
situations (see table 1-3). Programs that enhance protective
factors include those providing parent education, prenatal and
infant care, preschool, and social support activities that help
strengthen involved and responsive parenting. Programs that seek
to decrease the presence of risk factors include those designed
to reduce drug trafficking (e.g., community policing, clean
sweeps of housing projects), physical and sexual abuse, the
impact of negative life events (e.g., mental health counseling),
and parental neglect. Substance abuse treatment programs that
include an addict's family members also address risk factors. </p>

<p> <b> Schools and Peers </b> </p>

<p> Schools have been the target for prevention programs to
curtail drug use at school sites (e.g., Drug Free School Zones)
as well as curriculum-based programs that target drug use in the
community as a whole. Because school-age youth are especially
likely to initiate the use of alcohol and other drugs, much of
the research has focused on use, rather than on abuse and
dependency. Such research is nevertheless relevant to an
understanding of abuse and dependency, since use is a
precondition and contributor to abuse and dependency and because
even experimental use can be harmful. </p>

<p> OTA conducted the most extensive compilation and examination
of survey research on school-aged substance use to date-- 9,930
statistical analyses from 242 separate studies. The studies
reported statistical relationships between substance use and its
postulated causes. Statistical findings from the study reports
were sorted into 11 major categories and 50 subcategories (see
table 1-4), and then analyzed to identify strong, moderate, and
weak statistical relationships, as well as those that had been
insufficiently studied. The four variables that dominated as
correlates of and possible contributors to substance abuse are:
1) prior and concurrent use of substances, 2) substance use by
peers and friends, 3) perceived peer attitudes about substance
use, and 4) offers to use substances. The prominence of prior and
concurrent use is consistent with the reinforcing nature of
substance use itself. The prominence of the other three variables
emphasizes the importance of the social environment in
contributing to and reinforcing substance use among school- age
youth. </p>

<p> Schools primarily seek to prevent substance use and abuse
through curriculum-based drug prevention programs. Such programs
have dominated the field, largely because they are relatively
simple to understand, implement, and replicate, and because
methods to evaluate them have become standardized.
Curriculum-based prevention programs have been hampered, however,
by a lack of good evaluation data needed to prove their
effectiveness. </p>

<p> <b> Workplaces </b> </p>

<p> The prevalence of drug abuse among the employed remains
inadequately documented, based on a small number of studies.
Substance abuse contributes to workplace problems, such as
accidents, injuries, absenteeism, turnover, lost productivity,
compensation claims, and insurance costs. Substance abuse in
workplaces can be affected by nonworkplace factors and workplace
factors. The primary interventions are employee assistance
programs that help employees with personal problems by providing
services directly (through the work organization) or indirectly
(through a provider in the community); health promotion programs
that typically seek to prevent illness and promote wellness
through behavior change; and alterations to workplace
environments that seek to reduce stress and strengthen support
for workers. </p>

<p> <b> Recreational Settings </b> </p>

<p> Recreational activities and settings may also contribute to
the prevention of substance use and abuse or, by their absence,
increase the risk. Examples of recreational activities and
settings include Boys and Girls Clubs, Boy and Girl Scouts,
organized sports, and local park and recreation department
programs. </p>

<p> Research on the impact of organized youth activities on
substance use and abuse is limited, and only a few studies have
addressed the issue directly. However, existing research
indicates that involvement in youth programs and activities is
associated with fewer at-risk behaviors, including substance use
among youth. The youth development field, including the resources
of park and recreation departments, provides opportunities for
broad-based prevention interventions. </p>

<p> Involvement in activities does not by itself protect against
substance abuse. Some activities, such as those that are
unstructured and unsupervised, may even increase the risks of
substance use and abuse through association with a wider range of
peers, some of whom are using substances. In addition, activities
perceived as boring may not protect against substance use and
abuse. More research is needed to clarify the aspects of
recreational and other leisure activities that may protect
against substance use and abuse. Research might focus on whether
activities that are supervised, structured, drug-free,
empowering, skills- building, self-esteem-promoting, active,
shared, and nonboring (or some combination of those) are
associated with lower levels of substance use and abuse. </p>

<hr>

<p> <b> POLICY OPTIONS </b> </p>

<p> Issues related to substance abuse and addiction have long
occupied the attention of the American public (see table 1- 5).
Congress has authorized a multitude of federal programs aimed at
reducing or preventing the supply and demand of illicit drugs and
regulating the availability of illicit substances, and has
appropriated billions of dollars each year to federal agencies,
provided oversight of federal programs, and passed broad-based
legislation to coordinate programs as part of the war on drugs.
In addressing what some policymakers term as the root causes of
substance abuse and addiction, the list of relevant statutes
expands significantly, as many domestic and social programs can
influence the risk and protective factors that can lead an
individual into or away from substance abuse and addiction. </p>

<p> A total of 12 executive branch departments, four independent
agencies, one multiagency program (Weed and Seed), one White
House office (the Office of National Drug Control Policy--
ONDCP), and the Judiciary, all receive federal funding as part of
national drug control strategy. These efforts include
interdiction, treatment, and prevention programs. </p>

<p> The federal substance abuse control policy has as its primary
focus the eradication of the supply of drugs. Congress currently
appropriates more than $12 billion annually on antidrug efforts,
with approximately two-thirds of this amount supporting drug
interdiction and law enforcement activities, and the remainder
supporting demand- side activities, such as drug treatment,
research, and prevention programs. </p>

<p> Drug demand reduction efforts focus on providing treatment
for abusers and addicts, prevention programs for various
populations, and biomedical and behavioral research on the causes
of substance use, abuse, and addiction. Of these, the federal
government spends the most on treatment, followed by prevention
and causality research. Drug treatment and prevention programs
are funded at both the federal and state levels, while causation
research is funded primarily by the federal government. A recent
General Accounting Office (GAO) study revealed that for studying
the causes of drug abuse, funding has remained comparatively
tiny. In 1990, for example, such research was funded at a level
of $6 million, about one-tenth of one percent of the nation's
drug control budget for that year. </p>

<p> OTA, in conjunction with GAO, surveyed federal agencies
identified as having substance abuse prevention efforts. OTA
finds that substance abuse prevention efforts are scattered over
a number of federal agencies, and that federal prevention efforts
are dictated by statutory mandates, rather than directed at
identifying causes of substance abuse and addiction per se. The
White House ONDCP, charged with coordinating federal antidrug
efforts, lacks the statutory mandate to forcibly integrate or
alter the multitude of programs that make up the federal
government's war on drugs. </p>

<p> Congress faces several fundamental difficulties in addressing
the causes of substance abuse and addiction: </p>

<ul>
    <li> o No scientific consensus exists as to what is the
        driving cause of substance abuse and addiction. A range
        of risk and protective factors have been associated with
        drug use, abuse, and addiction. </li>
    <li> o Federal antidrug efforts, though coordinated by ONDCP,
        are spread among many federal agencies, whose
        authorization and appropriations fall under the
        jurisdiction of numerous congressional committees and
        subcommittees. ONDCP efforts in drug demand reduction
        efforts alone involved federal agencies across at least
        11 Cabinet-level departments. This makes coordinated
        legislative action difficult to achieve. </li>
    <li> o The federal budget deficit is an obstacle to the
        creation of new domestic programs or the enhancement of
        existing programs that target known risk and protective
        factors in individuals and communities. The framework and
        literature reviews presented in this report make clear
        that substance abuse and addiction can arise and be
        influenced by multiple factors in individuals, groups,
        and communities. Thus, effective intervention requires
        prevention practitioners to select from a variety of
        options, so they can target the specific factors that are
        especially important for the particular populations and
        communities they are addressing. This does not mean that
        everything must be done at once nor that everything be
        known in advance of taking action. To the contrary,
        policymakers and practitioners can take small steps at a
        time, and then, as resources and new knowledge permit,
        take additional steps that address a fuller range of
        factors and contexts in greater depth. </li>
    <li> o Current drug prevention programs lack scientifically
        accepted standards for determining their success or
        failure. Whatever methods are developed, tested, and
        incorporated into prevention programs, a critical
        component of success is careful, rigorous evaluation.
        Answering &quot;what works?&quot; is essential in making
        advances in preventing substance abuse. </li>
</ul>

<p> In choosing which policy issues to address, OTA focused on
those areas directly addressed in this study. OTA identified a
series of policy issues in four broad categories: federal focus
and prevention program structure, research needs, community
activity settings, and availability (see table 1- 6). A number of
policy questions and options for congressional action emerge from
these four categories (see table 1-7). A full discussion of the
policy issues and options for congressional action can be found
in chapter 9 of the full report. Given the broad nature of
federal antidrug efforts, many important issues relating to
federal antidrug efforts remain beyond the scope of this report.
Such topics include drug treatment, interdiction and enforcement,
and drug legalization. </p>

<p> </p>

<p> BOX 1-1: Overview of Alcohol and Some Other Psychoactive
Substances </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> <b> ALCOHOL (ethyl alcohol) </b> </p>

<p> Alcohol, one of the most widely used of all drugs, is a
central nervous system depressant with effects similar to those
of sedative-hypnotic compounds (see below). At low doses, alcohol
may be associated with behavioral excitation thought to be due to
the depression of inhibitory neurons in the brain. Alcohol
differs from sedative-hypnotic compounds in that it is used
primarily for recreation or social rather than medical purposes. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Beer. 2. Wine. 3. &quot;Hard&quot; liquor (e.g., whiskey,
gin). </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> <b> SEDATIVES, HYPNOTICS, OR ANXIOLYTICS </b> </p>

<p> Sedative-hypnotics are drugs of diverse chemical structure
that exert a nonselective general depressant on the central
nervous system. In addition, they reduce metabolism in a variety
of tissues in the body, depressing any system that uses energy.
Depending on the dose, any sedative hypnotic compound may be
classified as a sedative (an agent that allays excitement), a
tranquilizer (an antianxiety agent), a hypnotic (a sleep-inducing
agent), or an anesthetic (an agent that eliminates pain).
Sedative-hypnotics are used medically as sedatives, anxiolytics
(antianxiety agents), hypnotics, antiepileptics, muscle
relaxants, and general anesthetics. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Barbiturates (&quot;downers&quot; or &quot;barbs&quot;):
pentobarbital sodium[NembutalR], secobarbital sodium [SeconalR],
amobarbital [AmytalR]--taken orally. </p>

<p> 2. Nonbarbiturate hypnotics: methaqualone [QuaaludesR]--
taken orally. </p>

<p> 3. Tranquilizers: diazepam [ValiumR], chlordiazepoxide
hydrochloride [LibriumR]--taken orally. </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> <b> CANNABIS (THC) </b> </p>

<p> THC (tetrahydrocannabinol) the active agent in marijuana,
alters perceptions, concentration, emotions, and behavior, though
the mechanisms of action are not entirely clear. Researchers have
found, however, that THC changes the way in which sensory
information is processed by the brain. It can be used medically
to relieve nausea and side effects of chemotherapy in cancer
patients; it is very rarely used to treat glaucoma. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Marijuana (&quot;pot&quot; or &quot;grass&quot;)-- smoked
or eaten. 2. Hashish (&quot;hash&quot;)--smoked or eaten. 3.
Hashish oil (&quot;hash oil&quot;)--smoked (mixed with tobacco.
4. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)-- taken orally in capsules. </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> <b> NICOTINE </b> </p>

<p> Nicotine, obtained naturally from tobacco, is a central
nervous system stimulant.(c) It exerts its action secondary to
stimulation of certain cholinergic (excitatory) synapses both
within the brain and in the peripheral nervous system. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Cigarettes. 2. Smokeless tobacco (e.g., snuff or chewing
tobacco). </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> <b> COCAINE </b> </p>

<p> Cocaine, obtained naturally from coca leaves, is a potent
central nervous system stimulant.(c) It stimulates the
sympathetic nervous system, which regulates the activity of
cardiac muscle, smooth muscle, and glands. It also produces
bronchodilation in the lungs. It is used medically as a topical
anesthetic for surgical procedures. </p>

<p> </p>

<p> <b> Examples </b> </p>

<p> 1. Cocaine hydrochloride powder (&quot;coke&quot; or
&quot;street cocaine&quot;)--usually snorted or injected
intravenously.(d) </p>

<p> 2. Cocaine alkaloid (&quot;freebase&quot; or
&quot;crack&quot;)--smoked.(e) </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> AMPHETAMINES AND RELATED STIMULANTS(f) </p>

<p> 1. Amphetamines </p>

<p> Amphetamines are a group of three closely related compounds,
all of which are potent central nervous system and behavioral
stimulants.(c) Some amphetamines are used medically to treat
attention deficit disorder or minimal brain dysfunction in
children, narcolepsy (recurrent, uncontrollable, brief episodes
of sleep), or (rarely) depression. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Amphetamine (&quot;speed&quot; or &quot;uppers&quot;
(BenzedrineR]--taken orally, injected, or snorted.(g) </p>

<p> 2. Methamphetamine (&quot;speed&quot; or &quot;crystal
meth&quot; or &quot;ice&quot;) [MethadrineR]--taken orally,
injected, or snorted.(g),(h) </p>

<p> 3. Dextroamphetamine [DexedrineR]--taken orally, or injected.
</p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> 2. Nonamphetamine stimulants </p>

<p> Like amphetamines, nonamphetamine stimulates are central
nervous and behavioral stimulants. Some non-amphetamine
stimulants (e.g., PreludinR) are used for weight control, and
some (e.g., RitalinR and CylertR) are used medically to treat
hyperactivity, minimal brain dysfunction, narcolepsy, or (rarely)
depression. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Pheumetrazine hydrochloride [PreludinR]--taken orally or
injected.(d) </p>

<p> 2. Methylphenidate hydrochloride injected.(d) </p>

<p> 3. Pemoline [CylertR]--taken orally. [RitalinR]--taken
orally, or injected.(d) </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> <b> HALLUCINOGENS </b> </p>

<p> Hallucinogens, or psychedelics, are a heterogeneous group of
compounds that affect a person's perceptions, sensations,
thinking, self-awareness, and emotions.(i) </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) or
&quot;acid&quot;--taken orally or put in the eyes. </p>

<p> 2. Mescaline (3,4,5-trimethylox- phenylethyl amide) or
&quot;mesc&quot; and peyote--disks chewed, swallowed, or smoked;
tablets taken orally. </p>

<p> 3. Psilocybin (&quot;magic mushrooms&quot;)--chewed and
swallowed. 4. MDMA (methylene dioxymethamphetamine)--taken
orally. </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> <b> INHALANTS </b> </p>

<p> Inhalants are chemicals that produce psychoactive vapors.
Although different in makeup, nearly all of the abused inhalants
produce effects similar to those of anesthetics, which act to
slow down the body's functions or produce feelings of dizziness.
At low doses, users may feel slightly stimulated. Amyl nitrite is
used for heart patients because it dilates the blood vessels and
increases blood supply to the heart. There are no medical
indications for most of the inhalants. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Solvents (model airplane glue, nail polish remover,
lighter and cleaning fluids, and gasoline)--vapors inhaled. </p>

<p> 2. Aerosols (e.g., paints, hairsprays)--vapors inhaled. </p>

<p> 3. Some anesthetics (e.g.,nitrous oxide)--vapors inhaled. </p>

<p> 4. Amyl nitrite (&quot;snappers&quot; or &quot;poppers&quot;)
and butyl nitrite (&quot;rush&quot;)--vapors inhaled. </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> <b> OPIATES (NARCOTICS) AND RELATED ANALGESICS </b> </p>

<p> Opiates are natural or synthetic drugs that, like morphine, a
substance derived from the opium poppy, have analgesic
(pain-relieving) properties. Heroin is not approved for medical
uses in the United States. The major medical use of other opiates
is for the relief of pain (i.e., as analgesics); some narcotics
are used to relieve coughing (i.e., as antitussives) or to treat
diarrhea. Methadone is used in the treatment of narcotic
abstinence syndromes and as an analgesic in terminal illness. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> 1. Heroin (&quot;smack&quot; or &quot;horse&quot;)--
injected, smoked, or inhaled.(d) </p>

<p> 2. Codeine (codeine sulfate)--taken orally or injected.(d) 3.
Morphine (morphine hydrochloride)--injected, smoked, or inhaled. </p>

<p> 4. Synthetic opiates (e.g., methadone [DolophineR]);
hydromorphone hydrochloride [DilaudidR], meperidine hydrochloride
[DemerolR], oxycodone and asprin [PercodanR]-- taken orally or
injected. </p>

<p> Class of psychoactive substance(a) Description(b) </p>

<p> <b> PCP (PHENCYCLIDINE) AND SIMILARLY ACTING
SYMPHATHOMIMETICS </b> </p>

<p> Phencycyclidine, commonly referred to as PCP, alters the
functions of the neocortex and has been called a dissociative
anesthetic. It was developed in the 1950s as an anesthetic but
was subsequently taken off the market in 1967 when it was
discovered that the drug caused hallucinations in some people.(j)
PCP is now used legally only in veterinary medicine as an
immobilizing agent. </p>

<p> Examples </p>

<p> PCP (&quot;angel dust&quot; or &quot;lovely&quot;)--taken
orally, or smoked (sprayed on joints or cigarettes).(d) </p>

<p> (a) According to Julien, one could conceivably classify
psychoactive drugs by at least three methods: 1) mechanism of
action, 2) chemical structure, and 3) behavioral effects.
Probably the most useful approach would be to classify them by
mechanism of action, but knowledge of the brain's physiology is
too limited for this approach to be comprehensive. A limitation
of the second approach is that many drugs of apparently similar
structure exert quite different effects, and many drugs of
dissimilar structure exert quite similar effects. The
classification in this table largely reflects the behavioral
effects approach. The classification used here is based on the
categories in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed., revised.
According to the American Psychiatric Association, all of the
classes of psychoactive substances listed in this box except
nicotine are associated with both abuse and dependence. Nicotine
is associated with dependence but not abuse. </p>

<p> (b) The potential physiological, psychological, and
behavioral effects of using the psychoactive substance shown are
discussed in the sources listed below. The consequences depend in
part on the specific drug used, the dosage level and mode of
administration. </p>

<p> (c) Central nervous system stimulants are drugs that can
elevate mood, increase alertness, reduce fatigue, provide a sense
of increased energy, decrease appetite, and improve task
performance. They can also produce anxiety, insomnia, and
irritability. The drugs differ widely in their molecular
structures and mechanisms of action. </p>

<p> (d) According to the American Psychiatric Association, the
route of administration of a psychoactive substance is an
important variable in determining whether use will lead to
dependence or abuse. In general, routes of administration that
produce more efficient absorption of the substance in the blood
stream (e.g., intravenous injection) tend to increase the
likelihood of an escalating pattern of substance uses that leads
to dependence. Routes that quickly deliver psychoactive
substances to the brain (e.g., smoking or intravenous injection)
are associated with higher levels of consumption and with an
increased likelihood of toxic effects. Use of contaminated
needles for intravenous administration of amphetamines, cocaine,
and opiates can cause hepatitis, HIV infection, and other
illnesses. </p>

<p> (e) Freebase cocaine is a form of cocaine made by converting
&quot;street cocaine&quot; (cocaine hydrochloride) to a purified
base that is smoked. The effect of smoking freebase is similar to
that of intravenous injection but smoking provides a shorter more
intense high than sniffing or ingestion because of the rapid
absorption of the drug through the lungs. &quot;Crack
cocaine&quot; is the street name given to freebase cocaine that
has been processed from cocaine hydrochloride to a chemical base
by cooking it with baking soda and water. The term crack refers
to the cracking sound that is heard when the mixture is smoked
(heated), presumably due to the sodium bicarbonate. </p>

<p> (f) Describing a drug as a stimulant does not adequately
describe its properties. Drug use surveys typically mean
amphetamines when they use the word stimulants. Some surveys
regard as stimulants both prescription (amphetamines) and
nonprescription substances (e.g., caffeine-based compounds used
in No-Doz, diet pills, and &quot;fake pep pills&quot;). Cocaine
and nicotine (described above) are also central nervous system
simulants. </p>

<p> (g) According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse,
designer drugs are structural analogs of substances scheduled
under the Controlled Substances Act that are prepared by
underground chemists to mimic the psychoactive effects of
controlled substances or produce other psychoactive effects.
Because such analogs are not identical to their parent compound,
their manufacture and distribution does not violate the law. As
of June 1986, there were synthetic analogs of PCP, fentanyl and
meperidine, and amphetamine and methamphetamine. </p>

<p> (h) In the past, abuse of methamphetamine had been in the
form of tablets or intravenous injection. More recently,
&quot;ice&quot; (one of the common street names for
d-methamphetamine hydrochloride) has gained popularity in a form
suitable for smoking. </p>

<p> (i) Most of the agents in this class of drugs can induce
hallucinations if the dose is high enough. But the term
hallucinogen does not adequately describe the range of
pharmacological actions of the diverse group of substances
usually included in the class. The term psychedelic was proposed
by Osmond in 1957 to imply that these agents all have the ability
to alter the sensory perception and thus may be considered
&quot;mind expanding.&quot; The effects of hallucinogens are
unpredictable and depend on the amount taken, the user's
personality, mood and expectations, and the surroundings in which
the drug is used. </p>

<p> (j) PCP is considered a hallucinogen in some surveys of drug
use. </p>

<p> SOURCES: Office of Technology Assessment, 1991, based on the
following sources: American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd ed. revised
(Washington, DC: 1987); R.M. Julien, A Primer of Drug Action, 5th
ed. (New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Co., 1988); J.F. Kauffman, H.
Shaffer, and M. Burglass, &quot;The Biological Basics: Drugs and
Their Effects,&quot; Alcoholism and Substance Abuse: Clinical
Interventions (New York, NY: 1985); U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and
Mental Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
&quot;Hallucinogens and PCP, Inhalants, Marijuana, Opiates,
Sedative-Hypnotics, Stimulants, and Cocaine,&quot; Rockville, MD,
1983; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,
National Institute on Drug Abuse, &quot;Designer Drugs,&quot;
NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD, June 1986; U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug
Abuse, and Mental Health Administration, National Institute on
Drug Abuse, &quot;Marijuana Update,&quot; NIDA Capsules,
Rockville, MD, May 1989; U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental
Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse,
&quot;Methamphetamine Abuse,&quot; NIDA Capsules, Rockville, MD,
January 1989; and U.S. Department of Education, Growing Up Drug
Free: A Parent's Guide to Prevention (Washington, DC: 1989). </p>

<p> </p>

<p> BOX 1-2: Tolerance, Sensitization, Dependence, and Withdrawal
</p>

<p> Tolerance to a drug develops when, following a prolonged
period of use, more of the drug is required to produce a given
effect. Sensitization, the opposite of tolerance, occurs when the
effects of a given dose of a drug increase after repeated
administration. Dependence is a type of neuroadaptation to drug
exposure. With prolonged use of a drug, cells in the brain adapt
to its presence such that the drug is required to maintain normal
cell function. On abrupt withdrawal of the drug, the cell behaves
abnormally and a withdrawal syndrome ensues. Generally, the
withdrawal syndrome is characterized by a series of signs and
symptoms that are opposite to those of the drug's acute effects.
For example, withdrawal of sedative drugs produce excitation and
irritability. Conversely, withdrawal of stimulants produces
profound depression. </p>

<p> SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. </p>

<p> </p>

<p> BOX 1-3: Drugs and Discrimination </p>

<p> In America, tensions between the majority and various
minorities often hinge on concerns raised by drug use. The groups
change over time and place, but the dividing issues remain
remarkably similar. Those in power decide which drugs are legal
and how rules should be enforced. Minorities charge that unfair
policies result from prejudice, ignorance, and hypocrisy. </p>

<p> When? 1850 Where? Boston Who? Irish Immigrants </p>

<p> Impoverished Irish immigrants brought the tradition of
drinking whiskey with them. In American cities, people often
blamed whiskey for neighborhood quarrels. In the mid-19th
century, clashes with Irish immigrants occurred so often that
police vans came to be known by the term &quot;paddy
wagons.&quot; </p>

<p> When? 1880s Where? San Francisco Who? Chinese Immigrants </p>

<p> Fear of immigrant Chinese often focused on their recreational
use of opium. In 1875, San Francisco outlawed opium smoking,
which most residents associated exclusively with the Chinese.
This citywide ban became nationwide in 1909. </p>

<p> When? 1882 Where? Ohio Who? German Immigrants </p>

<p> Beer drinking often brought Germans into conflict with
temperance advocates. Cincinnati's lively German community
gathered at beer gardens on Sundays to sing, dance, drink, and
argue politics. In 1882, Ohio's governor denounced Germans as
&quot;sabbath breakers, criminals, and free thinkers.&quot; </p>

<p> When? 1930s Where? Colorado, New Mexico Who? Mexican Migrant
Workers </p>

<p> The Southwest welcomed Mexican migrants during labor
shortages. But during the Depression, anxiety over competition
for jobs shifted to wildly exaggerated fears of the effects of
marijuana use customary among Mexicans. To placate fears,
Congress passed the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, which prohibited
recreational use of the drug. </p>

<p> When? 1991 Who? African Americans Police forces are largely
white and inner-city residents are mostly black. Between 1980 and
1990, the drug-arrest rate in the city of Rochester, New York,
was about five times that for suburban Monroe County. </p>

<p> SOURCE: &quot;Altered States: Alcohol and Other Drugs in
America,&quot; Strong Museum, Rochester, NY, 1993. </p>

<p> </p>

<p> BOX 1-4: Ethnography </p>

<p> Ethnographic techniques allow researchers to study how
environmental and cultural factors affect values, attitudes, and
behaviors of individuals and groups. For three decades,
researchers have documented societal and cultural influences on
the patterns of substance use, abuse, and addiction; using a
range of methodologies and working in diverse contexts,
ethnographers have contributed to the understanding of substance
abuse. Interacting with drug users under a wider set of
circumstances than do strict quantitative researchers,
ethnographers have expanded the framework of substance abuse
research hypotheses. They have also assisted in the evaluation
and interpretation of clinical and survey data to different
subcultures and populations. </p>

<p> Ethnographies also provide information on constantlychanging
substance use patterns. By collecting data from substance users
in their natural environments, ethnographers have been able to
document who uses drugs and how drugs are used. This type of
methodology is essential to the historical understanding of
substance use and abuse. </p>

<p> Lastly, ethnographers have documented different styles of
substance use within American society as well as abroad.
Differences are cited in experience and use patterns based on
social class, cultural background, gender, and geographic
location. </p>

<p> SOURCE: Office of Technology Assessment, 1994. _ <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>