
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-56</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B043-251</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/cu/cu44.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122131231 text/html 42518
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:12:19 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:44:55 GMT
Content-length: 42299
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>How To Launch a Nationwide Drug Menace</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../../_private/sch_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61536" -->

<p><font size="5">The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit
Drugs</font></p>

<p><font size="5">44. </font></p>

<p><font size="5">How to launch a nationwide drug menace </font></p>

<hr>

<p>During the 1960s, Dr. Ralph M. Susman of the United States
Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, and his associate
Lenore R. Kupperstein, prepared a &quot;Bibliography on the
Inhalation of Glue Fumes and Other Toxic Vapors,&quot; which they
published in the Spring 1968 issue of the International Journal
of the Addictions. Despite diligent search, the earliest
references to glue-sniffing in either the medical or the popular
literature that they were able to find dated from 1959.1 A
similarly thorough search in the course of preparing this
Consumers Union Report has turned up no earlier mention of
glue-sniffing. Other documented studies of glue-sniffing are
similarly void of references earlier than 1959. Thus, while it is
likely that children (and adults as well) sniffed glue on
occasion before 1959, the practice either went unobserved or,
more probably, was not deemed worthy of recording. The first
known mentions of glue-sniffing in print date from 1959 and
concern the arrest for sniffing glue of children in Tucson,
Arizona, Pueblo, Colorado, and perhaps other Western cities. Laws
against sniffing glue or sniffing anything else, of course, did
not yet exist. Accounts of these remarkable arrests reached
Denver, where two reporters investigated. Their account of
glue-sniffing-the first full description in the mass media that
has yet turned up-appeared in Empire, the Sunday magazine
supplement of the Denver Post, on August 2, 1959. The article
reported: &quot;Police in Pueblo, Colo. and several other cities
in the West and Midwest report that juveniles seeking a quick
bang and a mild jag spread liquid glue on the palms of their
hands, then cup their hands over their mouth and nose and inhale
deeply.&quot; 2 Alerted by these police actions in other cities,
the two reporters interviewed Denver police officers concerned
with juvenile problems, and other authorities, to learn about
glue-sniffing in Denver. Apparently Denver bad no cases to
report, for the story led off with an account of a child
accidentally affected by glue fumes in a poorly-ventilated
basement room; and an expert the two reporters interviewed-Dr.
Samuel Johnson, director of Denver's Poison Control
Center-similarly warned against using quick-drying glue in a room
with the windows closed, lest intoxication accidentally result.
Dr. Johnson was on the whole reassuring about the glue
&quot;menace.&quot; If a person is affected by the fumes, he
said, he need only go out and breathe fresh air to recover.
Permanent injury is possible only if the exposure is prolonged
and heavy-as when a worker in a glue factory breathes the stuff
all day long every day. Yet the pioneer Denver story, setting a
pattern soon to be followed by newspapers and magazines
throughout the country, carried a scare headline: </p>

<p>SOME GLUES ARE DANGEROUS Heavy Inhalation Can Cause Anemia or
Brain Damage This and subsequent warnings in the mass media were
all based on the results of earlier industrial studies that, as
noted above, could not be justifiably applied to the
glue-sniffing fad. The newspaper story also explained that one
way to inhale glue is to soak a handkerchief with glue and hold
it over the mouth and nose.&quot; A photograph accompanying the
article showed a young man demonstrating how the glue-soaked
handkerchief should be held. Interesting results were promised if
the glue were sniffed as directed: &quot;The first effect of
breathing the undiluted fumes is dizziness, followed by
drowsiness. There is a feeling of suspension of reality. Later
there is lack of coordination of muscle and mind.&quot; In a
word, it was like getting drunk. The effects of this newspaper
article, published August 2, 1959-and no doubt of other similar
articles and broadcasts in other Denver mass media
thereafter-were visible by June 1960, when Denver police reported
that during the past six or eight months they had investigated
some 50 cases of glue-sniffing. In addition to these 50 cases, of
course, there were no doubt many hundreds of others which had not
come to the attention of the police. Denver was thus experiencing
what-so far as the available literature reveals-was the earliest
of many similar local glue-sniffing epidemics throughout the
country. Denver police met the new peril in the usual way-by
escalating the warnings. In August 1959, Denver glue-sniffers had
been threatened merely with anemia and brain damage. In June 1960
a spokesman for Denver's juvenile Police Bureau was quoted as
saying: &quot;This practice is extremely dangerous, and a kid can
die from it if he gets too much.&quot; A second police spokesman
added that &quot;inhaling large quantities of the cement fumes
can lead to permanent injury of the respiratory system and could
cause death.&quot; And the head of the Police Crime Laboratory
warned: &quot;I'm afraid some kid will get hold of too much of
the stuff and we'll have a fatal case on our hands.&quot; 3 In
October 1961 a Denver police lieutenant was quoted as explaining
that glue fumes &quot;diminish the oxygen supply to the
blood&quot; and &quot;cause severe brain damage and death .&quot;
4 A representative in the state legislature warned that
glue-sniffing &quot;can </p>

<p>result in permanent damage to the brain.&quot; 5 In April 1962
Denver youngsters were warned that glue-sniffing causes
&quot;stimulation of the central nervous system, followed by
depression and often convulsions,&quot; and that &quot;it can
affect the respiratory tract, mucous membranes, skin, liver,
kidneys, heart and blood-depending on what type of glue is
used.&quot; 6 The headline over the June 1960 story presented the
two central themes which were later to characterize
anti-glue-sniffing propaganda in other cities as well: </p>

<p>COULD BE FATAL Plane Glue Gives Kids a Kick </p>

<p>Far from ending Denver's glue-sniffing epidemic, however,
these warnings were followed by a further spread of the epidemic.
The warnings seemed to function as lures. By October 23, 1961,
the chief probation officer of the Denver juvenile Court was able
to announce: &quot;We are averaging about 30 boys a month now on
this glue-sniffing problem.&quot; Worse yet, he added, the custom
was spreading from the high schools into the junior highs and
&quot;even into the grade schools.&quot; I A police spokesman
similarly announced that glue-sniffing, unknown 26 months
earlier, was now &quot;a major problem among juveniles in
Denver.&quot; He noted that 278 arrests were made for
glue-sniffing in 1961, as compared with only 95 in 1960.8 Nor was
the problem limited to Denver. Tom Adams, director of the state
reform school in Golden, Colorado, was quoted in October 1961:
&quot;Right now I have about 50 boys here because of this
glue-sniffing.&quot; 9 Since no city or state law against
glue-sniffing had yet been passed, the reporter who covered the
story felt called upon to explain how 278 arrests could be made
in 1961 for glue-sniffing and how 50 children could be
incarcerated in a reform school for the same offense. His
explanation, however, did not entirely clarify the mystery. All
he could say was that &quot;the youths are charged under juvenile
delinquency procedures when they are found sniffing glue.&quot; A
police spokesman added a detail: the 278 Denver arrests for
glue-sniffing were classed for statistical purposes as
&quot;drunkenness arrests.&quot;' Throughout 1960 and 1961,
Denver police made further headlines by periodic raids on
glue-sniffers. A typical 1961 example was headed: </p>

<p>* Readers should not be surprised at this development, for a
substantial proportion of arrests and incarcerations of juveniles
throughout the country are for actions which are not prohibited
by any law and which would not be crimes if indulged in by
adults. (See Ruth and Edward Brecher, The Delinquent and the Law,
Public Affairs Pamphlet No. 337 [New York: Public Affairs
Pamphlets, 1962]; also, The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society,
A Report by the President's Commission on Law Enforcement and
Administration of Justice [New York: Avon Books 1968], . 227-228.
</p>

<p>7 DENVER YOUTHS ARRESTED FOR DEADLY &quot;GLUE-SNIFFING&quot;
The story began: </p>

<p>Seven Denver teenagers were arrested over the weekend for
&quot;glue-sniffing,&quot; a new thrill-seeking activity that
juvenile authorities label &quot;extremely dangerous.&quot; Five
of the boys, four of them 16 and the other 17, are in City jail.
Two others, 13 and 14, were lodged in juvenile Hall. All seven
were arrested Sunday near the Curtis Park Recreation Center, 50th
and Curtis Sts., by Patrolmen Dale Nelson and Donald Smith.10 </p>

<p>Thus the broad pattern was established-the dramatic police
raids and the imprisonment of children and teenagers, accompanied
by dire warnings of physical and psychological damage. The next
element in the pattern was soon added: proposals for specific
antiglue legislation. On December 8, 1961, just six weeks after
the sensational Curtis Park police raid, the Denver papers
reported that State Representative Ben Klein, a former probation
officer, would &quot;propose to the January [1962] session of the
Colorado Legislature three new laws to deter youngsters from
sniffing airplane glue. . . .&quot; 11 Denver youngsters no doubt
noted the order of events: arrests and jailings first,
legislation later-a sequence unlikely to encourage respect for
law. In support of his three new laws, Representative Klein
quoted Denver's juvenile Court judge Philip Gilliam as saying
that he considered gluesniffing to be now &quot;the Number I
juvenile problem in the metropolitan area.&quot; Glue-sniffing
had achieved this preeminence within two and a half years after
the two writers in Empire had found no evidence of gluesniffing
in Denver. Representative Klein's three laws would make it an
offense (1) to sell glue to minors without parental consent, (2)
to drive a car while under the influence of glue, or (3) to sniff
glue. This last proposed offense was remarkable-for, as noted in
Part 1, it is not an offense to use even such drugs as heroin, in
Denver or elsewhere in the United States. Representative Klein
said his legislation would also require retailers &quot;to keep a
registry of sales . . . similar to the registry of sales of
narcotics drugs.&quot; Thus glue-sniffing was more or less subtly
linked with heroin. just as arrests for glue-sniffing were
followed by laws against gluesniffing, so medical warnings were
followed by medical studies designed to justify the warnings. A
study undertaken by Dr. Oliver Massengale, director of the
Adolescent Clinic at the University of Colorado Medical Center,
and Dr. Helen Glaser, assistant professor of pediatrics at the
university, was no doubt the first scientific research on the
recreational aspects of glue-sniffing in the history of the
medical sciences. </p>

<p>Dr. Massengale explained that he became interested in
glue-sniffing way back in 1960, when early newspaper reports of
glue-sniffing hazards had appeared. A mother almost in tears, he
recalled, had brought her son to his office. &quot;He's sniffing
glue,&quot; the mother declared. &quot;You've got to stop him
before he dies.&quot; A reporter for a Denver paper, in an
interview with Drs. Massengale and Glaser published April 29,
1962, cited these researchers as authority for the statement that
some types of plastic cement &quot;may cause damage to the liver,
kidneys and brain.&quot; 12 When the full text of the
Glaser-Massengale study was published in the Journal of the
American Medical Association for July 28, 1962, however, certain
details were added that the newspaper interview had neglected.
Cases of damage from glue all involved either the swallowing of
substantial amounts or else the continuous dayafter-day exposure
to high concentrations among workers in industrial plants.
&quot;Although a great deal of concern about the ill effects of
this practice is expressed by parents, school personnel, juvenile
authorities, and the children themselves,&quot; the medical
experts noted in the medical publication, &quot;very little is
actually known about possible damage to organ systems resulting
from deliberate inhalation of cement vapors. Many children share
the so far unsubstantiated belief that glue-sniffing produces
insanity and death, and we know of one case in which glue was
first used by an adolescent boy in an attempt to commit
suicide.&quot; 13 Drs. Glaser and Massengale then presented six
cases of juvenile Denver glue-sniffers. In none of them was any
physical damage attributable to glue-sniffing; and in none of
them was glue-sniffing the source of the child's psychological
problems. Case Number 1, for example, concerned an
eleven-year-old boy; &quot;his mother worked at night; his
parents were separated; and he had not seen his father for six
years.&quot; The mother of Case Number 2 &quot;was an alcoholic
and was possibly also psychotic. The parents were separated, and
the patient lived in a foster home, where he was unhappy.... He
was ... depressed, anxious, and fearful, and longing for
affectional security. Seeing the world as hostile and
pain-inflicting, he tended to withdraw into passive, immature
forms of behavior.&quot; Patient Number 3 was a fourteen-year-old
whose father had died when he was five, &quot;and he had been
taken out of the custody of his alcoholic mother but subsequently
had been returned to her. A few months before being seen in the
clinic the boy bad spent eight months in a reformatory because of
stealing.&quot; Case Number 5 was the boy who tried to commit
suicide by sniffing glue. &quot;This boy's father, possibly
acting out of a cultural pattern of insecurity and fear, was very
strict and rigid and was looked upon by the patient as a tyrant.
His mother was a weak, inadequate </p>

<p>person who sided with her son but was unable to rebel against
her husband in his behalf.&quot; Case Number 6 was a
fifteen-year-old; &quot;the patient's father, who had been very
strict and punitive, had died about six months before, and the
mother was finding her son increasingly unmanageable and
destructive. This boy had been in trouble even before his
father's death because of writing obscenities in school books,
running away, and joy-riding.&quot; 14 In all cases, the child's
problems and disturbances had antedated the glue-sniffing. just
what good was accomplished by arresting and incarcerating these
troubled youngsters for sniffing glue did not appear in the
study. It should be noted, moreover, that these were not typical
glue-sniffers. Rather they were typical of the small subsample of
glue-sniffers who were caught at it-arrested by the police and
referred to the university's adolescent clinic. The
Glaser-Massengale paper in the Journal of the American Medical
Association confirmed the incredible speed with which
glue-sniffing had spread following the first accounts in the mass
media: &quot;Glue sniffing, almost unheard of two years ago, has
become a serious threat in some communities. In the Denver area
it is considered by responsible juvenile authorities to be the
most serious problem they face currently in working with known
delinquents and other youngsters brought to the attention of the
court because of violations of the law.&quot;' The 130 Denver
children arrested in the two-year period for glue-sniffing
&quot;ranged in age from 7 through 17, with a mean age of 13
years, and all but 6 were boys.&quot;&quot; Eighty percent bad
Spanish surnames; this high incidence was perhaps due as much to
the arresting practices of the police as to the frequency of
glue-sniffing among those children. Glue-sniffing children in
middle-class white neighborhoods are customarily seen by
pediatricians in private practice. The remainder of the Denver
story need here be only briefly summarized through selected
newspaper items: </p>

<p>&#149; January 18, 1965: Legislation introduced to ban
glue-sniffing.&quot; &#149; March 21, 1965: juvenile court lays
plans for preventive approach to glue-sniffing.&quot;' * April
22, 1965: Adams County sheriff announces breakup of juvenile
glue-sniffing activities with arrest of nineteen-year-old girl.18
* April 29, 1965: Thirteen-year-old leader of glue-sniffing gang
admits burglaries19 * June 25, 1965: Glue-sniffing charges
against boy will be dismissed if he enlists in armed services
before September 13 .20 * As noted above, however, there was as
yet no law to be violated. </p>

<p>* July 2, 1965: United States Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare makes $85,500 grant to finance study of glue-sniffing
in Denver.21 * January 11, 1966: Thirteen-year-old resident of
county receiving home hangs himself after being scolded for
sniffing glue.22 a May 18, 1966: Twenty-one-year-old jailed after
admitting he burglarized drugstore to get glue to sniff.23 * June
10, 1966: Three with Spanish surnames sentenced to 30 days each
in County jail after pleading guilty to sniffing glue .24 *
October 30, 1966: An additional $44,923 HEW grant is made to
study glue-sniffing in Denver . . . . 25 </p>

<p>While Denver was in all probability the first city in the
world to suffer a major glue-sniffing epidemic, other cities soon
followed Denver's example. In New York City, for example, the New
York Times ran a story about glue-sniffing on October 6, 1961:
&quot;L.I. Youths Inhale Glue in Model Kits For Narcotic
Effect.&quot; 26 Other New York area newspapersand no doubt radio
and television stations as well-ran similar stories. As in
Denver, the New York stories stressed the hazards of
glue-sniffing. The initial New York Times story, after stating
that youngsters sniff glue to &quot;obtain a feeling of elation
similar to that of narcotics,&quot; and that youngsters who sniff
glue are &quot;found in seemingly drunken stupors,&quot; went on
to cite the Nassau County Health Department as authority for the
warning that toluene, the organic solvent most commonly used in
model airplane glue, &quot;dulls the brain when it is inhaled and
could kill a person. It can cause damage to the liver and bone
marrow if it is taken in small repeated doses. The chemical has
an irritating effect on the lungs and can cause pain, vomiting,
headaches, confusion, and ultimately coma. It can also cause the
heart to beat irregularly and can result in transient euphoria.
The lethal dose is unknown. No fatalities have been
recorded.&quot; These warnings, like the earlier Denver warnings,
seemed to be highly effective lures. Within fifteen months, New
York City police had made 778 arrests for glue-sniffing 27 and
the city authorities were seriously considering proposals to make
glue-sniffing illegal. In 1963, New York City arrests totaled
2,003.28 Many tens of thousands of others, of course, were no
doubt sniffing glue by then without coming to the attention of
the police. Salt Lake City was another city where local news
media publicized glue-sniffing early, and where the glue-sniffing
epidemic had an early start. Twelve boys, aged fourteen to
eighteen, were apprehended there for glue-sniffing and
interviewed in 1962; the interviews were of particular
significance in revealing the way in which glue-sniffing, which a
few years earlier was only one of a number of forms of sniffing,
had become the prime form of sniffing. &quot;Seven of the boys
bad previously inhaled the fumes of other substances, notably the
fumes of gasoline (6 boys), ether, </p>

<p>and nasal inhalers (one each), and one of these boys had been
smoking marijuana.&quot; Glue-sniffing had recently, however, far
outstripped the other sniffings, &quot;to the extent that in one
small town the practice was considered virtually universal among
boys. Girls, as yet, have not been widely involved.&quot; 29
Marijuana smoking did not catch up with glue-sniffing among
children until a major antimarijuana campaign was launched a
little later. The glue interests contributed notably to expanding
the anti-gluesniffing campaign from a local to a nationwide
phenomenon. As early as 1962 the Hobby Industry Association of
America, representing 1,100 industry members, announced that it
was spending $250,000 a year to combat glue-sniffing. &quot;To
help inform communities about the sniffing problem,&quot; the
Wall Street Journal announced on its front page on December 7,
1962, &quot;the Hobby Industry Association has produced a
15-minute color film 'The Scent of Danger,' which it soon will
release to local civic groups. The film describes the harm done
by glue sniffing and mentions other products, such as cleaning
fluid and nail polish, which also contain solvents that can cause
intoxication. It recommends that communities make it illegal to
sniff any substance with an intoxicating effect.&quot; 30 For
this the hobby industry won rewards of two kinds-public approval
for its dedication to the anti-glue-sniffing campaign, and a
marked rise in glue sales during the subsequent years. The early
anti-glue-sniffing laws were remarkable in several respects. One
of the first of them-perhaps the very first-was Ordinance Number
1722, passed by the City of Anaheim, California, on June 6, 1962.
This ordinance made it illegal for any person to &quot;inhale,
breathe, or drink any compound, liquid, chemical, or any
substance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, or
other material or substance or combination thereof, with the
intention of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed,
irrational or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbing
the eyesight, thinking process, balance, or coordination of such
person .&quot; 31 Whiskey drinking was no doubt illegal under
this ordinance. A Maryland law enacted a little later was not
quite so broad; this statute made it &quot;unlawful for any
person under twenty-one years of age to deliberately smell or
inhale such excessive quantities of any narcotics, drugs, or any
other noxious substances or chemicals containing any ketones,
aldehydes, organic acetates, ether, chlorinated hydrocarbons or
any other substances containing solvents releasing toxic vapors,
as cause conditions of intoxication, inebriation, excitement,
stupefaction, or dulling of the brain and nervous system. . . .
Any person violating this section will be guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined . . . . 32 Why
glue-sniffing by adults aged twenty-one or older was exempted
from the Maryland law is not apparent. </p>

<p>Other cities and states passed laws restricting the sale of
glue in various ways-though this approach was opposed by the
Hobby Industry Association. At the beginning of 1968 the
Kupperstein-Susman bibliography listed 13 states and 29 counties
and municipalities that had already passed glue-sniffing laws;
additional states, counties, and municipalities had such laws
under consideration. The national news media contributed notably
to the glue-sniffing campaign. In its issue of February 16, 1962,
for example, the weekly news magazine Time carried an item headed
&quot;The New Kick,&quot; which declared: &quot;The newest kick
is glue-sniffing. A 14-year-old sniffer explains: 'You take a
tube of plastic glue, the kind squares use to make model
airplanes, and you squeeze it all out in a handkerchief, see.
Then you roll up the handkerchief into a sort of tube, put the
end in your mouth and breathe through it. It's simple and it's
cheap. It's quick, too. Man! , &quot; 33 As is customary, the
information about how to get high on glue was accompanied in Time
by ritual warnings-much as crime movies of the era, after
glorifying the heroic criminals, ended with their tragic deaths.
Time quoted Dr. Alan K. Done, director of Salt Lake City's Poison
Control Center, as saying: &quot;I have found definite evidence
of effects on the kidneys from glue sniffing. It is too soon to
know whether this effect is temporary or permanent damage .&quot;
34 Neither Time nor the other media, however, publicized the
findings of Dr. Massengale and his Denver associates indicating
that glue-sniffing did not produce kidney damage in Denver.
Newsweek followed on August 13, 1962, with a story entitled
&quot;The New Addicts.&quot; It began: </p>

<p>You're in outer space. You're Superman. You're floating in
air, seeing double, riding next to God. It's Kicksville. Are
these the fantasies of narcotics addicts on a pop? No. More
disturbingly, these hopped-up reactions are those of teenagers
hooked on goofballs, model airplane glue, and cough medicine.
Across the nation, police last week reported case after case of
this alarming trend.35 </p>

<p>In Miami, Newsweek noted, &quot;a 12-year-old boy, discovered
sniffing airplane glue by his father, snatched up a knife and
threatened to kill him.&quot; A police officer with the Miami
juvenile Bureau was then quoted as commenting: &quot;It's common
for the boys who sniff glue to become belligerent. They are
willing to take on a policeman twice their size.&quot; And
Newsweek added: &quot;Glue sniffers-while not physiologically
addictedcan do equal damage to their systems. Some of the
long-term effects [include] burned-out nose membranes, liver
damage, perforations of the gall bladder, destruction of bone
marrow, blindness, and possible death. But,&quot; Newsweek
cogently went on, &quot;this threat doesn't deter youngsters from
squeezing up to five tubes of glue daily into a paper bag and
breathing the fumes .&quot; 36 Consumer Reports, the magazine of
Consumers Union, also ran a warning against glue-sniffing-a bit
more restrained than the othersin January 1963. &quot;Although
there is as yet no documented evidence . . . &quot; the Consumer
Reports article cautiously noted, &quot;CU's medical consultants
are convinced that the inhalation of sufficient solvent vapors to
produce the mental effects the sniffers seek probably will also
produce damage to the liver, kidneys, respiratory organs, and
possibly other organs as well.&quot; 37 Even the Federal Bureau
of Investigation took a hand in the anti-gluesniffing campaign.
Its FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin for October 1965 carried an
article by Dr. Jacob Sokol, chief physician for the Los Angeles
County Probation Department, entitled &quot;A Sniff of
Death.&quot; The tenor of the article was summarized in the
subhead: &quot;Glue-sniffing-in all its horrifying and alarming
ramifications, mentally, physically, and medically -is discussed
by Dr. Sokol in plain, lay language. His report should be of the
utmost interest to law enforcement officers, parents, teachers,
civic leaders, and all persons concerned with the welfare and
health of young people .&quot; 38 The FBI Bulletin article,
moreover, cited a new argument by Dr. Sokol against
glue-sniffing: </p>

<p>Glue sniffers have described to me bow a number of children,
boys and girls, meet in unoccupied houses where they sniff glue
together and later have sexual relations-both homosexual and
heterosexual. To my knowledge this practice has not, however,
come to the attention of law enforcement agencies. Recently,
while conversing with deputy probation officers, I have been
informed that several episodes of homosexual relations have
occurred between adults and children under the influence of glue.
Some of these sexual perverts are encouraging the children to
sniff glue with the intensions of having homosexual relations
with them.&quot; </p>

<p>just where the &quot;sexual perverts&quot; got this idea of
giving children glue was not discussed; perhaps it was from
reading the anti-glue-sniffing campaigns in the mass media. To
end the glue menace, the FBI Bulletin article recommended seven
measures, including the following: &quot;I. We should arouse
public opinion as to the dangers of this practice.... &quot;7.
Legislation should be passed which would prohibit the sale of
glue containing certain toxic chemicals to persons under 21 years
of age.&quot; 40 One side effect of the anti-glue-sniffing
campaign, which continued throughout the 1960s, calls for special
mention. The campaign produced subtle changes in the relations of
parents and teachers to children. A child was now a suspect to be
spied upon lest he secretly be sniffing glue. Health departments
and other authoritative agencies encouraged this </p>

<p>espionage, and listed the symptoms adults should be on the
alert for: &quot;Parents suspecting or told that their children
have deliberately sniffed glue should take them to a doctor
without delay. &quot;Schoolteachers should note irritability,
inattentiveness, sleeping or loss of consciousness as symptoms of
glue sniffing.&quot; 41 The one voice of reason and common sense
amid the near-hysterical concern with glue-sniffing was found in
the Verhulst-Crotty bulletin issued by the National Clearinghouse
for Poison Control Centers, cited earlier. Summing up the
evidence from the studies of glue-sniffers reviewed by the
authors, the bulletin noted: </p>

<p>By speculation, projection, and imagination, one can ... build
up quite a case for the potential hazards of the repeated
inhalation of organic solvents such as those used in plastic
cements. It behooves us, however, to ascertain facts in this
regard. [One expert] inferred from his contact with a number of
boys who practice glue-sniffing that the boys could and would
give up the practice readily if they were convinced it was
dangerous. At the same time, however, it became evident that the
transparent misinformation or contradictory statements by
authorities concerning the dangers of these practices would be
completely disregarded by these boys and taken as evidence that
none of the information was true. It also became apparent that,
if the boys gave up glue-sniffing, they would take up other
habits which would provide a comparable effect. [One expert]
points out that, in our present state of knowledge, toluene (one
of the more commonly used solvents in plastic cements) is
considerably safer than many other organic solvents.42 </p>

<p>The mass media of the early 1960s were filled with reports of
deaths due to glue-sniffing. The Verhulst-Crotty bulletin tracked
down these reports and found a total of nine alleged
glue-sniffing deaths-each one reported many times. Six of the
nine were not due to glue fumes but to asphyxiation, which
occurred when the victim's head was covered by an airtight
plastic bag. A seventh death was probably also a plastic-bag
case. In an eighth case there was no evidence whatever that the
victim had been sniffing glue before his death, and no toluene
was found at autopsy. The last case was probably not due to
glue-sniffing; the victim had been ill and bad sniffed gasoline.
Thus among tens of thousands of glue-sniffers prior to 1964, no
death due unequivocally to glue vapor had as yet been reported.
The lifesaving advice children needed was not to sniff glue with
their heads in plastic bags. The Verbulst-Crotty bulletin also
reviewed behavioral effects of gluesniffing; children
unquestionably did all sorts of silly and potentially dangerous
things when high on glue much the same things they would have
done if drunk on alcohol. Those bulletins, unfortunately, were
distributed in mimeographed form to only a short list of
recipients. They had no visible effect on the nationwide
anti-glue-sniffing campaign. </p>

<p>The toxicology of recreational solvent-sniffing at this
writing remains very much where it was at the time of the 1964
Verhulst-Crotty summary. No one is prepared to say that
occasional solvent sniffing is safe, and some studies suggest
that frequent sniffing may be moderately harmful. Later in the
decade, it was widely observed that young people paid little or
no attention to dire warnings against the hazards of marijuana
smoking, LSD-using, and other forms of drug use. It seems highly
likely, in retrospect, that the exaggerated warnings against
glue-sniffing were among the factors desensitizing some young
people to drug warnings in general. Most teenagers knew of others
in their own neighborhoods who had sniffed glue repeatedly, and
who did not drop dead or go to the hospital with brain damage,
kidney damage, or liver damage. Children may be ignorant, but
they are not stupid. When the evidence of their own experience
contradicts adult propaganda, they (like sensible adults) rely on
their own experience-and tend to distrust in the future a source
of information which they had found unreliable in the past. The
nationwide anti-glue-sniffing campaign, it should be noted,
preceded the anti-LSD campaign, to be described later, and in
part set the model for it. The anti-LSD campaign, like the
antiglue campaign, featured solemn warnings of dire damage, laws
against LSD, sensational police raids, scientific studies
demonstrating hazards-and an endless bombardment of publicity
concerning all of these other factors. Both campaigns were
followed by increased use of the drugs attacked. There was also
one difference. In the case of LSD (see Chapter 50), the drug was
popularized through the simultaneous efforts of LSD enthusiasts
and LSD enemies. But glue-sniffing had no Timothy Leary to
advertise and praise it. The enemies of glue-sniffing popularized
the custom all by themselves. At the beginning of the decade,
gasoline sniffing was the most common form of organic solvent
inhalation. Paint-thinner sniffing, varnish-remover sniffing,
cigarette-lighter-fluid sniffing, glue-sniffing, and the others
were not-very-common phenomena to which no one paid much
attention. So far as can be determined, gasoline sniffing at the
end of the 1960s was neither more nor less popular than at the
beginning. The same was true of the sniffing of other readily
available organic solvents. Only glue-sniffing was the target of
a nationwide campaign-and only gluesniffing became a popular
youth pastime. It seems clear that the damage done by the arrests
and imprisonments of children for glue-sniffing during the 1960s
far exceeded the damage done by glue-sniffing during that sorry
decade-and served to popularize rather than to discourage the
practice. Just how popular it became, many recent surveys reveal.
</p>

<p>In 1969, 1,348 high-school seniors in Montgomery County,
Maryland, filled out a drug-use questionnaire. Of these, 7.4
percent stated that they had sniffed glue, and 1.0 percent
described themselves as current gluesniffers. Similarly, among
1,429 Montgomery County junior-high-school students, 6.6 percent
reported that they had sniffed glue.43 Among 781 sophomores,
juniors, and seniors in five high schools in Madison, Wisconsin,
filling out a questionnaire in 1969, 5.1 percent stated that they
had sniffed glue. The replies indicated that 0.8 percent sniffed
glue frequently, 1.0 percent sniffed glue infrequently, and the
remaining 3.3 percent had sniffed glue only once or twice .44
Among 47,182 students in Utah high schools and junior highs
answering a questionnaire in 1969, 7.1 percent reported that they
had at some time sniffed glue; 9.5 percent of the boys and 4.8
percent of the girls had sniffed. Among the boys, 3.5 percent had
sniffed only once, 3.8 percent had sniffed several times, and 2.2
percent had sniffed more than 10 times. The returns indicated
that 1.8 percent of the boys and 0.9 percent of the girls had
sniffed glue within the past few weeks.45 Among 1,379 high-school
seniors in 11 selected Michigan high schools in 1968, 8.1 percent
in one school reported glue-sniffing, as compared with 7.0
percent in another, 4.7 percent in a third, and none at all in
two small high schools.46 Among 1,225 students at Mamaroneck (New
York) Senior High School answering a questionnaire in 1967, 6.1
percent reported having sniffed glue and 2.0 percent had sniffed
glue more than once. Among 1,294 Mamaroneck junior High School
students, 8.3 percent reported having sniffed glue, and 1.4
percent had sniffed glue more than once .47 These and other
similar surveys suggest that at a rough estimate, at least 5
percent of all young Americans graduating from high school
perhaps 150,000 in each annual cohort-have sniffed glue at least
once. This level of use can be contrasted with the level before
1959, when glue sniffing was essentially unknown and
unpublicized. </p>

<p>On July 20, 1971, the New York Times heralded yet another
nationwide campaign against yet another inhalant menace with a
front-page headline: </p>

<p>AEROSOL SNIFFING: NEW AND DEADLY CRAZE </p>

<p>The story, by Grace Lichtenstein, echoed closely the kickoff
of the antiglue-sniffing campaign a decade earlier:
&quot;Physicians, government officials, drug experts and chemical
manufacturers are growing increasingly worried about a deadly and
relatively new drug-abuse problem among the nation's children:
the inhalation of aerosol sprays.&quot; As in the earlier stories
about glue-sniffing, precise details were sup- </p>

<p>plied on how to get high on aerosols: &quot;The aerosol
product-hair spray, deodorant, household cleaners or some
other-is sprayed into a paper bag or balloon and then inhaled
because the propellant produces a strange, floating kind of
high.&quot; There followed the usual warnings of disastrous
effects: </p>

<p>According to the Food and Drug Administration, more than 100
youths have died from deliberate aerosol sniffing since 1967,
with an average of four deaths a month currently being recorded.
. . . It appears that death occurs after a youngster deeply
inhales an aerosol spray for a prolonged period, either on a
single occasion or on several occasions. The fluorocarbon
propellant Freon, the best-known brand of fluorocarbon, can make
the heart beat irregularly and then stop. </p>

<p>An expert was quoted as adding: &quot;Once the final event
begins, it's quick, sudden, and irreversible.&quot; 48 </p>

<p>An earlier round of aerosol inhaling by children, the story
noted, had centered around a spray-on product used to chill
cocktail glasses. This product had therefore been removed from
the market. Little was accomplished, however, for &quot;experts
stress that any of the 300 kinds of aerosol products now on the
market can be equally abused because all use similar
propellants.&quot; Like the glue industry in the earlier
glue-sniffing campaign, the aerosol industry entered the
aerosol-sniffing campaign through an &quot;Inter-Industry
Committee on Aerosol Use.&quot; &quot;The campaign includes a
filmstrip, 'Rap On,' that has been distributed to 3,000 school
districts. The industry has also put out a booklet, 'Will Death
Come Without Warning?' which declares that aerosol products are
safe when used as directed.&quot; &quot;They're really trying
awfully hard,&quot; said B. J. Burkett, spokesman for the
Inter-Industry Committee and public relations manager of the
Freon Products Division of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co.
There was as yet no suggestion that aerosol sniffing be made a
criminal offense; but laws were being proposed to require a
warning-perhaps even a skull-and-crossbones-on the label of all
aerosol products. Such measures, however, had been decided
against as of this writing. But, one might wonder: Here we go
again?' </p>

<p>* The first effort to repress the recreational use of nitrous
oxide (laughing gas) was also instituted in 1971. Psychiatric
News reported: &quot;Strict regulations have been placed on the
distribution and sale of nitrous oxide in Maryland by Dr. Neil
Solomon, state following reports that the gas is being used by
some young people as an inhalant to produce an exhilarating
effect. This is the first regulatory action in the nation
concerning improper use of nitrous oxide, according to
information from the Food and Drug Administration. . . .&quot; 49
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61536" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>