
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-87</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B002-214</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032209 text/html 14009
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:21:59 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:21:55 GMT
Content-length: 13791
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>U.S. Counterdrug Activities in Central America </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>U.S. Counterdrug Activities in Central America </h2>

<p> <b>Statement of Benjamin F. Nelson, Associate Director,</b> </p>

<p> <b>International Affairs Issues, National Security and
International Affairs Division</b> </p>

<p> <b>GAO/T-NSIAD-94-251</b> </p>

<p> <b>August 2, 1994</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> GAO Testimony </p>

<p> Before the Subcommittee on Information, Justice,
Transportation, and Agriculture, Committee on Government
Operations, House of Representatives </p>

<p> Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee: </p>

<p> I am pleased to be here today to discuss the results of our
review on drug trafficking in Central America.' Our work, which
was conducted at the request of this Subcommittee, focused
primarily on (1) U.S. efforts to curb the flow of cocaine to the
United States and the obstacles to those efforts, and (2) the
capabilities of Central American countries to interdict cocaine
shipments and their dependence on U.S. assistance. </p>

<p> Strategically located between the United States and the
cocaine producing countries of South America, Central America and
its coastline are used by drug traffickers to facilitate cocaine
transshipment to Mexico and onward to the United States. The U.S.
Customs Service estimates that two-thirds of all cocaine entering
the United States crosses the U.S.-Mexican land border where
concealment in cargo is the preferred method of operation.
Although the amount of cocaine that transits Central America is
not known, the Department of State estimates that as much as 70
tons of cocaine annually transits Guatemala, the country which is
the focus of U.S. interdiction efforts in the region. The United
States, in 1993, programmed about $56.5 million to curb the flow
of drugs in the Central American region. Of this total, over $48
million was for U.S. directed interdiction efforts. </p>

<p> Drug Control <u>Interdiction_Efforts in Central America Have
Had Little Impact on the Flow Of_Drugs</u> (GAO/NSIAD-94-233,
Aug. 2, 1994). </p>

<p> <u>Drug Control:</u> Impact of DOD's Detection and Monitoring
on Cocaine Flow (GAO/NSIAD-91-297, Sept. 19, 1991): <u>Drug
Control: Heavy Investment in</u> Military <u>Surveillance Is Not
Paying Off</u> (GAO/NSIAD-93-220. Sept. 1, 1993): and <u>Drug
Control: Expanded Military_Surveillance Not</u> Justified by
Measured Goals<u> or Results </u>(GAO//T-NSIAD-94-14, Oct. 5,
1993). </p>

<p> <u>RESULTS</u> IN <u>BRIEF</u> </p>

<p> Despite various U.S. government interdiction efforts, Central
America continues to be a major transshipment point for cocaine
shipments to the United States. Available evidence suggests that
the supply of drugs enteringthe United States via Central America
remains virtually uninterrupted. Drug traffickers have adjusted
their modes of operations to evade U.S. air interdiction efforts
and are increasingly using sea and land transportation to move
drugs through Central America and on to the United States. </p>

<p> U.S. efforts to control the flow of narcotics have centered
on intercepting drug trafficking aircraft transiting the region
and seizing drugs destined for the United States. The primary
effort has been Operation Cadence, a program combining the
efforts of various U.S. government agencies with interdiction
operations conducted by Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) and
Central American police personnel. Initiated in 1991, Operation
Cadence involves the deployment of specially trained U.S. law
enforcement agents to Guatemala who, working on information and
intelligence developed by DEA, Department of Defense (DOD), and
the U.S. Customs Service, attempt to seize trafficking aircraft
and their cargos. </p>

<p> According to DEA, Operation Cadence has been responsible for
seizing almost 29 metric tons of cocaine since its inception.
However, annual Cadence cocaine seizures have declined. The
number of detected flights to the seven countries of Central
America fell from 84 in 1992 to 25 in 1993. Suspected trafficking
flights into Guatemala fell from 57 in 1992 to 13 in 1993. As a
result of Operation Cadence's ability to successfully seize a
growing percent of those aircraft choosing to land in Guatemala
and six consecutive successful interdiction operations during the
June to September 1993 period, traffickers have avoided Guatemala
and no suspected trafficking flights have been detected entering
the country between October 1993 and March of this year. </p>

<p> Operation Cadence achievements, however, have had little
impact on the flow of drugs to the United States. This is because
traffickers have changed to different modes of transportation
that are much more difficult to identify and stop. For example,
traffickers are increasingly using over-land and oversea air
drops to deliver cocaine to Central America. Traffickers are also
said to be changing their routes to avoid radar assets on the
northern coast of South America. A DEA official involved in
Operation Cadence told us that traffickers are believed to be
flying small aircraft into the jungle area that separates
Colombia and Panama, trucking drug cargoes across Panama, and
reloading the drugs on small aircraft that mix with legitimate
air traffic in the region. In addition, DEA reports indicate that
maritime vessels and air cargo containers are now responsible for
the bulk of the cocaine being moved into Central America and much
of the cocaine being smuggled into the United States. The use of
ships and boats allows cocaine to be transported in greater bulk
and more easily concealed--increasing the difficulty of detection
when commingled with legitimate cargo. </p>

<p> The large volume of vehicular traffic crossing into Mexico
from Central America also provides traffickers with ample
smuggling opportunities. Once into Mexico, whether by air, boat,
or land, the drugs are usually destined for the United States.
Almost 6,600 tractor trailer trucks and 21 1,000 passenger
vehicles cross the U.S.-Mexican border each day making drug
shipments difficult to detect. </p>

<p> The Central American nations through which these drugs travel
have neither the resources nor the institutional capability to
address the new drug trafficking modes and are heavily dependent
on U.S. assistance. Various U.S. government agencies are working
with Central American countries on a number of small-scale
projects to address new trafficking modes. However, the outcome
of these efforts is uncertain due to the limited host country
capabilities and changes in U.S. program emphasis from drug
interdiction in the transit countries of Central America to
intercepting drugs in the source countries of South America. </p>

<p> <u>U.S. AGENCIES EFFORTS TO CONTROL DRUG TRAFFIC FACE
OBSTACLES</u> </p>

<p> For fiscal year 1993, State, DEA, DOD, and the U.S. Customs
Service programmed over $48 million to support Operation Cadence
and other interdiction activities in Central America. This
expenditure primarily represents the cost of U.S. personnel and
services and the operation of U.S.-owned radar and aircraft.
Using various land-, sea-, and air-based radar, DOD programmed
$24.7 million on detecting and monitoring drugtrafficking
aircraft as they left South America and approached the Central
American isthmus. The U.S. Customs Service spent at least $9
million to monitor suspect trafficking aircraft and track them in
Central American airspace. The Department of State budgeted $6.1
million to operate and maintain aircraft used to transport
Cadence personnel to aircraft landing sites and $1 million to
train and support Guatemalan police personnel involved in
interdiction operations. DEA spent $828,000 to support the
deployment of Operation Cadence teams to the region and $6.5
million to operate its offices in six Central American countries.
</p>

<p> In addition to supporting Operation Cadence, the Department
of State programmed almost $8 million to improve the drug
interdiction capabilities of six Central American nations;
support drug eradication efforts; and inform Central American
citizens about the adverse impacts of drug production,
trafficking, and abuse. </p>

<p> <u>Obstacles to Successful Interdiction Operations</u> </p>

<p> In addition to problems inherent in identifying and
interdicting drug traffickers, U.S. efforts in Central America
face a number of other obstacles, some of which involve national
sovereignty and jurisdictional issues. For example, Operation
Cadence activities in Belize were suspended for about a year
because the government of Belize prohibited the entrance of
Cadence personnel armed with M-16 rifles. <b>Belize, </b>continues
to prohibit Department of State helicopters armed with M-60
machine guns from flying over Belize. Similarly, the government
of Honduras does not allow Guatemalan aircraft or personnel to
fly over its territory. According to one State Department
official, regional suspicions have also inhibited joint training
and adversely affected joint drug interdiction operations. </p>

<p> At a 1993 conference, Central American presidents discussed
greater antidrug cooperation and pledged their commitment to
develop specific regional counterdrug programs within 6 months.
To date, however, none of the actions approved at the presidents'
conference have been initiated. </p>

<p> <u>INTERDICTION CAPABILITIES OF CENTRAL AMERICAN COUNTRIES
ARE SEVERELY LIMITED AND HIGHLY DEPENDENT ON U.S</u>. <u>ASSISTANCE</u>
</p>

<p> Although all of the Central American countries--Belize, Costa
Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and
Panama--have drug control efforts underway, no country possesses
the technical, financial, or human resources necessary to run an
efficient drug interdiction program. In addition, none of the
countries has an organization in place to effectively counter the
overland or maritime drug movement. The limited interdiction
efforts that they do undertake face obstacles and are highly
dependent on U.S. assistance. </p>

<p> 3 Department of State helicopters used in Operation Cadence
are operated and maintained by a U.S. government contractor,
which employs Guatemalan civilian pilots. Also, Cadence
interdiction teams include a number of host nation law
enforcement personnel who are restricted to operations within
their country. </p>

<p> <u>Limited Capabilities and Obstacles</u> </p>

<p> None of the Central American countries have the resources
necessary to purchase sophisticated equipment and develop
well-trained personnel to combat the well-financed, creative, and
highly adaptable drug traffickers. No Central American nation has
a navy or coast guard capable of adequately patrolling all of its
territorial waters. For example, four Honduran Navy ships are
responsible for patrolling that country's 400 mile Caribbean
coast. At the time of our field visit, three of these ships were
in dry dock, and Honduras, for a long period of time, could not
afford fuel for the fourth ship. </p>

<p> Programs specifically dedicated to counternarcotics
activities suffer from inadequate funding. In Honduras, for
example, anti-drug police officers earn as little as $60 a month.
</p>

<p> Corruption also limits the effectiveness of Central American
governments' narcotics control efforts. In its 1993 and 1994
reports to Congress on the international narcotics control
strategy, State reported concerns of narcotics related corruption
in all seven countries of Central America. </p>

<p> <u>Funding for U.S. Narcotics Control Activities Is Declining</u>
</p>

<p> As a result of budgetary constraints and concern over the
effectiveness of State's narcotics control program, Congress
reduced the funds available for this worldwide program from
$147.8 million to $100 million in fiscal year 1994. During fiscal
year 1993, the United States provided a combined total of $6
million in narcotics control assistance to six of the seven
Central American countries. Current plans are to provide these
countries with $3 Billion during fiscal year 1994. </p>

<p> To accommodate reduced funding level in Central America,
State Department terminated the deployment of an
interdiction/eradication helicopter to Belize, reduced the number
of helicopters it had deployed to Guatemala, and greatly reduced
the number of flying hours available to support Operation Cadence
interdiction activities. This reduced level of aviation support
has adversely affected interdiction efforts, since DEA has had to
reduce the number of Operation Cadence teams in Guatemala. </p>

<p> In February 1994, the White House released the new national
drug control strategy, which changed the focus from interdicting
drug shipments in the transit zone toward stopping the flow of
drugs at their source. Along with the shift in emphasis, the
strategy clearly envisions a reduced role for DOD and its
detecting and monitoring assets in the transit zones. The impact
of this strategy shift is not yet clear. </p>

<p> Mr. Chairman, that concludes my statement. I will be happy to
answer any questions you or members of the Subcommittee have. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>