
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B040-95</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1g.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113214 text/html 56245
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:31:55 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:05 GMT
Content-length: 56027
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Effects of Long-Term Cannabis Use</h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Patterns of marihuana use in Western countries, particularly
the United States are primarily long term (two t o 10 years).
Additionally, Western investigators have been able to observe
those who use marihuana at most, daily and more often, moderately
or intermittently. Consequently, observed effects are rare.
Knowledge is incomplete but certain trends appear to be emerging
in regard to American usage patterns. </p>

<p>The relevance of Eastern reports of heavy hashish use is
uncertain. Nutrition, disease prevalence and quality of medical
care impose limits on transferring Eastern observations to
Western conditions of use.<br>
</p>

<p><b>DEPENDENCE AND TOLERANCE</b> </p>

<p>Neither severe physical dependence, nor prominent withdrawal
symptoms after abrupt termination of very heavy usage is
suggested by some overseas experience (Charen and Perelman, 1946;
Fraser, 1949; Ludlow, 1857, Marcovitz and Myers, 1944; Siler et
al., 1933; Walton, 1938). Other studies, however, suggest marked
psychological dependence from heavy use producing compulsive drug
taking in very heavy users (Indian Hemp, 1893; Chopra and Chopra,
1957; Bouquet, 1944; Lambo, 1965). </p>

<p>Psychosomatic abstinence syndromes often reported were
physical weakness, intellectual apathy, loss of appetite,
flatulence, constipation, insomnia, fatigue, abdominal cramps and
nervousness, restlessness, and headache. For most heavy users the
syndrome of anxiety and restlessness seem to be comparable to
that observed when a, heavy tobacco smoking American attempts to
quit smoking. </p>

<p>However, the psychological dependence appears to be severe as
evidenced by the f act that one group of subjects were unable to
cease their habitual use although the frequency of use, was only
eight to 12 times per month (Soueif, 1967). This psychological
dependence may have made some users claim physical dependence so
that the government did not terminate dispensing them their drug.
Studies in the United States using must lower doses for shorter
periods of time have revealed little if any evidence of
psychological dependence (Bromberg, 1934 Mayors Committee, 1944;
Williams et al., 1946). </p>

<p>Tolerance to the subjective and depressant effects of the drug
(discussed in an earlier section) does probably occur in man,
with heavy use. Thus, increasingly larger and more frequent doses
become necessary to experience the desired effects. </p>

<p>Several investigators have recently studied the question of
physiological and psychological dependence to Delta 9 THC in
monkeys using intravenous self-injection techniques. </p>

<p>Deneau and Kaymakcalan (1971) demonstrated that no monkey
initiated self-administration over a three-week period when given
the opportunity to self-inject a behaviorly effective dose of 100
micrograms per kilogram of Delta 9 THC in a Tween solution. The
researchers subsequently administered to these monkeys this dose
every six hours. Tolerance developed to the behavioral effects
within a few days. Dose administered was progressively increased
up to 400 micrograms per kilogram over the course of a month.
When the injections were abruptly discontinued, all six monkeys
showed after twelve hours, behavioral and physiological changes
described by the researchers as mild abstinence signs. Two of the
six monkeys then initiated and maintained for several weeks the
self-administration of THC. </p>

<p>The investigators believe these findings are evidence for mild
psychological and physiological dependence on THC. However,
vehicle controls were not included in the research design. Thus,
the abstinence signs and subsequent behavior may possibly be
accounted for by the biological effects in of the Tween vehicle. </p>

<p>Harris et al. (1972) utilized several procedures to maximize
the possible conditions necessary for developing self-injection
in monkeys. These procedures included: spontaneous Delta 9 THC
self administration with no previous training to the technique;
self-administration of A' THC after training, with cocaine alone
and a mixture of cocaine and Delta 9 THC. Doses utilized ranged
from 20 to 500 micrograms per kilogram suspended in
polyvinylpyrrolidone. In all cases, monkeys failed to self
-administer Delta 9 THC. </p>

<p>The researchers conclude that A' THC lacks the reinforcing
effects of psychomotor stimulants and depressants which monkeys
readily self infuse with no auxiliary incentives. Also Delta 9
THC lacks a reinforcing function even for monkeys that are
well-trained with cocaine and have experienced several days of
rather large quantities of Delta 9 THC during the early pleases
of extinction of the cocaine reinforced response. </p>

<p>Finally, the results demonstrate that a two week period of
exposure to Al THC (in a mixed solution with cocaine) does not
result in the degree of homeostatic imbalance which occurs with
morphine, ethanol, barbiturates and sometimes the amphetamines
which accounts for the continued self-administration of these
drugs.<br>
</p>

<p><b>PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS<br>
</b></p>

<p>Permanent congestion of the transverse ciliary vessels of the
eye and accompanying yellow discoloration is the only physical
effect firmly linked to long-term marihuana use (Ames, 1958;
Chopra, and Chopra, 1957; Dhunjibhoy, 1928). Although there are
several suspected or reported effects, none has been conclusively
demonstrated in a valid study. Some (Chopra and Chopra, 1939;
Indian Hemp, 1893) claim that bronchitis, asthma and other
respiratory problems may be produced by chronic and excessive use
of potent compounds in India. Eastern smoking, preparations are
often a mixture of tobacco and hashish. </p>

<p>Indian users reportedly exhibit digestive tract abnormalities,
weight loss and disturbed sleep (Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Soueif,
1967). However, the contributing factors of poor living
conditions, malnutrition and prevalence of communicable disease
could not easily be separated. </p>

<p>A high percentage of heavy Moroccan users have developed
obliterative arteritis of the lower extremities (Sterne, 1960)
possibly related to the occurrence of tropic foot ulcers (Ganja
-foot) (Miras, 1965). The progression of this abnormality is
claimed to parallel prolonged use of the drugs. </p>

<p>Mendelson et al. (1972) were unable to demonstrate clinically
significant abnormalities in the extensive battery of tests
performed which could be attributed purely to the subjects
long-term use of marihuana. No histories were obtained of
neurological, hepatic, renal, pulmonary, cardiac,
gastrointestinal, (renitourinary, or nutritional disorders. No
history of psychotic illness was given. </p>

<p>All subjects were Judged to be in normal mental, health by
psychiatric interview and psychological tests (MMPI and Edwards
Personality Preference Inventory). Three subjects were felt to be
neurotic. </p>

<p>Pre-drug complete physical exams, chest X-ray,
electrocardiogram, urinalysis, complete blood count and blood
chemistry profile did not demonstrate, any clinically significant
abnormalities. No subject showed evidence of poor nutrition. </p>

<p>Pulmonary vital capacity and one second forced expiratory
volume were reduced in 12 of the 20 subjects initially. These
changes were not correlated with either current cigarette smoking
or f requency or duration of marihuana smoking. Histories of past
cigarette use, past patterns of marihuana use and past or present
contact with environmental air pollutants were inadequate to
attempt to account for these pulmonary findings. </p>

<p>Many of the subjects were in fair to poor physical condition
as judged by a cardiac exercise tolerance test. </p>

<p>Four of the 20 subjects' initial performance on a battery of
cognitive functions tests was poorer than would have been
predicted by high average to superior I.Q. scores and educational
backgrounds. One of the casual subjects demonstrated improvement
with retesting consistent with good brain function. Thus,
behavioral impairment was present in three subjects.<br>
</p>

<p>Whether the impairment is related to prior drug histories,
particularly the excessive use of LSD by the two heavy users,
cannot be ascertained. For the casual users, nothing in the case
histories possibly elucidated the reason for relatively poor
performance based on the exceptionally high I.Q., 139 and 128. </p>

<p>Many Western investigators have suggested that smoking hashish
or marihuana may possibly cause bronchitis, asthma or
rhinopharyngitis (Bloomquist, 1967; Waldman, 1970; Tylden and
Wild, 1967; Schwartz, 1969). </p>

<p>Tenant et al. (1971) described bronchitis, sinusitis, asthma
and rhinopharyngitis in 22 American soldiers in Germany who
smoked daily enormous quantities (100 grams or more) of hashish
for six to 15 months. These conditions, believed to be caused by
irritation of the respiratory tract by hashish smoke, seemed to
improve, with diminished hashish use. </p>

<p>Twenty-one of the subjects were tobacco cigarette, smokers and
occasionally smoked hashish rolled in a tobacco cigarette. Nine
patients had symptomatic bronchitis. Five of these subjects
underwent pulmonary function tests while consuming their usual
daily amount of hashish and again three days after discontinuing
use. A mild obstructive pulmonary deficit was demonstrated which
was at least partially corrected with diminished hashish intake.
Hashish contributed to rbinopharyngitis in 12 of the patients and
this effect was not allergic in origin. Urticaria, acne, diarrhea
and gastrointestinal cramps were less frequent complaints.
Extensive hemotological and hentochemical studies including liver
function tests were performed and were within normal limits. </p>

<p>Mann et a]. (1970, 1971) and Finley (1971) studied the effect
of marihuana smoking on the pulmonary function of eight
non-cigarette smoking marihuana smokers (20-27 years old).
Marihuana smoking history was defined in marihuana
cigarette-years, that is, one marihuana cigarette daily for one
year or the equivalent over a longer or shorter period. The mean
marihuana cigarette years for the group was 11 and the range from
2.5 to 26. Three of the marihuana users also used hashish. Chest
X-ray, comprehensive spironietry deterinitiations, lung volumes
and carbon monoxide diffusion studies were observed and retested
with prednisone. Pulmonary functions were essentially normal for
all of the non-cigarette smoking marihuana smokers and
non-smoking controls.<br>
</p>

<p>These investigators were able to distinguish differences in
quantity and structure and function in pulmonary macrophages and
minor material between marihuana smokers and nonsmokers. In
tobacco smokers more marked changes were noted. These changes do
not indicate a diminution in defensive capacity of these cells. </p>

<p>Kew et al. (1969) has suggested a possible hepatotoxic effect
of marihuana. right persons who smoked marihuana for two to eight
years, at least six times a week, evidenced mild liver
dysfunction by liver function tests and liver biopsy. Several of
the patients admitted to the use of alcohol and oral amphetamines
but denied use of intravenous drugs. The authors concluded that
the findings were not unequivocally due to marihuana. </p>

<p>Hochman and Brill (1971) noted abnormal liver function tests
in 10 of 50 frequent marihuana users. However, all admitted to
long-term, regular and heavy use of alcohol. When these subjects
abstained from alcohol for one month but continued their usual
marihuana usage, evidence of disturbed liver function cleared in
nine out of 10 subjects. </p>

<p>Recently, Liskow et al. (1971) reported the appearance of an
anaphylactoid reaction in a 29year-old woman after smoking
marihuana for the first time. Skin tests were positive for an
allergy to marihuana, constituents. Allergy to marihuana,
especially in areas of the country where it grows wild, may be
more common than generally believed. </p>

<p>Campbell et al. (1971) presented evidence of ventricular
dilatation consistent with cerebral atrophy by air
encephalography in 10 young males (average age 22) with histories
of consistent marihuana use for three to 11 years as well as less
frequent use of LSD and amphetamines. The first four of the
patients had been referred originally for neurological
investigation of behavioral change, memory loss or headache. The
remaining six subjects were selected from patients tinder
treatment for drug abuse because of their long history of
marihuana use and concomitant neurological and behavioral
symptoms. </p>

<p>However, the patients showed personality behavioral and mental
disorders, as well as histories of head trauma and psychomotor or
grand mal epilepsy that are commonly associated with
ventriculographic changes. Also alcoholism can be associated with
these findings. Additionally, the authors compared their subjects
ventriculograms with those of normal young adults originally
referred for loss of consciousness, syncope and headache without
subsequent development of neurological illness. </p>

<p>Thus, the authors demonstrated dilation of the third
ventricle, of the frontal or temporal horn, or of the trigone of
the lateral ventricle. All of these are commonly associated with
personality and mental disorders such as these patients shelved.
However, whether these changes are caused by marihuana is not
proven because no specific neuropathological cause for the
cerebral atrophy was identified. Further carefully designed
studies are required to clarify this finding. </p>

<p>The LaGuardia Report (Mayor's Committee, 1944) indicated no
damage to the cardiovascular, digestive, respiratory and central
nervous system, nor the liver, kidney or blood in individuals who
had used from two to 18 cigarettes of unknown potency (average
seven) for a period of two-and a-half to 10 years (average
eight). However, this study was not up to modern standards as it
lacked double-blind precautions and placebo controls and adequate
statistical analysis of the data. Bias was present in reporting.
Small numbers of prisoners were used as subjects. </p>

<p>Another less comprehensive American study of 310 individuals
who used marihuana on the average of seven years was performed on
soldiers (Freedman &amp; Rockmore, 1946). It did not demonstrate
any evidence of physical or mental deterioration.<br>
</p>

<p>Another team of investigators (Meyer et al., 1971; Mirin et
al., 1970) examined a group of 10 male marihuana users (average
age 25) who had consumed the drug about 20 to 30 times a month
for all average of 4.4 years (one-half to five year range) and
had smoked daily for three of the 4.4 years. Heavy use was
correlated with psychological dependence, search for insight or
meaningful experience, multi-drug use, poor work adjustment,
diminished goal directed activity, decreased ability to master
new problems, poor social adjustment and poorly established
heterosexual relationship. No physical or neurological or
psychiatric abnormalities were noted in their work-up. </p>

<p>Indeed, numerous American investigators have not reported
abnormalities in baseline, examinations of their experimental
subjects who have various patterns of marihuana use from very
infrequent to many times a day.<br>
</p>

<p><b>GENETICS AND BIRTH DEFECTS<br>
</b></p>

<p>Much concern about possible effects on the unborn generations
has arisen because of marihuana's use by persons in their
reproductive years. Presently, most studies are preliminary.<br>
</p>

<p>There are three isolated case reports in man (Gelehrter, 1970;
Carakiishansky et al., 1969; Heelit et al., 1968) of birth
defects in mail in the offspring of parents who had used
marihuana and LSD. However, due to their complex gestational
histories and the high level of birth defects seen in a
&quot;normal&quot; population, a causal relationship cannot be
attributed to cannabis or anything else. At present, there is no
substantial evidence indicating that marihuana at the dose
commonly used is a teratogen in man. </p>

<p>Marihuana has been implicated as a teratogen in animals by
several groups at high doses. One study (Miras, 1965) showed
reduced fertility in rats impregnated after being fed a diet
containing marihuana extract for several months. However, the
offspring were normal. The reduced fertility may be related to
the finding of marked decrease rate of cellular division, but
without chromosomal damage, -when Delta 9 or All THC is added to
white blood cell cultures (Neu et al., 1969 Martin, 1969). </p>

<p>Dorrance et al. (1970) and Gilmore et al. (1970) detected no
significant difference in lymphocyte chromosomes in groups of
users and nonusers. No significant differences were, found in
lymphocyte chromosomes between heavy, long-term. Jamaican ganja
users and matched nonusers. (Rubin and Comitas, 1972) </p>

<p>Pregnant mice injected with cannabis resin on day six of
gestation caused stunted but not malformed offspring. Fetal
reabsorption occurred when the dose was given on days one to six
(Persand and Ellington, 1967). A second experiment using rats
injected on days one to six produced a high frequency of
malformed progeny. Another investigator (Geber, 1969; Geber and
Schramm, 1969) demonstrated congenital malformations in fetal
hamsters and rabbits after large multiple doses of cannabis
extract. </p>

<p>Another group (Pace et al., 1971) have administered a wide
range of dosages of Delta 8 and Delta 9 THC and marihuana extract
by subcutaneous, intraperitoneal and intravenous routes at
varying intervals pre- and post-conception to rats, hamsters and
rabbits. Delta 9 THC up to 200 mg/kg in variety of dose schedules
produced reduced average litter size and stunted pups at high
doses but no birth defects. A low incidence of abnormalities
occurred in rats and rabbits with marihuana extract, but a high
incidence of neonatal deaths was observed apparently due to
inadequate material lactation. </p>

<p>Studies with radioactive labeled THC (Idanpaaiini-Heikkila et
al., 1969) indicated that it did cross the placenta in high
concentrations early in gestation during the developmentally
labile phase. </p>

<p>These studies suggest that Delta 9 THC itself is not a
teratogen. Instead, perhaps some unidentified substance or
substances in the plant extract may be causing the teratogenic
effect noted by this group and others when injected. It is
uncertain whether this theoretical substance(s) volatilizes
during smoking or enters the pulmonary vasculature (Pace et al.,
1971).<br>
</p>

<p>Consequently, the following FDA label required of many
currently prescribed psychoactive drugs warning about use in
Pregnant women and women of childbearing age, appeals indicated.
&quot;Safe use of the drug during pregnancy and lactation has not
been established; therefore, in administering the drug to
Pregnant patients, nursing mothers, or women of childbearing
potential, the potential benefits must be weighed against the
possible hazards. Animal reproduction studies have yielded
inconclusive results. . . . There have been clinical reports of
congenital malformation associated with the use of this drug, but
a causal relationship has not been confirmed.&quot; <br>
</p>

<p><b>ORGANIC BRAIN DAMAGE<br>
</b></p>

<p>Deterioration of mental functioning allegedly due to long-term
use of marihuana can be subdivided into four major categories:
organic brain damage, mental illness-psychosis, amotivational
syndrome, and recurrent-pnuenomenia. As with alcoholism, it is
quite often impossible to distinguish whether the described
effects result from drug use or represent personality traits or
changes which would have been present without the drug use. </p>

<p>When marihuana consumption was irregular, mental deterioration
was not evidenced (Freedman and Rockmore, 1946) in 310 users with
an average history of seven years of use. Sixty-seven heavy users
in New York showed no evidence of dementia attributable to drug
use although they did have underlying personality disorders.
Another investigation (Mayor's Committee, 1944) of individuals
who used a daily average of seven marihuana cigarettes (two to 18
range) for average of eight years (two-and-a-half to 16 range)
showed no evidence of brain damage or mental deterioration. </p>

<p>Reports from India (Chopra, 1935; Chopra, 1940; Chopra and
Chopra, 1939; Chopra, Chopra, and Chopra, 1942) relate minor
impairment of judgment and memory, limited self -neglect and
insomnia, when potent preparations are consumed regularly in
large amounts for many years. No evidence for mental
deterioration or brain damage has been noted.<br>
</p>

<p>Miras (1967) has described a Greek population of heavy hashish
smokers who appear as outcasts from the community after 15 to 20
years of heavy hashish use. They appear mentally sluggish and
depressed. They are reported to exhibit laziness, psychic
instability, amorality and apparent lack of drive and ambition.
Their speech and behavior has been described as -peculiar. Some
degree of responsibility is retained in that some do work to
cover their living and drug purchasing expenses. Some of them are
still quite intelligent. Memory is not deteriorated except during
the intoxication. They appear overly suspicious. Samples of their
electroencephalograms were believed to demonstrate abnormalities.
</p>

<p>However, Miras believes that this effect is related to the
quantity and frequency of hashish use. He describes three
categories of long-term hashish users. Type A uses low doses
intermittently and is socially and mentally unaffected. Type B1
uses low doses daily and no interference is caused in function.
Type B 2 uses high doses daily causing dependence and performance
decrements. Type C uses very high doses daily allegedly causing
mental deterioration and abnormal behavior described above. Fink
and Dornbush (1971) are currently intensively studying this
population. The results will be described in a later section. </p>

<p>Non-differentiated psychosis noted in foreign populations may
also be included within this diagnostic category. These will be
discussed with the psychosis.<br>
</p>

<p><b>PSYCHOSIS</b> </p>

<p>The alleged connection between mental illness and cannabis
derives from Africa, the Middle East and India. These areas are
currently developing economically and scientifically, but for
many years medical care and especially psychiatric care were
given low priority. Many chronic illnesses still persist in these
countries which may affect mental functioning. Furthermore,
well-trained psychiatrists and methodologists are very rare in
mental hospitals in these countries. Consequently, the findings
of earlier studies are questionable due to lack of controls,
biased sampling and poor data collection and failure to account
for variables like nutrition, living standard, cultural factors
and socioeconomic status. </p>

<p>India's mental institutions were widely quoted to support the,
connection between excessive cannabis consumption and insanity.
The Indian Hemp Commission performed a thorough and objective
investigation of this question, although methodologically it was
not up to modern standards. The Commission was unconvinced of the
reliability of hospital statistics, where often the diagnosis was
not made by a psychiatrist but by a referring policeman. </p>

<p>Therefore, the Commission examined all admissions to Indian
mental hospitals for one year. They found that cannabis rise
could not be considered a factor in more than seven to 13% of all
cases of both acute and chronic psychosis. </p>

<p>Chopra et al. (1942) carefully performed the same examination
of admission to Indian mental hospitals from 1928 through 1939
when cannabis use was extremely high. They found 600 cases of
acute and chronic psychosis which could be traced to cannabis
use. Other reports from India have produced varying estimates of
the incidence of cannabis psychosis (Peebles and Mann, 1914;
Chopra, 1971; Dhunjibhoy, 1930 Evens, 1904). In Egypt 27% to 33%
of mental hospital admissions were cannabis related (Ireland,
1893; Warnock, 1903). </p>

<p>Benabud (1957) reported that cannabis users comprised 68% of
all mental hospital admissions in Morocco but only 25% of these
admissions could be called cannabis psychosis. Watt (1936 and
1961) reported that 2% to 3% of mental hospital admissions in
South Africa were due to the use of dagga (cannabis). </p>

<p>Boroffka (1966) and Asuni (1964) reported that 14% of
psychiatric admissions in Nigeria used cannabis. Toxic psychosis
accounted for half of these and cannabis was felt to aggravate
underlying schizophrenia in the remainder. </p>

<p>Several statistical studies from other countries including
Jamaica, Colombia, Algeria, Panama and Tunisia support this type
of data (Prince et al., 1970; Beaubrun, 1971 Allentuck and
Bowman, 1942; Bouquet, 1951; Chevers, 1870; Defer and Dielil,
1968; Fraser, 1949; Freedman and Rockmore, 1946; Porst, 1942;
Siler et al., 1933; Reales-Aroyco, 1953; Medical Staff, 1938). </p>

<p>Very little information is available on the prevalence of
psychosis in the overall population of cannabis users. Chopra and
Chopra (1939) classified 2% of the ganja and charas smokers and
0.5% of the bhang drinkers in their sample of 1,200 as psychotic.
</p>

<p>Roland and Teste (1958) estimated that no more than 0.5% of
kif (cannabis) smokers in Morocco suffer from recurrent mental
conditions. </p>

<p>Prince et al. (1970), in a study in Jamaica, noted that about
20 patients per year are admitted to mental or general hospitals
with acute psychotic reactions allegedly precipitated by ganja.
In one general and one mental hospital the, ganja smokers
comprised 20% of the psychiatric admissions. Furthermore, the
percentage of heavy ganja smokers in the community was
significantly higher than 20%. Thus, a larger percentage of
psychiatric admissions were, derived from non-ganja smokers in a
comparable lower socioeconomic segment of the population. </p>

<p>This finding contrasts with the 68% prevalence of cannabis use
among psychiatric admissions reported by Roland and Teste (1958)
which is considerably higher than the prevalence of cannabis use
in the general population of Morocco. </p>

<p>Studies based on several hundred cases indicate that the large
majority of individuals hospitalized in mental institutions for
&quot;cannabis psychosis&quot; have suffered acute toxic
psychoses associated with a sharp toxic overdose or massive
excesses among habitual users. Occasional smokers and moderate
habitual users seldom had psychotic reactions and then only when
there were substantial predisposing factors. </p>

<p>The acute clinical picture seen in these delirium with
confusion, disorientation, terror, and subsequent amnesia is that
of a severe exogenous psychosis. It does not typically involve
the type of thought disorder characteristic of schizophrenia.
Short recovery times ranging from a few days to six weeks are
uniformly reported in sharp contrast to the lengthy recovery
period of functional psychoses (Chopra et al., 1942; Roland, and
Teste, 1958; Defer and Diehl, 1968; Beaubrun , 1971; Stringaris,
1939). </p>

<p>Consequently, the psychiatric literature on cannabis-induced
chronic psychosis is quite confused. In general, it appears that
cannabis use probably produces a specific psychosis, but this
must be quite rare, since the prevalence of psychosis in heavy
cannabis users, world-wide, is only doubtfully higher than the
prevalence in general populations (Murphy, 1963). However,
incidence and prevalence data for these countries on psychosis of
users and non-users of cannabis does not exist. </p>

<p>A Morroccan investigator, Christozov (1965), studied 140
chronic heavy hashish users hospitalized in a mental hospital.
Their behavior was characterized by a confusional state of
consciousness, an impulsivity, an irresponsible attitude, and an
instability of mood and character. The patients were often
psychotic with persistent hallucinations. Intellectual functions
were reduced in over half the cases although this was related to
a low intellect prior to drug use. Electroencephalography showed
no specific changes. In addition, it was noted that half of the
patients were also alcoholics. <br>
</p>

<p>The majority of the patients were, sedated and showed a rapid
improvement, allowing them to be discharged and be employed,
Although it appeared that these characteristics are reversible,
the patient often returned to heavy drug use again causing return
of the syndrome. </p>

<p>Thus, the existence of a more long lasting cannabis-related
psychosis is poorly defined. Some evidence indicates the
existence, of a, quite rare slow-recovery, residual
cannabis-psychosis following heavy chronic use. Patients often
exhibit schizophrenic-like withdrawal, mental confusion and mild
residual hallucinations; but there is little tendency for the,
symptoms to become organized or proliferate. The symptoms develop
gradually and then subside gradually before proceeding to
full-blown psychotic symptoms. These may produce gradual psychic
deterioration in the habitual excessive user after prolonged
periods of time. Several authors theorized that the chronic
psychosis consists of recurrent acute attacks with gradual
deterioration in habitual excessive users (Roland and Teste,
1958; Chopra, et al., 1942; Stringaris, 1939; Sigg , 1963).<br>
</p>

<p>Most investigators, therefore, find it exceedingly difficult
to distinguish a psychosis due to cannabis from other acute and
chronic psychoses because, few, if any symptoms, are uniquely
found in it and not observed in other psychoses. Often the
diagnosis of cannabis psychosis is made because of the history of
heavy marihuana or hashish use. Several have suggested that a
characteristic cannabis psychosis does not exist and that
marihuana will not produce a psychosis in a well-integrated,
stable person (Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Reales-Aroyco, 1953). </p>

<p>In addition, alcohol often played a part in producing the
mental derangement (Medical Staff, 1938; Porst, 1942). Most data
refers to any form of psychosis in marihuana users; not
specifically cannabis psychosis. </p>

<p>Although it is fairly well-established that cannabis use
attracts the mentally unstable, the prevalence of major mental
disorder among cannabis users appears to be little if any higher
than that in the general population. Therefore, true cannabis
psychosis must be earlier, very rare or it must substitute for
other forms of psychosis. Perhaps, cannabis use alternatively is
protecting some less stable individuals from a psychosis (Murphy,
1963). </p>

<p>Because of these many difficulties, the role of cannabis use
in acute and especially chronic psychoses in these countries is
impossible to determine with certainty. </p>

<p>Finally, the Eastern literature often mentions the existence
of a characteristic psychic degeneration among older habitues
after prolonged excessive use (Chopra et al., 1942; Christozov,
1965; Indian Hemp Commission, 1893; Roland and Teste, 1958;
Stringaris, 1939; Warnock, 1903). They are frequently described
as showing a single minded, carefree state, such as
&quot;Kif-happy vagabonds.&quot; <br>
</p>

<p>Soueif (1967) administered psychomotor and cognitive
performance tests to imprisoned hashish users and non-hashish
users in Egypt. Preliminary results indicate that, on most of the
tests, the hashish sample scored 10% to 20% below the control,
and differences were larger for those with higher educational
levels. These results do not necessarily indicate a causal
relationship. Assessment of the significance of these findings
must await further description of the samples utilized. </p>

<p>Experience in the U.S. and Western Europe has not involved a
level of marihuana use comparable to the above-mentioned
countries. Consequently, the associated chronic psychotic
disturbances have not been seen.<br>
<br>
In Western countries, Bromberg (1939) and Allentuck and Bowman
(1952) reported on acute psychotic episodes with clear-cut onset
during the marihuana intoxication. Most symptoms cleared within a
few days although several had a, prolonged illness. These rare
acute psychotic episodes, discussed earlier, have been described
recently by a variety of authors in scattered countries (Smith,
1968; Weil, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Keeler, 1967; Milman, 1971;
Pesyko, 1970 Kaplan, 1971; Prince et al., 1970; Baker and Lucas,
1969; Grossman, 1969; Beaubrim, 1971; Spencer, 1970). </p>

<p>Some of these reported cases are quite transient and clear
rapidly with support of others and may be more like acute panic
reaction than psychosis. Still others appear to fit the picture
of transient toxic psychosis. </p>

<p>A few cases of marihuana psychosis reported by Kaplan (1971)
recovered very slowly after extensive psychotherapy. However, the
high incidence of schizophrenia and borderline states described
in these patients and their families may indicate that marihuana
use merely aggravated or precipitated an underlying psychosis in
these individuals. </p>

<p>George (1970) reported a case in Britain in which an acute
episode of confusion, disorientation, hallucination, anxiety,
paranoia, agitation and memory loss related to cannabis use was
followed by a more chronic schizophrenic-like syndrome with
thought disorder, incongruous affect and hallucinations. This
individual was experiencing considerable financial and marital
stress prior to these two separate acute episodes. The chronic
condition eventually responded to psychotherapy.<br>
</p>

<p>Bernhardson. (1969) reported aggravation by cannabis of
schizophrenic conditions in several Scandinavian patients. Perna
(1969) reported a case in which marihuana appeared to aggravate
an extended psychosis for which the patient had required
psychiatric treatment prior to the use of marihuana. </p>

<p>Keup (1970) reported 14 cases of prolonged psychotic symptoms
requiring hospitalization associated with the use of marihuana.
He noted evidence for the existence of a, high level of
psychopathology in many of them which predated their marihuana
use.<br>
</p>

<p>Kolansky and Moore (1971) in a widely publicized report of
cases of individuals ages 13-to-24 has claimed profound adverse
psychological effects from smoking marihuana two or more times a
week. </p>

<p>Of 38 individuals reported, all had decompensated
personalities, eight had psychoses (four attempted suicide) and
13, according to the authors became sexually promiscuous due to
marihuana. These clinical impressions were, all based on, at
most, a few interviews with the, individuals who were referred to
these psychiatrists for consultation for problems (including
one-third by legal authorities after arrest for possession of
marihuana). </p>

<p>Unfortunately, the authors made sweeping generalizations to
all young adolescent marihuana users from this biased and
non-representative sample. No attempt was made to interview other
young marihuana users who have not been referred for psychiatric
help, and the high prevalence of promiscuity and psychopathology
in comparable adolescent populations was totally disregarded. In
addition, case histories of previous mental health were obtained
introspectively from the patient, their families or the referral
source. </p>

<p>Thus, it is impossible, to state unequivocally, as the authors
do, that since marihuana use and psychiatric problems occurred at
the same time the former is causative of the latter. </p>

<p>Several authors have reported acute toxic psychosis following
marihuana use by soldiers in Vietnam (Talbott and Teague, 1969;
Colbach and Crowe, 1970, Bey and Zecchinelli, 1971). </p>

<p>All these cases represented transient reactions and cleared
rapidly with treatment. In many cases, personality disorders or
borderline personality states appeared to be predisposing factors
in the development of the psychotic state. Often revealed were
problems of identify diffusion, ego weakness, low self-esteem and
inability to form close interpersonal relationships. Also the
stressful conditions of the setting in which the drug was used
deserves emphasis. </p>

<p>Halikas et. al. (1971, 1972) performed intensive psychiatric
interviews on a population of 100 regular marihuana users and a
control group of 50 of their non-using or casually using friends.
Half of each group met the criteria for some psychiatric
diagnosis. Psychiatric illness and antisocial behavior most often
preceded marihuana use. </p>

<p>Some attempts have been made to estimate the incidence, of
psychosis and other adverse reactions to marihuana in Western
countries. Obviously, such estimates depend on how these
reactions are defined-one questionnaire study of 2,700
psychiatrists, psychologists, internists and general
practitioners in the Los Angeles area reported 1,887
&quot;adverse reactions&quot; to marihuana in an 18-month period
(Ungerleider et al., 1968). Adverse reactions were not defined by
the authors in the survey. Those reported ranged from mildly
unpleasant parental objections to use to severe anxiety or acute
psychosis. </p>

<p>Keeler (1967) reported on &quot;adverse reactions&quot; to
marihuana (paranoid feelings, etc.) which are limited to the
immediate period of intoxication. These phenomena occasionally
occur in such a light proportion of regular users that they are
of little interest in the present discussion, e.g., 80% of users
report they sometimes have paranoid reactions during the
marihuana intoxication (Tart, 1970). </p>

<p>Other estimates have been based on hospital admissions in
which marihuana use was the recognized precipitating cause.
Lundberg et al. (1971) reviewed the admission records for the Los
Angeles County General Hospital for the period 1961-1969 and
found marihuana use was listed as the reason for admission in
only nine out of 700,000 cases, and five of these were for
intravenous injections. </p>

<p>Keup (1970) reports that 0.9 per 1,000 of the 1968 admissions
to a Brooklyn psychiatric hospital were directly related to
cannabis use, and in another 1.9 per 1,000 it was found to be a
contributory factor. </p>

<p>In 1966, psychiatric hospitals in England listed 82 admissions
for which cannabis use was considered a factor (Baker and Lucas,
1969) in 1967, the number was 140 (George, 1970). For the 1966
data, further analysis revealed that eight of the 82 cases were
acute psychotic reactions to cannabis, 20 were related to
&quot;cannabis addiction as a way of life,&quot; and cannabis
could not be established as a definite factor in the remainder
(Baker and Lucas, 1969). </p>

<p>Colbach and Crowe (1971) estimate that among a population of
45,000 U.S. soldiers in Vietnam in 1969, some 40 to 50 per month
were hospitalized for psychiatric reasons and about five of these
were associated with (usually heavy) marihuana use. </p>

<p>Among college populations, Pillard (1970) estimates five to
seven marihuana-associated anxiety reactions are, seen per year
by the Boston University Health Service which cares for a student
population of 20,000; and Bialos (1970) reported 11 cases during
a one-year period (1968-1969) for a student population of 8,500. </p>

<p>If it is assumed that about one-third of the Vietnam and
college populations are using marihuana to some degree, the
annual incidence of hospitalized cases in Vietnam would be about
four per 1,000 users; the rate for student-health cases, 0.3 to
1.3 per 1,000 users. </p>

<p>The 1972 Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare's report
on Marihuana and Health prepared by the National Institute of
Mental Health noted in summary that marihuana can clearly
precipitate certain less serious adverse psychiatric reactions,
such as simple depression and panic, particularly in
inexperienced users. </p>

<p>In these reactions, non-drug factors may be the most important
determinants. Psychotic episodes may also be precipitated in
persons with a preexisting borderline personality or psychotic
disorder or those persons under excessively stressful conditions.
These acute psychoses appear to share considerable clinical
similarities with the acute toxic psychoses noted in the Eastern
literature. Both these psychoses resemble an acute brain syndrome
in that they occur primarily after heavier than usual usage and
are self-limited and short-lived after the drug is removed from
the body. </p>

<p>Some reports describing a prolonged psychotic course after an
initial acute episode cannot rule out the role of pre-existing
psychopathology. At the present time evidence that marihuana is a
suf ficient or contributory cause of chronic psychosis is weak
and rests primarily on temporal association. This issue may be
clarified by extensive epidemiological and controlled clinical
studies. (Secretary, HEW, 1972) </p>

<hr>

<p><b>AMOTIVATIONAL SYNDROME<br>
</b></p>

<p>Another type of possible mental deterioration or subtle
personality and behavioral changes associated with heavy
long-term cannabis use is the amotivational syndrome. </p>

<p>This syndrome has been described world-wide in its extreme
form when the most potent preparations are, used (Miras, 1967;
Chopra. and Chopra, 1957; Chopra et aL, 1942; Christozov, 1965;
Indian Hemp, 1893; Benabud, 1957; Warnock, 1903). Its most
extreme form depicts a loss of interest in virtually all
activities other than cannabis use. The resultant lethargy social
and personal deterioration and drug preoccupation may be
comparable to the skid row alcoholics' state. </p>

<p>Benabud (1957) describes the occurrence of this syndrome in
individuals chronically intoxicated with hashish. These
individuals are unlikely to show conventional levels of
motivation. Also the time required to obtain and consume enough
drug to maintain this state is not likely to leave much time for
other pursuits. The passive user tends to lose interest in work
and other long-term goals. </p>

<p>The question of whether there exists a significant causal as
opposed to an associative or correlational relationship, only
attracted attention when the traditionally achievement-oriented
Western youth adopted cannabis use. The traits of passivity or
amotivation are commonly described among heavy cannabis user
throughout the world. </p>

<p>A number of Eastern authors have expressed the opinion that
this is a result of organicity from chronic cannabis use in large
amounts, without objective studies being performed. </p>

<p>Recently the term has been used to describe the behavior of
numbers of young Americans who are for a variety of reasons
dropping out of school, refusing to prepare themselves for
traditional adult roles and smoking marihuana. </p>

<p>This type of social maladjustment is not comparable in
magnitude to that described in other cultures. However, the
individual may lose the desire to work, to compete, to face
challenges. Old interests and concerns are lost and the
individual's life, becomes centered around his compulsive drug
use. In addition, the individual may ignore personal hygiene,
experience loss of sex drive and avoid social interaction (Mirin
et al., 1970; Smith, 1968). </p>

<p>West (1970) and McGlothlin and West (1968) have described a
clinical syndrome as a result of observations of regular
marihuana users for four years. Their clinical impressions are
that these individuals show subtle changes in personality over
time which might represent an organic syndrome. These include
diminished drive, lessened ambitious decreased motivation,
apathy, shortened attention span, loss of effectiveness,
introversion, magical thinking, derealization and
depersonalization, decreased capacity to carry out complex plans
or prepare realistically for the future, a peculiar fragmentation
in flow of thought, and a progressive loss of insight. </p>

<p>Another psychiatrist, Powelson (1971), has also concluded on
the basis of over five years clinical experience with drug users
at the University of California, Berkeley, that the effects of
marihuana are cumulative. He, feels that after a period of
prolonged use a disorder of thinking characterized by a lack of
coherence and a pathological thinking process results. </p>

<p>These disturbing findings are being reported more frequently,
especially in adolescent and young-adult groups. Recently,
tentative and preliminary data (Francois et al., 1970; White et
al., 1970) has been presented on a group of 19 hospitalized
14-to-20-year-old patients with behavioral disorders who had used
marihuana and other drugs heavily. </p>

<p>In addition to &quot;amotivation,&quot; they showed primitive
and magical modes of thought and low frustration tolerance.
Subtle EEG patterns were detected although this finding is not
uncommon in adolescents with behavior problems. </p>

<p>The researchers are presently carrying out a study in
non-hospitalized adolescents without behavioral disorders who
have similar patterns of drug use in order to clarify their
findings. </p>

<p>Kornhaber (1971) believes that at least twice daily marihuana
use for a year, in a 13-to-18-yearold population, has a
deleterious effect upon the developing adolescent. The
intoxicated state facilitates a regression from
logical-mathematical thought processes to a more primitive
conceptual mode of fantasy and magical thinking and impairs
learning ability and judgment by decreasing attention and
concentration. Thus, the developing youth turns away from reality
toward fantasy and from structure and activity to passive
dependency. </p>

<p>Kornhaber suggests that marihuana facilitates the development
of normal adolescent turmoil into a pathological state. However,
he feels that the existence of the syndrome depends partially on
the individual's vulnerability to the drug influence. </p>

<p>A possibly milder variation of this syndrome has been
clinically observed by Scher (1970) in individuals in the
20-to-30 age group who have used marihuana daily for five years
while apparently functioning normally in society with good jobs,
often creative ones. These individuals begin to experience a
vague sense of functioning at reduced efficiency level. Thus, the
disabilities experienced are personal and internal ,and
constitute a vague neurotic depressive-like syndrome,. </p>

<p>In addition to the methodological problems of (Establishing
causative as opposed to associative relationships, it is also
very difficult to obtain a sample of heavy cannabis users in the
West who have not had substantial experience, with other drugs,
especially the strong hallucinogens. </p>

<p>Koridiaber (1971) has described a sample of 50 adolescent
psychiatric patients who used marihuana daily and also took other
drugs. He concluded that marihuana exercised a &quot;chronic,
tranquilizing, psychomotor-depressant effect&quot; among these
patients, and facilitated regression, fantasy and magical
thinking. School performance, participation in sports, and
personal hygiene also declined. He reported improvement in school
performance, mood and the underlying depressive symptoms for many
patients four to six weeks after discontinuing marihuana use. </p>

<p>Given there is a fairly strong tendency for heavy cannabis
users to be passive and apathetic, to emphasize the present over
the future, and to choose fantasy over rationality, there are
several ways by which this relationship might come about
(McGlothlin, 1972). </p>

<p>First,, persons who already exhibit these, traits may simply
be attracted to the use of cannabis. Sociologists tend to favor
this explanation, arguing that the relationship between cannabis
use and various behavioral indicators is not causal, but simply
one manifestation of a general pattern of youthful deviance or
rebellion (Goode, 1970). </p>

<p>Utilizing a large sample, Johnson (1971) found that marihuana
use is associated with impaired school performance and several
forms of deviance; however, other indicators such as premarital
sex and high school truancy predicted the dependent variable as
well or better. Tobacco and alcohol use were nearly as good
predictors as marihuana. </p>

<p>A second related explanation is that the illegal. context in
which the drug is taken forces the adoption of a nonconforming
life style. The users is thus further alienated from the dominant
culture through his close ties with the cannabis-using group. </p>

<p>Third, cannabis use and associated activities may largely
substitute for other interests. The individual may focus so much
of his time and energy on cannabis that he has little time for
other endeavors. </p>

<p>Fourth, heavy cannabis use may act pharmacologically to
produce a chronic tranquilized state. Although the acute phase of
intoxication is relatively short, there is some evidence of a
lethargic hangover effect (Haines &amp; Green, 1976). </p>

<p>Fifth, personality and behavior changes may result through the
routine process of learning via exposure. If an impressionable
youth spends a great deal of his time in the world of cannabis
intoxication, he may learn to think in a similar manner when not
intoxicated. In particular, he may learn to choose the drug
fantasy as an alternative to solving personal problems and facing
adult responsibility. </p>

<p>A related explanation is that cannabis acts as a catalyst,
creating a condition which facilitates change, providing other
necessary conditions are present. Cannabis, along with the strong
hallucinogens, produces a kind of mind-loosening effect in which
mechanisms providing structure and stability to perception of
self-image, environment, time sense,, etc., are temporarily
suspended. </p>

<p>The, more frequent users welcome this effect and report
utilizing the loosening effect of the drug to achieve further
personality change in the direction of less conformity and more
spontaneity, that is. the &quot;hang-loose ethic&quot; (Suchman,
1968; Simmons and Winograd, 1966). </p>

<p>In addition, the cannabis intoxication produces a heightened
suggestibility which likely makes the user more amenable to
adopting the attitudes and values of the subculture in which the
drug is taken. At a minimum, it may be concluded that the effects
of cannabis can reinforce and provide a rationalization for
previously existing tendencies. </p>

<p>Finally it is possible that chronic cannabis use can result in
organicity (Soueif, 1967). </p>

<p>In summary, if cannabis use produces personality and behavior
changes via one or more of the above mechanisms, the extent of
such changes is likely to be strongly related to the amount
consumed and the age of the user. According to evidence found in
Western literature, frequent use may be quite disruptive during
the formative years of adolescence. </p>

<p>On the other hand, the Eastern literature indicates that,
although the very heavy user (200 mg. THC or more per day) is
largely incapacitated, manual laborers often function adequately
while consuming amounts containing 30 to 50 mg. THC per day
(Roland and Teste, 1958; Chopra and Chopra, 1939). Similarly,
many musicians and entertainers in the United States have lived
productive lives while using marihuana (Winick, 1960). </p>

<hr>

<p><b>RECURRENT PHENOMENON</b> </p>

<p>Another poorly understood phenomenon is the spontaneous
recurrence of all or part of the drug intoxicated state (somatic
and visual sensations) when not under the influence of the drug.
This phenomenon has been called a &quot;flashback&quot; when it
occurs spontaneously or &quot;a contact high&quot; when it occurs
in the presence of others who are intoxicated. </p>

<p>Flashbacks have been reported with marihuana use alone.
However, these occurrences are apparently predominant in
marihuana users, who have taken hallucinogenic drugs previously.
These marihuana, users occasionally find that marihuana highs
change for them after their hallucinogenic. experiences. For
example, a simple hallucination experienced previously may
reoccur while high on marihuana. </p>

<p>These flashbacks may be interpreted as pleasant, even desired
experiences by some but unwelcome and disturbing to others. The
recurrences are benign in most individuals and tend to disappear
as the hallucinogenic experience recedes in time (Keeler, 1967;
Smith, 1968; Weil, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Blumenfield, 1970). </p>

<p>Truly vivid experiences which recapture most of the elements
of the original experience are extremely rare (Smith and Meld,
1970). More often they resemble an anxiety state occurring after
an unpleasant high or the recurrence of a new perceptual
awareness gained while high. It is difficult to differentiate
these recurrences from the not uncommon deja vu phenomenon in
which a person has the illusion that a perceived situation has
occurred before. These recurrences are intermittent and usually
occur within a few days to weeks following the use of marihuana.<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>