
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-68</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B033-424</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GENERAL/family4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122110953 text/html 27234
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:09:31 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:30:18 GMT
Content-length: 27016
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Richardson-Taylor Reunion News -- July 30, 1990</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->

<h1>RICHARDSON-TAYLOR REUNION NEWS</h1>

<hr>

<p>July 30, 1990 </p>

<p>Well, another reunion has come and gone and we can all breathe
a sigh of relief that we don't have to see <u>those</u> people
again for another year. It was a pretty good turnout with perhaps
a hundred people (anybody want to count?). As usual, everybody
got older but me. </p>

<p>We all owe thanks to Ruthie and Laurence for organizing
everything the way they did. The maps they sent me weren't the
greatest so, for all of you who thought Spring Lake park was
really in East Africa, I apologize for that. However, the parks
and all the fun and trimmings when we finally got there were very
good so I have to say that I thought they organized a pretty
successful reunion. You can always tell a successful reunion -
you can't recognize anyone. I hear that Margaret and Vic spent
most of Saturday morning with a nice family of Mexicans before
they realized it wasn't us. </p>

<p>I want to thank all of you who stepped forward to express your
appreciation for the work I did on the newsletter. I especially
want to thank all those who pulled Joanne off of me while she was
expressing her appreciation. My doctor says it was lucky I moved
when I did and there probably won't be any permanent scarring. </p>

<p>I understand that Margaret and Vic have volunteered to
organize next year's reunion, perhaps around the Carpenteria
area. I think they like that area primarily because it makes
people say &quot;Where?&quot;. It is around Santa Barbara - north
of L.A. It is a lovely oil-rich area with beautiful beaches which
have natural tar balls in the sand for your kids to track back to
your car. I am sure everyone will like it - just bring a few jars
of petroleum solvents. Assuming that Margaret still admits that
we are blood-related, I will keep you posted. </p>

<p>People who are easily offended should probably skip the Family
Doings section on Don Morris. I have made a considerable effort
to clean it up but it's hard to write anything about him and keep
it decent. </p>

<p>Sincerely, </p>

<p>Clifford A. Schaffer </p>

<p>Copyright 1990, C. A. Schaffer </p>

<p><b>FAMILY DOINGS </b></p>

<p>WHO THE HELL ARE THESE PEOPLE? </p>

<p>ARE THEY FAR, FAR AWAY FROM ME? </p>

<p>WHEN WILL THEY BE PAROLED? </p>

<p><b><u>INTRODUCTION</u></b> </p>

<p>This is the post-reunion dirt on everyone (that I am aware of)
who either showed up or sent back their forms. It is not the
complete family listing, if there ever could be one. I will do
another relatively complete update next year before the reunion. </p>

<p><b><u>PASSINGS</u></b> </p>

<p>Mary Taylor </p>

<p>Bob Taylor - son of Mary, one of the original old-time Taylors
</p>

<p>Jan Richardson - wife of Bud. She gave him a lot of love. </p>

<p>Our loss can only be measured by the blessings they have given
us. </p>

<p><b><u>THE FAMILY</u></b> </p>

<p><b>ALLSMAN, DOROTHY</b> (nee Richardson) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Clifford Male </p>

<p>Patrick Male </p>

<p>She mentioned again how much she enjoys the reunion but said
her pain medication wasn't as strong as it should be. Like
Margaret and Bud, she claims to have a copy of the family history
that Mary produced. They all said they would send me a copy but,
apparently, they are afraid of what I might do with it. </p>

<p><b>BARBER, PATRICIA</b> &quot;Teisha&quot; (nee Taylor) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Billy Male </p>

<p>Eric Male </p>

<p>The last time I saw Teisha she was about four years old. She
must be at least eleven or twelve by now. Teisha and husband Mike
and a friend have purchased a gold claim in the Siskiyou National
Forest. If they will agree to send me ten percent of whatever
they find I will promise not to send their address to everyone in
the family. </p>

<p>Mike is a Park Manager at Ft. Stevens Park in Oregon and
Teisha is an advertising clerk for Payless. Like all Taylors,
they spend most of their time in the woods, eating whatever they
manage to catch. </p>

<p>Both of the boys are groundskeepers for a military cemetery so
we should all make it a point not to ask them if they collect
anything. Billy is reportedly working for the county litter
patrol (if you don't have any they deliver) and will be hacking
trails through the wilderness for most of the summer. </p>

<p><b>BECK, META</b> (nee Richardson) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Ronni Female </p>

<p>Carrie Female </p>

<p>Meta showed up at the reunion in a jocular mood and spent most
of her time fighting with Bud over which one of them was going to
show off her grandson. It was a tough battle, but I think Meta
won - best two falls out of three. She must be doing well because
she is considerably better fed than the last time I saw her. </p>

<p><b>BERZ, RONNI</b> </p>

<p>She was there with her husband, George, who seems to be a nice
enough guy, so there is no real explanation how he got mixed up
with this family. Like all macho computer guys he spent a lot of
time talking about his big hard disk, and showing off his son. Of
course, Bud is so proud you would think he had the kid himself. </p>

<p><b>BRYER, BRENT</b> </p>

<p>Currently managing cousin Gary's RV sales and service company
in Redding, and apparently making a bundle doing it. </p>

<p><b>HARTER, BERRI</b> </p>

<p>She works in the electronics industry and is doing well. No
longer involved with Donald Trump. </p>

<p><b>HEDRICK, MARGARET</b> (nee Morris) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Scott Male </p>

<p>Nancy Female </p>

<p>This is the woman we all once knew as Margie Morris. She says
that her husband calls her &quot;Margaret&quot; which often leads
her to believe that she is really Margaret Sweet. It's easy to
get the two confused, especially if you are one. </p>

<p>She dragged Michael and me off into the woods and went into a
monster family-old-times-hugging fit. She has been married some
incredibly long time to a guy who is a combat veteran but is
scared to show up at the reunion, and is currently living with
Donna. They tell me that Nancy (current last name unknown) is
living in the same town. Most legal authorities agree that three
Morrises in the same town is prima facie evidence of a criminal
conspiracy. </p>

<p><b>KRAMER, JOANNE</b> (nee Morris) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Michael Andrew Porter Male </p>

<p>Laurence Kramer Male </p>

<p>Leslie Kramer Female </p>

<p>She says she is working as a supervisory
&quot;registered&quot; nurse (Fresno County still requires
Morrises to be registered) in a hospital in Fresno. Can you
imagine waking up from a coma to find Joanne standing over you?
I'd probably get religion. Would you trust this woman with your
bedpan? </p>

<p>Joanne listed no Significant Other and complained that the
destruction of the rain forests is making it hard for her to find
good dates. She pines for the good old days when she could just
hide down by the railroad tracks and catch them unawares. She
says that if anyone knows any good men she will pay all costs of
capture, crating, and shipping. </p>

<p>As achievements, Joanne says she finally got her student loan
paid off, probably making her the only Morris to ever pay a bill.
</p>

<p><b>KRAMER, LAURENCE</b> </p>

<p>Joanne says he is working at Vendo drilling holes in vending
machines which has always been sort of a family tradition among
the Morrises. I remember that most of the vending machines at
Fort Miller had the Morris family trademarks on them. Did you
ever wonder why the Morrises always paid for everything with a
bag of dimes? </p>

<p><b>KRAMER, LESLIE</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Crystal Female </p>

<p>She called me (fairly frantically but I won't say why) and
said she had fond memories from her youngest years of how her
Grandpa, Don Morris, would bounce her on his knee and sing her
his happy children's songs which are far too obscene to print.
Even though she was very young at the time, she still remembered
the words quite clearly and she sang one to me over the phone. I
could have had her arrested. </p>

<p>Joanne says that Leslie has fallen in love with a &quot;nice
Italian boy&quot; (as if there really was one), with an adorable
grandmother from the old country who speaks broken English, much
like the Morrises themselves. </p>

<p>Leslie brought the &quot;nice Italian boy&quot; to the reunion
(he was the one with the shoulder holster) and introduced him
around. Joanne tried to convince me that he is a Mafia hit man,
but that's only wishful thinking on her part because she wants
Leslie to date a man with a profession. </p>

<p><b>LEARD, DOUGLAS</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Douglas Jr. Male </p>

<p>Timothy Male </p>

<p>Gummo Male </p>

<p>Maurice Male </p>

<p>Zeppo Male </p>

<p>Douglas was there with wife Barbara. His list of children may
have some omissions because they didn't send back their forms. I
didn't get a chance to talk much with them but they seem to be
healthy and in good humor. </p>

<p><b>LEARD, LOUISE</b> (nee Richardson) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Douglas Male </p>

<p>David Male </p>

<p>Michael Male </p>

<p>She shamelessly claims that she spent twenty-six and a half
years &quot;working for the State of California&quot; (an obvious
contradiction in terms) before she retired. She says she now has
more time for the typical little old lady activities such as
traveling (your tax dollars are paying for that), gardening,
shopping (your tax dollars again), walking and just being lazy.
(How is this so different than government work?) </p>

<p>In an astonishing lapse of judgment she admits to having
produced three children, now variously known as Douglas, David,
and Michael. She has not yet seen fit to apologize to anyone for
that. </p>

<p>Louise said these letters were OK &quot;as long as you don't
pick on the Leards too much.&quot; Get real, lady. We ought to
have a Best Leard Joke contest. (No one gets to submit David
Leard.) </p>

<p><b>LEARD, MICHAEL</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>None admitted. </p>

<p>He bought a home in North Highlands and claims to be getting
cooperation from his neighbors, probably because they think he is
a member of a motorcycle gang. </p>

<p>He recently bought a .357 magnum, after trying mine out on the
crowds in downtown L.A., and is now laying for the neighbor's
cat. Fire the first shot in the air, Michael. It gets them
running and makes it a whole lot more fun. </p>

<p><b>LINK, BARBARA</b> (nee Sweet) </p>

<p>She and Dan didn't show up but Magaret brought some pictures
which may explain why. They live so far out in the boonies that
they have to drive in to town just to use the outhouse. </p>

<p><b>MORRIS, ELINOR</b> (nee Richardson) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Gary Male </p>

<p>Donna Female </p>

<p>Joanne Female </p>

<p>Harpo Male </p>

<p>Robert Male </p>

<p>Richard Male </p>

<p>Margie Female </p>

<p>Chico Male </p>

<p>Nancy Female </p>

<p>Steven Male </p>

<p>Jeff Male </p>

<p>Several people wrote to say they were surprised to learn that
was Don in &quot;Gorillas in the Mist&quot;. Amazing realism,
they said, but he looks a lot different with his hair combed. I
understand that he is currently working on his autobiography, <u>Knuckle
Tracks in the Sand</u>. </p>

<p>Don was there this year, but Elinor was not. Seems she gets a
backache just thinking about coming to the reunion. Don was
looking fairly fit (he can still carry his gut around) and he was
exceptionally well-behaved until someone coaxed him out of the
tree. </p>

<p>He is wearing suspenders now, which should help to cure the
breakaway pants problem which earned him the trophy for Most
Embarrassing Relative. After his belt got to a certain point on
his waistline there was nothing else to stop it, and away his
pants would go, far too fast for his reflexes to catch them. His
lack of underwear was the really special touch which put away the
competition year after year. I understand he even accidentally
mooned Nancy's fiance the first time they met. His timing was
always impeccable. </p>

<p>Actually the trophy for Most Embarrassing Relative was retired
in 1975 when he successfully completed his 10,000th career LPF
(Loud Public Fart). Younger family members will recognize it as
the Don Morris Memorial Award For Embarrassing Conduct, better
known as the &quot;Fellah&quot;. </p>

<p>He has had many, many memorable LPFs including some real
stunners in places such as churches, fine restaurants, and
crowded elevators. </p>

<p>One window-rattler occurred when someone invited him to attend
church (never a good idea) in the mistaken belief that it would
have some beneficial effect on his moral fiber. He stopped the
minister's sermon dead in its tracks and had half the
congregation looking out the windows for storm clouds. &quot;I
just couldn't resist,&quot; Don grinned. &quot;It echoes so
nice.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;The maitre' d thought I crapped my pants!&quot; Don says
proudly about another incident. </p>

<p>&quot;Sir, would you like some assistance?&quot; the maitre' d
asked discreetly. </p>

<p>&quot;No thanks,&quot; said Don, &quot;I can fart pretty good
all by myself.&quot; </p>

<p>In crowded elevators, his sighs of relief are perhaps even
more disturbing than the actual event itself. </p>

<p>If you really want to know some of the history of why the
trophy was retired, you should ask him to tell you about the time
he got hold of some bad water while driving across the desert
with his boss and his boss's wife. </p>

<p>He says he is too old to be a threat to women anymore but that
is probably just a ruse to lure them closer. It is still better
to be safe than sorry. When some men get to his age they tend to
lose their inhibitions. </p>

<p><b>NEWCOMB, DOUGLAS</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Joey Male </p>

<p>Pam Female </p>

<p>Josh Male </p>

<p>Recently moved from North Carolina to Oregon with wife Joann
and their multiple children. Currently working in Forklift sales.
</p>

<p><b>NEWCOMB, PAUL</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Kristi Female </p>

<p>Ruthie says Paul is a &quot;20-year man&quot; but she didn't
indicate whether that was the Marines or San Quentin. </p>

<p><b>NEWCOMB, RUTH</b> (nee Taylor) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Numerous, I am not clear how many, and I don't think she is
either. </p>

<p>She proudly confirmed the name of her fiance, Tom Springer -
she showed me the driver's license she found in his wallet. He
was there and he seemed to be a nice enough guy, but probably a
little dazed by it all, and more than a little concerned about
what Ruthie considers to be humorous. </p>

<p>Ruthie says she is getting married in August and her grandson
Ed will give her away. His is a joy I am sure we wish we all
could share. </p>

<p>Ruthie said that she thought that she would have five of hers
(so we know she has at least five children) there at the reunion
for the first time in 17 years (apparently a few of them were
just let out). She didn't tell me whether she actually achieved
that but how could I tell anyway? </p>

<p><b>NEWCOMB, STEVE</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Bridget Female </p>

<p>Steve is married to wife Colleen, and working as a carpenter
in Santa Rosa. </p>

<p><b>PORTER, MICHAEL ANDREW</b> </p>

<p>I got no word from Andy but instead received a note from some
woman who identified herself as Christie Clayton (an obvious
alias) and said that Andy had been snared by &quot;a nice young
girl&quot; (where have we heard that before?). She also said that
she was going to marry him next year and presumably attempt to
breed him in captivity. </p>

<p>From what Joanne says, she is apparently fairly well-educated
(a high school diploma and actual college classes and stuff) and
her interest in Andy has nothing at all to do with her primate
research project. Christie seems to be a devious type of person
so she will probably fit in well. Joanne says Christie works in
the Disaster Coordination Office for Orange County which is why
she insisted that Christie attend the reunion. </p>

<p>This same woman, or someone purporting to be her, showed up at
the reunion with Andy in tow. He used to be a scrawny little
sucker but he ain't no more - the Morris blood lines are
beginning to show as he ages. He is working as a customer service
rep - probably for a loan shark. He laughed about the tricks we
used to play on him when he was a kid. He said he got over most
of his anger soon after the casts came off. </p>

<p>Joanne says that Andy has surprised everyone and turned into a
&quot;responsible human being&quot;. One must keep Joanne's
perspective in mind. </p>

<p><b>QUIGLEY, DONNA</b> (nee Morris) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Rick Male </p>

<p>Amy Female </p>

<p>Manfred Male </p>

<p>Felix Male </p>

<p>Julius Male </p>

<p>Donna showed up with her boyfriend Lyle and no clear
explanation of where she got that last name. She and Margie spent
most of the time telling a lot of lies about me as a child. The
truth is that I never did any of those things. Neither she nor
Margie has provided a list of their children they can still
remember. </p>

<p><b>RICHARDSON, BECKY</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Refuses to say. </p>

<p>She showed up at the reunion with some apparently nameless
guy. I have seen him before but he still looks suspicious. She
said his name is &quot;Sadistic Sid&quot; Smith, but he doesn't
look quite that civilized. She did not say what his position was
in the motorcycle gang. </p>

<p>On the subject of her occupation she wisely pleads the Fifth
Amendment but says that she is making a major contribution to the
financial health of the California wine industry. She admits to
no children or, more correctly, says the government will not
release the records. </p>

<p><b>RICHARDSON, BUD</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Meta Female </p>

<p>Larry Male </p>

<p>Jerry Male </p>

<p>By Acquisition from Jan </p>

<p>Brent Bryer Male </p>

<p>Berri Harter Female </p>

<p>How many people knew his real name was Austin? Yeah, you're
lying too. Bud clearly holds the record for the best-preserved
alias - not even his own family knew his real name. </p>

<p>Bud, the elder statesman of the family, looks to be in great
shape. He said he was going to videotape everyone at the reunion
and have them actually identify themselves, but I guess some of
the family had legal objections or something so I don't know if
he got around to it. </p>

<p>As achievements, Bud lists ten grandchildren, and one great
grandson (it is undetermined whether the word &quot;great&quot;
refers to actual family lineage or is just Bud's opinion). </p>

<p>He also suggested that we should produce a family tree. He may
be so old that he is simply beyond shame. I have ordered some
computer software which will allow me to produce one. It should
embarrass everybody. </p>

<p><b>RICHARDSON, JAMES</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Becky Female </p>

<p>Jamie Female </p>

<p>I have to correct the impression I left when I said that
&quot;old farts&quot; were not greatly improved by aging. In
truth, he smells about as good as he ever did. </p>

<p>He and Edna were there and the years seem to be treating them
fairly well. Edna says she is still working while James has
already retired. James is no fool. </p>

<p>My kids tell me that James sagely counseled them to drink beer
and smoke pot. Thanks, James, you're a real help. Edna
specifically requested that Bonnie and I and kids attend the
reunion because (to paraphrase her) &quot;misery loves
company.&quot; </p>

<p>On Sunday James engaged Laurence and Don in a lively
discussion of which type of truck and tractor seats produce the
biggest hemorrhoids. I think they finally agreed on unpadded
metal tractor seats. Never let it be said that we don't have
intellectuals in this family. </p>

<p><b>RICHARDSON, JAMIE</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>None admitted. </p>

<p>Jamie says she is currently working as a &quot;respiratory
care practitioner&quot; which she did not explain, but says it is
not the same as selling pot. She said that she is currently at a
Catholic hospital but she didn't make it clear if that is where
she works, or just where they keep her at night. </p>

<p>Jamie says she previously spent fifteen years with the County
of Fresno. She must be referring to employment because they don't
usually hold people in county jails that long unless it is a long
series of offenses. She admits to no children and says she has
been spayed, which allows her to engage in a much greater variety
of disgusting behavior. </p>

<p>As achievements she says she has a cat and pays her own bills,
both of which are apparently new for her. As hobbies she says she
skis cross-country (it helps to be in practice when you are
taking it on the lam), and hikes in the woods, where she meets
more relatives than she cares to mention. Like Becky, she is
making a major contribution to the California wine industry, with
a marginal preference for corked, rather than screw-capped, wine.
</p>

<p><b>RICHARDSON, JERRY</b> </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Jerry Jr. Male </p>

<p>Terri Lynn Female </p>

<p>He and wife Karen did not show up. Bud says he is working for
Santa Clara County and is doing well. </p>

<p><b>RICHARDSON, LARRY</b> </p>

<p>He showed up with his hair and beard dyed mostly gray as part
of his Moses imitation. Like Meta, he seems to be pretty well
fed. I didn't get to talk to him much but Bud says he works for
Baltimore Cooling Towers in Madera and has just moved into a new
home. </p>

<p><b>RICHARDSON, PETE</b> </p>

<p>Pete showed up and related the story of how he told the truth
on a few occasions some years back. It's an old story, but he
tells it well, and we all enjoyed hearing it again. </p>

<p>He says he is going to run in the Nationals in Indianapolis in
August. If he will keep me posted, I will let you know how he
does. </p>

<p><b>SHEETS, KATHY</b> (nee Newcomb) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Ed Male </p>

<p>Drew Male </p>

<p>Ed is a lucky kid. Ruthie says that with feet like his he
never has to buy swim fins. Kathy works as a wine-maker and makes
extra money by renting out Ed's old shoes as duplexes. Terry, her
husband, drives a truck. Ruthie did not say whether he is a
Teamster so I don't know anything about his possible criminal
background. Ed and Drew are reportedly &quot;two of the very best
baseball players anywhere.&quot; (Ruthie's words, apply the
Taylor Veracity Factor.) </p>

<p><b>SWEET, MARGARET</b> (nee Richardson) </p>

<p>CHILDREN </p>

<p>Christine Female </p>

<p>Barbara Female </p>

<p>Julie Female </p>

<p>This year she became the first woman in the family to openly
admit having four-footed grandchildren. (Laura Richardson was
actually the first, with the birth of the Morrises, but everyone
was too polite to mention it.) She did a heavy-duty grandmother
routine and bored us all half to death with about a hundred
pictures of mountain lions, cheetahs, and the other beasts Julie
works with at the L.A. Zoo. They were cute. Margaret says that
Julie is well-behaved and does not fight with them over the food
dish. </p>

<p><b>TAYLOR, DON</b> </p>

<p>Bob &amp; Edith's eldest is a winemaker in Oakville, CA
(notice how many Taylors are involved in making wine) and
recently married wife Rosemary on April Fool's Day. Fools rush in
. . . </p>

<p><b>TAYLOR, EDITH</b> </p>

<p>She was at the reunion, looking good, and apparently no longer
on the run from the law. </p>

<p><b>TAYLOR, LAURENCE</b> </p>

<p>Laurence was there with his famous hat. It really makes you
wonder, doesn't it? At first I thought he wore it to hold his
brains in, but then I realized that couldn't be true. Some
relatives said that what I reported about Laurence was not
correct at all. Contrary to what I said, they asserted that
Laurence had not been caught telling the truth, and stated they
found it difficult to believe that he ever would be caught
telling the truth. My apologies, Laurence. </p>

<p>Laurence spent a good deal of time telling about his work with
the FAA. He says that he is not an Air Traffic Controller but
does something to maintain the equipment all of the Air Traffic
Controllers use. I am sure that we will all feel better about
flying just knowing Laurence is on the job. </p>

<p><b>TAYLOR, LOUISE</b> </p>

<p>She was there at the reunion looking good and doing well. No
word on whether she is still connected to the KGB. </p>

<p><b>TAYLOR, ROBERT</b> </p>

<p>Bob &amp; Edith's youngest is a history teacher and basketball
coach, presumably at some sort of school, in Woodland Hills,
California. He recently took it on the lam to Egypt, Greece, and
Turkey. No word yet on whether he managed to make it through
Customs coming back. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_entertainment_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="general.htm">General and Entertainment</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="16580" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>