
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-63</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-99</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hemprefs.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043803 text/html 75650
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:37:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:46 GMT
Content-length: 75432
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Historical and Literary References to Hemp - Part 1</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<h1>Historical and Literary References to Hemp </h1>

<p><b>A sampling of references to hemp (marijuana) throughout the
ages.</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>Aesop's Fables, Aesop, 550bc </p>

<p>The Swallow And The Other Birds </p>

<p>It happened that a Countryman was sowing some hemp seeds in a
field where a Swallow and some other birds were hopping about
picking up their food. &quot;Beware of that man,&quot; quoth the
Swallow. &quot;Why, what is he doing?&quot; said the others.
&quot;That is hemp seed he is sowing; be careful to pick up every
one of the seeds, or else you will repent it.&quot; The birds
paid no heed to the Swallow's words, and by and by the hemp grew
up and was made into cord, and of the cords nets were made, and
many a bird that had despised the Swallow's advice was caught in
nets made out of that very hemp. &quot;What did I tell you?&quot;
said the Swallow. </p>

<p>&quot;Destroy The Seed Of Evil, Or It Will Grow Up To Your
Ruin.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: History Of Herodotus</p>

<p>Book: Fourth Book, Entitled Melpomene </p>

<p>Author: Herodotus </p>

<p>Part III </p>

<p>73. Such, then, is the mode in which the kings are buried: as
for the people, when any one dies, his nearest of kin lay him
upon a wagon and take him round to all his friends in succession:
each receives them in turn and entertains them with a banquet,
whereat the dead man is served with a portion of all that is set
before the others; this is done for forty days, at the end of
which time the burial takes place. After the burial, those
engaged in it have to purify themselves, which they do in the
following way. First they well soap and wash their heads; then,
in order to cleanse their bodies, they act as follows: they make
a booth by fixing in the ground three sticks inclined towards one
another, ^1 and stretching around them woolen felts, which they
arrange so as to fit as close as possible: inside the booth a
dish is placed upon the ground, into which they put a number of
red-hot stones, and then add some hemp-seed. </p>

<p>74. Hemp grows in Scythia: it is very like flax; only that it
is a much coarser and taller plant: some grows wild about the
country, some is produced by cultivation: ^2 the Thracians make
garments of it which closely resemble linen; so much so, indeed,
that if a person has never seen hemp he is sure to think they are
linen, and if he has, unless he is very experienced in such
matters, he will not know of which material they are. </p>

<ol>
    <li>The Scythians, as I said, take some of this hemp-seed,
        and, creeping under the felt coverings, throw it upon the
        red-hot stones; immediately it smokes, and gives out such
        a vapour as no Grecian vapour- bath can exceed; the
        Scyths, delighted, shout for joy, and this vapour serves
        them instead of a water-bath; for they never by any
        chance wash their bodies with water. Their women make a
        mixture of cypress, cedar, and frankincense wood, which
        they pound into a paste upon a rough piece of stone,
        adding a little water to it. With this substance, which
        is of a thick consistency, they plaster their faces all
        over, and indeed their whole bodies. A sweet odour is
        thereby imparted to them, and when they take off the
        plaster on the day following, their skin is clean and
        glossy. </li>
</ol>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: History Of The Conquest Of Mexico </p>

<p>Book: Book VII. (Conclusion.) Subsequent Career Of Cortes. </p>

<p>Author: Prescott, William H. </p>

<p>Chapter V. Cortes Revisits Mexico, Part I. </p>

<p>It was the place won by his own sword from the Aztecs previous
to the siege of Mexico. It stood on the southern slope of the
Cordilleras, and overlooked a wide expanse of country, the
fairest and most flourishing portion of his own domain. He had
erected a stately palace on the spot, and henceforth made this
city his favorite residence. It was well situated for
superintending his vast estates, and he now devoted himself to
bringing them into proper cultivation. He introduced the
sugar-cane from Cuba, and it grew luxuriantly in the rich soil of
the neighboring lowlands. He imported large numbers of merino
sheep and other cattle, which found abundant pastures in the
country around Tehuantepec. His lands were thickly sprinkled with
groves of mulberry-trees, which furnished nourishment for the
silk-worm. He encouraged the cultivation of hemp and flax, and,
by his judicious and enterprising husbandry, showed the capacity
of the soil for the culture of valuable products before unknown
in the land; and he turned these products to the best account, by
the erection or sugar-mills, and other works for the manufacture
of the raw material. He thus laid the foundation of an opulence
for his family, as substantial, if not as speedy, as that derived
from the mines. Yet this latter source of wealth was not
neglected by him, and he drew gold from the region of
Tehuantepec, and silver from that of Zacatecas. The amount
derived from these mines was not so abundant as at a later day.
But the expense of working them, on the other hand, was much less
in the earlier stages of the operation, when the metal lay so
much nearer the surface. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Rollin's Ancient History: Egypt </p>

<p>Book: Chapter III. </p>

<p>Author: Rollin, Charles </p>

<p>Date: 1731 </p>

<p>Sections IV - VII. </p>

<p>Section IV: Of The Egyptian Soldiers And War </p>

<p>&quot;But let us imagine to ourselves a country where so great
a difference is not made between the several conditions; where
the life of a nobleman is not made to consist in idleness and
doing nothing, but in a careful preservation of his liberty, that
is, in a due subjection to the laws and the constitution; by a
man's subsisting upon his estate without dependence on any one,
and being contented to enjoy a little with liberty, rather than a
great deal at the price of mean and base compliances: a country,
where sloth, effeminacy, and the ignorance of things necessary
for life, are held in just contempt, and where pleasure is less
valued than health and bodily strength: in such a country, it
will be much more for a man's reputation to plough, and keep
flocks, than to waste all his hours in sauntering from place to
place, in gaming, and expensive diversions.&quot; But we need not
have recourse to Plato's commonwealth for instances of men who
have led these useful lives. It was thus that the greatest part
of mankind lived during near four thousand years; and that not
only the Israelites, but the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the
Romans, that is to say, nations the most civilized, and most
renowned for arms and wisdom. They all inculcate the regard which
ought to be paid to agriculture and the breeding of cattle; one
of which (without saying any thing of hemp and flax, so necessary
for our clothing,) supplies us, by corn, fruits, and pulse, with
not only a plentiful but a delicious nourishment; and the other,
besides its supply of exquisite meats to cover our tables, almost
alone gives life to manufactures and trade, by the skins and
stuffs it furnishes. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Narrative Of The Voyages Round The World </p>

<p>Book: Chapter II: Narrative Of Captain Cook's First Voyage
Round The World. </p>

<p>Author: Cook, Captain James </p>

<p>Date: 1779 </p>

<p>Part V. </p>

<p>In Eaheinomauwe there are no quadrupeds but dogs and rats; at
least, no other were seen by our voyagers, and the rats are so
scarce, that they wholly escaped the notice of many on board. Of
birds the species are not numerous; and of these no one kind,
excepting perhaps the gannet, is exactly the same with those of
Europe. Insects are not in greater plenty than birds. The sea
makes abundant recompense for this scarcity of animals upon the
land. Every creek swarms with fish, which are not only wholesome,
but equally delicious with those in our part of the world. The
Endeavour seldom anchored in any station, or with a light gale
passed any place, that did not afford enough, with a hook and
line, to serve the whole ship's company. If the seine was made
use of, it seldom failed of producing a still more ample supply.
The highest luxury of this kind, with which the English were
gratified, was the lobster, or sea cray-fish. Among the vegetable
productions of the country, the trees claim a principal place;
there being forests of vast extent, full of the straightest, the
cleanest, and the largest timber Mr. Cook and his friends had
ever seen. Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander were gratified by the
novelty, if not by the variety of the plants. Out of about four
hundred species, there were not many which had hitherto been
described by botanists. There is one plant that serves the
natives instead of hemp and flax, and which excels all that are
applied to the same purposes in other countries. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Political Works Of Thomas Paine </p>

<p>Book: Common Sense </p>

<p>Author: Paine, Thomas </p>

<p>Part III </p>

<p>On The Present Ability Of America. With Some Miscellaneous
Reflections. </p>

<p>In almost every article of defence we abound. Hemp flourishes
even to rankness, so that we need not want cordage. Our iron is
superior to that of other countries. Our small arms are equal to
any in the world. Cannon we can cast at pleasure. Saltpetre and
gunpowder we are every day producing. Our knowledge is hourly
improving. Resolution is our inherent character, and courage hath
never yet forsaken us. Wherefore, what is it that we want? Why is
it that we hesitate? From Britain we can expect nothing but ruin.
If she is once admitted to the government of America again, this
continent will not be worth living in. Jealousies will be always
arising, insurrections will be constantly happening; and who will
go forth to quell them? Who will venture his life to reduce his
own countrymen to a foreign obedience? The difference between
Pennsylvania and Connecticut, respecting some unlocated lands,
shows the insignificance of a British government, and fully
proves that nothing but continental authority can regulate
continental matters. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Origin Of Species </p>

<p>Book: Chapter XII. </p>

<p>Author: Darwin, Charles </p>

<p>Date: 1859 </p>

<p>Part II. </p>

<p>Single Centres Of Supposed Creation </p>

<p>Living birds can hardly fail to be highly effective agents in
the transportation of seeds. I could give many facts showing how
frequently birds of many kinds are blown by gales to vast
distances across the ocean. We may safely assume that under such
circumstances their rate of flight would often be thirty-five
miles an hour; and some authors have given a far higher estimate.
I have never seen an instance of nutritious seeds passing through
the intestines of a bird; but hard seeds of fruit pass uninjured
through even the digestive organs of a turkey. In the course of
two months, I picked up in my garden twelve kinds of seeds, out
of the excrement of small birds, and these seemed perfect, and
some of them, which were tried, germinated. But the following
fact is more important: the crops of birds do not secrete gastric
juice, and do not, as I know by trial, injure in the least the
germination of seeds; now, after a bird has found and devoured a
large supply of food, it is positively asserted that all the
grains do not pass into the gizzard for twelve or even eighteen
hours. A bird in this interval might easily be blown to the
distance of five hundred miles, and hawks are known to look out
for tired birds, and the contents of their torn crops might thus
readily get scattered. Some hawks and owls bolt their prey whole,
and, after an interval of from twelve to twenty hours, disgorge
pellets, which, as I know from experiments made in the Zoological
Gardens, include seeds capable of germination. Some seeds of the
oat, wheat, millet, canary, hemp, clover, and beet germinated
after having been from twelve to twenty-one hours in the stomachs
of different birds of prey; and two seeds of beet grew after
having been thus retained for two days and fourteen hours.
Fresh-water fish, I find, eat seeds of many land and water
plants; fish are frequently devoured by birds, and thus the seeds
might be transported from place to place. I forced many kinds of
seeds into the stomachs of dead fish, and then gave their bodies
to fishing-eagles, storks, and pelicans; these birds, after an
interval of many hours, either rejected the seeds in pellets or
passed them in their excrement; and several of these seeds
retained the power of germination. Certain seeds, however, were
always killed by this process. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: History Of Religions </p>

<p>Book: Religions Of China </p>

<p>Author: Foot Moore, George </p>

<p>Date: 1913 </p>

<p>Chapter II </p>

<p>Moral And Political Philosophy </p>

<p>Wang Ch'ung, who wrote toward the end of the first century of
our era, occupies in some respects a place apart in the history
of Chinese thought. He may be described as a materialistic
monist, and his physical philosophy somewhat resembles that of
Epicurus and Lucretius. At the beginning there was a homogeneous
vaporous or nebulous chaos. Out of this the lighter and the
heavier elements &quot;spontaneously&quot; - that is, without
intelligence or design - separated; the warm and light (elemental
fire) above, the cold and dark, represented by water, below. So
he adapts the old doctrines of Yang and Yin, fortifying himself
by quotations from the Yih-king and the Li-ki. The Taoist
Lieh-tsze developed a similar theory; but Wang Ch'ung, as pure
materialist, has no use for the mystical Tao nor for the primal
intelligence of Chu Hi and the Sung Confucianists. From the
combination and spontaneous interaction of these principles all
things arise. Man's body is of coarse matter, Yin; his vital
spirit and intelligence are of the fiery nature of the Yang.
Heaven - that is, the sky - is material just as truly as the
earth, only of a different composition, and its operations are
equally without design. It does not take note of men's doings to
punish the bad and reward the good. Heaven does not speak, nor
does it hear what men say; divination is absurd - how can the
shell of a dead tortoise or the stalks of a withered weed elicit
a response from Heaven! &quot;Some people think that Heaven
produces grain for the purpose of feeding mankind, and silk and
hemp to clothe them. That would make Heaven man's farmer or
mulberry-girl!&quot; The philosopher is fond of pricking man's
self-importance. To this vast frame of nature we are no more than
insects crawling on a human body. The struggle for existence is
proof that there is no wise and good purpose in creation.
&quot;If Heaven had produced its creatures on purpose, it ought
to have taught them to love one another, and not to prey upon and
destroy one another&quot; - precisely the argument of Epicurus. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: History Of Religions </p>

<p>Book: Religions Of Japan </p>

<p>Author: Foot Moore, George </p>

<p>Date: 1913 </p>

<p>Chapter I: Part II </p>

<p>To ward off ills caused by demons, especially the demons of
disease, the ancient Japanese sought the protection of a
particular group of gods, the Sahe no Kami, or &quot;preventive
deities&quot;, who are invoked in an old liturgical text to
defend the worshippers against the &quot;hostile and savage
beings of the root country,&quot; such as the &quot;hags of
Hades&quot; who pursued Izanagi. These deities were represented
by phalli, often of gigantic size, which were set up along
highways and especially at cross-roads to bar the passage against
malignant beings who sought to pass. In the liturgy referred to,
one of these gods is called &quot;No Thoroughfare&quot; (Kunado,
or Funado), the name of the staff which Izanagi threw down to
prevent his pursuing spouse from breaking out from Hades into the
world above; two others are the prince and princess of the eight
cross-roads. They had no temples, and were worshipped at the end
of the sixth and twelfth months - the time of the semiannual
lustration - and on occasion at other times, for example, on the
outbreak of a pestilence. The phallic form of the end post of a
balustrade or a bridge has a similar meaning; it keeps evil
influence from passing. The apotropaic virtue of this symbol - a
virtue which it has in many other countries, notably among the
ancient Greeks - is due to the association of virility with manly
strength, power to overcome invisible foes as well as visible,
and to protect those in need of help. Standing as they did on the
roadside and at cross-roads, these gods became the protectors of
the wayfarers; travellers prayed to them before setting out on a
journey and made a little offering of hemp leaves and rice to
each one they passed. These gods had nothing to do, so far as the
evidence shows, with fertility or the reproductive functions; no
peculiar rites were observed in their worship, and however
objectionable to the taste of a more refined age, the cult was in
no sense immoral or conducive to immorality. In modern times, out
of regard to the prejudices of Europeans who connected obscene
notions with them, they have been generally removed from the
roads, remaining only in out-of-the-way corners of the empire. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: History Of Religions </p>

<p>Book: Religions Of Japan </p>

<p>Author: Foot Moore, George </p>

<p>Date: 1913 </p>

<p>Chapter II: Part II </p>

<p>From the 13th to the 15th of July an All-Souls feast is kept,
at which time it is believed that the souls are permitted to
return to their kindred and be entertained by them. A staging of
bamboo canes is erected in one of the rooms of the house, on
which food and lanterns are placed for the spirits, and a
Buddhist priest reads a mass before them. On the first evening
fires of hemp leaves are lighted before the entrance of the
house, and incense strewed on the coals, as an invitation to the
spirits. At the end of the three days the food that has been set
out for the spirits is wrapped up in mats and thrown into a
river. Dances of a peculiar kind are a conspicuous feature of the
celebration, which is evidently an old Japanese custom; the
Buddhist elements are adscititious. At this season the graves are
decorated, and frequent visits are paid by the kinsfolk. For
those who have no relatives living a mass is said in all the
temples for &quot;the hungry devils.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Australia And The Islands Of The Sea </p>

<p>Author: Larkin, Dunton </p>

<p>Chapter XXVIII. The Balearic Isles. </p>

<p>Majorca is nearly square in form, the greatest distance from
east to west being sixty miles and from north to south fifty. Its
area is thirteen hundred square miles. The highest mountains of
the group are those of Majorca, the loftiest peak attaining a
height of forty-eight hundred feet. The climate is mild and
agreeable, and the extremes of heat and cold are seldom of long
duration. Fires are rarely required, except in the coldest
weather. </p>

<p>The soil of these islands on the average is exceedingly
fertile, and produces good crops of wheat, barley, olives,
almonds, grapes, figs, oranges, beans, and hemp. Besides these, a
great variety of other fruits and vegetables are grown for local
consumption. </p>

<p>. . . . . . . . . . </p>

<p>Minorca is situated about twenty-seven miles northeast of
Majorca and has an area of about two hundred and ninety square
miles. The coast is much indented with bays on all sides except
the south, and the shore in most places is bold and steep. It has
several excellent harbors, the best one of which is Port Mahon,
the capital of the island. The climate of Minorca is mild, but
not so equable as that of Majorca. The soil in general is not
very fertile, that on the plains being scanty and chalky. The
chief products are wheat, barley, wine, oil, potatoes, <b>hemp</b>,
and flax. Fruits of all kinds abound, including melons,
pomegranates, figs, and almonds. Cattle, sheep, and goats are
raised. Stone is plentiful, and a soft kind is much used in
building. The population numbers about thirty-nine thousand. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Discovery Of America </p>

<p>Book: Chapter VII: Mundus Novus </p>

<p>Author: Fiske, John </p>

<p>Date: 1892 </p>

<p>Part VII </p>

<p>This adventure of Cabral's had interesting consequences. It
set in motion the train of events which ended after some years in
placing the name &quot;America&quot; upon the map. On May 14,
1501, Vespucius, who was evidently principal pilot and guiding
spirit in this voyage under unknown skies, set sail from Lisbon
with three caravels. It is not quite clear who was chief captain,
but M. Varnhagen has found reasons for believing that it was a
certain Don Nuno Manuel. ^1 The first halt was made on the
African coast at Cape Verde, the first week in June; and there
the explorers met Cabral on his way back from Hindustan.
According to the letter attributed to Vespucius and published in
1827 by Baldelli, ^2 the wealth stowed away in Cabral's ships was
quite startling. &quot;He says there was an immense quantity of
cinnamon, green and dry ginger, pepper, cloves, nutmegs, mace,
musk, civet, storax, benzoin, porcelain, cassia, mastic, incense,
myrrh, red and white sandalwood, aloes, camphor, amber,&quot;
Indian hemp and cypress, as well as opium and other drugs too
numerous to mention. &quot;Of jewels he saw many diamonds,
rubies, and pearls, and one ruby of a most beautiful colour
weighed seven carats and a half, but he did not see all.&quot; ^3
Verily, he says, God has prospered King Emanuel. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: The Senate - 1789-1989 </p>

<p>Author: Byrd, Robert C. </p>

<p>Affiliation: US Senate </p>

<p>Volume: Vol. 1 </p>

<p>Date: 1989 </p>

<p>Chapter 5 The Era of Good Feelings: 1817-1824 </p>

<p>October 20, 1981. </p>

<p>. . . . Everywhere there were contradictions and
incompatibilities. And yet all were loosely bound together - the
Creole aristocrat of New Orleans, the liberal nationalist of
South Carolina, the parvenu cotton-planter of Georgia, the hemp
grower of Kentucky, the tobacco magnate of Virginia - all were
bound together by the institution of slavery. The Tallmadge
Amendment, like a powerful spell, conjured this loose bondage
into a tightness and coherence it was never afterwards to lose. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Australia And The Islands Of The Sea </p>

<p>Author: Larkin, Dunton </p>

<p>Chapter XXIX. Sardinia, Corsica, And Elba. </p>

<p>Next to Sicily, Sardinia is the largest of the islands in the
Mediterranean Sea, having an area of nearly ninety-three hundred
square miles. It lies directly south of Corsica, from which it is
separated by the Strait of Bonifacio, a channel which in its
narrowest part is only seven miles wide. The country is mostly
mountainous, and some of the peaks of the central chain have an
elevation of over six thousand feet. Many of these peaks are
extinct volcanoes. The coasts are as a rule steep and rugged.
There are many streams of water on the island, but only one of
them is even partially navigable, and none of them has a long
course. </p>

<p>The climate is mild, but in the low marshy lands, particularly
in the neighborhood of some of the lakes, a deadly malaria
prevails, especially in autumn. The inhabitants of these parts,
who can afford to do so, migrate annually during the unhealthy
months. Those who remain never leave their houses till an hour
after sunrise, and return before sunset, carefully closing all
doors and windows to prevent the entrance of the poisonous gas.
Between the mountain ranges are several wide valleys noted for
their beauty and fertility. </p>

<p>The principal products are wheat, barley, maize, oranges and
other fruits, all of which are esteemed for their excellent
quality. Grapes are extensively raised; but from carelessness in
the process of making the wine, it is of an inferior quality.
Olive trees are numerous. Cotton, linseed, flax, and hemp are
also produced. Among the trees which grow on the mountain sides
are cork, chestnut, oak, and pine, which form a considerable item
in the export trade. The manufactories of gunpowder, salt, and
tobacco are also of importance. Sardinia is rich in minerals, but
as yet its mines have been little developed. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: The Senate - 1789-1989 </p>

<p>Author: Byrd, Robert C. </p>

<p>Affiliation: US Senate </p>

<p>Volume: Vol. 1 </p>

<p>Date: 1989 </p>

<p>Chapter 6 The Era of Suspense: 1825-1829 </p>

<p>Throughout the spring of 1828, debate on the tariff filled the
House and Senate. Much of it was uninspired. Representative John
Taylor complained that &quot;day after day passes without any
sensible advance in the public business. One dull prosing speech
after another &amp; arguments for the fiftieth time repeated are
hashed up &amp; dished in new covers.&quot; And one can picture
the House as it looked to Taylor with, as historian Arthur
Schlesinger, Jr., described it, members &quot;lolling back in
armchairs, laughing, coughing, spitting, rattling newspapers,
while some poor speaker tried to talk above the din.&quot; </p>

<p>Through the din, Jacksonians obediently set about antagonizing
the northern manufacturers with a variety of bedeviling
amendments increasing duties on pig iron, flax, hemp, and so
forth. Everyone supposed that the New England senators would join
with the southern anti-protectionists to kill the measure. Daniel
Webster, who had moved from the House to the Senate in the autumn
elections, emerged, to the consternation of many, as one of the
leaders of the pro-tariff forces. On May 9, he offered an
extraordinary spectacle. He stood in front of his colleagues to
explain why he was about to repudiate all the free-trade
arguments he had made in the House in 1824. He was not eloquent,
not the &quot;great cannon loaded to the lips,&quot; but he was
very honest. He offered no moral or intellectual justifications
for the switch. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: The Senate - 1789-1989 </p>

<p>Author: Byrd, Robert C. </p>

<p>Affiliation: US Senate </p>

<p>Volume: Vol. 1 </p>

<p>Date: 1989 </p>

<p>Chapter 19 Currency, Foreign Affairs, Party Structure:
1893-1900 </p>

<p>Even as the debate raged, disillusioned Filipinos rose in
revolt against the United States which, they believed, had
promised them independence. The ruthless suppression of natives
by American troops and the crushing of the independence movement
intensified congressional soul-searching over this latest stage
of American expansionism. The most eloquent defender of the
president's policy was Indiana's new Republican senator,
thirty-seven-year-old Albert Beveridge, who, with his maiden
speech on the Philippine question, leapt to national fame.
&quot;The Philippines are ours forever,&quot; began Beveridge: </p>

<p>And just beyond the Philippines are China's illimitable
markets. We will not retreat from either. We will not repudiate
our duty in the archipelago. We will not abandon our opportunity
in the Orient. We will not renounce our part in the mission of
our race, trustees under God, of the civilization of the world.
God . . . . has marked us as His chosen people, henceforth to
lead in the regeneration of the world . . . . He has made us the
master organizers of the world to establish system where chaos
reigns. He has made us adept in government that we may administer
government among savages and senile peoples. </p>

<p>Beveridge went on to enumerate with zest the riches of the
islands: rice, coffee, sugar, coconuts, hemp, tobacco,
&quot;mountains of coal&quot; - all awaiting development by
American capital. He lightly brushed aside the objections of the
natives. &quot;It is barely possible that a thousand men in the
archipelago are capable of self-government in the Anglo-Saxon
sense.&quot; </p>

<p>[See A Narrow-Sighted Senator: Young Albert Beveridge of
Indiana was an eloquent, outspoken imperialist on the Philippine
question.] </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: Our Country: Volume 1 </p>

<p>Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. </p>

<p>Volume: Vol. 1 </p>

<p>Date: 1905 </p>

<p>Chapter XIII </p>

<p>Northward from his anchorage after his vessel had entered New
York Bay, Hudson saw a broad stream rising and falling with the
tide, which the Indians told him came from beyond the pale blue
mountain ranges in the distance. He believed it was a strait
through which he might pass into the Indian Ocean so he sailed up
the stream a few miles, and anchored. Natives came to him in
canoes from the shores with fruits and vegetables, and friendly
gestures. The men were athletic the women were graceful and the
young ones often beautiful. All were half-clad in mantles made of
skins or feathers depending from one shoulder and the waist, or
in colored hempen tunics; and some of the women who came in the
canoes, whose hair, long and black, hung loosely over their
shoulders and bosoms, wore fillets ornamented with shells and the
quills of the porcupine. They seemed anxious for friendly
intercourse, but Hudson repelled and offended them. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: History Of The Decline And Fall Of The Roman Empire </p>

<p>Book: Chapter XLII: State Of The Barbaric World. </p>

<p>Author: Gibbon, Edward </p>

<p>Date: 1782 (Written), 1845 (Revised) </p>

<p>Part I. </p>

<p>To the east, the Turks invaded China, as often as the vigor of
the government was relaxed: and I am taught to read in the
history of the times, that they mowed down their patient enemies
like hemp or grass; and that the mandarins applauded the wisdom
of an emperor who repulsed these Barbarians with golden lances.
This extent of savage empire compelled the Turkish monarch to
establish three subordinate princes of his own blood, who soon
forgot their gratitude and allegiance. The conquerors were
enervated by luxury, which is always fatal except to an
industrious people; the policy of China solicited the vanquished
nations to resume their independence and the power of the Turks
was limited to a period of two hundred years. The revival of
their name and dominion in the southern countries of Asia are the
events of a later age; and the dynasties, which succeeded to
their native realms, may sleep in oblivion; since their history
bears no relation to the decline and fall of the Roman empire. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Rollin's Ancient History: History Of The Persians And
Grecians </p>

<p>Book: Chapter II. </p>

<p>Author: Rollin, Charles </p>

<p>Date: 1731 </p>

<p>Sections II And III. </p>

<p>Xerxes commanded two other bridges to be built, one for the
army to pass over, and the other for the baggage and beasts of
burden. He appointed workmen more able and expert than the
former, who constructed it in the following manner: they placed
three hundred and sixty vessels across the strait, some of them
having three benches of oars, and others fifty oars a piece, with
their sides turned towards the Euxine sea; and on the side that
faced the Aegean sea they put three hundred and fourteen. They
then cast large anchors into the water on both sides, in order to
fix and secure all these vessels against the violence of the
winds, and against the current of the water. On the east side
they left three passages or vacant spaces between the vessels,
that there might be room for small boats to pass easily, as there
was occasion, to and from the Euxine sea. After this, upon the
land on both sides they drove large piles into the earth, with
huge rings fastened to them, to which were tied six vast cables,
which went over each of the two bridges; two of which cables were
made of hemp, and four of a sort of reeds, called, which were
used in those times in the manufacture of cordage. Those that
were made of hemp must have been of an extraordinary strength and
thickness, since every cubit of those cables weighed a talent.
The cables, laid over the whole extent of the vessels lengthwise,
reached from one side of the sea to the other. When this part of
the work was finished, quite over the vessels lengthwise, and
over the cables we have been speaking of, they laid the trunks of
trees, cut purposely for that use, and flat boats again over
them, fastened and joined together, to serve as a kind of floor
or solid bottom; all which they covered over with earth, and
added rails or battlements on each side, that the horses and
cattle might not be frightened with seeing the sea in their
passage. Such was the construction of those famous bridges built
by Xerxes. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Travels Of Marco Polo </p>

<p>Book: Book First: Here The Book Begins; And First It Speaks Of
The Lesser Armenia </p>

<p>Author: Polo, Marco </p>

<p>Part III </p>

<p>Chapter XXVI </p>

<p>Of A Province Called Khotan </p>

<p>Khotan is a province lying between northeast and east, and is
eight days' journey in length. The people are subject to the
great Khan, and are all worshippers of Mahommet. There are
numerous towns and villages in the country, but Khotan, the
capital, is the most noble of all, and gives its name to the
kingdom. Everything is to be had there in plenty, including
abundance of cotton, with flax, hemp, wheat, wine, and the like.
The people have vineyards and gardens and estates. They live by
commerce and manufactures, and are no soldiers. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Travels Of Marco Polo </p>

<p>Book: Book Second: Of Kublai Khan, Great Khan Now Reigning,
His Great Puissance </p>

<p>Author: Polo, Marco </p>

<p>Part IV </p>

<p>Chapter XXXII </p>

<p>Of The Charity Of The Emperor To The Poor </p>

<p>He also provides the poor with clothes. For he lays a tithe
upon all wool, silk, hemp, and the like, from which clothing can
be made; and he has these woven and laid up in a building set
apart for the purpose; and as all artisans are bound to give a
day's labor weekly, in this way the Khan has these stuffs made
into clothing for those poor families, suitable for summer or
winter, according to the time of year. He also provides the
clothing for his troops, and has woolens woven for them in every
city, the material for which is furnished by the tithe aforesaid.
You should know that the Tartars, before they were converted to
the religion of the idolaters, never practiced almsgiving.
Indeed, when any poor man begged of them they would tell him,
&quot;Go with God's curse, for if He loved you as He loves me, He
would have provided for you.&quot; But the sages of the
idolaters, and especially the Bakshis mentioned before, told the
great Khan that it was a good work to provide for the poor, and
that his idols would be greatly pleased if he did so. And since
then he has taken to do for the poor so much as you have heard. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Travels Of Marco Polo </p>

<p>Book: Book Second: Of Kublai Khan, Great Khan Now Reigning,
His Great Puissance </p>

<p>Author: Polo, Marco </p>

<p>Part IX </p>

<p>Now we will quit this matter and I will tell you of another
city called Kwa-chau. But first I must mention a point I had
forgotten. You must know that the vessels on this river, in going
up stream, have to be tracked, for the current is so strong that
they could not make head in any other manner. Now the towline,
which is some three hundred paces in length, is made of nothing
but cane. It is in this way: they have those great canes of which
I told you before that they are some fifteen paces in length;
these they take and split from end to end into many slender
strips, and then they twist these strips together so as to make a
rope of any length they please. And the ropes so made are
stronger than if they were made of hemp. </p>

<p>. . . . .. </p>

<p>They burn the bodies of the dead. And when any one dies the
friends and relations make a great mourning for the deceased, and
clothe themselves in hempen garments, and follow the corpse
playing on a variety of instruments and singing hymns to their
idols. And when they come to the burning place, they take
representations of things cut out of parchment, such as
caparisoned horses, male and female slaves, camels, armor, suits
of cloth of gold, and money, in great quantities, and these
things they put on the fire along with the corpse, so that they
are all burnt with it. And they tell you that the dead man shall
have all these slaves and animals of which the effigies are
burnt, alive in flesh and blood, and the money in gold, at his
disposal in the next world; and that the instruments which they
have caused to be played at his funeral, and the idol hymns that
have been chanted, shall also be produced again to welcome him in
the next world; and that the idols themselves will come to do him
honor. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Travels Of Marco Polo </p>

<p>Book: Book Third: Japan, The Archipelago, Southern India, The
Coasts And Islands </p>

<p>Author: Polo, Marco </p>

<p>Part I </p>

<p>Chapter I </p>

<p>Of The Merchant Ships Of Manzi That Sail Upon The Indian Seas </p>

<p>The fastenings are all of good iron nails and the sides are
double, one plank laid over the other, and caulked outside and
in. The planks are not pitched, for those people do not have any
pitch, but they daub the sides with other matter, deemed by them
far better than pitch; it is this. You see they take some lime
and some chopped hemp, and these they knead together with a
certain wood oil; and when the three are thoroughly amalgamated,
they hold like any glue. And with this mixture they paint their
ships. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: True Stories Of The Great War </p>

<p>Book: The Tale Of The &quot;Tara&quot; Off The African Coast </p>

<p>Author: Freeman R. Lewis </p>

<p>Date: 1915 </p>

<p>Translation: Bevir, Grace E. </p>

<p>The Tale Of The &quot;Tara&quot; Off The African Coast </p>

<p>I - Story Of The British Packet </p>

<p>And so they ran on. Fenton confessed to having had to
&quot;clout&quot; one of </p>

<p>the quartermasters, because the latter had been so
&quot;swanky&quot; as to maintain that the torpedo that sank the
Tara was scarlet &quot;when the bally thing was only red&quot;;
and Birkby admitted to having closed his argument for the
negative on one of Lieutenant Tanner's Sunday texts with,
&quot;And if you still think that 'Love is the greatest thing in
the world' - take that!&quot; And as we slid up the Liffey in the
drizzle of the Irish dawn, Barton just finished telling me how
someone accused the first man to sight the rescuing motors with
eating the &quot;Arabs' hemp and 'seeing' things,'&quot; adding
that the two were circling each other on tottering legs, looking
for an opening, when the bout was interrupted by the arrival of
the Red Cross ambulances. &quot;Half a minute later,&quot; he
concluded, &quot;the two of 'em was both guzzlin' over the same
jam-tin.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: World Civilizations: The Postclassical Era </p>

<p>Book: Chapter 19: Spread Of Chinese Civilization - Korea,
Japan, And Vietnam </p>

<p>Author: Stearns, Peter N.;Adas, Michael;Schwartz, Stuart B. </p>

<p>Date: 1992 </p>

<p>The Era Of Warrior Dominance </p>

<p>Despite the chaos and suffering of the warlord period, there
was much economic and cultural growth. Most of the daimyos
clearly recognized the necessity of building up their petty
states if they were to be strong enough to survive in the long
run. Within the domains of the more able daimyos, attempts were
made to stabilize village life by introducing regular tax
collection, supporting the construction of irrigation systems and
other public works, and building strong rural communities.
Incentives were offered to encourage the settlement of unoccupied
areas, and new tools, the greater use of draft animals, and new
crops - especially soybeans - contributed to the well-being of
the peasantry in the better-run domains. Peasants were also
encouraged to produce items such as silk, hemp, paper, dyes, and
vegetable oils, which were highly marketable and thus potential
sources of household income. Daimyos vied with each other to
attract merchants to their growing castle towns, and a new and
quite wealthy commercial class emerged as the purveyors of goods
for the military elite and the intermediaries in trade between
Japan and overseas areas, especially China. As in medieval
Europe, guild organizations for both craftsmen (carpenters,
thatchers, smiths, potters, etc.) and merchants were strong in
this era. They helped provide social solidarity and group
protection in a time of political breakdown and insecurity. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: World Civilizations: Industrialization And Western
Global Hegemony </p>

<p>Book: Chapter 30: Industrialization And Imperialism </p>

<p>Author: Stearns, Peter N.; Adas, Michael;Schwartz, Stuart B. </p>

<p>Date: 1992 </p>

<p>Introduction </p>

<p>The Making Of The European Global Order </p>

<p>In the industrial era, from roughly 1800 onward, the things
that Europeans sought in the outside world as well as the source
of the insecurities that drove them there changed dramatically.
Raw materials - metals, vegetable oils, dyes, cotton, and hemp -
needed to feed the machines of Europe, not spices or manufactured
goods, were the main products the Europeans sought overseas.
Industrialization made Europe for the first time the
manufacturing center of the world, and overseas markets for
machine-made European products became a key concern of those who
pushed for colonial expansion. Christian missionaries, by then as
likely to be Protestant as Roman Catholic, still sought to win
converts overseas. But unlike the rulers of Portugal and Spain in
the early centuries of expansion, European leaders in the
industrial age rarely took initiatives overseas to promote
Christian proselytization. In part this reflected the fact that
western Europe itself was no longer seriously threatened by the
Muslims or any other non-European people. The fears that fueled
European imperialist expansion in the industrial age arose from
internal rivalries between the European powers. Overseaspeoples
might resist the European advance, but the Europeans feared each
other far more than even the largest non- European empires. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: World Civilizations: Industrialization And Western
Global Hegemony </p>

<p>Book: Chapter 30: Industrialization And Imperialism </p>

<p>Author: Stearns, Peter N.; Adas, Michael;Schwartz, Stuart B. </p>

<p>Date: 1992 </p>

<p>Patterns Of Dominance: Continuity And Change </p>

<p>As increasing numbers of the colonized peoples were drawn into
the production of crops or minerals intended for export to
Europe, colonized areas in Africa, India, and Southeast Asia were
reduced to dependence on the industrializing European economies.
Roads and railways were built primarily to facilitate the
movement of farm produce and raw materials from the interior of
colonized areas to port areas where they could be shipped to
Europe. Benefiting from Europe's technological advances, mining
sectors grew dramatically in most of the colonies. Vast areas
that were previously uncultivated or (more commonly) had been
planted in food crops were converted to the production of
commodities - such as cocoa, palm oil, rubber, and hemp - in
great demand in the markets of Europe and, increasingly, the
United States. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Australia And The Islands Of The Sea </p>

<p>Author: Larkin, Dunton </p>

<p>Chapter XXXIX. The Philippine Islands. </p>

<p>The Philippine Islands form an important group in the northern
part of the Malay Archipelago. They belong to Spain, and, next to
Cuba, form its most important colonial possession. There are over
four hundred islands in the group, the two largest being Luzon
and Mindanao. </p>

<p>. . .. . </p>

<p>Among plants cultivated for use are the palms, hemp, coffee
tree, indigo, tobacco, cloves, nutmeg, and red and black pepper
vines. Rice, maize, wheat, yams, sweet potatoes, and many kinds
of fruits are also raised. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: World Civilizations: Industrialization And Western
Global Hegemony </p>

<p>Book: Chapter 32: Ottoman Empire, Islamic Heartlands, And Qing
China </p>

<p>Author: Stearns, Peter N.; Adas, Michael;Schwartz, Stuart B. </p>

<p>Date: 1992 </p>

<p>Western Intrusions And The Crisis In The Arab Islamic
Heartlands </p>

<p>Though Muhammad Ali's efforts to introduce reforms patterned
after Western precedents were not confined to the military, they
fell far short of a fundamental transformation of Egyptian
society. To shore up his economic base, he ordered the Egyptian
peasantry to expand their production of cotton, hemp, indigo, and
other crops that were in growing demand in industrial Europe.
Efforts to improve Egyptian harbors and extend irrigation works
met with some success and led to modest increases in the revenues
that could be devoted to the continuing modernization of the
military. Attempts to reform education were ambitious but limited
in what was actually achieved. Many of the most significant
innovations in schooling were linked to Muhammad Ali's military
projects. His frequent schemes to build up an Egyptian industrial
sector were eventually frustrated by the opposition of the
European powers and by the intense competition from imported,
Western-manufactured goods. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Wealth Of Nations </p>

<p>Book: Book II </p>

<p>Author: Smith, Adam </p>

<p>Date: 1776 </p>

<p>Chapter V. </p>

<p>Of the Different Employment of Capitals </p>

<p>It is of more consequence that the capital of the manufacturer
should reside within the country. It necessarily puts into motion
a greater quantity of productive labour, and adds a greater value
to the annual produce of the land and labour of the society. It
may, however, be very useful to the country, though it should not
reside within it. The capitals of the British manufacturers who
work up the flax and hemp annually imported from the coasts of
the Baltic, are surely very useful to the countries which produce
them. Those materials are a part of the surplus produce of those
countries which, unless it was annually exchanged for something
which is in demand there, would be of no value, and would soon
cease to be produced. The merchants who export it, replace the
capitals of the people who produce it, and thereby encourage them
to continue the production; and the British manufacturers replace
the capitals of those merchants. </p>

<p>. . . . . . </p>

<p>The foreign goods for home-consumption may sometimes be
purchased, not with the produce of domestick industry, but with
some other foreign goods. These last, however, must have been
purchased either immediately with the produce of domestick
industry, or with something else that had been purchased with it;
for the case of war and conquest excepted, foreign goods can
never be acquired, but in exchange for something that had been
produced at home, either immediately, or after two or more
different exchanges. The effects, therefore, of a capital
employed in such a round-about foreign trade of consumption, are,
in every respect, the same as those of one employed in the most
direct trade of the same kind, except that the final returns are
likely to be still more distant, as they must depend upon the
returns of two or three distinct foreign trades. If the flax and
hemp of Riga are purchased with the tobacco of Virginia, which
had been purchased with British manufactures, the merchant must
wait for the returns of two distinct foreign trades before he can
employ the same capital in re-purchasing a like quantity of
British manufactures. If the tobacco of Virginia had been
purchased, not with British manufactures, but with the sugar and
rum of Jamaica which had been purchased with those manufactures,
he must wait for the returns of three. If those two or three
distinct foreign trades should happen to be carried on by two or
three distinct merchants, of whom the second buys the goods
imported by the first, and the third buys those imported by the
second, in order to export them again, each merchant indeed will
in this case receive the returns of his own capital more quickly;
but the final returns of the whole capital employed in the trade
will be just as slow as ever. Whether the whole capital
employment in such a round-about trade belong to one merchant or
to three, can make no difference with regard to the country,
though it may with regard to the particular merchants. Three
times a greater capital must in both cases be employed, in order
to exchange a certain value of British manufactures for a certain
quantity of flax and hemp, than would have been necessary, had
the manufactures and the flax and hemp been directly exchanged
for one another. The whole capital employed, therefore, in such a
round-about foreign trade of consumption, will generally give
less encouragement and support to the productive labour of the
country, than an equal capital employed in a more direct trade of
the same kind. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Wealth Of Nations </p>

<p>Book: Book IV </p>

<p>Author: Smith, Adam </p>

<p>Date: 1776 </p>

<p>Chapter VIII, Section I. </p>

<p>Conclusion of the Mercantile System </p>

<p>The first bounties of this kind were those granted, about the
beginning of the present century, upon the importation of naval
stores from America. Under this denomination were comprehended
timber fit for masts, yards, and bowsprits; hemp; tar, pitch, and
turpentine. The bounty, however, of one pound the ton upon
masting-timber, and that of six pounds the ton upon hemp, were
extended to such as should be imported into England from
Scotland. Both these bounties continued without any variation, at
the same rate, till they were severally allowed to expire; that
upon hemp on the 1st of January 1741, and that upon
masting-timber at the end of the session of parliament
immediately following the 24th June 1781. </p>

<p>&#133;&#133;&#133; </p>

<p>The third bounty of this kind was that granted (much about the
time that we were beginning sometimes to court and sometimes to
quarrel with our American colonies) by the 4 Geo. III. chap. 26.
upon the importation of hemp, or undressed flax, from the British
plantations. This bounty was granted for twenty-one years, from
the 24th June 1764, to the 24th June 1785. For the first seven
years it was to be at the rate of eight pounds the ton, for the
second at six pounds, and for the third at four pounds. It was
not extended to Scotland, of which the climate (although hemp is
sometimes raised there, in small quantities and of an inferior
quality) is not very fit for that produce. Such a bounty upon the
importation of Scotch flax into England would have been too great
a discouragement to the native produce of the southern part of
the united kingdom. </p>

<p>&#133;&#133;&#133;&#133;&#133;&#133;&#133;.. </p>

<p>The seventh and last bounty of this kind, was that granted by
the 19 Geo. III. chap. 37. upon the importation of hemp from
Ireland. It was granted in the same manner as that for the
importation of hemp and undressed flax from America, for
twenty-one years, from the 24th June 1779, to the 24th June 1800.
This term is divided, likewise, into three periods of seven years
each; and in each of those periods, the rate of the Irish bounty
is the same with that of the American. It does not, however, like
the American bounty, extend to the importation of undressed flax.
It would have been too great a discouragement to the cultivation
of that plant in Great Britain. When this last bounty was
granted, the British and Irish legislatures were not in much
better humour with one another, than the British and American had
been before. But this boon to Ireland, it is to be hoped, has
been granted under more fortunate auspices, than all those to
America. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Autobiography Of Benvenuto Cellini </p>

<p>Book: Book First </p>

<p>Author: Cellini, Benvenuto </p>

<p>Date: 1566 </p>

<p>Translation: Symonds, John Addington </p>

<p>Part XVII </p>

<p>So I was taken into a gloomy dungeon below the level of a
garden, which swam with water, and was full of big spiders and
many venomous worms. They flung me a wretched mattress of course
hemp, gave me no supper, and locked four doors upon me. In that
condition I abode until the nineteenth hour of the following day.
Then I received food, and I requested my jailers to give me some
of my books to read. None of them spoke a word, but they referred
my prayer to the unfortunate castellan, who had made inquiries
concerning what I said. Next morning they brought me an Italian
Bible which belonged to me, and a copy of the Chronicles of
Giovanni Villani. When I asked for certain other of my books, I
was told that I could have no more, and that I had got too many
already. </p>

<p>[Footnote 1: This mention of an Italian Bible shows that we
are still in the days before the Council of Trent.] </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Apocrypha, The </p>

<p>Book: Ecclesiasticus </p>

<p>Author: Various </p>

<p>Date: 1611 </p>

<p>Chapter 40 </p>

<p>Great travail is created for every man, </p>

<p>And a heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, </p>

<p>From the day of their coming forth from their mother's womb, </p>

<p>Until the day for their burial in the mother of all things. </p>

<p>The expectation of things to come, and the day of death, </p>

<p>^1 Trouble their thoughts, and cause fear of heart; </p>

<p>From him that sitteth on a throne of glory, </p>

<p>Even unto him that is humbled in earth and ashes; </p>

<p>From him that weareth purple and a crown, </p>

<p>Even unto him that is clothed with a hempen frock. </p>

<p>There is wrath, and jealousy, and trouble, and disquiet, </p>

<p>And fear of death, and anger, and strife; </p>

<p>And in the time of rest upon his bed </p>

<p>His night sleep doth change his knowledge. </p>

<p>A little or nothing is his resting, </p>

<p>And afterward in his sleep, as in a day of keeping watch, </p>

<p>He is troubled in the vision of his heart, </p>

<p>As one that hath escaped from the front of battle. </p>

<p>In the very time of his deliverance he awaketh, </p>

<p>And marvelleth that the fear is nought. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Castilian Days </p>

<p>Book: A Miracle Play </p>

<p>Author: Hay, John </p>

<p>Date: 1903 </p>

<p>The sinister procession moves on. The audience, which had been
somewhat cheered by the prompt and picturesque punishment
inflicted upon the inhospitable Samuel, was still further
exhilarated by the spectacle of the impenitent traitor Gestas,
staggering under an enormous cross, his eyes and teeth glaring
with abject fear, with an athletic Roman haling him up to Calvary
with a new hempen halter. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Travels Of Marco Polo </p>

<p>Book: Book First: Here The Book Begins; And First It Speaks Of
The Lesser Armenia </p>

<p>Author: Polo, Marco </p>

<p>Part V </p>

<p>Then there is another kind of devotees called Sensin, who are
men of extraordinary abstinence after their fashion, and lead a
life of such hardship as I will describe. All their life long
they eat nothing but bran, which they take mixed with hot water.
That is their food: bran, and nothing but bran; and water for
their drink. 'Tis a lifelong fast! so that I may well say their
life is one of extraordinary asceticism. They have great idols,
and plenty of them; but they sometimes also worship fire. The
other idolaters who are not of this sect call these people
heretics - Patarins as we should say - because they do not
worship their idols in their own fashion. Those of whom I am
speaking would not take a wife on any consideration. They wear
dresses of hempen stuff, black and blue, and sleep upon mats; in
fact their asceticism is something astonishing. Their idols are
all female, that is to say, they have women's names. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Wealth Of Nations </p>

<p>Book: Book I </p>

<p>Author: Smith, Adam </p>

<p>Date: 1776 </p>

<p>Chapter X, Section II. </p>

<p>In Scotland there is no general law which regulates
universally the duration of apprenticeships. The term is
different in different corporations. Where it is long, a part of
it may generally be redeemed by paying a small fine. In most
towns, too, a very small fine is sufficient to purchase the
freedom of any corporation. The weavers of linen and hempen
cloth, the principal manufactures of the country, as well as all
other artificers subservient to them, wheel-makers, reel-makers,
&amp;c. may exercise their trades in any town corporate without
paying any fine. In all towns corporate all persons are free to
sell butcher's meat upon any lawful day of the week. Three years
is in Scotland a common term of apprenticeship, even in some very
nice trades; and in general I know of no country in Europe in
which corporation laws are so little oppressive. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Benjamin Franklin Experiments With Electricity </p>

<p>Author: Bigelow, John;Franklin, Benjamin </p>

<p>Date: 1747 </p>

<p>&quot;It was not till the summer of 1752 that he was enabled
to complete his grand and unparalleled discovery by experiment.
The plan which he had originally proposed was to erect, on some
high tower or other elevated place, a sentry-box, from which
should rise a pointed iron rod, insulated by being fixed in a
cake of resin. Electrified clouds passing over this would, he
conceived, impart to it a portion of their electricity, which
would be rendered evident to the senses by sparks being emitted
when a key, the knuckle, or other conductor was presented to it.
Philadelphia at this time afforded no opportunity of trying an
experiment of this kind. While Franklin was waiting for the
erection of a spire, it occurred to him that he might have more
ready access to the region of clouds by means of a common kite.
He prepared one by fastening two cross sticks to a silken
handkerchief, which would not suffer so much from the rain as
paper. To the upright stick was affixed an iron point. The string
was, as usual, of hemp, except the lower end, which was silk.
Where the hempen string terminated, a key was fastened. With this
apparatus, on the appearance of a thunder-gust approaching he
went out into the commons, accompanied by his son, to whom alone
he communicated his intentions, well knowing the ridicule which,
too generally for the interest of science, awaits unsuccessful
experiments in philosophy. He placed himself under a shed, to
avoid the rain; his kite was raised, a thunder-cloud passed over
it, no sign of electricity appeared. He almost despaired of
success, when suddenly he observed the loose fibres of his string
to move toward an erect position. He now presented his knuckle to
the key and received a strong spark. How exquisite must his
sensations have been at this moment! On this experiment depended
the fate of his theory. If he succeeded, his name would rank high
among those who had improved science; if he failed, he must
inevitably be subjected to the derision of mankind, or, what is
worse, their pity, as a well-meaning man, but a weak, silly
projector. The anxiety with which he looked for the result of his
experiment may be easily conceived. Doubts and despair had begun
to prevail, when the fact was ascertained, in so clear a manner
that even the most incredulous could no longer withhold their
assent. Repeated sparks were drawn from the key, a vial was
charged, a shock given, and all the experiments made which are
usually performed with electricity. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Buddhist Doctrine </p>

<p>Author: Buddhist Sources </p>

<p>Date: c500bc </p>

<p>Translation: Warren, Henry Clarke </p>

<p>Good And Bad Karma </p>

<p>Translated from the Samyutta-Nikaya </p>

<p>On a certain occasion The Blessed One was dwelling at Savatthi
in Jitavana monastery in Anathapindika's Park. Then drew near
king Pasenadi the Kosalan, at an unusual time of day, to where
The Blessed One was; and having drawn near and greeted The
Blessed One, he sat down respectfully at one side. And king
Pasenadi the Kosalan being seated respectfully at one side, The
Blessed One spoke to him as follows: </p>

<p>&quot;Pray, whence have you come, great king, at this unusual
time of day?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Reverend Sir, a householder who was treasurer in
Savatthi has just died leaving no son, and I have come from
transferring his property to my royal palace; and, Reverend Sir,
he had ten million pieces of gold, and silver beyond all
reckoning. But this householder, Reverend Sir, would eat sour
gruel and kanajaka, and the clothes he wore were made of hemp . .
., and the conveyance in which he rode was a broken-down chariot
with an umbrella of leaves.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Sir Francis Drake's Famous Voyage Round The World </p>

<p>Author: Francis Pretty, One of Drake's Gentlemen at arms. </p>

<p>Date: 1580 </p>

<p>Sir Francis Drake's Famous Voyage Round The World, Part I. </p>

<p>The Famous Voyage of Sir Francis Drake into the South Sea, and
therehence about the whole Globe of the Earth, begun in the year
of our Lord 1577. </p>

<p>The fifth of June, being in 43 degrees towards the pole
Arctic, we found the air so cold, that our men being grievously
pinched with the same, complained of the extremity thereof; and
the further we went, the more the cold increased upon us.
Whereupon we thought it best for that time to seek the land, and
did so; finding it not mountainous, but low plain land, till we
came within 38 degrees towards the line. In which height it
pleased God to send us into a fair and good bay, with a good wind
to enter the same. In this bay we anchored; and the people of the
country, having their houses close by the water's side, shewed
themselves unto us, and sent a present to our General. When they
came unto us, they greatly wondered at the things that we
brought. But our General, according to his natural and accustomed
humanity, courteously intreated them, and liberally bestowed on
them necessary things to cover their nakedness; whereupon they
supposed us to be gods, and would not be persuaded to the
contrary. The presents which they sent to our General, were
feathers, and cauls of network. Their houses are digged round
about with earth, and have from the uttermost brims of the
circle, clifts of wood set upon them, joining close together at
the top like a spire steeple, which by reason of that closeness
are very warm. Their bed is the ground with rushes strowed on it;
and lying about the house, [they] have the fire in the midst. The
men go naked; the women take bulrushes, and kemb them after the
manner of hemp, and thereof make their loose garments, which
being knit about their middles, hang down about their hips,
having also about their shoulders a skin of deer, with the hair
upon it. These women are very obedient and serviceable to their
husbands. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Life Of King Henry The Fifth, The </p>

<p>Book: Act III. </p>

<p>Author: Shakespeare, William </p>

<p>Date: 1599 </p>

<p>Scene VI. The English Camp in Picardy. </p>

<p>Pist. Fortune is Bardolph's foe, and frowns on him; </p>

<p>For he hath stolen a pax, and hanged must a' be, </p>

<p>A damned death! </p>

<p>Let gallows gape for dog, let man go free </p>

<p>And let not hemp his wind-pipe suffocate. </p>

<p>But Exeter hath given the doom of death </p>

<p>For pax of little price. </p>

<p>Therefore, go speak; the duke will hear thy voice; </p>

<p>And let not Bardolph's vital thread be cut </p>

<p>With edge of penny cord and vile reproach: </p>

<p>Speak, captain, for his life, and I will thee requite. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Holy Grail From The Book Of King Arthur </p>

<p>Book: Seventeenth Book </p>

<p>Author: Traditional </p>

<p>Date: c1175 </p>

<p>Translation: Malory, Thomas </p>

<p>Part I Chapter I </p>

<p>How Sir Galahad Fought At A Tournament, And How He Was Known
Of Sir Gawaine And Sir Ector De Maris </p>

<p>And when the ship was ready in the sea to sail, the lady let
make a great bed and marvellous rich, and set her upon the bed's
head, covered with silk, and laid the sword at the feet, and the
girdles were of hemp, and therewith the king was angry. Sir, wit
ye well, said she, that I have none so high a thing which were
worthy to sustain so high a sword, and a maid shall bring other
knights thereto, but I wot not when it shall be, nor what time.
And there she let make a covering to the ship, of cloth of silk
that should never rot for no manner of weather. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Poems And Songs Of Robert Burns </p>

<p>Book: Part III </p>

<p>Author: Burns, Robert </p>

<p>Date: 1786 </p>

<p>Part III </p>

<p>Death And Dying Words Of Poor Mailie, The Author's Only Pet
Yowe., The </p>

<p>An Unco Mournfu' Tale </p>

<p>&quot;Tell him, if e'er again he keep </p>

<p>As muckle gear as buy a sheep- </p>

<p>O, bid him never tie them mair, </p>

<p>Wi' wicked strings o' hemp or hair! </p>

<p>But ca' them out to park or hill, </p>

<p>An' let them wander at their will: </p>

<p>So may his flock increase, an' grow </p>

<p>To scores o' lambs, an' packs o' woo'! </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Poems And Songs Of Robert Burns </p>

<p>Book: Part X </p>

<p>Author: Burns, Robert </p>

<p>Date: 1786 </p>

<p>Part X </p>

<p>Halloween^1 </p>

<p>&quot;Our stibble-rig was Rab M'Graen, </p>

<p>A clever, sturdy fallow; </p>

<p>His sin gat Eppie Sim wi' wean, </p>

<p>That lived in Achmacalla: </p>

<p>He gat hemp-seed,^11 I mind it weel, </p>

<p>An'he made unco light o't; </p>

<p>But mony a day was by himsel', </p>

<p>He was sae sairly frighted </p>

<p>That vera night.&quot; </p>

<p>[Footnote 11: Steal out, unperceived, and sow a handful of
hemp-seed, harrowing it with anything you can conveniently draw
after you. Repeat now and then: &quot;Hemp-seed, I saw thee,
hemp-seed, I saw thee; and him (or her) that is to be my true
love, come after me and pou thee.&quot; Look over your left
shoulder, and you will see the appearance of the person invoked,
in the attitude of pulling hemp. Some traditions say, &quot;Come
after me and shaw thee,&quot; that is, show thyself; in which
case, it simply appears. Others omit the harrowing, and say:
&quot;Come after me and harrow thee.&quot;-R.B.] </p>

<p>Then up gat fechtin Jamie Fleck, </p>

<p>An' he swoor by his conscience, </p>

<p>That he could saw hemp-seed a peck; </p>

<p>For it was a' but nonsense: </p>

<p>The auld guidman raught down the pock, </p>

<p>An' out a handfu' gied him; </p>

<p>Syne bad him slip frae' mang the folk, </p>

<p>Sometime when nae ane see'd him, </p>

<p>An' try't that night. </p>

<p>He marches thro' amang the stacks, </p>

<p>Tho' he was something sturtin; </p>

<p>The graip he for a harrow taks, </p>

<p>An' haurls at his curpin: </p>

<p>And ev'ry now an' then, he says, </p>

<p>&quot;Hemp-seed I saw thee, </p>

<p>An' her that is to be my lass </p>

<p>Come after me, an' draw thee </p>

<p>As fast this night.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Poems And Songs Of Robert Burns </p>

<p>Book: Part XLV </p>

<p>Author: Burns, Robert </p>

<p>Date: 1786 </p>

<p>Part XLV </p>

<p>The Epitaph </p>

<p>Epistle From Esopus To Maria </p>

<p>From those drear solitudes and frowsy cells, </p>

<p>Where Infamy with sad Repentance dwells; </p>

<p>Where turnkeys make the jealous portal fast, </p>

<p>And deal from iron hands the spare repast; </p>

<p>Where truant 'prentices, yet young in sin, </p>

<p>Blush at the curious stranger peeping in; </p>

<p>Where strumpets, relics of the drunken roar, </p>

<p>Resolve to drink, nay, half, to whore, no more; </p>

<p>Where tiny thieves not destin'd yet to swing, </p>

<p>Beat hemp for others, riper for the string: </p>

<p>From these dire scenes my wretched lines I date, </p>

<p>To tell Maria her Esopus' fate. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: I Promessi Sposi Or The Betrothed </p>

<p>Book: Chapter III </p>

<p>Author: Manzoni, Alessandro </p>

<p>Date: 1826 </p>

<p>Chapter III </p>

<p>'Well,' continued Agnese, 'he is a man! I have seen more than
one person, bothered like a chicken in a bundle of hemp, and who
did not know where to put his head, and after being an hour nose
to nose with the Dr Azzecca - Garbugli, (take good care you don't
call him so) - I have seen him, I say, make a joke of it. Take
these four capons, poor creatures! whose necks I ought to have
wrung for tonight's supper, and carry them to him; because we
must never go empty - handed to these gentlemen. Relate to him
all that has happened, and you'll see he will tell you, in a
twinkling, things which would not come into our heads if we were
to think about them for a year.' <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>