
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-49</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B007-42</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/History/om/om4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034204 text/html 8241
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:41:55 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:41:02 GMT
Content-length: 8024
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Opium Monopoly - Singapore</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<h1>THE OPIUM MONOPOLY </h1>

<p><b>BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE</b> </p>

<h2>IV -- SINGAPORE</h2>

<hr>

<p>In January, 1917, we found ourselves at Singapore, a British
dependency, situated at the end of the Malay Peninsula, and one
of the greatest seaports of the Orient. We were stopping at the
Hotel de l' Europe, a large and first class hotel. The first
morning at breakfast, the waiter stood beside us, waiting for our
order. He was a handsome young Malay, dressed in white linen
clothes, and wearing a green jade bracelet on one wrist. We gave
him our order and he did not move off. He continued to stand
quietly beside our chairs, as in a trance. We repeated the
order-one tea, one coffee, two papayas. He continued to stand
still beside us, stupidly. Finally he went away. We waited for a
long time and nothing happened. At last, after a long wait, he
returned and set before us a teapot filled with hot water.
Nothing else. We repeated again-tea, coffee, papayas. We said it
two or three times. Then he went away and came back with some
tea. We repeated again, coffee and fruit. Eventually he brought
us some coffee. Finally, after many endeavors, we got the fruit.
It all took a long time. We then began to realize that something
was the matter with him. He could understand English well enough
to know what orders we were giving him, but he seemed to forget
as soon as he left our sight. We then realized that he was
probably drugged. It was the same thing every day. In the morning
he was stupid and dull, and could not remember what we told him.
By evening his brain was clearer, and at dinner he could remember
well enough. The effects of whatever he had been taking had
apparently worn off during the day. </p>

<p>We learned that the opium trade was freely indulged in, at
Singapore, fostered by the Government. Singapore is a large city
of about 300,000 inhabitants, a great number of which are
Chinese. It has wide, beautiful streets, fine government
buildings, magnificent quays and docks-a splendid European city
at the outposts of the Orient. We found that a large part of its
revenue is derived from the opium traffic-from the sale of opium,
and from license fees derived from shops where opium may be
purchased, or from divans where it may be smoked. The customers
are mainly Chinese. </p>

<p>I wanted to visit these Government-licensed opium shops and
opium dens. A friend lent me two servants, as guides. We three
got into rickshaws and went down to the Chinese quarter, where
there are several hundred of these places, all doing a
flourishing business. It was early in the afternoon, but even
then, trade was brisk. The divans were rooms with wide wooden
benches running round the sides, on which benches, in pairs,
sharing a lamp between them, lay the smokers. They purchased
their opium on entering, and then lay down to smoke it. The
packages are little, triangular packets, each containing enough
for about six smokes. Each packet bears a label, red letters on a
white ground, &quot;Monopoly opium.&quot; </p>

<p>In one den there was an old man-but you can't tell whether a
drug addict is old or not, he looked as they all do, gray and
emaciated-but as he caught my eye, he laid down the needle on
which he was about to cook his pill, and glanced away. I stood
before him, waiting for him to continue the process, but he did
not move. </p>

<p>&quot;Why doesn't he go on?&quot; I asked my guide. &quot;He
is ashamed to have you see him,&quot; came the reply. </p>

<p>&quot;But why should he be ashamed?&quot; I asked, &quot;The
British Government is not ashamed to sell to him, to encourage
him to drug himself, to ruin himself. Why should he be
ashamed?&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Nevertheless, he is,&quot; replied the guide. &quot;You
see what he looks like-what he has become. He is not quite so far
gone as the others-he is a more recent victim. He still feels
that he has become degraded. Most of them do not feel that way
after a while.&quot; </p>

<p>So we went on and on, down the long street. There was a
dreadful monotony about it all. </p>

<p>House after house of feeble, emaciated, ill wrecks, all
smoking Monopoly Opium, all contributing, by their shame and
degradation, to the revenues of the mighty British Empire. </p>

<p>That evening after dinner, I sat on the wide verandah of the
hotel, looking over a copy of the &quot;Straits Times.&quot; One
paragraph, a dispatch from London, caught my eye. &quot; Chinese
in Liverpool. Reuter's Telegram. London, January 17, 1917
Thirty-one Chinese were arrested during police raids last night
on opium dens in Liverpool. Much opium was seized. The police in
one place were attacked by a big retriever and by a number of
Chinese, who threw boots and other articles from the
house-top.&quot; </p>

<p>Coming fresh from a tour of the opium-dens of Singapore, I
must say that item caused some mental confusion. It must also be
confusing to the Chinese. It must be very perplexing to a Chinese
sailor, who arrives in Liverpool on a ship from Singapore, to
find such a variation in customs. To come from a part of the
British Empire where opium smoking is freely encouraged, to Great
Britain itself where such practices are not tolerated. He must
ask himself, why it is that the white race is so sedulously
protected from such vices, while the subject races are so eagerly
encouraged. It may occur to him that the white race is valuable
and must be preserved, and that subject races are not worth
protecting. This double standard of international justice he must
find disturbing. It would seem, at first glance, as if subject
races were fair game-if there is money in it. Subject races,
dependents, who have no vote, no share in the government and who
are powerless to protect themselves-fair game for exploitation. </p>

<p>Is this double-dealing what we mean when we speak of &quot;our
responsibility to backward nations, 1) or of &quot;the sacred
trust of civilization&quot; or still again when we refer to
&quot;the White Man's burden &quot; ? </p>

<p>Pondering over these things as I sat on the hotel verandah, I
finally reached the conclusion that to print such a dispatch as
that in the &quot; Straits Times&quot; was, to say the least,
most tactless. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="50318" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>