
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-105</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B048-295</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/forum.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122023336 text/html 19547
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:33:31 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:42:39 GMT
Content-length: 19329
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Report of the California Research Advisory Panel</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->

<h1>The Report of the California Research Advisory Panel </h1>

<p>The Drug Policy<b> </b>Foundation's </p>

<p>LEGISLATIVE FORUM ON DRUG POLICY </p>

<p>State Capitol, January 27, 1992 </p>

<p><b>FREDERICK H. MEYERS, M.D.</b> </p>

<p>Professor of Pharmacology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>Note from Cliff Schaffer: This was sent to me personally by
Dr. Meyers, with a few of his own hand written notes. He was the
head of the Research Advisory Panel for the State of California
and states that this speech paraphrases the conclusions of the
Research Advisory Panel. </p>

<hr>

<p>The premise of this meeting--- that the legislature must at
this time accept the suggestions of the nominal experts in
problems of drug abuse here assembled and begin the
decriminalization of drug use-- appears at first glance to be
presumptuous. It is not, however, if one considers our
deteriorating social and economic state and the forbidding
prospect of the adjustments that must<b> </b>be made by the
legislature at this session. </p>

<p>I think that no area of informed, disinterested thinking will
challenge the conclusion that whatever we have attempted by
legislation to regulate the use of the emotionally loaded street
drugs --- that is, excluding the laudable alcohol---has been
palpably damaging. The prohibition or legal approach has not been
merely ineffective but that approach, rather than the effects of
the drugs themselves, is responsible for the individual and
societal damage that so appropriately concerns us. Heroin, indeed
the non-medical use of narcotics in general, cannot be inherently
too dangerous or harmful or the legislature would not have
mandated the provision of methadone, a pharmacologically
equivalent narcotic, to some of our heroin habituated citizens. </p>

<p>It is, then, the reaction of society to the use of certain
drugs rather than the drug effects themselves that cause the
problems and damage that concern us. </p>

<p>I react to these problems as I see them in individual patients
and am most concerned about the damage imposed on the individual
by social drug use less dangerous to society than the use of
alcohol and by compulsive drug use that is not that different
from cigarette smoking. The physical damage and consequent cost
to society in medical care is much less with heroin, but,
cigarettes being legal and relatively inexpensive, the smoker is
not subject to the risk of prosecution or of being driven to
criminal activity. </p>

<p>A California legislator in 1992 would, I should think, be more
interested in the expense involved to the state and recognize an
area where budgetary relief can be achieved with a social and
humanitarian gain rather than the curtailment of a program of
some value. The financial burden at each governmental level of
enforcing laws whose violation cannot be managed by ordinary
police tactics is significant. Even greater is the expense and
disorganization imposed by the associated criminal activity on
police, jail, court, prison, probation and parole activities. </p>

<p>Now in deciding whether to accept my thesis, be influenced by
your own observations and common sense, which will establish the
clinching argument: all of the enforcement activity of the past
fifty years has been wasted in that the use of more and more
varied drugs has grown progressively to its present level. </p>

<p>Before discussing what changes should be made and in what
order, I will acknowledge and meet the fear of legislators that a
show of rationality will be interpreted as being &quot;soft on
drugs&quot;. This idea will be imposed, and the conclusions
presented here today will be challenged only by agents of what I
call the enforcement industry. (Or at least the <u>administrators</u>
of those agencies. I have not recently met an agent or
investigator working at the street level who thinks that the war
on drugs has been or can be won, and I do work with peace
officers.) </p>

<p>Workers in the enforcement area are given to protecting a
special position within police work. They are not disinterested
informants just as I am not a disinterested informant in matters
of pay and privilege for U.C. professors. They have great
influence on those citizens who depend on the daily media, press
or TV, or who confuse TV dramas with reality. The daily press is
not required to be accurate or comprehensive or to provide
follow-up; it is required only to report more or less accurately
whatever information, misleading or otherwise, is provided by an
informant who may not even be identified. Thus we have had a long
series of largest ever seizures, biggest dealer ever, etc, but it
is street level users who resorted to crime to
&quot;maintain&quot; who congest our system of criminal justice,
and we see no relief in the face of more and more money for
enforcement. </p>

<p>I insist that if you examine more deliberate, quality
journalism from as liberal as one dares to be today, for example,
<i>The Nation </i>, across the spectrum to Buckley's conservative
journal; if you examine the technical literature of medicine,
sociology and even economics and if you note the names and
positions of people supportive of organizations such as the Drug
Policy Foundation, you will agree with my statement above that no
area of informed, disinterested thought disagrees with the
conclusions of this meeting. Their agreement is often expressed
in terms of legalization of drugs, but, except for radicals like
Buckley and Greenspan, decriminalization is meant. </p>

<p>The time for academic discussion has passed. Now it is time to
think tactically, no longer asking if the drug laws should be
changed to achieve decriminalization but looking at what changes
should be made and in what order. </p>

<p>My discussion from here on, that is, the changes and tactics
suggested to the legislature, is almost entirely quotes or
paraphrases from a report to the legislature by the Research
Advisory Panel. I do not appear as a representative of that
group, but I see no reason why I should not exploit the
competence and effort reflected in the report. </p>

<p>The panel first established three prior cautions or bases for
deriving the changes: </p>

<p>1. Differentiate different drugs and different routes of
administration. Do not discuss the drug problem. </p>

<p>2. Separate drug effects from associated criminal activity. </p>

<p>3. Consider the risk/benefit ratio for any change. The goal is
to reduce the damage </p>

<p>done by a drug without significant increase in its use. No
unregulated (legalized) drug nor any industry comparable to
cigarette or alcohol industry proselytizing for drug use. </p>

<p>The panel then suggests a stepwise approach by the
legislature. The three changes suggested for the first year would
demonstrate that change could be safely accomplished and prepare
the public for more comprehensive revisions. </p>

<p>The suggested legislative changes are: </p>

<p><b><u>Allow Cultivation of Marihuana for Personal Use </u></b></p>

<p>Insofar as damage to the individual and society is concerned,
the quantitatively most important drugs are alcohol and nicotine
in the form of cigarettes. There remains, then, as the other
quantitatively important drug, marijuana, which has become, for a
large fraction of the population, a social drug comparable to
alcohol in pattern of use and approaching alcohol in extent of
usage. </p>

<p>Marijuana is a disinhibiting drug used socially to relieve
anxiety and as such has many liabilities in common with alcohol.
I acknowledge that marijuana is not without its effect on the
individual user and would not suggest any change that carried the
risk of a great increase in the use of marijuana. I resist the
use of the word &quot;legalization&quot; in relation to any drug,
including marijuana. On the other hand, an objective
consideration of marijuana shows that it is responsible for far
less damage to the individual and to society than are alcohol and
cigarettes. A further consideration in forming a reaction to the
wide use of marijuana is that is a source of conflict between
generations and of disrespect for the law. The huge cost of
attempting to enforce these disrespected laws and to punish their
infraction by people who do not feel guilty is, in my opinion,
entirely wasteful and damaging and the monies should be applied
in areas of greater need. </p>

<p>Also important is the economic and, to some extent, criminal
activity associated with the marketplace of marijuana. At the
moment, we are adding millions to our trade deficit, off of the
books to be sure, by our purchases of marijuana in Colombia,
Mexico, Thailand, and elsewhere. Yet, thanks to a previous action
of the California Legislature, the product of this illegal
activity may be possessed and used by the citizen with the
possibility of only minor sanctions. This change has not lead to
any disastrous consequences. On the contrary, it has reduced the
tension between generations and decriminalized to some extent the
generally sanctioned use of this new social drug by large numbers
of people. </p>

<p>This new situation, for which we applaud the Legislature, is
however, not stable, in the sense that the failure to act in
relation to the supply of the drug leaves unmet the question of
the still illegal market and the economic problem that that
entails. If this disparity could be resolved there would be
economic gain and a great simplification of law enforcement which
now devotes a considerable effort to seizing a small fraction of
the illegal importations or cultivations. </p>

<p>I therefore suggest that the law be changed to permit
cultivation for personal use. Such cultivation would be permitted
only on property serving as the residence for the individual,
this is, it would not authorize the cultivation of fifty plants
on a National forest and it would not permit the possession
outside of the home of more than the present one ounce, nor would
it sanction the provision to others in or out of the residence
whether by sale or in the form &quot;parties&quot;. </p>

<p>Any change regulating the provision of this drug <u>must</u>
be made in such a way that we do not see the development of
another industry comparable to the alcohol or cigarette industry.
Permitting the restricted cultivation would avoid that evil but
achieve an of the gains promised above. </p>

<p>There are people, including I am sure some legislators, who,
out of genuine concern rather than mere timidity, will wonder
whether such a change, however, warranted by social and economic
gains, would not also result in increased use. I do not dismiss
this justifiable concern out of hand. the Panel insisted, and I
agree, that no attitude of approval of marijuana, or alcohol, or
tobacco be projected. I would be a prohibitionist if prohibition
would work. To the extent that prohibition creates a marketplace
or social conflict, we suggest more flexible, practical, and
humane policies. It does ,however, appear that the supply and
experience with marihuana is such that a </p>

<p>plateau has been reached and that usage over foreseeable
circumstances will remain about at its present level, as is the
case with alcohol. </p>

<p><b><u>Remove Penalties for Possession of Needles and Syringes</u></b>
</p>

<p>The statement that heroin is inherently not a dangerous drug
has been weakened by the appearance in the community of the AIDS
virus. This virus is transmitted, among other ways, by the use by
one persons of paraphernalia for injection contaminated with the
blood of an infected person. The AIDS virus has already spread
through the, drug-using community to an extent that varies with
the sanitary practices of the local population. The prevalence of
infection is much higher, for example, in New York City than in
San Francisco and lower throughout the balance of California than
in San Francisco. There is thus some urgency and advantage in
instituting control methods. </p>

<p>There are two suggested methods of controlling the spread of
this relatively new virus. The first, demonstrably ineffective,
is to adopt a moralizing attitude, continue our current practices
and simple add the individual tragedy and economic burden to the
community of more AIDS patients. Such an attitude is consistent
with the feeling that heroin users (and gays and psychotics) are
better dead and is genocidal. </p>

<p>The other method of controlling the spread of the AIDS virus
would be to encourage sanitary practices at the time of injection
by <u>making</u> it possible for each heroin user to use his own
&quot;outfit&quot;, that is, syringe and needle, rather than
accept the risk of using one contaminated with another addict's
blood. This would become permissible as well as possible if the
intravenous (IV) drug user were permitted to legally possess his
own syringe and needle. </p>

<p>Heroin users understandably try to avoid carrying supplies of
their drug and their injecting paraphernalia any more than is
absolutely necessary since the mere possession of the substance
and the equipment is a punishable crime. The possession of
paraphernalia is defined as a misdemeanor. The availability of
the charge becomes a convenient mean of harassing the addict and
of subjecting him, in effect, to a three-day jail sentence
without trial. A person with a prior drug related conviction must
be especially careful since, in such a situation, even the
possession of an ordinary spoon can be construed, according to
the statute, as possession of paraphernalia. As a result, users
are reluctant to carry their own outfits and, their compulsion
being upon them, are quite likely to use whatever equipment is
available at the site of drug purchase. People driven by the
compulsion that the heroin user feels, and given their choice
between using someone else's outfit and being without their drug
will use the possibly contaminated equipment. Laudable as the
&quot;needle&quot; exchange programs are and admirable as I find
their practitioners, they (and the impending legislative respond)
are inadequate. The situation is too urgent for an
&quot;experimental&quot; program in one city and statutory change
is the definitive change needed to permit education in </p>

<p>proper practices by the junkie. </p>

<p><b><u>Prohibit (legal or illegal) Drug Use in Special State
Establishments</u></b> </p>

<p>At the same time that we carry out what will be seen as a
liberalization of some drug regulations we should demonstrate
that our ultimate goal is the reduction of all drug use. The
effectiveness of education in reducing drug abuse is obviously
disappointing. Not even the success in controlling cigarette
smoking extends to the youthful population. However, it is from
the successful imposition and acceptance of restrictions on
smoking by the adult population that we must learn. Drug
education efforts have focused largely on the populations that we
consider to be deviant and at risk, that is, young people and
minority groups. Our efforts to limit the use of quantitatively
important drugs should act to influence the entire population so
that an unambiguous attitude of disapproval is projected. </p>

<p>The amazing progress in dissuading people from the use of
tobacco, suggests additional action in relation to alcohol,
already a regulated drug. That prohibition is not feasible has
certainly been adequately demonstrated, but restricted use of
alcohol in inappropriate places is justifiable and would be an
essential step in projecting the attitudinal change desired. </p>

<p>The Panel applauds the establishment of tobacco free areas in
State institutions. As a condition of their funding the
Legislature should now insist that certain agencies within the
State system not sell or provide alcoholic beverages within the
confines of their campus or building. This should be immediately
applied to any medical center campus or hospital. Doctors and
other care-givers have a generally favored status and acquire
with that a special responsibility to project an attitude of
disapproval about the use of any disabling drug while they are
accepting responsibility for a dependent patient. Certainly the
State acquires a liability in providing alcohol to individuals
who are then going to drive or see patients. More importantly,
such use then projects an attitude totally at odds with that
which we claim throughout our discussions as desirable. </p>

<p>Similarly, it is impossible to rationalize the use of a
depressant drug, clearly shown to impair performance after small
doses, on a University or State University campus dedicated to
intellectual activity. </p>

<p><b><u>Conclusion</u></b> </p>

<p>These changes are minor indeed. However, they would achieve
some real progress and, equally important, would demonstrate to
the alarmed citizenry that constructive change is possible and
permit a freer discussion next year. I hope that the Legislature
senses the urgency in the situation in our state. I close by
threatening you with the aphorism of Francis Bacon of 400 hundred
years ago, &quot;He that will not apply new remedies must accept
new evils; for time is the great innovator.&quot; <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>