
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B008-265</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/CJSREFRM.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122040221 text/html 19043
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:02:16 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:17:11 GMT
Content-length: 18825
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Criminal Justice System Reform by Judge Thomas M. Stark</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="OPERATOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->

<p>Appellate Term </p>

<p>Supreme Court of the State of New York </p>

<p>9th and 10th Judicial Districts </p>

<p>THOMAS M. STARK </p>

<p>ASSOCIATE JUSTICE SUPREME COURT CHAMBERS CRIMINAL COURTS
BUILDING RIVERHEAD, N.Y, 11901-9007 </p>

<p>(516) 852-2157 </p>

<p>August l0, 1993 </p>

<p>The New York Times </p>

<p>Executive and Editorial Offices </p>

<p>229 West 43rd Street </p>

<p>New York, N.Y. </p>

<p>Re: Criminal Justice System reforms </p>

<p>Gentlemen: </p>

<p>From time to time you have published articles concerning the
Criminal Justice System of New York State, and have commented on
various proposals to reform the system. In this regard, the
Correctional Association of New York is probably the most
knowledgeable state-wide group which studies the problems and
recommends legislation to amend various sections of the New York
State Penal Law and Criminal Procedure Law. </p>

<p>Over the past several years, I have studied and suggested
various reforms, which, if enacted, would reduce the number of
inmates serving indeterminate sentences of imprisonment in the
State prison system. </p>

<p>The second felony offender law (Penal Law§70.06) mandates
prison sentences of defendants convicted of any felony (whether
violent or not) during the ten years period following the first
felony offense (again whether violent or not). Because of this
law, there are thousands of prisoners serving time in
correctional facilities for low grade non-violent felony
convictions, and who must serve one-half of their maximum
sentences before parole consideration (as compared to first
felony offenders which must serve only one-third of their maximum
sentences). Judges have no discretion in sentencing second felony
offenders. </p>

<p>The Correctional Association, Governor Cuomo, and many others,
have annually urged the Legislature to repeal the second felony
offender law and authorize judges to impose prison sentences, or
alternative non-prison sentences, depending on mitigating or
aggravating factors in each case. I believe this has never come
about because the legislators fear being perceived as &quot;soft
on crime.&quot; </p>

<p>Other reforms are badly needed. Under the Rockefeller drug
laws (Penal Law Article 220-Controlled Substance Offenses),
offenders must be sentenced to prison regardless of whether the
offender is a &quot;street seller&quot; (probably an addict
selling to support his own addiction), or a higher level seller.
Most offenders convicted of these crimes receive no treatment for
their addiction. The Penal Law should be amended to authorize
judges to impose alternate sentences coupled with drug treatment
in the community. Here again, legislators fear being labeled
&quot;soft on crime&quot;. </p>

<p>The third area where reform is badly needed is the granting of
good behavior time to imprisoned convicts to reduce their
sentences. When the new Penal Law was enacted in the mid-sixties,
it provided that an inmates' good behavior time could only be
applied to one-third of the maximum sentence (Penal Law §70.30
(4) Corrections Law §703-b) . The former Penal Law-applied the
good time to the minimum sentence. Under that earlier law,
Inmates had an incentive to reduce their minimum sentence by
complying with all the rules and regulations governing good
behavior. There is no longer such incentive available to today's
convict. </p>

<p>The Correctional Association has championed the repeal of the
mandatory second felony offender law, and giving discretion to
judges to impose an alternate sentence. The Association also
recommends legislation to apply good behavior time to the minimum
sentence. In this regard, I am enclosing a copy of the
Correctional Association Newsletter published this past March,
which sets forth the position of the Association and its reasons.
I am also enclosing a copy of a pessimistic Correctional
Association letter to me dated June 8, 1993. </p>

<p>These reforms have been included in the Governor's criminal
justice proposals for several years. I am enclosing a copy of a
letter to me dated June 17, 1993, from Counsel to the New York
State Director of Criminal Justice, with a frank conclusion that
the Governor's proposals are not likely to be enacted. </p>

<p>In addition to the Correctional Association position, the New
York State Commissioner of Correctional Services, Thomas A.
Coughlin III, has spoken out strongly in favor of the proposed
reforms. I am enclosing a copy of his testimony given at a
meeting of the Assembly Codes Committee on June 8, 1993. He
comments as to several reforms in the system, and the reasons why
the law should be modified or changed, including the harsh
Rockefeller drug laws, and the rigidity of the second felony
offender law. Mr. Coughlin's views are shared by Governor Cuomo,
but no action has been taken by the Legislature because of the
fear of being labeled &quot;soft on crime.&quot; I believe that
if the members of the Legislature would consider these reforms on
the merits, and explain the reasons to their constituents, this
would eliminate the &quot;soft on crime&quot; aspect of the
reforms. </p>

<p>On March 23, 1993, you published an extensive article written
by Francis X. Clines, beginning on page B-1, concerning the
harshness of the drug laws, and told the story of inmate Lawrence
V. Cipollone, who is serving a lengthy drug sentence and is
seeking executive clemency from the Governor later this year. I,
and many others, are actively supporting Mr. Cipollone's request.
On July 27, 1993, you published an article concerning the
Governor's December 29, 113,12, grant of executive clemency to
Lawrence Snider, an inmate serving time for drug offenses. The
article was written by Peter Marks, and started on page A-1. It
reviews the harshness of the Rockefeller drug laws as they punish
a low-level street drug seller. </p>

<p>While on the subject of executive clemency, there is a
remarkable story concerning Mr. Thomas E. Ventura of 278 North
Country Road, Miller Place, Long Island, which might be of
interest to you in subsequent articles on this subject. In the
fall of 1974, Mr. Ventura, age 23 at that time, was charged in
Suffolk County with sale and possession of more than one ounce of
marijuana on November 4, 1974. He was also charged with sale and
possession of more than one ounce of cocaine on December 4, 1974.
He was convicted as charged, after a jury trial on October
5,1978. On November 2, 1978, he was sentenced to life
imprisonment, with a minimum of fifteen years. His conviction was
affirmed by the Appellate Division on November 10, 1980, and
Leave to Appeal to the Court of Appeals was denied on December
15, 1980. </p>

<p>While in prison, Mr. Ventura began an extensive educational
effort. </p>

<p>It included: (1) 1980-Osborn School, Auburn Correctional
Facility-Mechanical Drafting. (2) 1983-Ulster County Community
College- an Associate Degree in Liberal Arts, maintaining a grade
point average of 4.0. (3) 1985-State University of New York at
New Paltz, a Bachelor of Arts Degree, majoring in psychology and
sociology. His grade point average was 3.96, and he graduated <u>summa
cum laude</u>, and was Valedictorian of his class. Mr. Ventura
applied for Executive Clemency in 1986, after serving seven and
one-half years, (one-half of his minimum sentence). I had
extensive correspondence with Mr. Ventura in the fall of 1986
concerning his application. After reviewing the situation on
November 13, 1986, I recommended that Governor Cuomo grant
clemency to Mr. Ventura. There were compelling reasons for the
Governor's action. Mr. Ventura's application was also supported
by the then District Attorney of Suffolk County, Patrick Henry,
and many other persons within the correctional system, who were
familiar with Mr. Ventura's accomplishments while in prison. </p>

<p>On Christmas Eve, December 24, 1986, Governor Cuomo granted
clemency, and Mr. Ventura was conditionally released on parole
several days later. After his release, Mr. Ventura began the
study of law at Touro Law School in Huntington. He received his
Juris Doctor Degree on May 30, 1993. Mr. Ventura received the
American Jurisprudence Award For Excellence. He also served as
Editor-in-Chief of the Law Journal. While attending law school,
Mr. Ventura served as: (1) student library assistant; (2) an
intern with the Touro Criminal Law Clinic; and (3) law intern
judicial clerk with Hon. Alfred E. Lama of the New York State
Supreme Court. He is presently serving as a law intern in the
office of Scott Zamek, Esq., of Melville. </p>

<p>I believe that Mr. Ventura's outstanding rehabilitation while
in prison and his activities after release could be the subject
of a <u>New York Times</u> article at an appropriate time. His
story demonstrates the harshness of the Rockefeller drug laws.
After being found guilty of sale and possession of a small amount
of narcotic drugs, Mr. Ventura's life sentence was mandated. </p>

<p>In an interesting recent development, a Long Termers (those
serving sentences of more than ten years) Committee at Woodbourne
Prison has begun publication of a Newsletter containing their
hopes for criminal justice reforms, including the proposal to
change the application of good behavior time to the minimum
sentence. These Newsletters are excellently written, and the
Committee is attempting to promulgate the Newsletter to a wide
spectrum of individuals and organizations concerned with reforms
of the Criminal Justice System. I am enclosing copies of the
March, April-May, June and July Newsletters, and a copy of the
inmates' letter to me. The work of this Committee should be
publicized as much as possible, especially to legislators and
appropriate state officials. </p>

<p>One might ask why I am so concerned with Criminal Justice
System reform. I have acquired knowledge and experience during my
many years service in the State judiciary. I have been a trial
judge in the County Court of Suffolk County and subsequently in
the Criminal Term of the New York State Supreme Court for over
thirty years. I have presided over hundreds of criminal trials,
pre-trial and post-trial hearings, sentencing proceedings and
miscellaneous criminal court matters. Since 1985, In addition to
my other duties, I serve as an Associate Justice of the Appellate
Term of the Supreme Court in the Ninth and Tenth Judicial
Districts. Over one-half of the appeals are from convictions in
the local criminal courts (District Courts of Nassau and Suffolk,
City Courts in the Ninth Judicial District, and Town and Village
Courts in both judicial districts). </p>

<p>When I first came on the bench, I had wide discretion to
impose sentences, both of imprisonment, and alternate sentences
within the community, mainly sentences of probation. Over the
ensuing years, the Penal Law has been amended so as to mandate
sentences of imprisonment for a large number of crimes. No longer
have judges authority to choose an appropriate sentence based
upon the facts of the crime, the criminals background and other
factors. In recent years, judges have become &quot;rubber
stamps&quot;, imposing bargained-for sentences between the
District Attorney and the offender. A judge generally takes no
part in the sentence bargaining, which is first presented to him
at the guilty plea proceeding. The only right reserved by the
judge is to permit a defendant to withdraw his guilty plea if the
judge has decided, after reviewing the written presentence
investigation, to impose a stiffer sentence than the one
bargained-for. A defendant in this situation may either accept
the judge's intended sentence, or withdraw his guilty plea, and
either be tried or to attempt to negotiate another sentence. </p>

<p>There is little chance of the present Legislature amending the
Penal Law to give judges discretion in determining appropriate
sentences. Here again, the legislators perception of the voters
being against them as being &quot;soft on crime&quot;, prevents
serious legislative consideration of these needed reforms in the
Criminal Justice System. </p>

<p>In this letter, I have attempted to set forth what many of us
believe should be done to reform the New York State's Criminal
Justice System. In an effort to obtain greater coverage of this
subject, I have written several times to the Long Island
newspaper <u>Newsday</u>, and I am enclosing copies of my letters
of March 25, 1993, and April 12, 1993, and a copy of my April 12,
1993 letter to the New York State Director of Criminal Justice. </p>

<p>My present effort is to obtain wide promulgation of these
important issues. I am confident that<u> The New York Times</u>,
as the quintessential leader of newspapers published in New York
State, will, at an appropriate time, add its voice to these
efforts. </p>

<p>Very truly yours, </p>

<p>THOMAS M. STARK </p>

<p>TMS/ml </p>

<p>Encs. </p>

<p>Appellate Term </p>

<p>Supreme Court of the State of New York </p>

<p>9th and 10th Judicial Districts </p>

<p>THOMAS<i> </i>M. STARK SUPREME COURT CHAMBERS </p>

<p>ASSOCIATE JUSTICE CRIMINAL. COURTS BUILDING </p>

<p>RIVERHEAD, N.Y. 11901-9007 </p>

<p>(516) 8S2-2157 </p>

<p>August 11, 1993 </p>

<p>Hon. Ralph J. Marino </p>

<p>Majority Leader </p>

<p>New York State Senate </p>

<p>68 West Main Street </p>

<p>Oyster Bay, New York 11771 </p>

<p>Re: Criminal Justice System reforms </p>

<p>Dear Senator Marino: </p>

<p>For the past several years, I have become quite concerned over
problems in the State Criminal Justice System, and believe that
certain legislative reforms are necessary to modify or amend the
Penal Law and Criminal Procedure Law to accomplish these reforms.
</p>

<p>The Correctional Association of New York is probably the most
knowledgeable state-wide group which studies these problems, and
recommends appropriate legislation. </p>

<p>I have summarized my views of the entire situation, and I am
enclosing a copy of my recent letter to the <u>New York Times</u>
on these subjects, together with various appendices. </p>

<p>I have long supported the Governor's Criminal Justice
proposals and have been disappointed each year when the
Legislature, for various reasons, fails to act. </p>

<p>I believe that this inaction is predicated on their belief
that supporting these reforms would lead to a perception by the
voters that they were &quot;soft on crime&quot;. This is most
unfortunate. I am attempting to promulgate my views and those of
others to as many persons, organizations, and news media as is
possible. </p>

<p>I sincerely hope that the Governor's proposals receive a
better reception in the 1994 session. </p>

<p>Very truly yours, </p>

<p>THOMAS M. STARK </p>

<p>TMS/ml </p>

<p>Enc. </p>

<p>Appellate Term </p>

<p>Supreme Court of the State of New York </p>

<p>9th and 10th Judicial Districts </p>

<p>THOMAS M. STARK SUPREME COURT CHAMBERS </p>

<p>ASSOCIATE JUSTICE CRIMINAL COURTS BUILDING </p>

<p>RIVERHEAD. N.Y. 11901-9007 </p>

<p>(516) 852-2157 </p>

<p>August 11, 1993 </p>

<p>Hon. Saul Weprin </p>

<p>Speaker, New York State Assembly </p>

<p>61-08A- 224th Street </p>

<p>Bayside, New York 11346 </p>

<p>Re: Criminal Justice System reforms </p>

<p>Dear Speaker Weprin: </p>

<p>For the past several years, I have become quite concerned over
problems in the State Criminal Justice System, and believe that
certain legislative reforms are necessary to modify or amend the
Penal Law and Criminal Procedure Law, to accomplish these
reforms. </p>

<p>The Correctional Association of New York is probably the most
knowledgeable state-wide group which studies these problems, and
recommends appropriate legislation. </p>

<p>I have summarized my views of the entire situation, and I am
enclosing a copy of my recent letter to the <u>New York Times</u>
on these subjects, together with various appendices. </p>

<p>I have long supported the Governor's Criminal Justice
proposals and have been disappointed each year when the
Legislature, for various reasons, fails to act. </p>

<p>I believe that this inaction is predicated on their belief
that supporting these reforms would lead to a perception by the
voters that they were &quot;soft an crime.&quot; This is most
unfortunate. I am attempting to promulgate my views and those of
others to as many persons, organizations, and news media as is
possible. </p>

<p>I believe your view of the Governor's annual crime proposals
are similar to mine, and I sincerely hope that the Governor's
proposals receive a better reception in the 1994 session. </p>

<p>Very truly yours, </p>

<p>TMS/ml THOMAS M. STARK </p>

<p>Enc. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../MISC/misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements
on Drug Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="3340" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>