
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-51</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B035-25</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/asap/painmed2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070256 text/html 115478
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:02:41 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:32:55 GMT
Content-length: 115259
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Medical References on Pain and Pain Medication - Part 2 </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_asap_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="asapmain.htm"><font size="3">ASAP - American Society for
Action on Pain</font></a><font size="2"> </font></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43622" -->

<h1>Medical References on Pain and Pain Medication - Part 2</h1>

<hr>

<p>Author: Schnurr-R-F. MacDonald-M-R. </p>

<p>Title: Memory complaints in chronic pain. </p>

<p>Source: Clin-J-Pain. 1995 Jun. 11(2). P 103-11. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CLINICAL JOURNAL OF PAIN. </p>

<p>Abstract: </p>

<p>OBJECTIVE: In clinical practice, patients with chronic pain
frequently report problems with memory functioning. This issue,
however, has received little attention in the scientific
literature. The present study was designed to investigate this
common problem and to stimulate research interest in this
neglected and important area. </p>

<p>DESIGN: Self-reported memory problems were investigated in two
groups of chronic pain patients--patients with pain from
acceleration-deceleration automobile accidents (n = 56) and
patients with pain from various work accidents (n = 27)--and two
control groups involving medical/dental (n = 24) and
psychotherapy patients (n = 20). SETTING: Private practice,
chronic pain, rehabilitation psychology services. RESULTS: Our
findings suggest that memory complaints are higher in patients
with chronic pain than in medical/dental or psychotherapy
patients. No differences were found between chronic pain groups.
On more general measures of memory complaint, differences between
pain patients and controls were attributed to the severity of
patients' depression. On a questionnaire designed to be more
specific to memory complaint in chronic pain patients,
differences in memory complaint between pain patients and
controls were found, even after the effects due to depression
were statistically removed. Although pain patients often
attribute their memory problems to codeine use and/or
psychoactive medications, there was no support for this in the
present study. </p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS: Within the limitations of this study, these
findings suggest that memory complaints may be related not only
to depression but also to the presence of chronic pain. Further
research in this area is needed. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Enck-R-E. </p>

<p>Title: Pain management and parenteral opioids: an update. </p>

<p>Source: Am-J-Hosp-Palliat-Care. 1995 Sep-Oct. 12(5). P 8,
9-13. </p>

<p>Journal Title: AMERICAN JOURNAL OF HOSPICE AND PALLIATIVE
CARE. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Junien-J-L. Riviere-P. </p>

<p>Title: Review article: the hypersensitive gut--peripheral
kappa agonists as a new pharmacological approach. </p>

<p>Source: Aliment-Pharmacol-Ther. 1995 Apr. 9(2). P 117-26. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ALIMENTARY PHARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEUTICS. </p>

<p>Abstract: Hypersensitivity to pain is a common component of
functional bowel disorders. Hyperalgesia may be induced by
various stimuli which produce a cocktail of inflammatory
mediators that decrease the pain threshold. Drugs able to block
these peripheral events within the gut may offer a new
pharmacological approach for treating functional bowel disorders.
Kappa opioids have been shown to inhibit somatic pain through a
peripheral mechanism of action, acting directly on receptors
located on peripheral sensory endings. They can block both the
nociceptive messages as well as the release of sensory peptides.
This paper reviews the effects of opioid agonists on gut visceral
pain and motility anomalies induced by visceral pain. Kappa
opioids have strong effects on all models tested, with a
peripheral mechanism of action allowing the design of drugs
acting only in the periphery and having no central nervous system
side- effects. This contrasts with mu agonists which are
centrally active on pain and worsen the subsequent transit and
motility anomalies. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Golinski-M-A. Fill-D-M. </p>

<p>Title: Preemptive analgesia. </p>

<p>Source: CRNA. 1995 Feb. 6(1). P 16-20. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CRNA. </p>

<p>Abstract: Preemptive analgesia describes a situation where the
administration of a pharmacological agent administered before the
onset of a painful stimulus causes a decrease in the intensity of
pain felt, and subsequently there is a decrease in the total
amount of analgesic required compared with the administration of
an agent after a painful stimulus. It is best understood if it is
thought of as a block to afferent impulses that are trying to
reach the central nervous system before a tissue injury.
Preemptive analgesia, administered in the form of narcotics,
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, or local anesthetics, is
thought to alter peripheral and central sensitization to
nociceptive impulses. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Martin-M-I. Goicoechea-C. Ormazabal-M-J. Lopez-F.
Alfaro-M- J. </p>

<p>Title: Analgesic effect of two calcitonins and in vitro
interaction with opioids. </p>

<p>Source: Gen-Pharmacol. 1995 May. 26(3). P 641-7. </p>

<p>Journal Title: GENERAL PHARMACOLOGY. </p>

<p>Abstract: 1. When the analgesic effect of salmon-calcitonin
(S-CT) and of eel-calcitonin (E-CT), as well as their influence
on the morphine-analgesia were compared, no significant
differences were found. 2. While on isolated tissues, E-CT
induced a significant increase on the effect of bremazocine,
[D-Pen2,D- Pen5]enkephalin and [Met5]enkephalin and no changes
were observed on the effect of DAMGO, suggesting that E-CT
increases the effects of opioids acting on delta or kappa
receptors but not on mu receptors. 3. These findings corroborate
the possibility of interactions between calcitonin and the opioid
system. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Stein-C. </p>

<p>Title: The control of pain in peripheral tissue by opioids. </p>

<p>Source: N-Engl-J-Med. 1995 Jun 22. 332(25). P 1685-90. </p>

<p>Journal Title: NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL OF MEDICINE. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Scholz-M-J. </p>

<p>Title: Assessing safety of opioids for chronic pain. </p>

<p>Source: RN. 1995 Apr. 58(4). P 71. </p>

<p>Journal Title: RN. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Antonijevic-I. Mousa-S-A. Schafer-M. Stein-C. </p>

<p>Title: Perineurial defect and peripheral opioid analgesia in
inflammation. </p>

<p>Source: J-Neurosci. 1995 Jan. 15(1 Pt 1). P 165-72. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF NEUROSCIENCE. </p>

<p>Abstract: Opioid receptors have been demonstrated on sensory
nerves in both inflamed and normal subcutaneous tissue but
locally applied opioid agonists produce analgesia in inflamed
tissue only. Inflammation confers a disruption of the perineurial
barrier that can also be induced deliberately by hyperosmolar
solutions. The present study examines at which stage of Freund's
adjuvant-induced inflammation peripheral opioid analgesic effects
become manifest and whether a perineurial defect contributes to
the appearance of such effects. To this end we have monitored the
temporal evolution of inflammatory signs (swelling, temperature,
hyperalgesia) and of peripheral antinociceptive effects (by the
paw pressure test) of mu-, delta-, and kappa-selective opioids.
Using horseradish peroxidase histochemistry, the perineurial
barrier was assessed in normal and inflamed tissue and following
its artificial disruption by hyperosmolar saline and mannitol in
vivo. Finally, we sought to elicit analgesia in normal tissue by
the concomitant application of mannitol and receptor-selective
opioids or by an extremely lipophilic opioid agonist (fentanyl).
We found that peripheral opioid antinociception and perineurial
leakage occur simultaneously at a very early stage (within 12 hr)
of the inflammatory reaction and that both can be mimicked by the
administration of hyperosmolar solutions in normal tissue.
Fentanyl produced peripheral antinociception in noninflamed
tissue that was potentiated by mannitol or inflammation. Our
findings demonstrate that the perineurium is a crucial
determinant for peripheral opioid analgesia and that the efficacy
of locally applied hydrophilic or lipophilic neuromodulatory
compounds can be improved dramatically by the concomitant
modulation of perineurial permeability.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS) </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Fowler-C-J. Fraser-G-L. </p>

<p>Title: Mu-, delta-, kappa-opioid receptors and their subtypes.
A critical review with emphasis on radioligand binding
experiments [see comments] </p>

<p>Source: Neurochem-Int. 1994 May. 24(5). P 401-26. </p>

<p>Comment: Comment in: Neurochem-Int. 1994 May. 24(5). P 433-7. </p>

<p>Journal Title: NEUROCHEMISTRY INTERNATIONAL. </p>

<p>Abstract: Since the early 1970's, when specific binding sites
for opiates were first described, there has been a vast
literature on opiate receptors, their subtypes, and even the
multiplicity of these subtypes. In the present review, the signal
transduction pathways, structure, and brain and spinal cord
localization of the established subtypes (mu, delta, kappa) are
reviewed. In addition, evidence suggesting heterogeneity of these
subtypes, in particular from radioligand binding studies, is
discussed critically. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Ziegler-D-K. </p>

<p>Title: Opiate and opioid use in patients with refractory
headache [see comments] </p>

<p>Source: Cephalalgia. 1994 Feb. 14(1). P 5-10. </p>

<p>Comment: Comment in: Cephalalgia. 1994 Dec. 14(6). P 466-7. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CEPHALALGIA. </p>

<p>Abstract: Opiate and opioid analgesics are commonly used for
pain in general and presumably for headache. Codeine, oxycodone
and propoxyphene, among the most commonly prescribed, do carry
some risk of abuse, and their efficacy in headache patients has
not been well studied. In many patients with other kinds of pain,
however, both of neoplastic and non-neoplastic origin, chronic
opiate use has been demonstrated to be of benefit without adverse
side effects. The type of headache patient with intractable pain
who needs frequent opiate analgesic and who does not develop
addiction or drug abuse is an important subject for research. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Joranson-D-E. Gilson-A-M. </p>

<p>Title: Policy issues and imperatives in the use of opioids to
treat pain in substance abusers. </p>

<p>Source: J-Law-Med-Ethics. 1994 Fall. 22(3). P 215-23. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF LAW, MEDICINE AND ETHICS. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Sjogren-P. Jensen-N-H. Jensen-T-S. </p>

<p>Title: Disappearance of morphine-induced hyperalgesia after
discontinuing or substituting morphine with other opioid
agonists. </p>

<p>Source: Pain. 1994 Nov. 59(2). P 313-6. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PAIN. </p>

<p>Abstract: Hyperalgesia and allodynia in 4 cancer patients
treated with morphine disappeared after discontinuing or
substituting morphine with other opioid agonists. The first case
describes a young female who developed hyperalgesia and myoclonus
during intravenous morphine infusion. The hyperalgesia and
myoclonus disappeared when the morphine administration was
discontinued and she felt comfortable on small and sporadic oral
doses of methadone. The second case describes hyperalgesia
occurring after a small dose of sustained-release morphine which
disappeared after alternative use of oral ketobemidone. The third
case describes hyperalgesia following high doses of intramuscular
morphine which disappeared after alternative use of continuous
subcutaneous infusion of sufentanil. The fourth case describes a
boy developing hyperalgesia after high doses of oral and
intramuscular morphine. The hyperalgesia disappeared after
discontinuing morphine administration but withdrawal symptoms
developed due to too small doses of methadone. Possible
mechanisms of morphine-induced hyperalgesia are discussed. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Turk-D-C. Brody-M-C. Okifuji-E-A. </p>

<p>Title: Physicians' attitudes and practices regarding the
long-term prescribing of opioids for non-cancer pain. </p>

<p>Source: Pain. 1994 Nov. 59(2). P 201-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PAIN. </p>

<p>Abstract: Prescribing long-term opioids for patients with
chronic pain is controversial. The primary purpose of this study
was to examine physicians' beliefs about and prescribing of the
long-term use of opioids in the treatment of chronic pain
patients. Concerns about regulatory pressure and appropriateness
of education regarding opioids were also examined. The design was
a stratified random sample. In the United States, 6962 physicians
were randomly selected from two states in each of five regions of
the country (Northeast, Midwest, Southeast, Southwest, and
Pacific). Physicians from seven medical specialties (Family
Practice, Internal Medicine, Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Rheumatology, Orthopedic Surgery, Neurosurgery,
and Neurology) were surveyed and 1912 (27.46%) responded. A
survey consisting of questions regarding years of practice,
number of chronic pain patients treated, frequency of prescribing
long-term opioids, concerns about opioids, goals of treatment,
beliefs about education regarding opioids, and concerns about
regulatory pressures was used. Based on the physicians who
responded, it appears that prescription of long-term opioids is
relatively wide-spread. Differences were noted by region,
specialty, and the requirement for the use of multiple
prescriptions for schedule II drugs. Physicians in the Midwestern
United States were the least likely to prescribe the long-term
use of opioids. Rheumatologists and general practitioners were
significantly more likely to prescribe long-term opioids than
were surgeons, neurologists, or physiatrists and were more likely
to emphasize the importance of symptom improvement as an
appropriate goal even in the absence of functional
improvements.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Cherry-D-A. Gourlay-G-K. </p>

<p>Title: Pharmacological management of chronic pain: a
clinician's perspective. </p>

<p>Source: Agents-Actions. 1994 Oct. 42(3-4). P 173-4. </p>

<p>Journal Title: AGENTS AND ACTIONS. </p>

<p>Abstract: Of the currently available mu agonist drugs, the
following are relatively contraindicated: 1.
Methadone--unpredictable duration of action [5]. 2.
Pethidine--unwanted central effects, metabolised to an active
metabolite and too short acting. 3. Codeine--too weak and with
constipating side-effects. 4. Fentanyl--too short acting. 5.
Oxycodone--too short acting although suppositories may overcome
some theoretical disadvantages. 6. Dextropropoxyphene--weak
agonist which is possibly metabolised to a cardiotoxic metabolite
[6]. Morphine remains the drug of choice for chronic pain when
administered in a sustained release preparation. MS Contin, a
slow release oral formulation of morphine, is available and has a
predictable duration of action lasting from 8-12 h, while
improved formulations are about to be released in the near future
in some countries. Prescribers need to take into account the
relatively poor oral bioavailability of morphine when calculating
the daily morphine dose. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Pribilla-O. </p>

<p>Title: Medical legal and ethical questions in palliative
medicine and euthanasia. </p>

<p>Source: Forensic-Sci-Int. 1994 Dec 16. 69(3). P 299-306. </p>

<p>Journal Title: FORENSIC SCIENCE INTERNATIONAL. </p>

<p>Abstract: The increasing importance of legal and ethical
questions in palliative medicine and euthanasia due to the
increased technical possibilities for extending life will be
considered. In palliative medicine, the choice of the best
therapy will be discussed, especially in the case of oncological
diseases. Here, consideration of the prospects of success, for
example, in chemotherapy, is faced with partly serious
side-effects. The requirements of palliative medicine that the
patient has to be fully informed of the fatal prognosis of his
disease is equally debated as the optimum pain therapy. In this
respect, the modification of the Narcotics Act of 1 February 1993
is also under discussion. In the field of euthanasia, the
technical development of life extension versus dying has raised
considerable legal and ethical problems regarding termination of
therapy. Additionally, fiscal considerations are of increasing
relevance. The common development of the legal and ethical
discussion, for example, with regard to the publicity of the work
of the so-called 'Gesellschaft fur humanes Sterben', the public
discussion leading up to a hearing of the 'Bundestag' regarding
active euthanasia leads to a realization of the subject. The
proposals for an active termination of life by discontinuing
therapy for adults and also for malformed newborns are discussed.
A dispute concerning the new legal regulation of active
euthanasia in the Netherlands of February 1993 is also discussed.
There, around 2% of all deaths per year result from active
termination of life and also cases where persons are not able to
consent. This also has enormous consequences for the position of
the physician.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Platt-D. </p>

<p>Title: Important principles of effective pain management. </p>

<p>Source: Conn-Med. 1994 Nov. 58(11). P 667-9. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CONNECTICUT MEDICINE. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Goodman-N-W. </p>

<p>Title: Recent advances in pain relief [letter; comment]
[published erratum appears in Br J Hosp Med 1994 May 4-
17;51(9):496] </p>

<p>Source: Br-J-Hosp-Med. 1994 Apr 20-May 3. 51(8). P 433. </p>

<p>Comment: Comment on: Br-J-Hosp-Med. 1993 Nov 17-Dec 14.
50(10). P 616-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: BRITISH JOURNAL OF HOSPITAL MEDICINE. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Rabenstein-K. </p>

<p>Title: Recent advances in pain relief [letter; comment] </p>

<p>Source: Br-J-Hosp-Med. 1994 Apr 20-May 3. 51(8). P 431. </p>

<p>Comment: Comment on: Br-J-Hosp-Med. 1993 Nov 17-Dec 14.
50(10). P 616-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: BRITISH JOURNAL OF HOSPITAL MEDICINE. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Oh-V-M. </p>

<p>Title: The placebo effect: can we use it better? [editorial]
[see comments] </p>

<p>Source: BMJ. 1994 Jul 9. 309(6947). P 69-70. </p>

<p>Comment: Comment in: BMJ. 1994 Sep 10. 309(6955). P 667. </p>

<p>Journal Title: BMJ. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Lindley-C. </p>

<p>Title: Overview of current development in patient-controlled
analgesia. </p>

<p>Source: Support-Care-Cancer. 1994 Sep. 2(5). P 319-26. </p>

<p>Journal Title: SUPPORTIVE CARE IN CANCER. </p>

<p>Abstract: Over the past two decades, numerous trials have
assessed the safety and efficacy of patient-controlled analgesia
(PCA). Advantages over conventional parenteral narcotics reported
from these trials include equivalent to superior pain relief,
superior patient satisfaction, decreased sedation and anxiety,
faster return to normal functional status, and reduction in
nursing time and hospitalization. The majority of these trials
have been conducted in the postoperative patient population. In
the mid to late 1980s, interest arose in applying PCA technology
to the management of cancer pain. Factors that served as an
impetus for the use of PCA in cancer pain included favorable
reports from the postoperative setting and the often-cited
statistics regarding the magnitude of the cancer pain problem.
Advances in PCA technology coupled with advances in vascular
access technology that allow the placement of long-term ports and
catheters to facilitate intravenous, epidural, or intrathecal
administration of opioid analgesics have made the applicability
of PCA in ambulatory cancer patients an attractive option. The
greatest breakthrough in PCA technology came with the
introduction of devices making it possible to choose between
intermittent (demand bolus) and continuous administration
(continuous infusion) or both intermittent and continuous modes.
A comparison of these types of PCA devices is described. The
limitations of the literature involving PCA therapy in cancer
patients make it difficult to identify optimal patient selection
criteria, PCA administration schedules, drug selection and
dosing, and optimal route of administration. The current status
and pertinent issues related to these topics are addressed. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: McCaffery-M. Ferrell-B-R. </p>

<p>Title: Nurses' assessment of pain intensity and choice of
analgesic dose. </p>

<p>Source: Contemp-Nurse. 1994 Jun. 3(2). P 68-74. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CONTEMPORARY NURSE. </p>

<p>Abstract: Under-treatment of all types of pain has been
identified in many countries throughout the world. For example,
the World Health Organization states that unrelieved cancer pain
is an international problem. Lack of education of health care
professionals, including nurses, is frequently cited as a major
reason for under-treatment of pain. This survey of 517 Australian
nurses suggests that they have some of the same educational needs
as nurses in North America, such as how to assess pain intensity
and how to select a dose of an opioid analgesic that is
appropriate for the individual patient. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Chapman-V. Haley-J-E. Dickenson-A-H. </p>

<p>Title: Electrophysiologic analysis of preemptive effects of
spinal opioids on N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated events. </p>

<p>Source: Anesthesiology. 1994 Dec. 81(6). P 1429-35. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ANESTHESIOLOGY. </p>

<p>Abstract: BACKGROUND: Spinal N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor- mediated mechanisms may contribute to reduced opioid
sensitivity in conditions of pain. The effectiveness of spinal
opioids in inhibiting NMDA-mediated nociceptive events was
assessed with two models. In addition, opioid dose-response
curves with preemptive administration were compared with early
and late postadministrations. METHODS: Dorsal horn nociceptive
neuronal responses were recorded in the intact halothane
anesthetized rat to acute repetitive C-fiber electrical
stimulation (0.1 and 0.5 Hz) and to the peripheral injection of
5% formalin. At 0.5 Hz but not at 0.1 Hz, there was an enhanced
C-fiber evoked response of dorsal horn neurons elicited by
repetitive C-fiber stimulation (wind-up), which is mediated by
the NMDA receptor. Formalin produced a biphasic response; the
late protracted inflammatory phase was NMDA receptor-mediated.
RESULTS: With 0.5-Hz stimulation a large degree of wind-up was
elicited; it was less sensitive to 5 micrograms morphine compared
with the effect of the same dose on the residual wind- up
elicited at 0.1 Hz. Preadministration and early
postadministration of morphine were equieffective at inhibiting
the second-phase formalin response. In contrast, administration
of the fast-acting mu opioid, D-Ala-Gly-MePHe-Gly-ol, given late
postadministration (during the second phase) was less effective
than preadministration. Increasing the dose of D-Ala-
Gly-MePHe-Gly-ol produced complete inhibitions. </p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS: NMDA receptor-mediated neuronal responses, such
as wind-up and the established second phase of the formalin
response, are poorly responsive to opioids. Dose increases and
preemptive opioids effectively inhibit these NMDA
receptor-mediated events. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Santill'an-R. Maestre-J-M. Hurl'e-M-A. Fl'orez-J. </p>

<p>Title: Enhancement of opiate analgesia by nimodipine in cancer
patients chronically treated with morphine: a preliminary report.
</p>

<p>Source: Pain. 1994 Jul. 58(1). P 129-32. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PAIN. </p>

<p>Abstract: The ability of nimodipine, a calcium-channel
blocker, to enhance morphine analgesia and/or modify the
development of tolerance was studied in patients with cancer pain
who had needed successive increments of morphine for periods
ranging from 21 to 780 days. Assessment of daily morphine
consumption was the primary effect parameter. Nimodipine
succeeded in reducing the daily dose of morphine in 16 of 23
patients (oral, n = 13; intrathecal, n = 3), and failed to modify
it in 2 patients. Total oral daily dose was reduced by nimodipine
(120 mg/day) from 282.6 +/- 47.7 mg to 158.7 +/- 26.2 mg (n = 15,
P &lt; 0.001). Intrathecal morphine was also reduced by 1-5
mg/day. Nimodipine was withdrawn in 5 patients during the first
week of treatment due to intolerance (n = 3) or aggravation of
the disease (n = 2). These preliminary results support
experimental findings showing that pharmacological interference
with Ca(2+)-related events may modify chronic opioid effects,
including the expression of tolerance. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Elizaga-A-M. Smith-D-G. Sharar-S-R. Edwards-W-T.
Hansen-S-T- Jr. </p>

<p>Title: Continuous regional analgesia by intraneural block:
effect on postoperative opioid requirements and phantom limb pain
following amputation. </p>

<p>Source: J-Rehabil-Res-Dev. 1994 Aug. 31(3). P 179-87. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF REHABILITATION RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT. </p>

<p>Abstract: The objective of this study was to assess the
effectiveness of a previously described technique of regional
analgesia (continuous infusion of local anesthetic through a
catheter placed at the time of amputation within the exposed
sciatic or posterior tibial nerve) on relieving the postoperative
pain in a heterogeneous group of patients who underwent lower
extremity amputations. A second objective was to determine the
effect of such treatment on the incidence and characteristics of
phantom limb pain 6 months or more after surgery in the same
patients. The study design was retrospective, unblinded,
controlled (postoperative pain), and unblinded questionnaire and
interview (phantom pain) were utilized. Subjects were inpatients
at Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA. Nineteen bupivacaine-treated and 40 nonbupivacaine-treated
patients who underwent lower extremity amputation subsequent to
trauma, infection, long-standing injury (poor or no function),
congenital deformity, or burns were evaluated in the
postoperative pain management assessment. Nine treated and 12
untreated patients were interviewed in the phantom pain
assessment. Bupivacaine 0.5% 2-6 ml/h was infused through a
polyamide 20-gauge catheter inserted into the sciatic or
posterior tibial nerve sheath under direct vision at the time of
surgery. All patients, treated and control, received opioid
analgesics systemically during the 72-hour period of study. The
postoperative opioid analgesic requirement of treated patients
was compared with that of control patients who received opioid
analgesics alone. A questionnaire was administered to assess
presence, severity, and character of phantom pain.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Bilfinger-T-V. Kushnerik-V. </p>

<p>Title: The use of morphine in surgery: an overview. </p>

<p>Source: Adv-Neuroimmunol. 1994. 4(2). P 133-44. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ADVANCES IN NEUROIMMUNOLOGY. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Krick-S-E. Lindley-C-M. Bennett-M. </p>

<p>Title: Pharmacy-perceived barriers to cancer pain control:
results of the North Carolina Cancer Pain Initiative Pharmacist
Survey. </p>

<p>Source: Ann-Pharmacother. 1994 Jul-Aug. 28(7-8). P 857-62. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ANNALS OF PHARMACOTHERAPY. </p>

<p>Abstract: OBJECTIVE: To assess pharmacists' knowledge,
attitudes, and beliefs regarding the use of narcotics in cancer
pain management, identify pharmacist counseling activities for
cancer pain patients, assess pharmacy- related barriers to cancer
pain management, and evaluate the availability of narcotic
analgesics. METHODS: Mailing of a six-page survey. SETTING: Five
hundred randomly selected pharmacists registered in North
Carolina. PARTICIPANTS: Of 500 pharmacists surveyed, 141 surveys
were completed and returned for a response rate of 28.2 percent.
RESULTS: Pharmacists surveyed were knowledgeable regarding the
problem of undertreatment of cancer pain. More than 80 percent of
respondents replied that most cancer patients experience pain at
some time during their illness. Eighty-five percent of
respondents agreed that the nurse must believe the patient's
report of pain and that the patient is the best judge of the
intensity of the pain. Conservative physician prescribing
patterns and conservative administration patterns of nurses were
identified as perceived barriers to adequate pain management by
51 and 44 percent of respondents, respectively. Less than 30
percent of respondents frequently counseled cancer pain patients
and were unable to identify patients who have cancer pain as a
major medical illness. Hospital pharmacists recommended
adjunctive therapy more often than did community pharmacists (p =
0.013). Interventions in pain management regimens were more often
conducted by hospital pharmacists than by community pharmacists
(p = 0.049). Differences in availability of narcotics was noted
among practice sites for some more potent narcotics. Of the
pharmacists surveyed, only 43 percent had attended a continuing
education program on cancer pain management. Ninety-six percent
of respondents were interested in attending a continuing
education program in the future. </p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacists in North Carolina are aware that the
undertreatment of cancer pain is a serious medical problem.
Unfortunately, pharmacists appear to be unable to identify
patients with cancer pain as a major medical problem; therefore,
counseling activity is limited. Addiction is still perceived as a
barrier by some pharmacists. Through organizations such as the
North Carolina Pain Initiative, these problems can be addressed. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Jamison-R-N. Anderson-K-O. Peeters-Asdourian-C.
Ferrante-F-M. </p>

<p>Title: Survey of opioid use in chronic nonmalignant pain
patients. </p>

<p>Source: Reg-Anesth. 1994 Jul-Aug. 19(4). P 225-30. </p>

<p>Journal Title: REGIONAL ANESTHESIA. </p>

<p>Abstract: BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES. Opioids have been
accepted as appropriate treatment for acute and cancer pain, but
remain controversial for use with chronic nonmalignant pain.
Clinicians are concerned about efficacy, tolerance, addiction,
and unwanted side effects. METHODS. The aim of this study was to
survey chronic pain patients who were taking opioids for their
pain, to determine the incidence of these adverse conditions. Two
hundred seventeen patients who were being treated for their pain
at two different pain centers completed a medication
questionnaire. The most common diagnosis was low back pain. One
hundred twelve patients reported taking oral opioids for their
pain. RESULTS. Of the patients who reported taking opioids for
their chronic pain, 83% felt that the opioids were moderately
beneficial in relieving their pain; 25% felt that the opioid had
not lost its ability to relieve the pain over time; 35% reported
that they did not need to increase their medication; 36%
expressed no fear of addiction or dependence; and 56% reported
having no unwanted side effects. </p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS. The results suggest that chronic nonmalignant
pain patients taking opioids for their pain reported some
tolerance, fear of addiction, and side effects when taking
opioids. However, despite these concerns, some of these patients
felt that opioid therapy was very beneficial. Further
investigations are needed to determine which patient
characteristics predict benefit from opioid therapy for
nonmalignant pain. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: King-J-C. Kelleher-W-J. Stedwill-J-E. Talcott-G. </p>

<p>Title: Physical limitations are not required for chronic pain
rehabilitation success. </p>

<p>Source: Am-J-Phys-Med-Rehabil. 1994 Sep-Oct. 73(5). P 331-7. </p>

<p>Journal Title: AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE AND
REHABILITATION. </p>

<p>Abstract: A high performance, active duty fitness requirement
group rehabilitated equally to a low performance needs civilian
group, both suffering from disabling chronic pain. The purpose of
this prospective study was to determine whether higher physical
performance requirements adversely affected outcome in a chronic
pain rehabilitation program. Twenty-three active duty, chronic
pain patients were treated along with 22 civilian chronic pain
sufferers in a behavior modification, including positive, verbal
reinforcement for performance, stress management and family
counseling, physical reconditioning, including stretching,
strengthening and aerobic conditioning in a slowly progressive
fashion to required needs, and narcotic and muscle relaxant
detoxification program at a major military medical center.
Eighteen patients in each group, representing, respectively, 78
and 82% of the military and civilian participants, successfully
completed the inpatient program. Success was defined by (1)
elimination of all narcotics and minor tranquilizers, (2)
elimination of all physical restrictions that precluded any
desired work or play, which required much higher levels for the
active duty patients that included: (3) elimination of all
physical profile restrictions and (4) objectively passing annual
aerobics field test requirements before the program's end. Review
of military disability separation records, averaging 24 mo
posttreatment, showed that no formerly successful active duty
patients had later been discharged because of physical
impairments. Of individuals responding to mail questionnaires at
an average of 19 mo postprogram, 12 of 14 (86%) initially
successful military patients reported continued unrestricted
maintenance of physical abilities, whereas 10 of 14 (71%) of the
initially successful civilians reported no restrictions in
desired activities.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Meert-T-F. De-Kock-M. </p>

<p>Title: Potentiation of the analgesic properties of
fentanyl-like opioids with alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonists in rats.
</p>

<p>Source: Anesthesiology. 1994 Sep. 81(3). P 677-88. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ANESTHESIOLOGY. </p>

<p>Abstract: BACKGROUND: Data on the analgesic properties of
alpha 2 agonists and their interactions with opioids are
conflicting. Experiments were conducted in rats to evaluate
whether various available alpha 2 agonists can potentiate the
analgesic properties of opioids and to determine the route of
administration needed for optimal interaction. METHODS: The
tail-withdrawal reaction test was used as an analgesia assay. In
separate experiments, the interactions between systemic
(subcutaneous, intravenous, and intraperitoneal) and spinally
(epidural and intrathecal) administered alpha 2 agonists and
opioids were evaluated. The antagonism of medetomidine plus
fentanyl with naloxone and/or idazoxan also was studied. RESULTS:
All alpha 2 agonists tested, when injected subcutaneously with
fentanyl, potentiated the opioid-induced analgesia. In terms of a
reduction of the amount of fentanyl needed to produce a deep
surgical analgesia (tail-withdrawal reaction latency &gt; or = 10
s) over more than 2 h, the relative order of potency of the alpha
2 agonists tested was: medetomidine &gt; dexmedetomidine &gt;
xylazine &gt; clonidine &gt; detomidine. For some of these alpha
2 agonists there was a biphasic effect: at the larger doses
tested, a reduction in the fentanyl potentiation was present. The
potentiation of the opioid activity with alpha 2 agonists was
also demonstrated in terms of a longer duration of analgesia
after combined treatment with fixed doses of opioids. The
interaction between the alpha 2 agonists and the opioids remained
present when a more profound criterion of analgesia
(tail-withdrawal reaction latency &gt; or = 30 s) was used.
Furthermore, the interactions between the alpha 2 agonists tested
and fentanyl or sufentanil appeared to be independent of the
route of administration. Potentiations were observed after
simultaneous subcutaneous injections of both groups of compounds,
after the combination of intraperitoneal (alpha 2 agonist) plus
subcutaneous (opioid), intravenous (alpha 2 agonist) plus
epidural (opioid) and simultaneous epidural or intrathecal
administrations. With regard to antagonism of the analgesic
activity of combined treatment with alpha 2 agonists plus
opioids, naloxone provided total antagonism, whereas the alpha 2
antagonist idazoxan overcame only the alpha 2 agonist-induced
potentiation of fentanyl. </p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS: The tested alpha 2 agonists can potentiate the
analgesic properties of opioids, but they have no intrinsic
antinociceptive effects on spinal reflexes on their own. The
potentiating activities of the alpha 2 agonists could be measured
both in terms of a reduction of the amount of opioid needed to
reach a particular level of analgesia and in terms of a longer
duration of analgesia with a fixed dose of the opioid. The
potentiations were observed with various alpha 2 agonists and
opioids and appeared independent of the routes of administration.
</p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Poyhia-R. </p>

<p>Title: Opioids in anaesthesia: a questionnaire survey in
Finland. </p>

<p>Source: Eur-J-Anaesthesiol. 1994 May. 11(3). P 221-30. </p>

<p>Journal Title: EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ANAESTHESIOLOGY. </p>

<p>Abstract: A questionnaire was sent to the pharmacies of 88
Finish hospitals with surgical departments to inquire about the
consumption of opioids during 1990. Another questionnaire was
sent to 480 members of the Finnish Society of Anaesthesiologists
to ask how they administer opioids to adult patients. Answers
were received from 95% of hospitals and 67% of anaesthetists.
Dextropropoxyphene was the most common oral opioid and oxycodone
was the most common parenteral opioid used in Finland. Parenteral
opioids were consumed almost totally in the hospitals. The
anaesthetists reported oxycodone to be the opioid of choice for
premedication, postoperative pain and sedation of critically ill
patients. Fentanyl was the opioid most commonly used
intravenously during balanced anaesthesia and in epidural
administration. Epidural opioids were administered by 77% of
anaesthetists and patient- controlled analgesia (PCA) technique
mostly for intravenous administration by 19%. Only 10% of Finnish
anaesthetists were actively involved in the management of chronic
pain; the methods they use are discussed. The majority of
anaesthetists were satisfied with the currently available
opioids. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Richardson-M. </p>

<p>Title: Conquering cancer pain. New guidelines try to overcome
old myths about the use of narcotics. </p>

<p>Source: Tex-Med. 1994 May. 90(5). P 28-31. </p>

<p>Journal Title: TEXAS MEDICINE. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Eriksen-J. Clausen-T-G. Borgbjerg-F-M. </p>

<p>Title: [Opioid analgesics in the treatment of non-malignant
chronic pain] </p>

<p>Source: Ugeskr-Laeger. 1994 Jan 31. 156(5). P 621-3, 626-7. </p>

<p>Journal Title: UGESKRIFT FOR LAEGER. </p>

<p>Abstract: Opioid sensitivity, residual pain, development of
tolerance, physical and psychological dependence are described
and discussed in relation to long-term opioid therapy. Based on
this, guidelines for long-term opioid administration are
established for chronic pain conditions of non-cancer origin. The
indication must be well-considered--a life-long treatment may be
instituted. Prior to final initiation of the treatment, a testing
of the selected drug and method of administration should be
performed. Due to the compliance- reasons, only long acting
opioids should be used (controlled release morphine preparations,
methadone, buprenorphine) and the route of administration should
always be oral. The treatment must be individualised, covering 24
hours a day. The single dosages should be identical and
administered with identical time intervals, which are determined
by the duration of action of the drug in use.
P.r.n.-administration should not be allowed. Only one physician
should be responsible for the treatment and for the prescription
of the opioid analgesic drugs. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Lewis-K-S. Whipple-J-K. Michael-K-A. Quebbeman-E-J. </p>

<p>Title: Effect of analgesic treatment on the physiological
consequences of acute pain. </p>

<p>Source: Am-J-Hosp-Pharm. 1994 Jun 15. 51(12). P 1539-54. </p>

<p>Journal Title: AMERICAN JOURNAL OF HOSPITAL PHARMACY. </p>

<p>Abstract: Physiological responses to acute pain are described,
and the effects of different analgesic techniques on these
responses are discussed. The body's response to acute pain can
cause adverse physiological effects. Pain can impede the return
of normal pulmonary function, modify certain aspects of the
stress response to injury, and alter hemodynamic values and
cardiovascular function. It can produce immobility and contribute
to thromboembolic complications. In addition, pain can slow a
patient's recovery from surgery and contribute to increased
morbidity. Fewer pulmonary complications occur when adequate
analgesia is provided through the use of epidural narcotics and
local anesthetics, particularly if the injury or surgery involves
the lower part of the body. Continuous morphine infusions,
intercostal nerve blocks, and transcutaneous electrical
stimulation do not alter the frequency of pulmonary
complications. The effectiveness of patient-controlled analgesia
in reducing postoperative pulmonary complications is still not
known. Epidural local anesthetic therapy inhibits the stress
response, particularly in operations involving the lower abdomen
or extremities; this technique is less effective during major
abdominal procedures. Suppression of endocrine-metabolic changes
following lower abdominal surgery requires neural block to the
fourth thoracic segment. Epidural narcotics partially inhibit the
stress response after lower abdominal or extremity surgery but
not after upper abdominal or thoracic surgery. Local anesthetics
applied to the surgical site, intercostal nerve blocks, and
intrapleural and intraperitoneal administration also do not
modify the stress response. Adequate analgesia through the use of
local anesthetics and narcotics postoperatively generally results
in improved cardiovascular function, decreased pulmonary
morbidity and mortality, earlier ambulation, and decreased
likelihood of deep vein thrombosis. Some data suggest that
improved patient outcome occurs with adequate analgesia. Block of
afferent and efferent neural pathways by local anesthetics seems
to be the most effective analgesic modality in lessening the
physiologic response to pain and injury. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Li-Q-S. Cao-S-H. Xie-G-M. Gan-Y-H. Ma-H-J. Lu-J-Z.
Zhang- Z-H. </p>

<p>Title: Combined traditional Chinese medicine and Western
medicine. Relieving effects of Chinese herbs, ear-acupuncture and
epidural morphine on postoperative pain in liver cancer. </p>

<p>Source: Chin-Med-J-Engl. 1994 Apr. 107(4). P 289-94. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CHINESE MEDICAL JOURNAL. </p>

<p>Abstract: In the evaluation of Chinese herbs (A),
ear-acupuncture (B) and epidural morphine (C) to relieve
postoperative pain and abdominal distension, sixteen male
patients with primary liver cancer were observed. This study was
conducted by means of orthogonal experiment and double blind,
randomized design. The patients received various treatments
according to the display of the orthogonal table L16(2)15 which
corresponds to 2(3) factorial experiment design. C+ (morphine 2
mg) was given before the peritoneum was sutured. A+ (orally
administered) and B+ were given 24 hours after operation. 50-100
mg of pethidine was given when the pain intensity VAS (0-100)
exceeded 50-70. The observation parameters included plasma
leucine enkephalin (LEK), postoperative total dosage of narcotics
administered for 5 days, VAS for pain and pain reliever,
abdominal distension, urinary retention, constipation, etc. The
results were as follows: a. Patients who had received A (A+B+C+,
A+B+C-, A+B-C-, A+B-C+); C (C+A+B+, C+A+B-, C+A-B+, C+A-B-), or B
(B+A+C+, B+A+C-, B+A-C+, B+A-C-) produced better analgesic
effects than those who had received placebo. The A, B, and C
reduced narcotics 650, 450 and 550 mg respectively when compared
with placebo. The effects of A and C were of statistical
significance (P &lt; 0.05), while AB, BC, and AC interactions
were not found; b. A and B minimized abdominal distension and
urinary retention, while C prolonged them. As compared with the
placebo, A and B accelerated restoration of bowel peristalsis (P
&lt; 0.05, ANOVA). Both A and B decreased it for 165 hours, while
epidural morphine prolonged it for 49 hours; and c.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Portenoy-R-K. </p>

<p>Title: Management of common opioid side effects during
long-term therapy of cancer pain. </p>

<p>Source: Ann-Acad-Med-Singapore. 1994 Mar. 23(2). P 160-70. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ANNALS OF THE ACADEMY OF MEDICINE, SINGAPORE. </p>

<p>Abstract: For most patients with cancer pain, the primary goal
of opioid pharmacotherapy is a satisfactory balance between
analgesia and side effects. Consequently, the assessment and
treatment of opioid side effects is a fundamental aspect of
therapy, which may increase the likelihood of a favourable
treatment outcome, potentially allow higher and more efficacious
opioid doses, and improve quality of life by reducing other
uncomfortable symptoms. This review describes the presentation,
assessment and management of adverse neuropsychological and
gastrointestinal effects due to opioid drugs. These common side
effects pose the major challenge for the clinician who undertakes
the long-term opioid therapy of patients with cancer pain. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Hecker-R-B. </p>

<p>Title: Spinal narcotics for chronic noncancer pain warrants
further investigation [editorial] </p>

<p>Source: J-Am-Osteopath-Assoc. 1994 Jun. 94(6). P 477-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN OSTEOPATHIC
ASSOCIATION. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Rapp-S-E. Wild-L-M. Egan-K-J. Ready-L-B. </p>

<p>Title: Acute pain management of the chronic pain patient on
opiates: a survey of caregivers at University of Washington
Medical Center. </p>

<p>Source: Clin-J-Pain. 1994 Jun. 10(2). P 133-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CLINICAL JOURNAL OF PAIN. </p>

<p>Abstract: OBJECTIVE: The provision of acute pain management
for the chronic pain patient can pose a challenge. We sought to
characterize management issues. SUBJECTS/SETTING: An anonymous
survey was distributed to 270 physicians and 212 nurses at
University of Washington Medical Center (UWMC) in an attempt to
characterize management issues. DESIGN: Caregivers were queried
regarding treatment modalities, efficacy of anxiolysis, patient
attributes, concern of the quantity of medication, criteria for
patient evaluation, and other management issues. RESULTS: Of the
respondents, 61.8% were physicians, and 38.2% were nurses. The
mean duration in practice was 7.7 years. The responses from the
two groups were similar. Seventy-five percent reported using
different pain-evaluation techniques for chronic pain patients
than those utilized for the &quot;average&quot; patient. Pain
scores were used frequently in the average patient, whereas
ability to perform activities was used more commonly in the
chronic pain patient (p &lt; 0.0001). Half of the respondents
expressed concern regarding the amount of medication used and
level of sedation. The same proportion found anxiolysis to be a
helpful adjunct. The use of a time- contingent &quot;pain
cocktail&quot; as an oral medication was a useful strategy for
88% of respondents. The least labor- intensive modality reported
was patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) for 84.5% of respondents;
intravenous opiate fusion, 5.3%; and epidural analgesia, 11.2%. </p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS: The survey describes caregiver concerns regarding
this patient population, including medication use, sedation,
length of hospital stay, and evaluation techniques. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Kenner-D-J. </p>

<p>Title: Pain forum. Part 2. Neuropathic pain. </p>

<p>Source: Aust-Fam-Physician. 1994 Jul. 23(7). P 1279-83. </p>

<p>Journal Title: AUSTRALIAN FAMILY PHYSICIAN. </p>

<p>Abstract: Neuropathic pain is often a reason for an
unfavourable response to morphine or other opioids in treating
cancer pain. This type of pain is difficult to manage and may
co-exist with nociceptive cancer pain. There is still a potential
for opioid responsiveness, although the doses needed will be
higher, and adjuvant drug therapies are best employed
concurrently with opioid drugs. Adjuvant drugs used are the
antidepressants, anticonvulsants, including benzodiazepines,
corticosteroids and neurolepts. Less commonly, agents such as
baclofen and clonidine, and sympatholytic drugs such as prazosin
can be employed for sympathetically maintained neuropathic pain
(discussed in Part 3). The type of agent selected will depend on
the natural history of the disease process, as well as a
description of the pain-- the lancinating pains tending to
respond better to anticonvulsants. Non invasive neurostimulatory
approaches such as transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(TENS) may be useful in management, and a few patients may
require an invasive procedure such as dorsal column stimulation. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Canty-S-L. </p>

<p>Title: Constipation as a side effect of opioids. </p>

<p>Source: Oncol-Nurs-Forum. 1994 May. 21(4). P 739-45. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ONCOLOGY NURSING FORUM. </p>

<p>Abstract: PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: To describe the phenomenon of
opioid- induced constipation and its treatment. DATA SOURCES:
Published books and journal articles; commercial pharmacologic
information. DATA SYNTHESIS: Patients receiving opioid analgesia
are at risk for constipation and its complications. A number of
pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic interventions are available to
prevent and treat this problem. </p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS: Discomfort from this opioid side effect can be
particularly distressing to patients with cancer who already
suffer from pain. Accurate assessment and individualized
interventions are needed. IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING PRACTICE:
Collaboration with physicians to determine appropriate drug or
nondrug interventions and patient and family education regarding
the problem, preventive action, and appropriate treatment
methods. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Hill-T-P. </p>

<p>Title: Freedom from pain: a matter of rights? </p>

<p>Source: Cancer-Invest. 1994. 12(4). P 438-43. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CANCER INVESTIGATION. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Scott-J-L. Smith-M-S. Sanford-S-M. Shesser-R-F.
Rosenthal-R- E. Smith-J-P. Feied-C-F. Ghezzi-K-T. Hunt-D-M. </p>

<p>Title: Effectiveness of transnasal butorphanol for the
treatment of musculoskeletal pain. </p>

<p>Source: Am-J-Emerg-Med. 1994 Jul. 12(4). P 469-71. </p>

<p>Journal Title: AMERICAN JOURNAL OF EMERGENCY MEDICINE. </p>

<p>Abstract: A prospective, open-label study of the effectiveness
of transnasal butorphanol in the treatment of pain resulting from
musculoskeletal injuries. Twenty-eight patients with strains (n =
20), fractures (n = 6), contusions (n = 1), and stab wounds (n =
1) were included. All patients were examined by an attending
level emergency medicine physician and deemed to have pain severe
enough to warrant parenteral narcotic analgesia. All patients
received an initial 1-mg dose of transnasal butorphanol.
Subsequent dosing was flexible depending on response to the
initial dose. All patients received pain relief from transnasal
butorphanol, and only one requested alternative analgesic
medication. Fifty- seven percent (n = 16) of patients noticed at
least a little relief of pain within 5 minutes of administration
and 93% (n = 26) received at least a little relief within 15
minutes. Seventy-one percent of the patients received a 50%
reduction of pain within 60 minutes. No serious side effects were
noted, but drowsiness occurred in 82% (n = 23) and dizziness in
54% (n = 15) of the patients. One patient discontinued
participation in the study because of nausea. In this limited
trial transnasal butorphanol proved to be a rapidly effective
opioid analgesic. Further controlled studies comparing transnasal
butorphanol with standard parenteral narcotics are needed. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Ralphs-J-A. Williams-A-C. Richardson-P-H. Pither-C-E.
Nicholas-M-K. </p>

<p>Title: Opiate reduction in chronic pain patients: a comparison
of patient-controlled reduction and staff controlled cocktail
methods. </p>

<p>Source: Pain. 1994 Mar. 56(3). P 279-88. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PAIN. </p>

<p>Abstract: This study compares the effectiveness of two methods
of opiate reduction in 108 chronic pain patients during a 4 week
inpatient pain management programme, and at 1-month and 6-month
follow-up. Patients chose either the patient-controlled reduction
(PCR) or cocktail reduction method, aiming to complete withdrawal
by discharge. Use of opiates and other drugs was recorded, and
psychological measures taken, at admission, at discharge, and at
follow-ups. Patients who opted for the cocktail reduction method
started at higher morphine equivalents (P &lt; 0.001), were less
confident in their ability to cope without medication (P &lt;
0.05), and rated their everyday activities a more disrupted by
pain (P &lt; 0.05). At discharge, 89% of the cocktail group were
abstinent from opiates compared with 68% of the PCR group (P &lt;
0.05). By 1- month follow-up, the advantage of the cocktail
method had disappeared, with no significant differences between
the two groups in mean opiate dose, nor in the proportion of
abstinent patients. This was the result of a greater return to
opiate use in the cocktail group, with abstinence rates remaining
unchanged in the PCR group. By 6-month follow-up, abstinence
rates for the groups were equivalent, with 55% of patients
remaining off opiates. By this stage, however, non-abstinent
cocktail group patients were taking significantly larger doses of
opiates than PCR patients (P &lt; 0.05), although in both groups,
the dose was well below admission level. Admission opiate dose
level was the best predictor both of abstinence at discharge and
of subsequent opiate dose level in non-abstinent patients. This
study demonstrates that both reduction methods can produce
substantial reduction in opiate use by severely impaired chronic
pain patients with long medication histories. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Markley-H-G. </p>

<p>Title: Chronic headache: appropriate use of opiate analgesics.
</p>

<p>Source: Neurology. 1994 May. 44(5 Suppl 3). P S18-24. </p>

<p>Journal Title: NEUROLOGY. </p>

<p>Abstract: The question of the appropriate use of opiate
analgesics in the management of chronic headache pain is under
debate. Often, the management of headache pain is complicated by
the overuse of dependency-promoting analgesics. Because of
confusion about the use of analgesics in pain management, some
patients are denied access to necessary opioid analgesia, whereas
others receive large quantities of combination analgesics. The
proper use of opiate analgesics is presented here, including a
review of the pharmacology of these agents. Signs of analgesic
dependence, analgesic rebound headache, and methods of withdrawal
are also presented. The potential use of such new treatment
modalities as butorphanol nasal spray is discussed. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Andreev-N. Urban-L. Dray-A. </p>

<p>Title: Opioids suppress spontaneous activity of polymodal
nociceptors in rat paw skin induced by ultraviolet irradiation. </p>

<p>Source: Neuroscience. 1994 Feb. 58(4). P 793-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: NEUROSCIENCE. </p>

<p>Abstract: Changes in chemical sensitivity of peripheral
nociceptors following injury or inflammation have been studied in
in vitro preparation of the saphenous nerve-hind paw skin from
adult rats. Heat hyperalgesia in the hind paw was induced by a
prior ultraviolet irradiation and the skin from these animals was
investigated five days later. Polymodal nociceptors were
quiescent in normal skin but were spontaneously active in the
majority of fibres after ultraviolet exposure. Capsaicin- induced
activation of fine fibres was enhanced after ultraviolet
pretreatment. Direct administration of morphine, DAGOL
(mu-receptor agonist) and U-69593 (kappa-receptor agonist), but
not DPDPE (delta-receptor agonist) to the receptive field
produced a concentration-related and naloxone- reversible
suppression of spontaneous firing in polymodal nociceptors of
ultraviolet-treated skin. Morphine did not reduce the activity of
fibres in normal skin when these were driven by KCl
depolarization. These data show that polymodal nociceptors change
their activity and sensitivity to exogenous chemicals following
the induction of peripheral hyperalgesia by ultraviolet
irradiation. Specifically, evidence is provided for the
expression of opioid sensitivity and inhibition of polymodal
nociceptor activity through mu- and kappa-opioid receptors. These
observations may account for peripheral antinociceptive actions
of opioids during specific states of peripheral hyperalgesia. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Tyre-T-E. Walworth-D-E. Tyre-E-M. </p>

<p>Title: The outcome status of chronic pain patients 4 years
after multidisciplinary care. </p>

<p>Source: Wis-Med-J. 1994 Jan. 93(1). P 9-12. </p>

<p>Journal Title: WISCONSIN MEDICAL JOURNAL. </p>

<p>Abstract: Thirty-three patients previously treated for a
variety of chronic pain syndromes (largely non-surgical back
problems) were selected for study on the basis of 2 years or
greater post-discharge status. A patient profile was developed
revealing an 86% successful return-to-work rate and minimal use
of narcotics 4 years after discharge. In addition, there was
relatively low use of either inpatient or outpatient medical
services after treatment. These patient behaviors were specific
goals of the pain management program in which these patients had
participated. Interesting data were also collected on medication
use after treatment and methods of pain control used most
successfully. Selected outcome variables were also studied across
specific diagnostic categories (surgical v non-surgical back
problems, amputee pain, reflex sympathetic dystrophy, and others)
for this group. In general, rather compelling positive outcomes
are shown for the long-term effects of multi-disciplinary pain
management. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Kehlet-H. </p>

<p>Title: Postoperative pain relief--what is the issue?
[editorial] </p>

<p>Source: Br-J-Anaesth. 1994 Apr. 72(4). P 375-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: BRITISH JOURNAL OF ANAESTHESIA. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Trujillo-K-A. Akil-H. </p>

<p>Title: Inhibition of opiate tolerance by non-competitive
N-methyl-D- aspartate receptor antagonists. </p>

<p>Source: Brain-Res. 1994 Jan 7. 633(1-2). P 178-88. </p>

<p>Journal Title: BRAIN RESEARCH. </p>

<p>Abstract: Our laboratory and others have previously reported
that the non-competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor
antagonist, MK-801, interferes with the development of tolerance
to the analgesic effects of morphine. The present studies were
performed in order to further characterize the role of NMDA
receptors in opiate tolerance. The results demonstrate that
opiate tolerance is inhibited rapidly, and at low doses, by four
different non-competitive NMDA receptor antagonists (MK-801,
ketamine, dextrorphan and phencyclidine), suggesting that this
inhibition results from blockade of NMDA receptors rather than
from the 'side-effect' of a particular drug. The NMDA antagonists
were found to inhibit the development but not the expression of
opiate tolerance; i.e. they were able to prevent but not reverse
tolerance. Finally, the results suggest that NMDA receptor
antagonists do not interfere with associative tolerance; instead
it appears that these drugs may specifically inhibit
non-associative tolerance. It thus appears that NMDA receptors
may have a fundamental role in the development of opiate
tolerance, and that non- competitive NMDA receptor antagonists
may be effective adjuncts to opiates in the treatment of chronic
pain. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Rogers-J-N. Valley-M-A. </p>

<p>Title: Reflex sympathetic dystrophy. </p>

<p>Source: Clin-Podiatr-Med-Surg. 1994 Jan. 11(1). P 73-83. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CLINICS IN PODIATRIC MEDICINE AND SURGERY. </p>

<p>Abstract: In summary, RSD is pain of neuropathic origin. The
diagnosis is often obscure and requires a complete history,
physical, and psychological evaluations. The diagnosis depends on
symptoms (burning pain, allodynia and hyperpathia); signs (edema,
sudomotor changes, temperature changes); and objective
measurements, such as skin temperature, QSART, radiographs, and
triple-phase bone scans; as well as the clinical response to a
sympathetic block. Management of RSD should be designed to
promote restoration of function utilizing physical therapy made
possible by sympathetic, central, or peripheral nerve blockade.
Medications may include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
tricyclic antidepressants, and vasoactive drugs. Psychologic
support is an important part of the patient's rehabilitation.
Dorsal column or peripheral nerve stimulators, sympathectomies,
and narcotics should be considered only when other more
conservative measures have failed. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Woodburn-S-E. </p>

<p>Title: Postoperative pain management. </p>

<p>Source: Clin-Podiatr-Med-Surg. 1994 Jan. 11(1). P 55-64. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CLINICS IN PODIATRIC MEDICINE AND SURGERY. </p>

<p>Abstract: When surgery is planned, postoperative pain
management requires careful consideration. Many medications and
techniques can greatly reduce a patient's postsurgical
discomfort, including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
long-acting local anesthetics, corticosteroids, narcotics, ice,
and compression. Pain management should begin preoperatively,
continue through surgery, and be fully managed postoperatively.
Successful management of postoperative pain greatly affects
patients' overall impressions of their surgery. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Tyler-D-C. </p>

<p>Title: Pharmacology of pain management. </p>

<p>Source: Pediatr-Clin-North-Am. 1994 Feb. 41(1). P 59-71. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PEDIATRIC CLINICS OF NORTH AMERICA. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Trachtenberg-A-I. </p>

<p>Title: Opiates for pain: patients' tolerance and society's
intolerance [letter] </p>

<p>Source: JAMA. 1994 Feb 9. 271(6). P 427. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JAMA. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Andersen-G. Thomsen-A-B. Jensen-N-H. Sjogren-P. </p>

<p>Title: [Cerebral dysfunction after prolonged use of opioids
(see comments)] </p>

<p>Source: Ugeskr-Laeger. 1993 Oct 25. 155(43). P 3459-62. </p>

<p>Comment: Comment in: Ugeskr-Laeger. 1994 Jan 10. 156(2). P
200. </p>

<p>Journal Title: UGESKRIFT FOR LAEGER. </p>

<p>Abstract: Cerebral dysfunction due to long-term treatment with
opioids is a problem of increasing relevance because of the
rapidly growing use of opioids. A review of psychomotor and
cognitive test methods is given, including their application in
patients on long-term opioid treatment. The findings of the most
valid studies on cancer patients in long-term treatment with
opioids are an increase in continuous reaction time and
subjective sedation score regardless of the routes of
administration. Studies of drug addicts in long-term treatment
with opioids seem to reflect a lowering of the general level of
activity. According to recent studies, patients with chronic non-
malignant pain conditions are responsible for the major part of
the total opioid consumption. So far, no studies of cerebral
dysfunction have been performed on this group of patients.
Further research should concentrate on the use of few valid
psychomotor and cognitive tests and should include patients with
chronic non-malignant pain conditions. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Patt-R-B. </p>

<p>Title: Spinal opioids: distinguishing trend from science
[letter; comment] </p>

<p>Source: J-Pain-Symptom-Manage. 1993 Oct. 8(7). P 451-3. </p>

<p>Comment: Comment on: J-Pain-Symptom-Manage. 1993 Jan. 8(1). P
36-46. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF PAIN AND SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Sees-K-L. Clark-H-W. </p>

<p>Title: Opioid use in the treatment of chronic pain: assessment
of addiction [see comments] </p>

<p>Source: J-Pain-Symptom-Manage. 1993 Jul. 8(5). P 257-64. </p>

<p>Comment: Comment in: J-Pain-Symptom-Manage. 1994 Feb. 9(2). P
74. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF PAIN AND SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT. </p>

<p>Abstract: Addiction medicine specialists, besieged with the
adverse consequences of opioids, not unreasonably develop
reservations about their use. Opioid prohibition may be
appropriate when working with addicts, but drug abstinence is not
always the most appropriate nor optimal treatment of pain
patients. Consultation concerning the management of chronic pain
patients may require an attitude adjustment of challenging
proportions for the addiction medicine specialist; it is a role
substantially different from that usually assumed in treating
alcohol- and drug-dependent patients. Rather than relentlessly
pursuing psychotropic drug abstinence as the treatment goal,
restoration of function should be the primary treatment goal for
the chronic pain patient. Unlike the chemically dependent patient
whose level of function is impaired by substance use, the chronic
pain patient's level of function may improve with adequate,
judicious use of medications, which may include opioids.
Evaluating for addiction in a patient who is prescribed long-term
opioids for pain control is often problematic. While the concept
of addiction may include the symptoms of physical dependence and
tolerance, physical dependence and/or tolerance alone does not
equate with addiction. In the chronic pain patient taking
long-term opioids, physical dependence and tolerance should be
expected, but the maladaptive behavior changes associated with
addiction are not expected. Thus, it is the presence of these
behaviors in the chronic pain patient that is far more important
in diagnosing addiction. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Krames-E-S. Lanning-R-M. </p>

<p>Title: Intrathecal infusional analgesia for nonmalignant pain:
analgesic efficacy of intrathecal opioid with or without
bupivacaine. </p>

<p>Source: J-Pain-Symptom-Manage. 1993 Nov. 8(8). P 539-48. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF PAIN AND SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT. </p>

<p>Abstract: We report on the analgesic efficacy of intrathecal
infusions of opioids alone or in combination with bupivacaine in
16 nonmalignant pain patients with implanted pumps. Three
patients had nociceptive pain, five had neuropathic pain, and 8
had mixed pain syndromes. Infusional therapy was delivered over a
combined monthly total of 445 mo of therapy (mean, 27.8 mo). Dose
requirements appeared to be stable with a mean dose increase of
0.26 mg/mo. Bupivacaine was added to the opioid to enhance pain
control in 13 patients who received combination therapy for an
average of 11.7 mo/patient. Thirteen patients (81%) reported good
to excellent results with opioid alone or opioid combined with
bupivacaine. The addition of bupivacaine improved analgesia in
two of three patients with nociceptive pain (66.7%), compared to
eight of ten patients with a pure or mixed neuropathic component
to their pain (80%). We conclude that intrathecal opioids alone
or in combination with bupivacaine are efficacious for the
treatment of nonmalignant pain states and are relatively free of
significant side effects or tolerance. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Joranson-D-E. </p>

<p>Title: Availability of opioids for cancer pain: recent trends,
assessment of system barriers, New World Health Organization
guidelines, and the risk of diversion. </p>

<p>Source: J-Pain-Symptom-Manage. 1993 Aug. 8(6). P 353-60. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF PAIN AND SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Clark-H-W. Sees-K-L. </p>

<p>Title: Opioids, chronic pain, and the law. </p>

<p>Source: J-Pain-Symptom-Manage. 1993 Jul. 8(5). P 297-305. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF PAIN AND SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT. </p>

<p>Abstract: As the United States continues its &quot;War on
Drugs,&quot; physicians who prescribe opioids for the purpose of
pain control must recognize that legal issues are an important
part of the prescription process. Physicians who do not correctly
prescribe opioids may mark their patients as drug abusers and
themselves as misprescribers. Efforts are under way to
characterize appropriately the conditions under which opioids
should be prescribed for the management of pain. California and
Texas have passed intractable pain laws, which permit the
prescribing of opioid medication for chronic pain patients. These
laws were necessary because claims were made against prescribers
who legitimately administered opioids to chronic pain patients.
Physicians must be aware that once a patient has been diagnosed
an addict, it is not legal to prescribe opioids for the purpose
of maintaining or detoxifying that patient; treatment of pain is
still permissible, however. It is clear that new standards of
care must be developed to reduce the liability of legitimate
prescribers from sanctions in either criminal or civil settings.
With new standards of care, prescriptions for opioids written in
good faith for the treatment of pain should survive legal
scrutiny. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Wesson-D-R. Ling-W. Smith-D-E. </p>

<p>Title: Prescription of opioids for treatment of pain in
patients with addictive disease. </p>

<p>Source: J-Pain-Symptom-Manage. 1993 Jul. 8(5). P 289-96. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF PAIN AND SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT. </p>

<p>Abstract: Addiction medicine specialists and pain specialists
can provide better patient care by combining their expertise when
treating patients who are addicted to alcohol, street drugs, or
prescription medications. Addiction specialists--particularly
those whose primary treatment philosophy is drug free--must
accept that controlled opiate maintenance is appropriate for some
patients, and pain specialists need to increase their sensitivity
to the possibility of addiction among their patients. Both pain
and addiction are treatable conditions, and optimal care of some
patients requires the coordinated services of both an addiction
medicine specialist and a pain specialist. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Schofferman-J. </p>

<p>Title: Long-term use of opioid analgesics for the treatment of
chronic pain of nonmalignant origin. </p>

<p>Source: J-Pain-Symptom-Manage. 1993 Jul. 8(5). P 279-88. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF PAIN AND SYMPTOM MANAGEMENT. </p>

<p>Abstract: The use of long-term opioids (LTOs) to treat chronic
pain of nonmalignant origin (CNMP) is controversial. Most
physicians had felt there was essentially no role for LTOs in
CNMP, but successful treatment outcomes have recently been
reported. Tolerance, organ toxicity, or fear of addiction are not
reasons to limit LTOs. The significant question is efficacy. Does
LTO therapy improve pain and increase function with minimal side
effects or risk? It is useful to divide chronic pain patients
into three types. Type 1 patients are &quot;typical&quot; chronic
pain patients with pain and disability far out of proportion to
the peripheral stimulus. Psychological factors are significant.
In this type of patient, opioids appear to do more harm than
good. Type 2 patients have ongoing nociception and moderate
refractory pain. Type 3 patients have refractory severe
nociception or neuropathic pain. The latter types might be
considered for LTOs. LTO use is appropriate for a very small,
carefully selected group of patients. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Gonzales-G-R. Portenoy-R-K. </p>

<p>Title: Selection of analgesic therapies in rheumatoid
arthritis: the role of opioid medications. </p>

<p>Source: Arthritis-Care-Res. 1993 Dec. 6(4). P 223-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ARTHRITIS CARE AND RESEARCH. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Hamman-W. </p>

<p>Title: Neuropathic pain: a condition which is not always well
appreciated [editorial] </p>

<p>Source: Br-J-Anaesth. 1993 Dec. 71(6). P 779-81. </p>

<p>Journal Title: BRITISH JOURNAL OF ANAESTHESIA. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Kehlet-H. Dahl-J-B. </p>

<p>Title: The value of &quot;multimodal&quot; or &quot;balanced
analgesia&quot; in postoperative pain treatment. </p>

<p>Source: Anesth-Analg. 1993 Nov. 77(5). P 1048-56. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ANESTHESIA AND ANALGESIA. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Abram-S-E. </p>

<p>Title: 1992 Bonica Lecture. Advances in chronic pain
management since gate control. </p>

<p>Source: Reg-Anesth. 1993 Mar-Apr. 18(2). P 66-81. </p>

<p>Journal Title: REGIONAL ANESTHESIA. </p>

<p>Abstract: OBJECTIVE. Two pain treatment systems that developed
soon after the publication of the gate theory are probably a
direct result of its publication: neuraxial opiate administration
and electrical stimulation of the spinal cord and peripheral
nerves and receptors. Although the use of these modalities has
become widespread in managing chronic pain, there is disagreement
about their long-term efficacy. This presentation will attempt to
review the data regarding the mechanisms of action of these
modalities and their efficacy in treating chronic pain of
malignant and nonmalignant origin. DATA SOURCES. Data were
derived almost entirely from original articles reporting
experimental data from both animal and human studies and from
series of patients undergoing treatment with the modalities
reviewed. STUDY SELECTION. Where possible, controlled studies
were selected. However, much of the available data regarding
treatment results are uncontrolled. DATA EXTRACTION AND
SYNTHESIS. Selected data from studies that were felt to be
reasonably well conducted are presented or summarized. Because of
the lack of control groups in many of the clinical trials,
meta-analyses were not carried out. </p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS. Long-term spinal opiate administration has been
shown to be more effective than systemic opiates in some patients
with cancer pain, but often must be combined with local
anesthetics to provide satisfactory pain relief. Loss of effect
over time is a significant problem. Since the identification of
spinal opiate receptors and the introduction of spinally
administered narcotics, a number of other receptors that are
important in both sensitization and suppression of pain
projection systems have been characterized. Agonists and
antagonists to many of these receptors are being developed, and a
few are available for clinical trials. Long-term electrical
stimulation of the spinal cord produces substantial analgesia
below the stimulated spinal segments in some patients with
chronic pain. Although initial results are usually encouraging,
long-term efficacy may be disappointing. It is postulated that
analgesia associated with spinal stimulation is associated with
both stimulation of large fiber ascending tracts and blockade of
spinothalamic pathways. Transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS) has come into widespread use in managing
chronic pain and has had limited trials in cancer pain patients.
It is well accepted by patients and physicians, but clinical
studies of long-term efficacy have yielded variable results. The
analgesic action is probably the result of both large afferent
fiber activation and blockade of peripheral nociceptors. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Bowsher-D. </p>

<p>Title: Pain syndromes and their treatment. </p>

<p>Source: Curr-Opin-Neurol-Neurosurg. 1993 Apr. 6(2). P 257-63. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CURRENT OPINION IN NEUROLOGY AND NEUROSURGERY. </p>

<p>Abstract: Neurogenic pain (encompassing all types of
neuropathic and central pain) is discussed. Experimental work is
presented in a model in which the rat sciatic nerve is loosely
ligatured. In painful human neuropathies, tricyclic
antidepressants have been found to be effective in proportion to
the degree they facilitate monoaminergic activity. Several papers
also stress the importance of early treatment with amitriptyline
or desipramine, and the ineffectiveness of analgesics, including
narcotics. In nociceptive pain, recent findings in humans
emphasize the importance of both the retroinsular (SII) and the
anterior cingulate cortices in the conscious appreciation of
pain. Opioid studies have revealed individual differences in the
metabolism of morphine to its 3- and 6-glucuronosides; patients
with nociceptive pain who respond poorly to morphine or
diamorphine probably have a high 3:6 ratio. It has been pointed
out that methadone may be useful in such cases, as it is not
broken down to glucuronosides. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Zenz-M. Willweber-Strumpf-A. </p>

<p>Title: Opiophobia and cancer pain in Europe [see comments] </p>

<p>Source: Lancet. 1993 Apr 24. 341(8852). P 1075-6. </p>

<p>Comment: Comment in: Lancet. 1993 Jun 5. 341(8858). P 1473-4.
Comment in: Lancet. 1993 Jun 5. 341(8858). P 1474. Comment in:
Lancet. 1993 Jun 5. 341(8858). P 1474-5. </p>

<p>Journal Title: LANCET. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Garattini-S. </p>

<p>Title: Narcotic drug use for severe pain. </p>

<p>Source: Lancet. 1993 Apr 24. 341(8852). P 1061-2. </p>

<p>Journal Title: LANCET. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Randich-A. Robertson-J-D. Willingham-T. </p>

<p>Title: The use of specific opioid agonists and antagonists to
delineate the vagally mediated antinociceptive and cardiovascular
effects of intravenous morphine. </p>

<p>Source: Brain-Res. 1993 Feb 19. 603(2). P 186-200. </p>

<p>Journal Title: BRAIN RESEARCH. </p>

<p>Abstract: Intravenous (i.v.) administration of morphine
produces a dose- dependent inhibition of the tail-flick (TF)
reflex, depressor response, and bradycardia in the rat. Some of
these effects depend on interactions of i.v. morphine with
peripheral opioid receptors and the integrity of cervical vagal
afferents. The present studies used the relatively specific mu,
delta, and kappa opioid receptor agonists (DAGO, DPDPE or
U-50,488H) and the relatively specific mu, delta, and kappa
opioid receptor antagonists (beta-FNA, naloxonazine, naltrindole
or nor-BNI) in either intact rats or rats with bilateral cervical
vagotomy (CVAG) to delineate the vagal afferent/opioid-mediated
components of these effects. I.v. administration of DAGO in
intact rats produced a dose-dependent inhibition of the TF
reflex, depressor response, and bradycardia virtually identical
to those produced by i.v. morphine. All of these effects of
either i.v. DAGO or i.v. morphine were significantly attenuated
by either bilateral CVAG or pre-treatment with the mu 2 opioid
receptor antagonist beta-FNA. Pre-treatment with the mu 1 opioid
receptor antagonist naloxonazine affected i.v. DAGO- induced
inhibition of the TF reflex and bradycardia, but had no
significant effects on i.v. morphine-produced responses. I.v.
administration of DPDPE produced a dose-dependent pressor
response, but had no marked effects on the either the TF reflex
or heart rate (HR). The pressor response was unaffected by either
bilateral CVAG or pre-treatment with naltrindole, naloxone,
hexamethonium, or bertylium. i.v. administration of U-50,488H
produced a depressor response and bradycardia, but had no
significant effect on the TF reflex. The depressor response and
bradycardia produced by i.v. U-50,488H were unaffected by
bilateral CVAG, but could be antagonized by pre- treatment with
either nor-BNI or naloxone. These studies suggest that the vagal
afferent-mediated antinociceptive and cardiovascular effects of
i.v. morphine are primarily mediated by interactions with low
affinity mu 2 opioid receptors. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Stiefel-F. </p>

<p>Title: Malignant and non-malignant chronic pain: therapy,
opioids and fears. Swiss Centre for Paraplegia, Nottwil, 6 May
1993. </p>

<p>Source: Support-Care-Cancer. 1993 Sep. 1(5). P 279-80. </p>

<p>Journal Title: SUPPORTIVE CARE IN CANCER. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Lossignol-D-A. </p>

<p>Title: Pitfalls in the use of opiates in treatment of cancer
pain. </p>

<p>Source: Support-Care-Cancer. 1993 Sep. 1(5). P 256-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: SUPPORTIVE CARE IN CANCER. </p>

<p>Abstract: The use of morphine in the treatment of cancer pain
is widely accepted among people taking care of cancer patients
and concerned with pain relief. Several problems regarding common
side-effects, life-threatening complications in cancer and
opioid-non-responsive pain syndromes will be discussed. The
development of grading systems may open new directions for
adequate pain control. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Sosnowski-M. </p>

<p>Title: Pain management: physiopathology, future research and
endpoints. </p>

<p>Source: Support-Care-Cancer. 1993 Mar. 1(2). P 79-88. </p>

<p>Journal Title: SUPPORTIVE CARE IN CANCER. </p>

<p>Abstract: In this article, first, the different stages of
acquisition and processing of nociceptive information from
peripheral receptor to brain are reviewed and the plastic changes
that accompany tissue injury are underlined. For instance, the
subclassification of peripheral receptors in nociceptors and
non-nociceptors (e.g., mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors) must be
understood in the light of peripheral sensitization. This
phenomenon is the probable explanation for primary hyperalgesia,
the decrease in pain threshold at the site of injury. The
observation that substance P enhances N-methyl- D-aspartate
(NMDA)-elicited responses suggests that these two receptors may
operate in concert to prolong and amplify the afferent input
generated by peripheral tissue injury. Such afferent barrage
induces a state of central sensitization. Second, the major
problems in the management of cancer pain, i.e. the development
of tolerance to opioids and opioid-insensitive pain, are
discussed. The loss of drug effect observed after chronic
exposure of the opioid receptor (tolerance) may be the
consequence of the down-regulation or desensitization phenomenon
(where the total number of receptors coupled to the second
messenger is reduced). The agonist dose- response begins to shift
to the right. The dramatic analgesic improvement obtained with
subanaesthetic doses of ketamine, an NMDA receptor antagonist, in
those of our cancer patients who have become resistant to
morphine is intriguing. As shown for tolerance, insensitivity to
opioids may represent a rightward shift in the opioid
dose-response curve and the analgesic effect of ketamine the
reversal of that shift. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Grossman-S-A. </p>

<p>Title: Undertreatment of cancer pain: barriers and remedies. </p>

<p>Source: Support-Care-Cancer. 1993 Mar. 1(2). P 74-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: SUPPORTIVE CARE IN CANCER. </p>

<p>Abstract: Over 70% of patients with cancer have moderate to
severe pain during their illness and many fear pain more than
death itself. There is consensus among experts that most patients
can be well-palliated using knowledge, medications, and
techniques that are readily accessible. Despite this, only a
small proportion of patients with cancer pain receive adequate
analgesia. Some of the barriers that interfere with the delivery
of appropriate analgesia are patient-related, while others
involve health-care providers. Patients frequently do not
communicate the intensity of their pain to care- givers and are
often hesitant to take opiates. Health-care providers receive
scant teaching on cancer pain, have little awareness of pain
intensity in their patients, and may be overly concerned about
opiate toxicities. They lack appropriate role models in academic
institutions and may be concerned about the potential for
investigation by law-enforcement agencies. These obstacles can be
largely overcome by (a) emphasizing the importance of pain
control in cancer patients, (b) considering the etiology of pain
in each patient, (c) weighing the full range of available
therapeutic options, (d) ensuring that &quot;user-friendly&quot;
opiate- equivalence information is available, (e) using pain
assessment tools routinely and recording pain intensity scores in
the medical record, and by (f) not being easily dissuaded from
providing adequate doses of opiates for pain relief. The
rationale for and current efforts in each of these areas are
discussed in this review. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Oliver-M. Stenn-P-G. </p>

<p>Title: Is there a risk for dependency with therapeutic doses
of dimenhydrinate? [letter] </p>

<p>Source: Psychosomatics. 1993 Sep-Oct. 34(5). P 459. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PSYCHOSOMATICS. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: North-R-B. </p>

<p>Title: Neurosurgical procedures for chronic pain. General
neurosurgical practice. </p>

<p>Source: Clin-Neurosurg. 1993. 40. P 182-96. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CLINICAL NEUROSURGERY. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Gybels-J. Kupers-R. Nuttin-B. </p>

<p>Title: What can the neurosurgeon offer in peripheral
neuropathic pain? </p>

<p>Source: Acta-Neurochir-Suppl-Wien. 1993. 58. P 136-40. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ACTA NEUROCHIRURGICA. SUPPLEMENTUM. </p>

<p>Abstract: Neurosurgery has much to offer in the treatment of
peripheral neuropathic pain but selection of the best procedure
for a given patient remains problematic: planning of the
treatment must be based on an analysis of the pathophysiological
mechanism in the given case but the identification of this
mechanism is often difficult. Available procedures are: 1) Nerve
repair, neurolysis and nerve relocation; 2) Interventions on the
sympathetic nervous system; 3) Neurostimulation; 4) Intraspinal
morphine; 5) Ablative lesions. Neurosurgeons have, or should
have, the necessary neuroscience background and microsurgical
skills to be important partners of the team caring for patients
with peripheral neuropathic pain. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Brown-S-T. Bowman-J-M. Eason-F-R. </p>

<p>Title: A comparison of patient-controlled analgesia versus
traditional intramuscular analgesia in postoperative pain
management. </p>

<p>Source: J-Intraven-Nurs. 1993 Nov-Dec. 16(6). P 333-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF INTRAVENOUS NURSING. </p>

<p>Abstract: A retrospective chart review of the 198
postoperative subjects (patient-controlled analgesia [PCA] group
= 100 and non-PCA group = 98) comparing analgesic usage and other
variables was conducted. The PCA group used significantly more
medication during the first 24 hours postoperatively and patients
required more analgesic when a greater number of secondary
diagnoses existed. No significant differences were found in
length of stay or documentation. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Kamerling-S-G. </p>

<p>Title: Narcotics and local anesthetics. </p>

<p>Source: Vet-Clin-North-Am-Equine-Pract. 1993 Dec. 9(3). P
605-20. </p>

<p>Journal Title: VETERINARY CLINICS OF NORTH AMERICA. EQUINE
PRACTICE. </p>

<p>Abstract: The recognition and alleviation of animal pain is a
growing veterinary and public concern. Pain can be of an acute or
chronic nature with different behavioral manifestations.
Physiologically, pain is a dynamic and complex phenomenon that
produces changes in the central and autonomic nervous systems as
well as in the endocrine system. Horses and other animals appear
to possess an endogenous pain-suppressing system involving the
brainstem and spinal cord. This system can modulate pain
perception and the responses to it. The recently discovered
endogenous opioid peptides (endorphins and enkephalins) appear to
play a role in this system, which is activated by stress. Opioids
(narcotic analgesics) act to selectively depress pain- sensitive
cells. Opioid analgesics may act via multiple opioid receptors.
Each subclass of opioid receptor has a different pharmacologic
profile. Classical opioids that act at mu (morphine) receptors
typically produce analgesia, increased locomotor activity,
cardiorespiratory stimulation, and a decrease in intestinal
peristalsis in the horse. Opioids that act at kappa receptors
produce analgesia, sedation, ataxia, and minimal autonomic
effects in the horse. Owing to their lack of excitatory actions,
the kappa opioids represent a potentially useful class of
analgesics for use in equine species. Local anesthetics depress
all excitable cells and can diminish sensory, motor, and muscular
function. They do not act selectively on pain fibers, although
pain is among the first sensations lost following a nerve block.
Local anesthetic activity is enhanced by increased extraneuronal
pH, nerve cooling, increased nervous activity, coadministration
of a vasoconstrictor or hyaluronidase, delayed systemic
absorption, prolonged drug metabolism, and by using agents with
high lipid solubility. Procaine, lidocaine, and mepivacaine are
among the most widely used and studied agents in horses. These
agents and/or their metabolites can be readily detected in urine;
in some cases, for prolonged periods. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Krames-E-S. </p>

<p>Title: The chronic intraspinal use of opioid and local
anesthetic mixtures for the relief of intractable pain: when all
else fails! [editorial] </p>

<p>Source: Pain. 1993 Oct. 55(1). P 1-4. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PAIN. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Rahman-A-F. Takahashi-M. Kaneto-H. </p>

<p>Title: Development of tolerance to morphine antinociception in
mice treated with nociceptive stimulants. </p>

<p>Source: Jpn-J-Pharmacol. 1993 Sep. 63(1). P 59-64. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JAPANESE JOURNAL OF PHARMACOLOGY. </p>

<p>Abstract: We have examined whether or not the presence of pain
can block the development of tolerance to morphine
antinociception in mice. A single injection of formalin or Freund
complete adjuvant into the dorsal part of one side of the hind
paw resulted in a significant swelling of the treated paw which
lasted more than 5 days. In formalin-treated animals that
received the initial morphine 2 hr after the stimulant, the
development of tolerance to morphine was delayed without
affecting morphine antinociception when the effect was measured
daily by the tail-pinch (TP) method but not by the tail-flick
(TF) method. However, the stimulant suppressed tolerance
development even in the TF method unless the daily measurement
was undertaken. When morphine injection was started from 5 days
after the formalin injection, tolerance developed in a pattern
similar to that in the control animals. On the other hand,
treatment with Freund adjuvant did not affect the development of
tolerance measured by both the TP and TF methods, with or without
daily measurement of antinociception. When acetic acid was used
as a stimulant, daily morphine was administered before or after
the acetic acid injection, in the presence or absence of pain,
tolerance developed to the same extent as in the control group,
regardless of the time of morphine injection. Thus, our results
suggest that the development of tolerance to narcotics may be
modified by various factors, such as the type and intensity of
nociception; and they also suggest that different results may be
produced depending on the test method. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Kim-T. Kim-J. Kim-S. </p>

<p>Title: Extended-release formulation of morphine for
subcutaneous administration. </p>

<p>Source: Cancer-Chemother-Pharmacol. 1993. 33(3). P 187-90. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY AND PHARMACOLOGY. </p>

<p>Abstract: Pain arising from cancer tends to be chronic and
chemotherapy of cancer pain usually requires narcotics. Most
injectable narcotics, however, have short half-lives (T1/2) and
require either continuous infusion or repeated frequent
injections which are both inconvenient and uncomfortable. An
extended-release formulation of morphine sulfate (Depo/Morphine)
in a lipid-based drug- delivery system was characterized and
tested in an animal model. The encapsulation efficiency was 53%
+/- 4%, and the in vitro release T1/2 in human plasma at 37
degrees C was 12.1 +/- 1.1 days. Following s.c. administration of
Depo/Morphine, the total amount of morphine remaining at the s.c.
injection site decreased monoexponentially with a T1/2 value of
2.59 +/- 0.16 days as compared with 0.46 +/- 0.04 h following the
injection of unencapsulated morphine. The morphine concentration
in plasma also decreased monoexponentially with a T1/2 value of
8.33 +/- 2.13 days as compared with 0.45 +/- 0.21 h for
unencapsulated morphine. Cataleptic behavior was observed in mice
injected with unencapsulated morphine but not in those given an
identical dose of morphine in the form of Depo/Morphine. In
conclusion, Depo/Morphine has potential as an extended-release
formulation of morphine and may be useful in chemotherapy of
cancer pain as well as in maintenance therapy of narcotic
addicts. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Smithkey-J-3d. </p>

<p>Title: The use of narcotics in controlling patient pain. </p>

<p>Source: J-Pract-Nurs. 1993 Dec. 43(4). P 17-9. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF PRACTICAL NURSING. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: King-S. Caccavo-S. </p>

<p>Title: Will I become addicted? </p>

<p>Source: AARN-News-Lett. 1993 Jun. 49(6). P 32. </p>

<p>Journal Title: AARN NEWS LETTER. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Welch-S-P. Dunlow-L-D. </p>

<p>Title: Antinociceptive activity of intrathecally administered
potassium channel openers and opioid agonists: a common mechanism
of action? </p>

<p>Source: J-Pharmacol-Exp-Ther. 1993 Oct. 267(1). P 390-9. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF PHARMACOLOGY AND EXPERIMENTAL
THERAPEUTICS. </p>

<p>Abstract: The potassium channel openers could share a common
mechanism of action with the opiates in the production of
antinociception because both classes of drugs have been shown to
enhance potassium efflux. The i.t. administration of the
potassium channel openers diazoxide, minoxidil, and lemakalim
(BRL38227) produced antinociception as measured in the tail-flick
test. The ED50's were 122, 184 and 35 micrograms/mouse,
respectively. Minoxidil and lemakalim (BRL 38227) were full
agonists, whereas diazoxide was a partial agonist.
Diazoxide-induced antinociception was blocked by the potassium
channel blockers glyburide, apamin and charybdotoxin. Minoxidil-
and lemakalim (i.t.)-induced antinociception was blocked totally
by only glyburide. The antinociception produced by the potassium
channel openers (i.t.) was blocked differentially by opiate
antagonists (i.t.). The antinociceptive effects of diazoxide were
blocked by nor binaltorphimine, ICI 174,864 and naloxone.
Minoxidil- and lemakalim-induced antinociception was blocked by
naloxone and ICI 174,864, but not by nor-binaltorphimine.
Naloxone (s.c.) shifted the dose-effect curve for minoxidil to
the right in a parallel manner. Morphine-induced antinociception
was partially blocked by glyburide and apamin, whereas that
produced by DPDPE was blocked totally by apamin. U50,
488H-induced antinociception was blocked partially by apamin. The
potassium channel openers (i.t.) were not cross tolerant to
morphine when measured in the tail-flick test. Apamin and
glyburide precipitated &quot;withdrawal-like&quot; symptoms in
morphine-tolerant mice. The interaction of potassium channel
openers and opioids probably does not represent a direct
interaction of these two classes of drugs at a similar receptor,
but rather may occur via an interaction with a common second
messenger system such as calcium. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Bushnell-T-G. Justins-D-M. </p>

<p>Title: Choosing the right analgesic. A guide to selection. </p>

<p>Source: Drugs. 1993 Sep. 46(3). P 394-408. </p>

<p>Journal Title: DRUGS. </p>

<p>Abstract: Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional
experience, unique to each individual patient. In the dynamic
processes of nociceptive stimulation, signal transmission,
central decoding and interpretation there are many potential
sites for pharmacological intervention, and there are many drugs
which will produce analgesia. An analgesic 'ladder' has been
proposed for rational pain relief in cancer and a similar concept
should be used in all forms of acute and chronic pain. Continuing
research and drug development undoubtedly extends our
understanding, but consistent improvement in our clinical ability
to relieve pain depends more on our willingness to consider the
need of each patient individually, to tailor the drug, route and
mode of administration to that patient's requirements, and then
to monitor on the basis of the response of the patient to the
treatment. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Skaer-T-L. </p>

<p>Title: Management of pain in the cancer patient. </p>

<p>Source: Clin-Ther. 1993 Jul-Aug. 15(4). P 638-49; discussion
637. </p>

<p>Journal Title: CLINICAL THERAPEUTICS. </p>

<p>Abstract: Pain is the most common symptom experienced in
patients with advanced cancer. This pain may be acute, chronic,
or intermittent, and often has a definable origin, usually
related to tumor recurrence and treatment. The goal of therapy is
to provide patients with enough pain relief to enable them to
tolerate diagnostic and therapeutic manipulations and allow them
freedom of movement and choice, while limiting medication-induced
adverse effects. Morphine is the medication of choice, and is
available in a sustained-release oral formulation with convenient
around-the-clock administration every 8 to 12 hours. Morphine can
also be administered subcutaneously, intravenously, and rectally,
which provides enhanced flexibility for dosing patients unable to
take oral medications. The transdermal fentanyl patch may provide
a convenient dosage-form alternative if oral morphine
preparations are not tolerated. Some patients with advanced
cancer may require other adjunctive medications such as
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, tricyclic antidepressants,
steroids, or benzodiazepines, as well as psychologic techniques,
to assist in pain management. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Xu-J-Y. Tseng-L-F. </p>

<p>Title: Increase of nitric oxide by L-arginine potentiates
beta- endorphin- but not mu-, delta- or kappa-opioid
agonist-induced antinociception in the mouse. </p>

<p>Source: Eur-J-Pharmacol. 1993 May 12. 236(1). P 137-42. </p>

<p>Journal Title: EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PHARMACOLOGY. </p>

<p>Abstract: L-Arginine pretreated i.c.v. produced a time- and
dose- dependent potentiation of beta-endorphin-induced inhibition
of the tail-flick response in ICR mice. However, the inhibition
of the tail-flick response induced by morphine, DAMGO ([D-
Ala2,NMePhe4,Gly5-ol]enkephalin), DPDPE ([D-Pen2,D-
Pen5]enkephalin or U50,488H given i.c.v. was not potentiated by
i.c.v. pretreated L-arginine. The results indicate that L-
arginine selectively potentiates antinociception induced by
epsilon-opioid receptor agonist, but not mu-, delta- or kappa-
opioid receptor agonist. L-Arginine pretreated i.t. did not
potentiate i.c.v. administered beta-endorphin-induced inhibition
of the tail-flick response, indicating that the potentiating
effect of L-arginine on beta-endorphin-induced antinociception is
located at the supraspinal sites but not at the spinal sites. </p>

<hr>

<p>Accession No.: 93189288. </p>

<p>Author: Perrot-S. Attal-N. Ardid-D. Guilbaud-G. </p>

<p>Title: Are mechanical and cold allodynia in mononeuropathic
and arthritic rats relieved by systemic treatment with calcitonin
or guanethidine? </p>

<p>Source: Pain. 1993 Jan. 52(1). P 41-7. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PAIN. </p>

<p>Abstract: The putative antinociceptive action of guanethidine
and calcitonin systemically injected has been compared in 2 rat
models of persistent experimental pain: Freund's adjuvant-induced
arthritis (n = 29) and mononeuropathy induced by 4 loose
ligatures around the sciatic nerve (n = 24). Guanethidine (30
mg/kg, i.v.) and calcitonin (0.125 mg, s.c.) were injected once a
day over 1 week, when hyperalgesia was fully developed. The
antinociceptive action was gauged using nociceptive tests based
on mechanical or cold stimuli (vocalization threshold to paw
pressure and struggle latency to 10 degrees C, respectively), and
the score of spontaneous pain-related behavior was measured on
the basis of the abnormal hind paw position. No antinociceptive
action was observed in calcitonin-compared to saline-injected
rats, either in arthritic or neuropathic animals. Guanethidine
treatment was ineffective on hyperalgesia exhibited in arthritic
rats but was able to reduce reliably and even suppress the
abnormal reactions to cold stimulus in neuropathic animals. The
lack of hypoalgesic action of calcitonin versus its beneficial
action in bone repair, as well as the possible role(s) of the
sympathetic system in neuropathic versus arthritic pain and in
hyperalgesia versus physical signs of inflammation, are
discussed. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Walker-J-M. Bowen-W-D. Patrick-S-L. Williams-W-E.
Mascarella-S-W. Bai-X. Carroll-F-I. </p>

<p>Title: A comparison of (-)-deoxybenzomorphans devoid of opiate
activity with their dextrorotatory phenolic counterparts suggests
role of sigma 2 receptors in motor function [published erratum
appears in Eur J Pharmacol 1993 Jun 4;236(3):495] </p>

<p>Source: Eur-J-Pharmacol. 1993 Jan 26. 231(1). P 61-8. </p>

<p>Journal Title: EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PHARMACOLOGY. </p>

<p>Abstract: Three novel benzomorphans,
(+)-N-benzylnormetazocine, (-)- deoxy-N-benzylnormetazocine, and
(-)-deoxypentazocine were tested for their ability to produce
circling behavior in rats following intranigral microinjections.
Dose studies revealed the following rank order of potency:
(-)-deoxypentazocine &gt; (- )-deoxy-N-benzylnormetazocine &gt;
(+)-N-benzylnormetazocine. This rank order approximates that for
affinities for sigma 2 receptors but not sigma 1 receptors. It is
very unlikely that the effects of the (-)-deoxybenzomorphans were
mediated by opiate receptors for the following reasons: (1)
consistent with the known requirement for the phenolic hydroxyl
group for opiate activity, both (-)-deoxy compounds showed very
low affinity for opiate receptors; (2) naloxone (4 micrograms)
co- administered with (-)-deoxy-N-benzylnormetazocine failed to
reduce its efficacy; (3) both (-)-deoxy compounds failed to
produce marked analgesic effects in the tail flick test following
systemic injections of 20 mg/kg s.c. These finding suggest that
sigma 2 receptors mediate the motor effects of sigma ligands in
rats. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Stein-C. </p>

<p>Title: Peripheral mechanisms of opioid analgesia. </p>

<p>Source: Anesth-Analg. 1993 Jan. 76(1). P 182-91. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ANESTHESIA AND ANALGESIA. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Foley-K-M. </p>

<p>Title: Opioids. </p>

<p>Source: Neurol-Clin. 1993 Aug. 11(3). P 503-22. </p>

<p>Journal Title: NEUROLOGIC CLINICS. </p>

<p>Abstract: The major clinical uses for opioids are to control
pain, suppress cough, and to treat diarrhea. These drugs,
however, have the potential for abuse. It is postulated that the
significant mood-altering effects of opioids combined with their
pharmacology, in which tolerance and physical and psychological
dependence occur, account for their abuse liability. A
classification of the groups of patients that commonly present
with complications of opioid use is reviewed briefly before
discussing the clinical pharmacology of the opioids and their
acute and toxic effects. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Barsan-W-G. Tomassoni-A-J. Seger-D. Danzl-D-F.
Ling-L-J. Bartlett-R. </p>

<p>Title: Safety assessment of high-dose narcotic analgesia for
emergency department procedures. </p>

<p>Source: Ann-Emerg-Med. 1993 Sep. 22(9). P 1444-9. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ANNALS OF EMERGENCY MEDICINE. </p>

<p>Abstract: STUDY OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety of high-dose
IV narcotics in patients requiring analgesia for painful
emergency department procedures. DESIGN: Prospective multicenter
clinical trial. SETTING: Five adult urban EDs. METHODS AND
MEASUREMENTS: All patients received IV meperidine (1.5 to 3.0
mg/kg) titrated to analgesia followed by a painful procedure.
Vital signs and alertness scale were recorded at regular
intervals, and patients were observed for four hours. Adverse
events were monitored and documented. Comparisons between
baseline and postanalgesia intervals were made with a repeated
measures ANOVA (Dunnett's test). RESULTS: Although statistically
significant changes in vital signs and alertness scale occurred,
they were not clinically significant. Opiate reversal with
naloxone was not needed in any patient, and no significant
respiratory or circulatory compromise occurred. CONCLUSION: This
study of 72 patients demonstrates that high- dose narcotic
analgesia is appropriate, well tolerated, and safe when used in
selected patients before painful procedures in the ED. Narcotic
antagonists and resuscitation equipment nonetheless should be
available to maximize safety. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Longstreth-G-F. Wolde-Tsadik-G. </p>

<p>Title: Irritable bowel-type symptoms in HMO examinees.
Prevalence, demographics, and clinical correlates. </p>

<p>Source: Dig-Dis-Sci. 1993 Sep. 38(9). P 1581-9. </p>

<p>Journal Title: DIGESTIVE DISEASES AND SCIENCES. </p>

<p>Abstract: A study of irritable bowel-type symptoms in 1264
health examinees using a self-administered questionnaire and
psychological tests revealed they are common throughout
adulthood. Of affected subjects 68% were female, and those with
the more severe type (&gt; or = 3 Manning criteria) were
predominantly female (80%). Fewer Asians than other racial/ethnic
groups had these symptoms. Nongastrointestinal symptoms,
physician visits, incontinence, laxative use, a stress effect on
bowel pattern and abdominal pain, abdominal surgery,
hysterectomy, childhood abuse, use of mind- altering drugs,
depression, and anxiety were correlated with irritable bowel-type
symptoms. Regression analysis found some of the clinical
correlates were independent markers for irritable bowel-type
symptoms and that sexual abuse was related to nongastrointestinal
symptoms and abdominal surgery independent of irritable
bowel-type symptoms. More severe irritable bowel-type symptoms
were especially associated with nongastrointestinal symptoms,
stress effects, sexual abuse, use of sedatives and oral
narcotics, and a past alcohol problem. There are important
demographic and clinical correlates with irritable bowel-type
symptoms. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: MacDonald-N. Der-L. Allan-S. Champion-P. </p>

<p>Title: Opioid hyperexcitability: the application of alternate
opioid therapy. </p>

<p>Source: Pain. 1993 Jun. 53(3). P 353-5. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PAIN. </p>

<p>Abstract: Three cases are reported where patients experienced
severe central nervous system adverse effects on high-dose
hydromorphone. These effects were rapidly alleviated following a
change in therapy to morphine at 20-25% of the usually accepted
potency equivalent dose. We recommend caution in using equivalent
dose tables when changing opioid therapy in patients receiving
high-dose opioid treatment. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Chrubasik-J. Martin-E. Chrubasik-S. Friedrich-G.
Black-A. </p>

<p>Title: Epidural opioids for treatment of acute pain: a
question of dose? [letter] </p>

<p>Source: Pain. 1993 May. 53(2). P 237-9. </p>

<p>Journal Title: PAIN. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Draznin-E. Rosenberg-N-L. </p>

<p>Title: Intensive rehabilitative approach to eosinophilia
myalgia syndrome associated with severe polyneuropathy. </p>

<p>Source: Arch-Phys-Med-Rehabil. 1993 Jul. 74(7). P 774-6. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ARCHIVES OF PHYSICAL MEDICINE AND
REHABILITATION. </p>

<p>Abstract: We report a case of the eosinophilia myalgia
syndrome (EMS) with incapacitating myalgias, weakness secondary
to a severe polyneuropathy, and contractures in all four
extremities requiring aggressive rehabilitation treatment. A
55-year-old woman was admitted to a rehabilitation hospital 11
months after the onset of EMS. At that time, she had severe
weakness secondary to peripheral neuropathy and painful
contractures in all extremities and required high doses of
narcotics for pain control. A continuous passive range of motion
machine was used in order to maintain range of motion obtained
during active exercise therapy. The patient showed functional
improvement in basic mobility and ADL skills. She was withdrawn
from narcotics and successfully learned pain management
techniques. An aggressive rehabilitation approach in the
treatment of EMS associated with peripheral neuropathy may
improve functional outcome even when instituted late in the
clinical course. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Tobias-J-D. </p>

<p>Title: Management of minor adverse effects encountered during
narcotic administration. </p>

<p>Source: J-Post-Anesth-Nurs. 1993 Apr. 8(2). P 96-100. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF POST ANESTHESIA NURSING. </p>

<p>Abstract: Presented are four clinical scenarios of patients
receiving narcotics to control pain of various etiologies. In all
cases minor adverse effects necessitated intervention so that
continued use of these agents was possible. The four cases
illustrate common adverse effects, including nausea, vomiting,
pruritus, and dysphoria, that may occur during narcotic
administration. Management strategies to deal with these and
other common non-life-threatening effects of narcotic agents are
presented. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: Landau-B. Levy-R-M. </p>

<p>Title: Neuromodulation techniques for medically refractory
chronic pain. </p>

<p>Source: Annu-Rev-Med. 1993. 44. P 279-87. </p>

<p>Journal Title: ANNUAL REVIEW OF MEDICINE. </p>

<p>Abstract: Advances in our knowledge of the physiology of pain
transmission and modulation have created new surgical options for
the control of chronic pain. The pain modulation network can be
activated by administration of spinal opiates or by electrical
stimulation of the nervous system with transcutaneous, peripheral
nerve, spinal cord, and deep brain stimulation. The theoretical
basis and the clinical applications of neurostimulation for the
treatment of medically intractable chronic pain are reviewed. </p>

<hr>

<p>Author: McCarthy-M-R. Yates-C-K. Anderson-M-A.
Yates-McCarthy-J-L. </p>

<p>Title: The effects of immediate continuous passive motion on
pain during the inflammatory phase of soft tissue healing
following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. </p>

<p>Source: J-Orthop-Sports-Phys-Ther. 1993 Feb. 17(2). P 96-101. </p>

<p>Journal Title: JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC AND SPORTS PHYSICAL
THERAPY. </p>

<p>Abstract: Continuous passive motion (CPM) may have potential
application as a physical modality in decreasing acute pain. The
purpose of this study was to examine the effects of CPM
immediately following an arthroscopically-assisted anterior
cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction utilizing bone-patella-
bone autograft on acute pain during the inflammatory phase of
soft tissue healing. Acute pain was measured by assessing the
amount of pain medication (amount of narcotic delivered from the
patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) pump during the first
postoperative 24 hours and the total intake of oral medication
during the second and third postoperative days), the need for
pain medication (number of times the patient pushed the PCA
button during the first postoperative 24 hours), and perceived
pain (graphic pain scale measuring antalgic sensation). Thirty
patients (15-45 years old) participated in this study. The
patients were prospectively randomized into two groups, CPM and
non-CPM. Both groups followed an identical postoperative
rehabilitation program except for the CPM groups using a CPM
device. The design of this study included the collection of data
during the inflammatory phase of soft tissue healing. The results
indicated that the initiation of CPM immediately following an ACL
reconstruction had a significant (p &lt; .05) effect on
decreasing the amount of medication consumed by the patient and a
significant (p &lt; .05) decrease in the patient's need for
medication during the inflammatory phase. There was no
statistical significance in the level of perceived pain between
the groups.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>