
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-4</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B016-162</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf21_30.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043406 text/html 30579
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:34:00 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:24 GMT
Content-length: 30361
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp Facts 21-30</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>Hemp FACT #21-Marijuana Myths </p>

<p>Date: 95-02-01 10:46:56 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth #8. Marijuana is more potent today than in
the past</b> </p>

<p>This myth is the result of bad data. The researchers who made
the claim of increased potency used as their baseline the THC
content of marijuana seized by police in the early 1970s. Poor
storage of this marijuana in un-air conditioned evidence rooms
caused it to deteriorate and decline in potency before any
chemical assay was performed. Contemporaneous, independent assays
of unseized &quot;street&quot; marijuana from the early 1970s
showed a potency equivalent to that of modern &quot;street&quot;
marijuana. Actually, the most potent form of this drug that was
generally available was sold legally in the 1920s and 1930s by
the pharmaceutical company Smith-Klein under the name,
&quot;American Cannabis&quot;. </p>

<p>References: </p>

<p>8) See &quot;Cannabis 1988, Old Drug New Dangers, The Potency
Question&quot; by Tod H Mikuriya, M.D. and Michael Aldrich,
Ph.D., Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, ibid. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #22-Marijuana Myths </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-02 10:59:16 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth #9. Marijuana impairs short-term memory</b> </p>

<p>This is true but misleading. Any impairment of short-term
memory disappears when one is no longer under the influence of
marijuana. Often, the short-term memory effect is paired with a
reference to Dr. Heath's poor rhesus monkeys to imply that the
condition is permanent. </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth #10. Marijuana lingers in the body like DDT</b>
</p>

<p>This is also true but misleading. Cannabinoids are fat soluble
as are innumerable nutrients and, yes, some poisons like DDT. For
example, the essential nutrient, Vitamin A, is fat soluble but
one never hears people who favor marijuana prohibition making
this comparison. </p>

<p>References: </p>

<p>9) See Marijuana and Health, ibid. Also see &quot;Marijuana,
Memory, and Perception&quot;, ibid. </p>

<p>10) The fat solubility of cannabinoids and certain vitamins is
well known. See Marijuana and Health, ibid. For some information
on vitamin A, see &quot;The A Team&quot; in Scientific American,
Vol 264, No. 2, February 1991, p. 16. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #23-Marijuana Myths </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-03 13:53:44 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>Marijuana Myth #11. There are over a thousand chemicals in
marijuana smoke</b> </p>

<p>Again, true but misleading. The 31 August 1990 issue of the
magazine Science notes that of the over 800 volatile chemicals
present in roasted COFFEE, only 21 have actually been tested on
animals and 16 of these cause cancer in rodents. Yet, coffee
remains legal and is generally considered fairly safe. </p>

<p><b>Marijuana &quot;Myth&quot;#12. No one has ever died of a
marijuana overdose</b> </p>

<p>This is true. It was put in to see if you are paying
attention. Animal tests have revealed that extremely high doses
of cannabinoids are needed to have lethal effect. This has led
scientists to conclude that the ratio of the amount of
cannabinoids necessary to get a person intoxicated (i.e., stoned)
relative to the amount necessary to kill them is 1 to 40,000. In
other words, to overdose, you would have to consume 40,000 times
as much marijuana as you needed to get stoned. In contrast, the
ratio for alcohol varies between 1 to 4 and 1 to 10. It is easy
to see how upwards of 5000 people die from alcohol overdoses
every year and no one EVER dies of marijuana overdoses. </p>

<p>References: </p>

<p>11) See &quot;Too Many Rodent Carcinogens: Mitogenesis
Increases Mutagenesis&quot;, Bruce N. Ames and Lois Swirsky Gold,
Science, Vol 249, 31 August 1990, p. 971. </p>

<p>12) Cannabis and alcohol toxicity is compared in Marijuana
Reconsidered, ibid., p. 227. Yearly alcohol overdoses was taken
from &quot;Drug Prohibition in the United States: Costs,
Consequences, and Alternatives&quot; by Ethan A. Nadelmann,
Science, Vol 245, 1 September 1989, p. 943. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #24-A Book to Read </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-04 11:00:33 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>SOMETHING TO LOOK INTO</b> </p>

<p>There is a book that tells the vast number of medical uses of
marijuana. It explains that many (not all) of the dangers we have
been warned about have been myths. The book is &quot;Marihuana,
the Forbidden Medicine&quot; by Lester Grinspoon, M.D., and James
B. Bakalar (1993). Obviously everything on this planet has its
dangers. Everything could be abused or used in a harmful way.
Anything could be addictive, but not everything is physically
addictive. Marijuana is not proven to be physically addictive.
The drug does not cause brain damage. It is also far less toxic
than many of today's prescription medicine. This book contains
stories written by patients that had experienced using marijuana
to help with their disease or disorder. It shows you the history
of the cannabis; why it was made a law, why people still believe
the myths, and why full legalization is necessary so the medical
users could obtain it cheap and without any trouble. Some people
are getting marijuana medication, but the vast majority of
medical marijuana users are still being arrested and serving long
prison terms without the proper medication (marijuana). </p>

<p>Here is a list of diseases and disorders marijuana helps: It
could help addicts of opiates, cigarette attics, probably many
more recuperate; cancer chemotherapy (it does not cause cancer),
glaucoma, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, paraplegia and
quadriplegia, AIDS, chronic pain, migraine, pruritis, menstrual
cramps and labor pain, depression and other mood disorders, and
many more. </p>

<p>Here is a description of the book from its jacket and a
paragraph from the very first page: </p>

<p>From the jacket: Much of the book consists of accounts written
by patients (including one from famed scientist Stephen Jay
Gould) that dramatically illustrate not only the relief provided
by marihuana but also the unnecessary distress caused by the need
to obtain it illegally. Grinspoon and Bakalar recount the long
history of medical marihuana use, discuss the real (as opposed to
fancied) potential health hazards of the drug, and analyze the
social causes of the government's insistence of making outlaws of
its medical users. They find that marihuana is a remarkably safe
substance and that criminalizing its use is costly, ineffective,
and unfair. They conclude that legalizing it for medical purposes
alone would be unworkable and that it must be given the same
status as alcohol--legal, with appropriate limitations, for use
by adults for any purpose. </p>

<p>From the first page: &quot;When I began to study marihuana in
1967, I had no doubt that it was a very harmful drug that was
unfortunately being used by more and more foolish young people
who would not listen to or could not understand the warnings
about its dangers. My purpose was to define scientifically the
nature and degree of those dangers. In the next three years, as I
reviewed the scientific, medical, and lay literature, my views
began to change. I came to understand that I, like so many other
people in this country, had been brainwashed. My beliefs about
the dangers of marihuana had little empirical foundation. By the
time I completed the research that formed the basis for a book, I
had become convinced that cannabis was considerably less harmful
than tobacco and alcohol, the most commonly used legal drugs. The
book was published in 1979; its title, Marihuana Reconsidered,
reflected my change in view.&quot; --Lester Grinspoon,M.D. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #25-U.K. Article.Pt.1 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-06 10:54:16 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>Here's a portion of an article that appeared in the Guardian
Newspaper on 9/18/93. Read and Enjoy. Please remember that this
article was written in the UK all comments in ( ) are the
posters. </p>

<p>-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p><b>INSIDE STORY</b> </p>

<p><b>MEDICINE, MAN</b> </p>

<p>Since the Thirties cannabis has been taboo demonised as a
stepping stone to hard Drugs. Yet for centuries it was a
respected medicine. Now, people with ailments from multiple
sclerosis to glaucoma are clamouring for pot on prescription.
Could marijuana be a wonder drug for the Nineties? </p>

<p>ALEX KERSHAW investigates. </p>

<p>&quot;When I first took it the effects were dramatic. It was a
god-send. It's help with my spasticity, my bladder, taken away my
head sweats and gives me a much better night's sleep.&quot; A
year ago, 43-year-old David McGill was suffering chronic pain.
Depressed and insomniac, he had sunk to his lowest point since
being diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 1983. Then, last
November he heard about cannabis. He is just one of hundreds,
maybe thousands, who now use the drug regularly as a treatment
for MS and all sorts of other debilitating diseases. </p>

<p>Despite widespread use for thousands of years, cannabis's
secret medical history is only now being rediscovered in this
country, thanks in part to those battling against diseases for
which there is no known cure. Yet from 1842 to 1900, cannabis
made up half of all the medicine sold in America. </p>

<p>Robert Burton the English clergyman, first recommended
cannabis for depression in the Anatomy of Melancholy, published
in 1621. Queen Victoria used it to alleviate period pains. </p>

<p>A hundred odd years later, the use or supply of cannabis is,
of course, illegal. Next month, a Merseyside GP (General
Practitioner) is due to appear at Liverpool Crown Court charged
under the Misuse of Drugs Act, 1971. It is likely to be a test
case about the supply of cannabis out of medical necessity. The
case is the first of its kind in this country, but there have
been many similair presented in American courts. </p>

<p>Although the US Surgeon General, Jocelyn Elders, supports
cannabis for therapeutic use, the medical profession remains
bitterly divided over cannabis. Its political potency, it seems,
is as intoxicating as ever. And far more is at stake than
possible legalisation. The arguments over cannabis are also about
the efficacy of modern medicine, the futility of the government's
war on drugs and even the ecology of the planet itself. </p>

<p>Most evidence of cannabis's therapeutic value come from
America. Marihuana: The Forbidden Medicine, for example written
by Dr Lester Grinspoon, Associate Professor of Psychiatry at
Harvard medical school, includes moving personal accounts of how
cannabis has alleviated epilepsy, the weight loss of Aids, the
nausea of chemotherapy, menstrual pains and multiple sclerosis. </p>

<p>Several glaucoma sufferers have found that using cannabis had
lowered the pressure within the eye, so averting the onset of
blindness. Robert Randall is one of them. In 1975, steep street
prices drove him to grow cannabis plants in his Washington home
&quot;just eight blocks from Capitol Hill&quot; to treat his
glaucoma. He was arrested, acquitted and then sued the American
government to obtain the first legal supply of cannabis in the
United States. </p>

<p>&quot;My defence was actually derived from English common
law,&quot; recalls Randall. &quot;Thirty five US states have
allowed the medical use of marihuana. In opinion polls, 80 per
cent of Americans support marijuana on prescription.&quot; Now
president of the US alliance for Cannabis Therapeutics, Randall
was told in 1972 that his sight would last three years. Today his
glaucoma is no worse. </p>

<p>(Part 2. of this article tomorrow) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #26-U.K. Article.Pt 2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-07 11:20:45 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is Part Deux of an article that appeared in the Guardian
Newspaper on 9/18/93. </p>

<p>Please remember, this article was written in the UK all
comments in ( ) are the posters. </p>

<p>A handful of patients with cancer or suffering chronic pain
have also won access. In 1990, a man known as Steve L becam the
first Aids patient to obtain the drug legally, 10 days before he
died. The same year, Aids patients Kenny Jenks and his wife,
Barbra, won the same right following their arrest for possesing
two cannabis plants. Ten armed narcotics officers had broken down
the door to their trailer home and held a gun to Barbra Jenks's
head. </p>

<p>Then, in 1991, James O Mason, head of America's Public Health
Service, suspended the programme which allowed the Jenkses and
others cannabis on compassionate grounds. Robert Randall, who
recieves a tin box every month crammed with 300 joints (!), is
one of only nine people in the US permitted a legal supply grown
on the US governments's marijuana plot at the University of
Mississipi. </p>

<p>&quot;We let doctors decide every day whether we are allowed
to take morphine and all kinds of dangerous drugs,&quot; said
Kenneth Jenks before he died on July 19. &quot;The decision to
take marijuana should be between the doctor and the
patient&quot;. </p>

<p>Jenks's sentiments are echoed by many in this country.
Sufferers from various ailments are turning to cannabis, often in
the last resort and in preference to legally prescribed,
sometimes highly toxic, drugs. Many suffering manic depressive
order, for example, complain the lithium carbonate robs them of
their creativity and vitality to the extent that they stop taking
it despite the potentially serious consequences. Cannabis, for
some, has proved an effective substitute. And for MS sufferes, in
particular, Dr. Lester Grinspoon insists, &quot;cannabis is the
drug of necessity.&quot; Desperate for relief, many swear it
helps to alleviate muscle spasms and other symptons. </p>

<p>&quot;It has completely changed my life,&quot; says Elizabeth
MacRory, who is 51 years old. Diagnosed as having MS in 1986
after a car accident, MacRory was told &quot;go home and get used
to it and don't read any books.&quot; &quot;Sometimes I joke that
I'll be the first woman in prison in a wheelchair,&quot; she
says. &quot;Cannabis has criminalised me but also liberated me.
It has helped with muscle spasms, allowed me to sleep properly
and helped control my bladder.&quot; </p>

<p>Clare Hodges , a 36-year-old mother of two, who has coped with
MS for 10 years, reports similair results. She runs the British
Association of Cannabis Therapeutics from her home in Leeds.
&quot;I now wake up in the morning and my balance is sensational.
I've been prescribed alll sorts of medicines. Most of the time I
felt I was being overdrugged, but with cannabis you can really
regulate the dosage. So-called experts are always quick to point
to the side-effects. But if you read about the possible effects
of aspirin, you'd never take it again,&quot; she says, lighting a
joint containing herbal tobacco. </p>

<p>MacRory, Hodges, McGill and other MS sufferers, who claim
considerable benefit from cannabis, are increasingly disaffected
with the charity representing their interests, the Multiple
Sclerosis Society. Hodges points to the memorandum on cannabis
use issued by the Society in which John Walford, its general
secretary, asserts that &quot;there is no evidence that this
agent has an effect on people with MS.&quot; Walford also claimed
that &quot;long-term use may be associated with significant,
serious side effects.&quot; This contradicts Therapeutic Claims
in MS, published by the International Federation of MS Societies,
which concludes that &quot;no significant side effects were
reported in the limited trials&quot; and &quot;no serious
long-term effects have been proven to result from the drug.&quot;
</p>

<p>Part 3 Tomorrow </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #27-U.K. Artcl.Pt 3 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-08 10:57:04 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is part Three of an article that appeared in the Guardian
Newspaper on 9/18/93. </p>

<p>Please remember that this article was written in the UK. All
comments in ( ) are the posters. </p>

<p>When pressed, Walford concedes, &quot;The society would
welcome properly conducted trials into any substance that is
thought to be helpful, but there are 80,000 people with MS in the
UK. What you are alking about is a small minority. There are
people who will swear by all manner of things.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;He [Walford] thinks we all just get high,&quot; counters
Elizabeth MacRory with some bitterness. &quot;He says there are
'significant side effects associated with long-term cannabis use'
yet the Society fails to inform the membership of the toxic
effects of drugs with no proven efficacy which neurologists
continue to prescribe.&quot; </p>

<p>&quot;Cannabis is one of humanity's oldest medicines, with a
remarkable record of both safety and efficacy,&quot; insists Dr
Lester Grinspoon whose unflinching advocacy of cannabis caused a
storm in America and even led to death threats, &quot;I'd like to
see the day when full medical potential of cannabis is
recognized,&quot; he says. &quot;Then it will be seen in the same
light as other so-called wonderdrugs: penicillin, aspirin and
insulin. People will look back and ask how people could have been
so blind. There is no plant with so many therapeutic qualities.
It's one of the safest drugs known to mankind.&quot; </p>

<p>Far from being a potential &quot;wonderdrug&quot;, it has been
claimed that cannabis causes birth defects, hormonal imbalances
resulting in males growing breasts, impaired sperm and egg
production as well as impotence, frigidity, cancer and brain
damage. None of these claims has yet been supported by scientific
evidence. An estimated 10,000 studies worldwide and hundreds
conducted by the US gorvernment between 1966-76 to back its
policy of prohibition, have shown that cannabis, even when smoked
in huge quantities, is relatively benign. The spaced-out
pot-head, permanently brain damaged after countless tokes on a
&quot;Camberwell carrot&quot;, is a figment of what Grinspoon
calls Psycopharmacological McCarthyism&quot;. </p>

<p>As all regular users know - and the Home Office estimated that
there were 1.5 million in the UK in 1991, and new figures to be
published later this month are likely to put the total higher -
cannabis does have well-known side-effects: attention and
short-term memory, tracking and co-ordination can be impaired.
But not permanently. </p>

<p>The only well-confirmed negative effect of marijuana,
according to Grinspoon, is caused by the smoke, which contains
three times more tars and five times more carbon monoxide than
tobacco. But even the heaviest marijuana smokers rarely use as
much as an average tobacco smoker. And, of course, many prefer to
eat it. </p>

<p>Coming manana Part 4 of this article. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #28-U.K. Artcl.Pt.4 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-09 11:11:10 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is Pt. IV of an article that appeared in the Guardian
Newspaper on 9/18/93. </p>

<p>Please remember that this article was written in the UK all
comments in ( ) are the posters. </p>

<p>&quot;Cannabis does have therapeutic properties,&quot; admits
Dr Heather Ashton, Professor of Clinical Psychopharmacology at
Newcastle University, &quot;but at the cost, in my view, of
unacceptable side-effects. I'm not convinced that it can be any
more therapeutic than other drugs which don't have the risks or
that the advantages of cannabis outweigh its disadvantages
compared to other drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>Also a leading expert on cannabis, Professor Ashton points to
the &quot;marked increase in heart rate&quot; caused by
marijuana, which, she insists, &quot;can precipitate heart
attacks in people with cardiac diseases.&quot; She stresses that
marijuana does cause &quot;amotivational syndrome&quot; when
consumed - &quot;it take away the desire to do anything because
you feel good.&quot; It has, in some rare cases, also triggered
psychotic episodes. </p>

<p>Dr Roger Pertwee, Secretary of the International Cannabis
Research Society and the UK's pre-eminent cannabis expert, sees
himself as occupying the middle ground on the cannabis debate.
&quot;Cannabis does seem to be as effective, if not better, than
existing drugs in dealing with spasticity and bladder problems of
multiple sclerosis. The side-effects seem to be more tolerable
for some patients,&quot; he says. &quot;Clinical trials have all
backed cannabis in being able to, not cure, but suppress some of
the symptons. Migraine could well be another case.&quot; </p>

<p>As a recreational drug, alongside nicotine, alcohol and even
caffeine, Dr Pertwee concedes that cannabis compares favourably.
No human fatalities have as yet been recorded as a result of
marijuana. Withdrawal symptons have been reported in long-term
chronic users in Jamaica and Costa Rica, but they do not appear
to be dependent in the damaging sense that others are to, say,
alcohol and tranquillizers. </p>

<p>Much effort has also been devoted to proving the
&quot;stepping-stone hypothesis&quot; that marijuana smoking
leads to the use of dangerous drugs. In Holland, laws passed in
1976 established a division between hard and soft drugs,
effectively decriminalizing, with strict conditions, the
possesion and supply of cannabis. The Lancet report in 1989:
&quot;The Dutch have shown that there is nothing inevitable about
the drugs ladder in which soft drugs lead to hard drugs. The
ladder does not exist in Holland because the dealers have been
separated.&quot; </p>

<p>The most exhaustive recent investigation into cannabis occured
in America between 1986 and 1988, when the Drug Enforcement
Administration heard evidence from doctors, patients and studied
thousands of pages of documentation. The conclusion reached by
the DEA's administrative judge, Francis J Young, makes startling
reading: &quot;Nearly all medicines have toxic, potentially
lethal effects,&quot; declared Young, &quot;But marijuana is not
such a substance . . . Marijuana, in its natural form, is one of
the safest active substances know to man. By any measure of
rational analysis marijuana can be safely used within a
supervised routine of medical care.&quot; </p>

<p>Pt. 5 Tomorrow </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #29-U.K. Artcl.Pt.5 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-10 11:19:44 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is Part 5 of an article that appeared in the Guardian
Newspaper on 9/18/93. </p>

<p>Please remember that this article was written in the UK all
comments in ( ) are the posters. </p>

<p>Given cannabis's medical potential, why was it criminalised at
all? Jack Here, author of The Emperor Wears No Clothes, has
constructed a powerful thesis to explain cannabis's fall from
favour earlier this century, culminating in the 1937 Marijuana
Tax in America. Cannabis, also known as hemp, is a prolificm
fast-growing crop, useful for a wide range of industrial
purposes, and an economical source of fuel: it threatened to
bankrupt the paper industry, destroy an emerging synthetic fibre
industry and even challenge the dominance of oil companies. </p>

<p>In Harry Anslinger, head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics,
imperilled interests in America found a messianic ally, &quot;If
the hideous monster Frankenstein came face to face with the
monster marijuana he would drop dead of fright,&quot; railed
Anslinger. Through a rash of B movies such as Reefer Madness,
Anslinger managed to convince the American public that cannabis
caused violent crimes and accelerated Uncle Sam's moral decline.
Cannabis still unnerves a powerful axis of interests. Many of the
4,000-odd &quot;Families Against Marijuana&quot;-style
organisations in the US are funded by the tobacco, pharmaceutical
and alcohol lobbies. Cannabis revisionists now view the Marijuana
Tax as an ecologocial crime. &quot;We want the establishment to
acknowledge that the reasons cannabis became illegal in the first
place was because of the threat posed by it's commercial
applications. not its use as a drug,&quot; says Andy Waller of
the UK-based House of Hemp, set up this year to promote
cannabis's commercial use. Until the late 19th century, says
Waller, cannabis was one of the world's main agricultural crops. </p>

<p>Today, it has an estimated 50,000 non-smoking commercial uses.
According to the US Department of Agriculture research, hemp has
four times as much cellulose fibre suitable for making paper as
wood pulp. The original Levi's jeans were, in fact, 100 per cent
hemp (This has been debated) / others claim that cultivating
marijuana in the Third World would save the rainforest purify the
atmosphere and provide autonomy to Third World economies crippled
by debt. </p>

<p>In tacit recognition of marijuana's profit potential, in
February, the Home Office granted commercial licences to permit
the cultivation of 1,505 acres of cannabis in the UK. It is,
however, unsmokeable, containing none of the psychoactive
ingredient THC. The first crop is now being harvested. (Most of
the hemp plants that were grown in the U.S. for hundreds of years
prior to prohibition were this type. They grow 18-20 feet tall
and have stalks like tree trunks. This is where the fiber comes
from.) </p>

<p>Tamale part 6. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #30-U.K. Artcl.Pt.6 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-02-11 10:28:52 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is Part 6 of an article that appeared in the Guardian
Newspaper on 9/18/93. </p>

<p>Please remember that this article was written in the UK all
comments in ( ) are the poster's. </p>

<p>In the Seventies, Dr Raphael Mechoulam, who first isolated THC
at the University of Tel Aviv in 1964, predicted that marijuana
would become a major medicine by the mid-Eighties, replacing 10
to 20 per cent of all prescription medicines. Dr Grinspoon argues
that, since cannabis is inexpensive, it could significantly
reduce health service's enormous drugs bills. </p>

<p>Used to combat stress, the world's number one killer, cannabis
could also curtail or replace hugely-profitable drugs such as
Valium, Librium and, indeed, alcohol, Grinspoon believes.
&quot;I'm convinced,&quot; he says, &quot; that cannibidiol (one
of 60 therapeutic compounds isolated in cannabis) will be the
best sleeping medicine and one of the best anti-anxiety drugs
with the least toxic side-effects.&quot; </p>

<p>Cannabidiol, which does not produce a high, could also
possibly alleviate Britains's most serious drug problem:
tranquiliser abuse, which is already responsible for more
emergency hospital admissions than all illegal drugs combined.
&quot;Cannabidiol could do all these things,&quot; concurs
Professor Ashton. &quot;But not at any less cost than other
drugs, in my opinion.&quot; </p>

<p>At grass-roots level, cannabis's rehabilitation also reflects
a growing disaffection with orthodox medicine, borne out by the
Nineties' boom in alternative medicine. A common complaint, aired
by MS sufferers in particular, is that cannibidiol research has
been woefully neglected. </p>

<p>However, despite decades of marginalisation, there have been
spectacular breakthroughs. Pertwee points to the recent discovery
of anandamide (reported in a recent New Scientist), a substance
produced by the brain that behaves like marijuana.
&quot;Anandamide's discovery promises to open a door to how the
brain works. There may be possibilities of working on a memory
drug and the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.&quot; </p>

<p>The exploitation of cannabis's medical benefits has always
been limited because of it's psychoactive properties. The holy
grail of cannabinoid therapeutics has, therefore, been to
eliminate cannabis's high. Drug companies have spent years
trying, without success. But now, the discovery in Cambridge by
Dr Sean Munro of a receptor for THC, not in the brain, but in
peripheral tissues, promise to solve this problem. Pharmaceutical
companies have already expressed an interest in Munro's findings,
particularly as related to glaucoma. Yet it is the receptors in
the brain, points out Munro, &quot;that are responsible for many
of cannabis's potential therapeutic effects.&quot; And it is
precisely the euphoria induced by marijuana which makes it such
an attractive drug for those with terminal illnesses. </p>

<p>Part VII coming next (aren't y'all excited) </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>