
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-76</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B021-71</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/sfbc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122053408 text/html 12990
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:33:53 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:45:51 GMT
Content-length: 12772
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>CANNABIS MEDICINAL USES AT A &quot;BUYERS'&quot; CLUB</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> Abstract </p>

<h1>CANNABIS MEDICINAL USES AT A &quot;BUYERS'&quot; CLUB </h1>

<p> <b>Mikuriya, T.H. </b> </p>

<p> <b>Medicinal uses of cannabis at a buyers' club ___:
_____________ 1995</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> Background. A century ago, cannabis was regarded as the
second most important analgesic after the opiates for the control
of chronic pain. At the time of its removal from prescriptive
availability in 1938 it was recognized as a sedative and
antispasmodic. </p>

<p> Methods. 57 buyers of cannabis for self-medication were
interviewed by the author at the Cannabis Buyers' Club of San
Francisco utilizing a structured medical interview outline. </p>

<p> Results. 51 were male, 6 female, ranging in age from 18 to 69
with the median of 38 years. Race: 50 were white, 3 Hispanic, 2
Black, 1 Oriental, and 1 Samoan. Education ranged from 7th grade
to post doctoral study. Medical characteristics of the population
were 41 HIV+ and 16 Presumed HIV-. Time since HIV+ diagnosis
ranged from 1 month to 10 years with a median of 40 months.
Medicinal purposes reported were:
anorexia/nausea/vomiting/diarrhea 39, anxiety/panic
attacks/depression 39, AIDS related illness 35, arthritis and
other pain 22, muscle spasm 19, harm reduction: alcohol
substitution 12, opiod substitution 6, amphetamine substitution
1, followed by migraine/vascular headache 11, cancer/cancer
chemotherapy 10, asthma/cough 9, itching/hiccough 8, epilepsy 5,
glaucoma 4, drusen of the optic chiasm 1, psychiatric post
traumatic stress disorder 1, and pre menstrual syndrome 1. Of the
19 who tried Marinol* none experienced equipotent effects, 7
experienced partial relief without adverse side effects, 5
experienced no effects, and 7 experienced adverse side effects. </p>

<p> Conclusions. Cannabis is not a new drug. Medicinal
applications reported by self-medicating buyers would appear to
reconfirm descriptions in clinical literature before the drug was
removed from prescriptive availability. Further clinical study is
warranted. Restoration of cannabis to prescriptive availability
is indicated. </p>

<p> MEDICINAL USES OF CANNABIS AT A BUYERS' CLUB: A PILOT STUDY </p>

<p> by </p>

<p> Tod H. Mikuriya, M.D. </p>

<p> Background </p>

<p> From 1839 to 1938 cannabis was available by prescription and
utilized for a variety of conditions before removal after the
passage of the 1937 Marihuana Tax Act at which time it was an
infrequently used sedative and antispasmodic . Since then it has
been legally defined as having no medicinal redeeming virtue
having high potential for abuse by the Controlled Substances Act
of 1970 as a Schedule I drug. </p>

<p> Recent History </p>

<p> Compassionate clinical investigative new drug (IND)
applications for marijuana were suspended in 1991 by then chief
of the Public Health Service James O. Mason, M.D. </p>

<p> Starting with a coalition of marijuana law reform and AIDS
treatment/prevention activists in the San Francisco gay community
a proposition was put on the ballot later that year to restore
hemp medical preparations for prescribing. The measure passed by
a 4:1 margin that resulted in passage of a supportive resolution
by the San Francisco Board of Supervisors that urged the District
Attorney to allow a letter from a treating physician to be
evidence of medical use. </p>

<p> In December, 1993 the San Francisco Cannabis Buyers Club
began to sell illicit cannabis to patients with a referral note
from their physician or health facility. </p>

<p> Interviews at the site by the author with 57 of the buyers
using a structured questionnaire (attached) provided the
following data regarding medical conditions and drug use. </p>

<p> Setting. Several doors away from a busy street corner is a
nondescript door with a peep lens. Pressing the doorbell between
the hours of 10 AM to 7 PM weekdays, the door is opened by a
doorman who asks to see the numbered club card. At the top of a
short flight of stairs, a second hall person of hefty stature
scrutinizes and greets the visitor. Entering midway in a large
old former dime-a-dance hall above the bar below, the room is
well lit from clerestory windows. The ceiling is covered by a
huge rainbow flag. The walls are covered with local artists' work
and political posters. Two small rooms to the right are a kitchen
with sink and refrigerator with access to the roof and an
interview room. A sink and toilet are off the short hallway to
the interview room. </p>

<p> The well ventilated rooms with open windows and a corner
15&quot; exhaust fan left from the dance hall era are needed to
cope with the clouds of cannabis (and some tobacco) smoke from
the patrons. A large old dining room table dominates the center
of the room, a semicircle of sofas at the left, and smaller
tables against the wall on the right accommodate the buyers.
Joints are rolled, pipes and water pipes are filled and shared
from medium grade cannabis furnished by the house on small trays.
The dealers measure out the cannabis from behind a
&quot;bar&quot; where buyers inspect and purchase cannabis.
Grades, types and prices are posted behind the bar on an erasable
board with samples of each available for inspection and trial.
Pipes, cigarette lighters, and rolling papers are also sold at
the counter. In addition to smoked cannabis baked goods for oral
use are sold. Cookies and brownies made from the lower grade
cannabis are bioassayed by the bakers and staff with rough
estimates of strength provided for each batch. On the periphery,
tables with diverse health and informational literature provides
reading materials for the buyers. Stationary, postage, and lists
of politicians provide other activities for buyers, staff, and
visitors. </p>

<p> Demographics </p>

<p> There were 51 men and 6 women. Their ages ranged from 18 to
69, with the median of 38 years. Education was from 7th grade to
post doctoral professionals. Racially, 50 were white, 3 hispanic,
2 black, 1 oriental, and 1 samoan. </p>

<p> Medical Characteristics </p>

<p> 41 were HIV+ with 35 seeking treatment of AIDS related
illness. The shortest time since diagnosis 1 month, the longest
time was 10 years with 40 months the median, and 53.8 months the
average. </p>

<p> The 16 presumed HIV- were 13 males and 3 females ages 23 to
69 years with a median of 36 with an average of 45.5 years of
age. The racial composition was 13 white, 1 Hispanic 1 Black and
1 Oriental. </p>

<p> Symptoms and Conditions </p>

<p> Gastrointestinal and affective conditions were the most
frequent with anorexia/nausea/vomiting/diarrhea, anxiety/panic
attacks, and insomnia/depression (39 each). The second most
numerous category was the musculoskeletal with Arthritis and
other pain (22). The third most frequently mentioned target
symptom was muscle spasm (19) </p>

<p> Harm reduction through substitution of cannabis for more
toxic drugs: alcohol (12), sedative/opiates (6), amphetamine (1)
was the fourth most mentioned category. Migraine/vascular
headache (11) was the fifth largest category followed by:
asthma/cough (9), Itching/hiccough (8) Epilepsy (5) Glaucoma (4)
Post traumatic stress disorder (1) drusen of the optic chiasm (1)
</p>

<p> Table 1 </p>

<p> Conditions Treated With Self Administered Cannabis </p>

<p> Condition HIV+ HIV- Total </p>

<p> Anorexia/Nausea/Vomiting/Diarrhea 32 7 39 </p>

<p> Insomnia/Depression 30 9 39 </p>

<p> Anxiety/Panic Attacks 31 8 39 </p>

<p> AIDS related illness 35 0 35 </p>

<p> Arthritis/Other Pain 14 8 22 </p>

<p> Muscle Spasm 16 3 19 </p>

<p> Alcoholism/Alcohol Abuse 9 3 12 </p>

<p> Migraine/vascular headache 10 1 11 </p>

<p> Cancer/Cancer Chemotherapy 8 2 10 </p>

<p> Asthma/Cough 8 1 9 </p>

<p> Itching/Hiccough 8 1 9 </p>

<p> Sedative/Opiate Dependence 6 0 6 </p>

<p> Epilepsy 4 1 5 </p>

<p> Glaucoma 2 2 4 </p>

<p> Amphetamine Dependence 0 1 1 </p>

<p> Post traumatic Stress Disorder 1 0 1 </p>

<p> Drusen of Optic Nerve 0 1 1 </p>

<p> Allergic rhinitis 0 1 1 </p>

<p> Pre Menstrual Syndrome 0 1 1 </p>

<p> Past experience with cannabis </p>

<p> All had used the drug recreationally prior to self
medication. The shortest length of time since first use was 4
months, the longest was 48 years with the median of 14 years of
using cannabis. </p>

<p> Dosage and Frequency of Use of Cannabis </p>

<p> The range of dose varied from two puffs on a pipe every two
weeks to more than one cannabis cigarettes 6 times a day. The
modal frequency was one or less cigarette or equivalent daily. </p>

<p> Route of Administration </p>

<p> Fifty smoked cannabis. Three ate cannabis only. The marijuana
cigarette or &quot;joint&quot; was the most frequently used with
38, a pipe was second most popular with 27, water pipe third with
11. </p>

<p> Three inhaled but did not smoke. They utilized a vaporizer
that permits delivery of cannabinoids at temperatures below the
flash or burning point. </p>

<p> Twenty three both ate and smoked the drug. </p>

<p> Of the three cases who only ate the drug, all had significant
pulmonary pathology. One suffered recurrent fungal infections:
aspergillosis and cryptococcus, one had pneumocystis carinii
(PCP), and the third, recurrent bacterial pneumonitis and AIDS
encephalopathy. </p>

<p> Marinol, a legally available monocannabinoid, has been
promoted as a viable alternative to crude polycannabinoids. </p>

<p> Of the 19 who described experience with Marinol, only 3 knew
what dose they had taken. 5 experienced no effects or side
effects, 7 felt it was somewhat helpful without adverse side
effects. </p>

<p> The symptoms for which Marinol was somewhat helpful were: 5
Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting, 4 Depression and 1 with post
traumatic injury pain. All of the dose levels were unknown. </p>

<p> Of the 7 who experienced adverse effects from Marinol, 5
complained of lethargy, tiredness and over sedation, 2 of
confusion, (one with a 30 milligram dose, the other of an unknown
dose), three described a worsening of the target symptoms of
nausea (all at unknown dosage), one experienced a transient
diploplia at an unknown dose, and one of a generalized headache
from 10 milligrams. </p>

<p> Discussion </p>

<p> It would appear that naturally occurring polycannabinoid
cannabis is superior to monocannabinoid dronabinol but that
dronabinol gives partial relief for some. Supplementing Marinol
with crude cannabis appears to decrease the intake of crude
cannabis. </p>

<p> Cannabis has been described as having therapeutic properties
in a variety of conditions in clinical literature prior to its
removal from prescriptive availability in 1938. Interviews with a
status criminalized population of 57 individuals with serious
illness self-medicating at a &quot;medical speakeasy&quot;,
confirm many of the pre prohibition therapeutic uses of cannabis.
</p>

<p> The wide variety of conditions appear to have some common
elements of affective, autonomic, and anti-inflammatory effects
that warrant further systematic clinical study. Burstine suggests
the inhibition of prostaglandin secretions modulated by
eicosanoids, complex fatty acids, caused by certain
tetrahydrocannabinols may be one of the mechanisms of action.
Indications of NSAID activity appear in the inhibition of
marihuana effects by premedication with indomethacin. </p>

<p> William B. O'Shaughnessy, M.D., who in 1839 introduced
cannabis to western medicine, acknowledged its non-medical use
but was able to recognize and study its therapeutic potential
despite the drug's adverse reputation. While much has been
learned scientifically of mechanisms of actions, adverse social
attitudes continue to prevent clinical study for therapeutic
potential. </p>

<p> The existence of this &quot;buyers' club, per se, (some 2,000
members) appears to functionally contradict official
pronouncements denying the therapeutic uses of cannabis and is a
compensatory social excrescence of Prohibition as a public
policy. </p>

<p> THM 12-4-94 </p>

<p> References </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>