
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-62</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B008-81</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/persuas.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122034635 text/html 22196
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:46:27 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:25:11 GMT
Content-length: 21978
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Persuasive Strategies for the Drug Legalization Debate </title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Clifford A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h1>Persuasive Strategies</h1>

<p> <b>by Clifford A. Schaffer</b> </p>

<h2><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </h2>

<h2>Dos </h2>

<h3>The issue is prison. </h3>

<p> The issue is not legalization or decriminalization because we
really do not know if we will ever do those things, or anything
like them. The issue is prison. The issue is how many millions of
people will have to go to prison before this policy is
successful. </p>

<p> You cannot successfully defend decriminalization or
legalization to most people at this point, because it is not here
and they cannot see it. Turn the issue around on them, and make
them defend what we are doing now. The drug war has not worked
and there is not a drug law enforcement official in the United
States who pretends that it can work. Once they are on the
defensive, it is easy to get them to admit that it is time to
look for another approach -- whatever that approach might be. </p>

<h3>Do your homework. </h3>

<p> There is enough information in the references I have listed
to sink anyone who supports the use of jails for drugs. That's
why the reports were written. </p>

<h3>Be reasonable. </h3>

<p> If you can present a sound and reasonable approach to solving
the drug problem, and maintain that stance, you will
short-circuit most of the negative emotions and hostility which
may be raised against you. Notice that I have said a reasonable
&quot;approach&quot; to solving the drug problem, not a
reasonable &quot;solution&quot; to the drug problem. By approach,
I mean a method of finding a solution. Do not try to present a
solution because, as discussed later, that only gets you into
trouble. Instead, promote a fair and reasonable method of finding
a solution -- such as the objective commission called for by the
Hoover Resolution. </p>

<p> At the same time, this reasonable stance forces our opponents
to either be reasonable and follow us toward reform, or adopt
ever more extreme positions on drugs. One of my favorite
questions for them is: &quot;What do you have against an open and
honest review of the evidence?&quot; </p>

<p> If they do not agree to an open and honest review of the
evidence then they clearly demonstrate that they are too extreme
to even consider the facts. If they do agree to the review, then
I have them every time because I have already read the evidence
and I know what it says. </p>

<h3>Judo is better than boxing. </h3>

<p> You can beat someone with boxing, in which case you knock
them down with your weight. Or, you can beat someone with judo,
in which case you knock them down with their own weight. Judo is
always better than boxing when you have to persuade someone. Use
the arguments your audience finds persuasive, not the arguments
you find persuasive. </p>

<p> For example, if you encounter a fundamentalist Christian,
nothing you will say to them will have any meaning to them at all
unless they believe that Jesus Christ would support what you are
saying. So far most of them have believe that drug users should
be thrown in prison because drug use is immoral -- that is, Jesus
would not approve of drug use. I have found that the best
approach to these people is to help them to understand it in
their own terms. What I say is: </p>

<p> &quot;You are certainly a better Christian than I am so you
tell me. If Jesus came down here today and we gave the drug
problem to him, what do you think he would do? Would he build
bigger prisons? Or would he build hospitals and schools?&quot; </p>

<p> When the issue is stated in these simple terms, most of them
will come around right away. They will immediately see the good
sense in an approach that heals, rather than punishes. </p>

<h3>Avoid complex arguments </h3>

<p> The supporters of the drug war have, in keeping with their
general intellectual level, made the simplest propaganda
possible. The eggs in the frying pan commercial is a good
example. In order to compete with them, it is necessary to make
arguments which are as simple and as easily understood as
possible. There are a lot of ways to get really complicated in a
drug argument but two of the favorites are arguments based on
civil liberties and economics. Please keep in mind that I agree
with the arguments based on civil liberties and economics, I just
don't find them persuasive to others. </p>

<p> Arguments based on such topics as civil liberties or
economics are not likely to be persuasive for three reasons: </p>

<p> 1) They are complicated issues which take a lot of thought.
Even if you come up with a reasonable sounding argument today,
someone will just confuse them tomorrow with an equally good
sounding argument. </p>

<p> 2) Surveys consistently show that a large portion of the
American public would readily sacrifice their civil liberties to
try to solve some mythical problem. </p>

<p> 3) The people who are likely to be persuaded are already
persuaded. </p>

<p> There are exceptions to every rule, of course, but, in
general, most people will not be persuaded by philosophical
arguments about civil liberties, or arcane arguments about
economics. It may be sad, but it is true. </p>

<p> One of the major exceptions to this is property owners.
Property owners in California have become very sensitive to the
fact that their property can be seized even though they knew
nothing at all about criminal activity on the property. Property
owners can be a pretty vocal group so they should not be
overlooked as allies. </p>

<p> Economic arguments, when used, should be simplified to avoid
long-winded discussions which do not resolve anything. For
example: With $500,000 of tax money we can put one drug user in
prison, or we can provide treatment or education for more than
100 people. Which do you think is the better deal? </p>

<h3>Build agreement. </h3>

<p> Sales people know that a person is more likely to agree with
you if they have already agreed with you. That is, if you can get
them to agree that it is a nice day, for example, they will be
more likely to agree with whatever else you may say. You get them
in the habit of saying &quot;Yes&quot; and they will keep saying
&quot;Yes.&quot; </p>

<p> There are certain issues on which nearly everyone will
readily agree. The first is that people who are sick should get
whatever medicine they need. If they understand that marijuana
can help save the lives of people with AIDS and cancer, and that
heroin can help relieve extreme chronic pain, and may even speed
healing after surgery or injury, they will usually agree that --
for medical purposes at least -- we should allow the use of these
drugs. Then point out: </p>

<p> Sick people are suffering and dying because they need these
medicines to live. If that was the only reason to re-examine our
drug policy it would be reason enough. But, as you know, it is
not the only reason to re-examine what we are doing. Isn't it
time to examine all these problems and see what really is the
right thing to do? </p>

<h3>Attack the very foundations of the drug laws. </h3>

<p> The drug laws were the product of racism and ignorance. They
never did have anything to do with public health and safety. It
is important that people understand this point. Most people
wrongly assume that the drug laws were passed because it was
necessary to protect people against dangerous drugs. Most people
do not know that, at the time the laws were passed, there was no
medical evidence to show that these drugs were dangerous, and
that major newspapers like the New York Times published articles
with titles like &quot;Negro Cocaine Fiends, New Southern
Menace.&quot; Once people begin to understand that there never
was a good reason for the laws in the first place, then it is
perfectly legitimate to ask what is the reason for these laws
now. </p>

<p> This can lead to a discussion of how the drug laws came to be
(your opponent loses by default); or the fact that half of all
our prison inmates are black, most of them there on drug charges;
or the fact that in places like Washington, DC, ninety percent of
all the black men have already been to jail, most of them on drug
charges (your opponent loses by embarrassment). </p>

<h3>One standard response </h3>

<p> The following sentence works for nearly anything your
opponent may say: </p>

<p> <b>&quot;There is no evidence to support that assertion.
Every major study of drug policy agreed that, even if it was
true, decriminalization would still be a better solution.&quot;</b>
</p>

<p> For example, they may say that, if drugs are legalized that
everyone will become drug addicts. You say: </p>

<p> &quot;There is no evidence to support that assertion. Every
major study of drug policy agreed that, even if drug use did
increase, decriminalization would still be a better
solution.&quot; </p>

<h3>Preface your sentences </h3>

<p> Put a prefix in front of your sentences. The prefix is <b>&quot;Every
major study agreed . . .&quot;</b> Without this phrase, the
things you say will be interpreted as your own opinion. If you
use this phrase, your opinions are seen more clearly as the
overwhelming weight of the evidence. Also, this phrase will force
your opponent to debate on the basis of fact, where they are the
weakest, and will quickly flatten their best arguments. </p>

<h3>Attack, Attack, Attack. </h3>

<p> It is the only way you will win. Even if people believed that
legalization was right, they would still support the current set
of laws because they aren't certain about legalization and
believe the criminal laws do no harm. They must be made to see
that the current laws are worse than no laws at all. You must put
your opponents on the extreme defensive and keep them there. Make
them justify all of the awful facts. The subject is not
legalization or decriminalization. The subject is prison. </p>

<h3>Keep it short and punchy. </h3>

<p> Know what you are going to say and trim every excess word. If
you are really lucky you will get a full fifteen minutes of media
air time to explain everything there is to know about drugs. Hit
the major facts as rapidly as you can. </p>

<h3>Memorize what you want to say </h3>

<p> Salesmen memorize their sales pitch because, once they have
it down by rote, they can say it without even thinking, thus
freeing their tactical brain to get an edge on their prospect.
With tricky subjects like drug policy reform it is very easy to
make verbal missteps which will weaken your case, or send your
audience into extreme cognitive dissonance (a mental shutdown)
where they will not hear another thing you say. Be extremely
careful about the phrasing you use and stick with the phrasing
which will keep you out of trouble. Memorize the names of the
studies so you can spit them out without thinking. </p>

<h3>Stick to the issue. </h3>

<p> Don't let the discussion stray into related social issues.
Drug policy is one of those issues which is closely intertwined
with other issues such as morality, education, health care,
welfare, and many others. Don't get sidetracked into arguments
over welfare reform or some other complicated issue You don't
have time for it and most Americans don't have the brain capacity
to understand the complexities anyway. The issue is whether
building massive prisons will solve the drug problem. </p>

<h3>Get the facts out. </h3>

<p> Most people do not know the actual statistics on things like
drug deaths, the number of people in prison, the percentage of
black men who will go to prison and the plight of medical
patients who cannot get these medicines. When they hear the
facts, they really begin to wonder about the current policy. </p>

<h3>Win by inches. </h3>

<p> Don't try to bring people too far in their thinking. The
concept of legalization or decriminalization is a big
intellectual and emotional stretch for a lot of people and you
could easily spend years getting them to fully believe it. It is
simply not practical, or necessary, to try to bring people over
to the legalization side all at once. People will naturally come
to the legalization point of view if you can simply convince them
that our current policy is a disaster which could never work (and
that is really easy!). Once they agree that the current policy is
not working, and cannot work, then they will ask themselves -- if
prisons don't work, what should we do? When they confront this
question, they have started down the slippery slope to
decriminalization. </p>

<p> Federal Judge Jack B. Weinstein said, &quot;Unthinking
acceptance of the current drug policy is unreasonable.&quot; If
we can just get people to admit that there is a real problem with
what we are doing now, and that we must look for a better
solution, they will eventually agree with you. </p>

<p> An interesting thing happened to Judge James P. Gray. A man
wrote Judge Gray a letter in which he started out by telling
Judge Gray how wrong Judge Gray was about legalization. The guy
tried to tell Judge Gray why he was so wrong and, in the space of
three written pages, wound up realizing that Judge Gray was
right. He convinced himself once he just sat down and thought
about it. </p>

<h3>Take the moral high ground </h3>

<p> Our opponents like to take the stance that anyone who does
not believe in huge prisons full of drug dealers is less than
moral, beneath contempt, and is probably selling drugs to
grade-school children in their spare time. It is time to tear
down this moral charade. </p>

<p> There is nothing moral about incarcerating most of the black
men in America. There is nothing moral about denying legitimate
medicines to people who are suffering and dying. There is nothing
moral about a drug policy which seeks to destroy people, not heal
them. The damage being done by this policy is too great to allow
anyone to maintain the pretense that this drug war is something
holy and moral. </p>

<h1>Don'ts </h1>

<h3>Don't use the &quot;L&quot; word, the &quot;D&quot; word, or
the &quot;M&quot; word. </h3>

<p> Don't use &quot;legalization,&quot;
&quot;decriminalization,&quot; or &quot;medicalization&quot;.
These words tend to set some people's heads on fire. In the first
place, these words will cause many people to go into an immediate
complete mental shut-down and they will not hear another thing
you say. In the second place, it is wrong to reduce what must
necessarily be a complex policy under any circumstances, to a
single word. It only serves to further distort the issue.
Besides, you don't have to use the words to win. </p>

<p> Some people have mentioned that the word
&quot;legalization&quot; must be used sooner or later in the
public debate simply because a recognition that prison is wrong
will lead people to consider the alternatives, which will
ultimately lead to prison. This is certainly true. However, I
would recommend that you let your opponent use it first, and that
you do not promote it as a cause. </p>

<h3>Don't defend the use of drugs. </h3>

<p> Don't tell people that everyone has a God-given right to put
whatever they want to in to their body. You may be right, and I
happen to agree, but it won't play in Peoria. Many people just
view this as an excuse to get loaded (and, in many cases, they
are right). </p>

<h3>Don't advance your own plan for selling drugs. </h3>

<p> Do not discuss your personal plan for how legalization would
work The reasons are: </p>

<p> a) You can only sell one product at a time. First convince
them <u>whether</u> we should change the laws. We will have
plenty of time for <u>how</u> later. </p>

<p> b) When you suggest how it should be done then your
individual ideas become the focus. If your plan fails for any
reason, then your whole argument will fail, and; </p>

<p> c) The real secret is that there is no right answer to drug
policy. Every idea you will suggest is only the lesser of
multiple evils and leaves you open to violent emotional attack. </p>

<h3>Don't get tied up in debates over the health risks. </h3>

<p> First let me state that the evidence is quite clear that, by
any standard of comparison, alcohol and tobacco are far more
dangerous than almost any of the illegal drugs. However, the
relative health risks are not really the issue. </p>

<p> Just because something is dangerous does not automatically
mean that the best approach to those dangers is to throw millions
of people in prison. We all know that tobacco, and alcohol, and
AIDS are hazardous to your health. But we all would agree that
prison is not the best public policy for those hazards. Prison,
in fact, would be a terrible mistake. </p>

<p> It is the same principle with illegal drugs. We can assume
that drugs are dangerous. That is not the question. The question
is: What is the best public policy for those dangers? On this
question, every major study of drug policy has agreed that,
whatever the dangers may be, prison is the wrong approach. Every
major study recommended decriminalization <u>because</u> of those
dangers, and because prison is the worst approach. Bigger prisons
do not equal better public health policy. </p>

<h3>Don't get stuck on questions which cannot be answered. </h3>

<p> Congressman Charles Rangel likes to ask the question,
&quot;How do you propose that we go about legalizing drugs?
Should we have crack stores next to liquor stores?&quot; The
trick is that there really is no perfect answer, and any answer
you give leaves you open to attack. It turns the issue into one
of your personal social ideas rather than the objective truth
that all studies agree that decriminalization, under almost any
scenario, is a better approach. </p>

<h3>Don't Overdose </h3>

<p> I generally avoid mention of overdoses because the word
itself distorts the issue in a very emotional sense. The drug
which produces the most overdoses is alcohol. No one thinks of a
drunk high school kid puking into a toilet as a drug overdose,
even when you point it out to them. Consumers Union found that
there are very few real drug overdoses and none at all for
marijuana. Most of the so-called &quot;overdoses&quot; were
clearly attributable to other causes, such as impurities in the
drugs. </p>

<h3>Don't get the issues stuck between you </h3>

<p> People are more likely to believe you and be persuaded by
what you say if they feel that you share their same basic
concerns, that is, if they feel you are &quot;on their
side.&quot; Always explain you answers in terms of their thoughts
and goals. Your goals are probably the same as theirs anyway --
reducing the harm done by drugs, keeping drugs away from kids,
controlling the social costs of drugs, etc. </p>

<h3>Don't let them have anything. </h3>

<p> There are many, many myths about drugs and drug use. Like for
instance, the old myth that pushers spike marijuana with heroin
and cocaine to get unsuspecting kids hooked. It doesn't happen. <u>Licit
and Illicit Drugs</u> effectively explodes most of these myths.
If your opponent mentions such a myth, jump down his throat and
point out that there is no evidence at all to support what he is
saying. Make them prove it. You can prove what you say, they
can't. </p>

<h3>Don't get stuck on Constitutional issues. </h3>

<p> Issues based on the US Constitution will generally not be
persuasive for a number of reasons: </p>

<ol>
    <li>They are complicated. They require a lot of knowledge of
        history, law, and other subjects which most people,
        including you, are not likely to have. Like any other
        complicated issue, anyone can make long-winded
        discussions go on forever with no clear resolution.
        Complicated arguments are best avoided because they just
        don't win. </li>
</ol>

<ol>
    <li>The people who are likely to agree with you probably
        already agree with you. Many Americans, including some
        intelligent ones, do not understand the protections
        afforded by the Constitution and why they are so
        important. Many people tend to feel that the protections
        of the Constitution were only meant to be given to the
        law-abiding citizens like them and, besides, if innocent
        people are hurt because the police have violated their
        rights, then that is just the price we have to pay for
        law and order. It is pointless to argue with these people
        on this point because, for the most part, you are not
        going to change their basic attitude about it. </li>
</ol>

<ol>
    <li>Even if you win, you don't win anything. Even if you get
        your opponent to agree that Fourth Amendment rights (or
        some other rights) are being violated by the police, it
        can be dismissed as simple bad management. That is, they
        will argue that we should manage it a little better, but
        we still ought to continue the war on drugs.
        Constitutional arguments in general do not effectively
        address the point that the drug war is morally and
        practically wrong at its very foundations. </li>
</ol>

<p> </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>