
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-41</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000615-B002-30</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/basicfax.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122024456 text/html 46075
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:44:46 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:43:13 GMT
Content-length: 45857
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Basic Facts About the War on Drugs</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="studies/studies.htm">Major Studies</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="60738" -->

<h1>Basic Facts About the War on Drugs </h1>

<p><b>by Clifford A. Schaffer</b> </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><strong>A summary of the basic facts about drugs and the drug
war. </strong></p>

<p><a href="#q1">1. Why were the laws against drugs passed in the
first place? </a></p>

<p><a href="#q2">2. How many people use drugs in the United
States?</a> </p>

<p><a href="#q3">3. How many people are actually killed by drugs?</a>
</p>

<p><a href="#q4">4. Which drug causes the greatest burden on our
medical facilities? </a></p>

<p><a href="#q5">5. Which drugs are the most addictive? </a></p>

<p><a href="#q6">6. Do illegal drugs cause violent crime? </a></p>

<p><a href="#q7">7. Can we win the war on drugs this way? </a></p>

<p><a href="#q8">8. How many millions of people will have to go
to prison?</a> </p>

<p><a href="#q9">9. What does it cost to put a single drug dealer
in jail? </a></p>

<p><a href="#q10">10. What does this drug policy do to the black
community? </a></p>

<p><a href="#q11">11. How does our policy compare with the
policies of other countries?</a> </p>

<p><a href="#q12">12. Do the illegal drugs have any legitimate
uses?</a> </p>

<p><a href="#q14">13. Does marijuana lead to harder drugs?</a> </p>

<p><a href="#q13">14. What should we do about drugs?</a> </p>

<p><a href="graphs.htm">Charts and Graphs on Drug War Statistics</a>
</p>

<p><a href="#q15">15. How dangerous is marijuana, really?</a> </p>

<p><a href="#q16">16. Would &quot;legalization&quot; cost more
than it saves?</a> </p>

<p><a href="#q17">17. How Many People are currently in prison,
and what are they in for? </a></p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q1">1. Why were the laws against drugs passed in the
first place? </a></h2>

<p>The first American anti-drug law was an 1875 San Francisco
ordinance which outlawed the smoking of opium in opium dens. It
was passed because of the fear that Chinese men were luring white
women to their &quot;ruin&quot; in opium dens. &quot;Ruin&quot;
was defined as associating with Chinese men. It was followed by
other similar laws, including Federal laws in which trafficking
in opium was forbidden to anyone of Chinese origin, and
restrictions on the importation of smoking opium. The laws did
not have anything really to do with the importation of opium as a
drug, because the importation and use of opium in other forms --
such as in the common medication laudunum -- were not affected.
The laws were directed at smoking opium because it was perceived
that the smoking of opium was a peculiarly Chinese custom. In
short, it was a way of legally targeting the Chinese. </p>

<p>Cocaine was outlawed because of fears that superhuman
&quot;Negro Cocaine Fiends&quot; or &quot;Cocainized
Niggers&quot; (actual terms used by newspapers in the early
1900's) take large amounts of cocaine which would make them go on
a violent sexual rampage and rape white women. There is little
evidence that any black men actually did this, if only because it
would have been certain death. The United States set a record in
1905 with 105 recorded lynchings of black men. At the same time,
police nationwide switched from .32 caliber pistols to .38
caliber pistols because it was believed that the superhuman
&quot;Negro Cocaine Fiend&quot; could not be killed with the
smaller gun. </p>

<p>Dr. Hamilton Wright is sometimes referred to as the
&quot;Father of American Drug Laws&quot;. Dr. Wright was the
Opium Commissioner at the time and had previously become famous
because he had &quot;scientifically proved&quot; that beri-beri
was a communicable disease. Beri-beri is a vitamin deficiency. </p>

<p>The Harrison Act which &quot;outlawed&quot; these drugs was,
on its face, a simple licensing law which simply required sellers
to get a license if they were going to handle the opiates and
cocaine. As the Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs
has said, it is doubtful that very many members of Congress would
have thought that they were passing what would later be regarded
as a general drug prohibition. The law even contained a provision
that nothing in the law would prohibit doctors from prescribing
these drugs in the legitimate practice of medicine. </p>

<p>In fact, even the people who wrote the Harrison Act and the
Marijuana Tax Act in 1937 agreed that a general prohibition on
what people could put into their own bodies was plainly an
unconstitutional infringement on personal liberties. For
comparison, see the history of the constitutional amendment which
was required to prohibit alcohol. There is no fundamental reason
why a constitutional amendment should be required to prohibit one
chemical and not another. </p>

<p>The trick was that the bureaucrats who were authorized to
issue licenses never did so, and there was a heavy penalty for
not having the license. This heavy penalty required that the
enforcing bureaucrats needed more staff and, therefore, more
power, which, in turn required tougher laws. Over the years,
through a series of court rulings, they gradually got the courts
to change what had been well-established constitutional law.
Specifically, they got the courts to accept the notion that it
really was a tax violation when people got arrested for drugs,
and that the fact that the government would not issue any
licenses was not a defense. They also got the courts to bypass
the old issue of whether the Federal Government had the right to
control what an individual puts into their own bodies by creating
the fiction that whatever the person puts into their bodies must
have come as a result of some form of interstate commerce, which
is regulated by the Federal Government in the form of taxes and
licenses and, therefore, since the Federal Government is allowed
to levy a tax it is -- by rather indirect logic -- allowed to
regulate what anyone may put into their own bodies. </p>

<p>Marijuana was outlawed in 1937 as a repressive measure against
Mexican workers who crossed the border seeking jobs during the
Depression. The specific reason given for the outlawing of the
hemp plant was its supposed violent &quot;effect on the
degenerate races.&quot; (Testimony of Bureau of Narcotics
Commissioner Harry J. Anslinger, in testimony before Congress in
hearings on the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937). The American Medical
Association specifically testified that they were opposed to the
law. When the supporters of the law were asked about the AMA's
view on the law on the floor of Congress, they lied and said that
the AMA was in favor of the law because they knew the law would
never pass without the AMA's endorsement. The law passed, and the
AMA later protested, but the law was never repealed. </p>

<p>In both cases, newspapers across the country carried lurid
stories of the awful things that these drugs did to racial
minorities, and of the horrors that people of racial minorities
inflicted on innocent white people while they were under the
influence of these drugs. Later research has shown that not a
single one of the stories used to promote these laws could be
substantiated. </p>

<p>There never was any scholarly evidence that the laws were
necessary, or even beneficial, to public health and safety and
none was presented when the laws were passed. </p>

<p><a href="cureport.htm">Consumers Union Report on Licit and
Illicit Drugs</a>, by Edward M. Brecher and the Editors of
Consumer Reports, 1972 </p>

<p><u>The American Disease, The Origins of Narcotics Control</u>,
by Dr. David F. Musto, 1973 </p>

<p><a href="studies/nc/ncmenu.htm"><u>The Report of the National
Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse</u></a>, 1973 </p>

<p><a href="../history/whiteb1.htm">The History of the Drug Laws</a>,
a short speech by Professor Charles Whitebread, of USC Law
School. </p>

<p><i>Guinness Book of World Records</i> (information on
lynching) </p>

<p>&quot;Cocaine Fiends: New Southern Menace,&quot; New York
Times, February 18, 1914 </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q2">2. How many people use drugs in the United
States?</a> </h2>

<p>This is a difficult question to answer with any certainty. </p>

<p>The Federal Government's Household Survey on Drug Abuse,
conducted annually, is the most commonly cited set of statistics
on the prevalence of drug use. According to the latest surveys,
cited by the DEA themselves, there are about 12.7 million people
who have used some illegal drug in the last month and perhaps 30
to 40 million who have used some illegal drug within the last
year. Of the 12.7 million who used illegal drugs in the last
month, about 10 million are presumed to be casual drug users, and
about 2.7 million are addicts. </p>

<p>But there are a number of problems with these figures. The
survey is conducted by calling people on the telephone at random
and asking them about their use of illegal drugs. Some of the
problems with this technique are: </p>

<ol>
    <li>It only reaches people who have a telephone. If the
        effects of drugs are as bad as some people claim, it
        seems only reasonable that a lot of addicts would no
        longer have a telephone. </li>
    <li>It only reaches people who answered the telephone. There
        are many groups of people who would not necessarily
        answer the phone, including addicts who are out looking
        for drugs, as well as business people out for a
        two-martini lunch. </li>
    <li>The survey crew calls people they don't know and asks
        them if anyone in their household has committed a felony
        (used drugs) recently. In a time of increasing penalties
        for drug use, and increasing publicity about those
        penalties, it seems only logical that most people would
        not answer this question entirely honestly, particularly
        if they were currently using drugs and, therefore, were
        acutely aware of the penalties. Rather than a measure of
        the number of people who use drugs, the Household Survey
        may be a better measure of the number of people stupid
        enough to answer the question. </li>
</ol>

<p>Other surveys put the number of drug users at levels that are
perhaps twice as high as the figures produced by the Household
Survey on Drug Abuse. The very disparity of the estimates of
various surveys points to one of the problems caused by a general
drug prohibition. Because these drugs are illegal, it is
difficult to get accurate information about their use. </p>

<p>The source for the number of drug users comes from, among
other sources, the Household Survey on Drug Abuse, a Federal
survey, available through any of the sources listed here. The
costs to imprison them are based upon figures published by the
Department of Justice, available through the sources mentioned
here. </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q3">3. How many people are actually killed by drugs?</a>
</h2>

<p>The number of drug deaths in the US in a typical year is as
follows: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Tobacco kills about 390,000. </li>
    <li>Alcohol kills about 80,000. </li>
    <li>Sidestream smoke from tobacco kills about 50,000. </li>
    <li>Cocaine kills about 2,200. </li>
    <li>Heroin kills about 2,000. </li>
    <li>Aspirin kills about 2,000. </li>
    <li>Marijuana kills 0. There has never been a recorded death
        due to marijuana at any time in US history. </li>
    <li>All illegal drugs combined kill about 4,500 people per
        year, or about one percent of the number killed by
        alcohol and tobacco. Tobacco kills more people each year
        than all of the people killed by all of the illegal drugs
        in the last century. </li>
</ul>

<p>Source: NIDA Research Monographs </p>

<p><img src="deaths1.gif" align="bottom" width="640" height="480">
</p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q4">4. Which drug causes the greatest burden on our
medical facilities? </a></h2>

<p>Alcohol and tobacco are the clear leaders. Some authorities
have estimated that up to forty percent of all hospital care in
the United States is for conditions related to alcohol. </p>

<p>As a medical hazard, few drugs can compete with alcohol or
tobacco on any scale. A study at Rockefeller University in 1967
concluded that &quot;Tobacco is unquestionably more hazardous to
the health than heroin.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q5">5. Which drugs are the most addictive? </a></h2>

<p>This is a difficult question to answer because it depends upon
a lot of factors in both the drug and the person who uses it. In
an attempt to define clearly what is meant by addiction, and
which drugs are the most addictive, Dr. Jack E. Henningfield of
the National Institute on Drug Abuse and Dr. Neal L. Benowitz of
the University of California at San Francisco ranked six
psychoactive substances on five criteria. </p>

<ul>
    <li>Withdrawal -- The severity of withdrawal symptoms
        produced by stopping the use of the drug. </li>
    <li>Reinforcement -- The drug's tendency to induce users to
        take it again and again. </li>
    <li>Tolerance -- The user's need to have ever-increasing
        doses to get the same effect. </li>
    <li>Dependence -- The difficulty in quitting, or staying off
        the drug, the number of users who eventually become
        dependent </li>
    <li>Intoxication -- The degree of intoxication produced by
        the drug in typical use. </li>
</ul>

<p>The tables listed below show the rankings given for each of
the drugs. Overall, their evaluations for the drugs are very
consistent. It is notable that marijuana ranks below caffeine in
most addictive criteria, while alcohol and tobacco are near the
top of the scale in many areas. </p>

<p>The rating scale is from 1 to 6. 1 denotes the drug with the
strongest addictive tendencies, while 6 denotes the drug with the
least addictive tendencies. </p>

<p>HENNINGFIELD RATINGS </p>

<hr>

<pre width="132">
<font size="2"><b>Substance<font face="Courier New"></b>   <b>Withdrawal</b>   <b>Reinforcement   Tolerance   Dependence  Intoxication 
</b>Nicotine         3             4             2           1            5       

Heroin           2             2             1           2            2       

Cocaine          4             1             4           3            3       

Alcohol          1             3             3           4            1       

Caffeine         5             6             5           5            6       

Marijuana        6             5             6           6            4       

</font></font></pre>

<hr>

<p>BENOWITZ RATINGS </p>

<hr>

<pre width="132">
<font size="2"><b>Substance<font face="Courier New"></b>   <b>Withdrawal</b>   Reinforcement   Tolerance   Dependence  Intoxication 

Nicotine        3*             4             4           1            6       

Heroin           2             2             2           2            2       

Cocaine         3*             1             1           3            3       

Alcohol          1             3             4           4            1       

Caffeine         4             5             3           5            5       

Marijuana        5             6             5           6            4       

</font></font></pre>

<hr>

<p>*equal ratings </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q6">6. Do illegal drugs cause violent crime? </a></h2>

<ul>
    <li>Of all psychoactive substances, alcohol is the only one
        whose consumption has been shown to commonly increase
        aggression. After large doses of amphetamines, cocaine,
        LSD, and PCP, certain individuals may experience violent
        outbursts, probably because of preexisting psychosis.
        Research is needed on the pharmacological effects of
        crack, which enters the brain more directly than cocaine
        used in other forms. </li>
</ul>

<ul>
    <li>Alcohol drinking and violence are linked through
        pharmacological effects on behavior, through expectations
        that heavy drinking and violence go together in certain
        settings, and through patterns of binge drinking and
        fighting that sometimes develop in adolescence. . . . </li>
</ul>

<ul>
    <li>Illegal drugs and violence are linked primarily through
        drug marketing: disputes among rival distributors,
        arguments and robberies involving buyers and sellers,
        property crimes committed to raise drug money and, more
        speculatively, social and economic interactions between
        the illegal markets and the surrounding communities. </li>
</ul>

<p><a href="../GOVPUBS/psycviol.htm">Psychoactive Substances and
Violence</a><i>, by Jeffrey A. Roth, Department of Justice
Series: Research in Brief, Published: February 1994</i> </p>

<p>All major authorities agree that the vast majority of
drug-related violent crime is caused by the prohibition against
drugs, rather than the drugs themselves. This was the same
situation which was true during alcohol Prohibition. Alcohol
Prohibition gave rise to a violent criminal organization. Violent
crime dropped 65 percent in the year Prohibition was repealed. </p>

<p>There are about 25,000 homicides in the United States each
year. A study of 414 homicides in New York City at the height of
the crack epidemic showed that only three murders, less than one
percent, could be attributed to the behavioral effects of cocaine
or crack. Of these, two were victim-precipitated. For example,
one homicide victim tried to rape someone who was high on crack
and got killed in the process. </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q7">7. Can we win the war on drugs this way? </a></h2>

<p>We could win the war on drugs if we could be successful in at
least one of three areas: </p>

<h3><img src="../GRAPHICS/subbutto.gif" align="bottom" width="18"
height="15">We could stop drug production in other countries. </h3>

<p>On December 28, 1992 ABC Television aired a major special on
the drug war in Bolivia which, according to the Bush
Administration, is our &quot;best hope&quot; for winning the drug
war in South America. They concluded decisively that there was no
hope and that the war on drug production has already been lost. </p>

<p>By the US Federal Government's own estimates, the entire
United States consumption of illegal drugs could be supplied by
approximately one percent of the worldwide drug crop. In their
best year, US Drug Enforcement Agents working together with
foreign governments seized about one percent of the worldwide
drug crop, leaving 99 percent free to supply the US. The US
Government also states that, in the unlikely event that drug
production was stopped in South America, several countries would
suffer a major economic collapse. </p>

<p>There is no credible evidence anywhere to suggest that there
is any possibility that drug production can be eliminated in
other countries. </p>

<p>&quot;Peter Jennings Reporting: The Cocaine War, Lost in
Bolivia,&quot; ABC News, December 28, 1993 </p>

<p>US Department of State, Bureau of International Narcotics
Matters, <u>International Narcotics Control Strategy Report</u>
(INCSR) (Washington: US Department of State, April, 1993 </p>

<h3><img src="../GRAPHICS/subbutto.gif" align="bottom" width="18"
height="15">We could stop drugs at the border. </h3>

<p>No. Any examination of the statistics regarding border
interdiction shows quite clearly that border interdiction is an
expensive failure. In 1990, the General Accounting Office
completed a major study on border interdiction. They reported
that border interdiction was a waste of money and that no
conceivable increase in funding or effort would make it any
better. </p>

<p>In 1988, Stirling Johson, the Federal prosecutor for New York,
stated that the police would have to increase drug seizures by at
least 1,400 percent to have any impact at all on the drug market,
assuming there were no corresponding increases in production.
That was before the police busted twenty tons of cocaine in a
single location and had to revise all their estimates of the
cocaine market upward. </p>

<p>The best Federal Government evidence has concluded that there
is no way to stop, or even greatly reduce, either production of
drugs in foreign countries or the smuggling of drugs into the US.
</p>

<p>There is no credible evidence anywhere that we could stop, or
even greatly reduce, the flow of drugs across our borders. In
fact, all of the Federal Government's own evidence shows that
this is impossible and it is a waste of money to try. </p>

<p><u>Sealing the Borders: The Effects of Increased Military
Participation in Drug Interdiction</u>, Peter Reuter, The Rand
Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 1988 </p>

<p>&quot;Drug Control: Impact of the Department of Defense's
Detection and Monitoring on Cocaine Flows,&quot; General
Accounting Office, September 19, 1991 </p>

<h3><img src="../GRAPHICS/subbutto.gif" align="bottom" width="18"
height="15">We could stop the sale of drugs within the United
States, </h3>

<p>The first question to address is how many drug dealers are
there? Under the law, all drug users are drug dealers because the
laws in most states state that any distribution of illegal drugs
is considered a sale, regardless of whether there is a profit or
monetary interest involved. Therefore, under the law, anyone who
ever passed a joint to the next person at a rock concert is a
&quot;drug dealer&quot;. If we use the strict legal definition of
a &quot;dealer&quot; then there are somewhere between 12 and 40
million drug dealers in the United States. </p>

<p>We might use a more restricted definition and assume that we
will imprison only the drug dealers who distribute drugs on a
regular basis. Research has long established that most drug sales
are between friends who have known each other for a long time.
Still, under this tighter definition, most drug users would be
classed as &quot;drug dealers&quot; and we are left with the same
problem of potentially incarcerating tens of millions of
Americans. </p>

<p>No. Most of the prisons and jails in the United States are
already far in excess of their planned capacity and correctional
institutions in 24 states are under Federal court order to
release prisoners. Arresting all of the drug dealers would
require construction of at least five new prison beds for every
one which now exists, assuming that no new drug dealers came
along to fill the gap. </p>

<p>In September, 1992 Sheriff Sherman Block announced that he
would release 4,000 prisoners, about twenty percent of the total
Los Angeles County jail population, because there was no room to
keep them and no more tax dollars to build more jails. For every
person who goes to jail from now on, another one will be
released. Tough drug laws have done all they can do and they have
not solved the problem. The &quot;get-tough&quot; policy is over.
</p>

<p>There is no credible evidence anywhere that we could stop, or
even greatly reduce, the sale of drugs within the United States.
In fact, all of the Federal Government's own evidence shows that
this is impossible and not only is it a waste of money to try,
but it actually does more harm than if we did nothing at all. </p>

<p>Many sources, including the list of major studies and Sterling
Johnson, Federal Prosecutor for the District of New York, in
testimony before the House Select Committee on Narcotics and Drug
Abuse, September, 1988. </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q8">8. How many millions of people will have to go
to prison?</a> </h2>

<p>There are currently about 1.5 million people in state and
Federal prisons and jails throughout the United States. At the
current time, at least 24 states are under Federal court orders
to relieve prison overcrowding. </p>

<p>The following chart shows the growth of the US prison
population since 1960. The US prison population was relatively
stable from about 1926, when figures were first compiled, through
1970. After this point, the effects of Nixon's war against drugs,
and later the Reagan and Bush war against drugs, produced a
dramatic increase in the number of prisoners. </p>

<p><img src="prisnrs.gif" align="bottom" width="640" height="480">
</p>

<p>There are an estimated thirty to forty million people who have
used illegal drugs in the last year. If we imprisoned all of
them, we would have to build a prison large enough to hold the
combined populations of California, Arizona, and New Mexico. The
total cost to imprison them for five years, including the costs
of arrest and prosecution would be roughly ten to fifteen
trillion dollars, or about ten times the total Federal annual
budget. This does not include the related costs to society which
would be caused by the imprisonment of millions of gainfully
employed, tax-paying citizens. </p>

<p>There doesn't seem to be any clear answer to this question. I
have asked public officials of all kinds, including law
enforcement officers, elected officials and all three of the US
Federal Drug Czars. To date, the only person who has ever replied
with an actual numerical estimate is Michael Levine, one of the
DEA's former top agents. He estimated that the optimum number of
drug offenders to put in prison would be about 2.7 million -- in
addition to the people who are currently in prison. His
assumption, he said, was that we would put all of the addicts in
prison, and he estimated the number of addicts at about 2.7
million, based on other government figures. Mr. Levine's plan
would require that, for every prison cell which now exists, we
would have to build three more just like it. He did not say what
he would do about the fact that even this plan would leave tens
of millions of recreational drug users free to continue their
drug use with little fear of prosecution. </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q9">9. What does it cost to put a single drug dealer
in jail? </a></h2>

<p>The cost to put a single drug dealer in jail is about
$450,000, composed of the following: </p>

<p>The cost for arrest and conviction is about $150,000. </p>

<p>The cost for an additional prison bed is about $50,000 to
$150,000, depending upon the jurisdiction. </p>

<p>It costs about $30,000 per year to house a prisoner. With an
average sentence of 5 years, that adds up to another $150,000. </p>

<p>The same $450,000 can provide treatment or education for about
200 people. In addition, putting a person in prison produces
about fifteen dollars in related welfare costs, for every dollar
spent on incarceration. Every dollar spent on treatment and
education saves about five dollars in related welfare costs. </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q10">10. What does this drug policy do to the black
community? </a></h2>

<p>At the present time, one-fourth of all of the young black men
in America are either in prison or on parole. Most of them were
arrested on non-violent drug charges. </p>

<p>In Washington, DC, the Bush administration's
&quot;demonstration&quot; city, half of all of the black men in
the city are currently in jail or on parole. More than ninety
percent have arrest records. The same is true of inner city black
men in Baltimore, New York, New Jersey, and Florida. </p>

<p>Two-thirds of all of today's black male high school students
will be dead, disabled, or in prison before their thirtieth
birthday. The majority will go to prison because of non-violent
drug charges. For every black man who goes to college, three will
go to prison. </p>

<p>By the year 2000, about half of all black men in America will
have gone to prison. Most of them will go to prison for
non-violent drug charges. Most of those who go to prison will be
released into society again. Because they are black men with a
prison record, they will be permanently unemployable. </p>

<p>&quot;The Prevalence of Imprisonment,&quot; US Department of
Justice, 1980, and The Sourcebook of Criminal Justice Statistics.
</p>

<p>&quot;Incarceration of Minorities,&quot; The Sentencing
Project, Washington, DC, 1992 </p>

<p>Employment Problems of Released Prisoners, Department of
Justice, Bureau of Prisons, 1992 </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q11">11. How does our policy compare with the
policies of other countries?</a> </h2>

<p>Europe is beginning to form uniform drug laws as a result of
European unification. Europe is decriminalizing drugs along the
lines of the programs used in England and the Netherlands. Most
of the countries have already approved the Frankfort Accord,
which adopts decriminalization as the primary approach to drugs. </p>

<p>Let's compare the results of two roughly comparable major
cities which both have a drug problem. The cities are New York,
and Liverpool, England. </p>

<ul>
    <li>In New York, heroin and cocaine addicts suffer from
        tremendous medical problems. In Liverpool, England, most
        heroin and cocaine addicts suffer few medical problems. </li>
    <li>In New York, most drug addicts are unemployed criminals.
        In Liverpool, most drug addicts are gainfully employed
        taxpayers. </li>
    <li>In New York, crime committed by drug addicts is a major
        problem. In Liverpool, it is a very minor problem. </li>
    <li>In New York, drug addicts often have their children taken
        away and live under miserable conditions. In Liverpool,
        most addicts live with their families in stable homes and
        manage to raise healthy, well-adjusted children. </li>
    <li>In New York, thousands of babies are permanently damaged
        every year by their mother's drug use. In Liverpool,
        health authorities report no cases of harm to infants as
        a result of their mother's drug use. </li>
    <li>In New York, sixty percent of all intravenous drug users
        are infected with AIDS, and they are a major cause of the
        spread of AIDS. In Liverpool, only one percent of the
        intravenous drug users are infected with AIDS and they
        are a very minor source of infection for the rest of the
        population. </li>
    <li>In the United States, drug use is illegal and the police
        hunt down drug users to throw them in prison. Four
        thousand people died from illegal drugs in the US last
        year and we now have more than 600,000 people in prison
        on drug charges. </li>
    <li>In Liverpool, England, the police do not arrest drug
        users any more. Instead, health care workers seek them
        out and encourage them to come in for counseling and
        medical treatment. Both counseling and medical treatment
        are provided on demand. The medical treatment often
        includes maintenance doses of narcotics under the
        management of a physician. </li>
</ul>

<p>Liverpool, England, has adopted the same approach as the
Netherlands and has had substantially the same results. They both
chose decriminalizatiion. </p>

<p>Many sources, including &quot;Rx Drugs&quot; Sixty Minutes,
December 27, 1992. </p>

<p>For additional information and resources on the situation in
Europe, see <a href="http://www.xs4all.nl/~mlap/">DrugText</a> </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q12">12. Do the illegal drugs have any legitimate
uses?</a> </h2>

<p>Heroin is a powerful pain-killer and could be used to control
extreme chronic pain or the pain of severe diseases, such as
cancer. The medical literature shows that heroin is significantly
less hazardous than most of the drugs which are given in its
place. </p>

<p>Cocaine is used as a topical anesthetic in medicine. </p>

<p>There are about 50,000 products which can be made from the
marijuana (hemp) plant. It has been used since the dawn of
history for the widest variety of uses. These uses include
fibers, fuels, materials, and medicine. The first American laws
regarding marijuana were passed in the 1700's and required
farmers to grow hemp (marijuana) because of its tremendous
commercial value for dozens of uses. It was grown throughout the
United States as a commercial product well into the 1940's. It
was made illegal in 1937 largely as a result of pressure from oil
and chemical companies who feared the competition from marijuana.
Despite the laws, during World War II marijuana was considered so
vital to the national interest that the US Government exempted
farmers from military duty if they grew marijuana. Local 4-H
clubs were encouraged to have their members grow marijuana and
the US Government produced a film called &quot;Hemp for
Victory&quot;' </p>

<p>Marijuana produces fibers which are ideal for ropes, cloth,
paper, and dozens of other products. The fiber is unusually
strong, soft, absorbent and cheap to produce. If we grew
marijuana solely for paper production, we could completely
eliminate cutting forests for paper. Marijuana produces eighty
times as much usable fiber per acre as a comparable stand of
forest. </p>

<p>Marijuana can produce several different kinds of fuel. In the
1800's and 1900's hempseed oil was the primary source of fuel in
the United States and was commonly used for lamps and other oil
energy needs. The diesel engine was originally designed to run on
marijuana oil because Rudolf Diesel assumed that it would be the
most common fuel. Mairjuana is also the most efficient plant for
the production of methanol. It is estimated that, in one form or
another, marijuana grown in the United States could provide up to
ninety percent of the nation's entire energy needs. </p>

<p>Marijuana is useful for a wide variety of medical problems
and, according the the Drug Enforcement Administration's Chief
Administrative Law Judge, &quot;marijuana is probably the safest
therapeutically active substance known to man,&quot; and &quot;it
is safer than many of the foods we commonly eat.&quot; Marijuana
is often the most effective treatment for chronic pain, glaucoma,
nausea from chemotherapy, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, and other
medical conditions. </p>

<p>Marijuana can also be used to restore the life of depleted
farmland. It grows quite readily under even extreme conditions
and actually replenishes and extends the life of the soil in
which it is grown. Depleted soil is now becoming a major problem
in some of our most productive agricultural farmlands, such as
the Central Valley of California. For much of this farmland,
marijuana could be the cheapest and most effective remedy. </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q14">13. Does marijuana lead to harder drugs?</a> </h2>

<p>There is no evidence that smoking marijuana leads to the use
of harder drugs. In the first place, it is chemically illogical
that the consumption of any drug could give someone the craving
for another drug they have never had. </p>

<p>When the Marihuana Tax Act was first passed in 1937, Harry
Anslinger, then head of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics testified
before Congress and was asked specifically if there was any
association between the use of marijuana and the use of harder
drugs. He replied specifically that there was no such connection
and that the users of the different types of drugs commonly did
not associate with each other. </p>

<p>This myth arose in the 1950's when it became apparent that the
old motives for the law against marijuana would no longer be
viable. It was then that Anslinger contradicted his earlier
testimony and started saying that marijuana led to harder drugs.
This change occurred most prominently in the hearings for the
Boggs Act of 1951, after a series of doctors had just destroyed
everything Harry Anslinger had said about marijuana in 1937. </p>

<p>For Harry Anslinger's testimony, see the hearings for the <a
href="../hemp/taxact/taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act</a>. </p>

<p>For a short discussion of the origins of the
&quot;gateway&quot; myth and how it arose at the hearings for the
Boggs Act see <a href="../history/whiteb1.htm">The History of the
Drug Laws</a>, a short speech by Professor Charles Whitebread, of
USC Law School. </p>

<p>For a more complete discussion of some of these issues, please
see <a href="mjgate.htm">The Myth of Marijuana's Gateway Effect</a>
by John P. Morgan, M.D. and Lynn Zimmer, Ph.D. </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2>14. What should we do about drugs? </h2>

<p>The overwhelming weight of the scholarly evidence on drug
policy supports decriminalization. Every major study of drug
policy in history has recommended a non-criminal approach. This
is irrefutable. </p>

<p>I recommend that you start with: <a
href="../LIBRARY/cureport.htm">The Consumers Union Report on
Licit and Illicit Drugs</a>, published by the Editors of Consumer
Reports Magazine. </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q15">15.</a> How dangerous is marijuana, really? </h2>

<p>Not very. The DEA's own Chief Administrative Law Judge, after
listening to the evidence for two years concluded that marijuana
in its natural form is safer than many of the foods we commonly
eat. More detailed information can be found in the following
links: </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22"
height="22"><a href="studies/nc/ncmenu.htm">Report of the
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse.</a> This is the
largest study of drugs and drug policy ever conducted by the US
Federal Government. It contains detailed information on all
aspects of the medical effects of marijuana. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22"
height="22"> <a
href="http://www.commonlink.com/~olsen/MEDICAL/YOUNG/young.html">DEA
Docket No. 86-22, Sept. 6, 1988</a>, </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22"
height="22"><a href="mjfaq1.htm">ANSWERS TO FREQUENTLY ASKED
QUESTIONS </a>ABOUT MARIJUANA USE </p>

<p>This is an excellent summary of many of the questions
regarding marijuana. It is very well-documented. Contributed by
Christopher Reeve. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22"
height="22"><a href="../LIBRARY/marij.htm">PHARMACOLOGY OF
MARIJUANA: JUST ANOTHER SEDATIVE </a>by Frederick H. Meyers,
M.D., Professor of Pharmacology, University of California, San
Francisco, Ca. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22"
height="22"><a href="../LIBRARY/slikker.htm">A Review of the
Scientific Literature Re Amotivational Syndrome </a></p>

<p>This is an excellent synopsis of the information regarding the
&quot;amotivational syndrome&quot; and marijuana. Complete with
citations for further reference. Contributed by Brian of DRCNet. </p>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q16">16.</a> Would &quot;legalization&quot; cost
more than it saves? </h2>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>No. The best analysis done to date by any Federal official
shows that &quot;legalization&quot; of the now illegal drugs
would result in a net $37 Billion annual savings. This estimate
is considered conservative. That is, it is likely that the
savings would be more. </p>

<p><a href="savings.htm">Federal Financial Analysis of
Legalization of Drugs</a> </p>

<p>This Federal financial analysis of legalization comes from
Theodore R. Vallance, Former chief of the Planning Branch of the
National Institutes of Mental Health. His main professional
effort for many years was directed at just this sort of analysis.
The analysis was published in the 7-10-95 issue of National
Review. </p>

<pre>
<b><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"></b></pre>

<pre><font size="2"><i>Reductions (in millions of $)           From            To              Saving  </i></font></pre>

<pre><font size="2"><i>Direct
<font face="Courier New"></i>Law Enforcement                        13,203          3,300           9,903
*Interdiction costs                     2,200           0               2,200
*International anti-drug                768             384             384
*OCDETF (Organized Crime &amp; Drug         399             40              359
          Enforcement Task Force)
ONDCP (the &quot;drug czar&quot;)                  69              17              52</font></font></pre>

<pre><font size="2"><i>Indirect
</i>Victims of Crime                        842             210             632
Incarceration                           4,434           887             3,547
Crime careers                           13,976          2,679           11,297
                                                                        ________
<i>Subtotal</i>                                                                28,374
Less increase in prevention research and service                        (3,572)
Less increase in treatment research and service                         (2,802)
                                                                        ________
<i>Subtotal</i>                                                                22,000
Plus net income from drug taxes                                         15,000
                                                                        ________
<i>Total</i>                                                                   37,000
                                                                        
*1993 Figures. 
</font>
</pre>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<h2><a name="q17">17.</a> How many are in prison and what are
they in for? </h2>

<p><img src="../GRAPHICS/blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p><b>How many are in prison?</b> </p>

<p>The Department of Justice announced that there are now 1.5
million people in prisons across the United States? </p>

<p><b>Who are they?</b> </p>

<p><b>What are they in for?</b> </p>

<p><b>TYPE OF OFFENSE (Sentenced Pop. Only)</b> - Federal
Prisoners </p>

<p>Drug Offenses 59.6% </p>

<p>Robbery 9.8% </p>

<p>Property Offenses 5.5% </p>

<p>Extortion, Fraud, Bribery 6.8% </p>

<p>Violent Offenses 2.7% </p>

<p>Firearms, Explosives, Arson 8.6% </p>

<p>White Collar 1.0% </p>

<p>Immigration 2.8% </p>

<p>Courts or Corrections 0.8% </p>

<p>National Security 0.1% </p>

<p>Continuing Criminal Enterprise 0.8% </p>

<p>Miscellaneous 1.5% </p>

<p><a href="http://gopher.usdoj.gov/bop/bop.html">Federal Bureau
of Prisons Home Page</a> </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_navbar.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="studies/studies.htm">Major Studies</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="60738" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>