
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-50</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B014-108</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/alcohol/ANDREAE.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122042429 text/html 17357
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:24:23 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:36:12 GMT
Content-length: 17139
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>A Glimpse Behind the Mask of Prohibition</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="K. Austin Kerr">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_alcohol_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="alcohol.htm">Alcohol</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="45071" -->

<h1>&quot;A Glimpse behind the Mask of Prohibition&quot;</h1>

<p>by Percy Andreae </p>

<h1>in <i>The Prohibition Movement in its Broader Bearings upon
Our Social, Commercial, and Religious Liberties</i></h1>

<p>(Chicago: Felix Mendelsohn, 1915): 9-19 </p>

<p>Somewhere in the Bible it is said: &quot;If thy right hand
offend thee, cut it off.&quot; I used to think the remedy
somewhat radical. But to-day, being imbued with the wisdom of the
prohibitionist, I have to acknowledge that, if the Bible in
general, and that passage in it in particular, has a fault, it
lies in its ultra-conservativeness. What? Merely cut off my own
right hand if it offend me? What business have my neighbors to
keep their right hands if I am not able to make mine behave
itself ? Off with the lot of them! Let there be no right hands;
then I am certain that mine won't land me in trouble. </p>

<p>I have met many active prohibitionists, both in this and in
other countries, all of them thoroughly in earnest. In some
instances I have found that their allegiance to the cause of
prohibition took its origin in the fact that some near relative
or friend had succumbed to over-indulgence in liquor. In one or
two cases the man himself had been a victim of this weakness, and
had come to the conclusion, firstly that every one else was
constituted as he was, and, therefore, liable to the same danger;
and secondly, that unless every one were prevented from drinking,
he would not be secure from the temptation to do so himself. </p>

<p>This is one class of prohibitionists. The other, and by far
the larger class, is made up of religious zealots, to whom
prohibition is a word having at bottom a far wider application
than that which is generally attributed to it. The liquor
question, if there really is such a question per se, is merely
put forth by them as a means to an end, an incidental factor in a
fight which has for its object the supremacy of a certain form of
religious faith. The belief of many of these people is that the
Creator frowns upon enjoyment of any and every kind, and that he
has merely endowed us with certain desires and capacities for
pleasure in order to give us an opportunity to please Him by
resisting them. They are, of course, perfectly entitled to this
belief, though some of us may consider it eccentric and somewhat
in the nature of a libel on the Almighty. But are they privileged
to force that belief on all their fellow beings? That, in
substance, is the question that is involved in the present-day
prohibition movement. </p>

<p>For it is all nonsense to suppose that because, perhaps, one
in a hundred or so of human beings is too weak to resist the
temptation of over-indulging in drink-or of over-indulging in
anything else, for the matter of that-=therefore all mankind is
going to forego the right to indulge in that enjoyment in
moderation. the leaders of the so-called prohibition movement
know as well as you and I do that you can no more prevent an
individual from taking a drink if he be so inclined than your can
prevent him from scratching himself if he itches. They object to
the existence of the saloon, not, bear in mind, to that of the
badly conducted saloon, but to that of the well-regulated, decent
saloon, and wherever they succeed in destroying the latter, their
object, which is the manifestation of their political power, is
attained. That for every decent, well-ordered saloon they
destroy, there springs up a dive, or speak-easy, or blind tiger,
or whatever other name it may be known by, and the dispensing of
drink continues as merrily as before, doesn't disturb them at
all. They make the sale of liquor a crime, but steadily refuse to
make its purchase and consumption an offense. Time and again the
industries affected by this apparently senseless crusade have
endeavored to have laws passed making dry territories really dry
by providing for the punishment of the man who buys drink as well
as the man who sells it. But every such attempt has been fiercely
opposed by the prohibition leaders. And why? Because they know
only too well that the first attempt to really prohibit drinking
would put an end to their power forever. They know that 80 per
cent of those who, partly by coercion, partly from sentiment,
vote dry, are perfectly willing to restrict the right of the
remaining 20 per cent to obtain drink, but that they are not
willing to sacrifice that right for themselves. </p>

<p>And so the farce called prohibition goes on, and will continue
to go on as long as it brings grist to the mill of the managers
who are producing it. But the farce conceals something far more
serious than that which is apparent to the public on the face of
it. Prohibition is merely the title of the movement. Its real
purpose is of a religious, sectarian character, and this applies
not only to the movement in America, but to the same movement in
England, a fact which, strangely enough, has rarely, if at all,
been recognized by those who have dealt with the question in the
public press. </p>

<p>If there is any one who doubts the truth of this statement,
let me put this to him: How many Roman Catholics are
prohibitionists? How many Jews, the most temperate race on earth,
are to be found in the ranks of prohibition? Or Lutherans? Or
German Protestants generally? What is the proportion of
Episcopalians to that of Methodists, Baptists and Presbyterians,
and the like, in the active prohibition army? The answer to these
questions will, I venture to say, prove conclusively the
assertion that the fight for prohibition is synonymous with the
fight of a certain religious sect, or group of religious sects,
for the supremacy of its ideas. In England it is the
Nonconformists, which is in that country the generic name for the
same sects, who are fighting the fight, and the suppression of
liquor there is no more the ultimate end they have in view than
it is here in America. It is the fads and restrictions that are
part and parcel of their lugubrious notion of Godworship which
they eventually hope to impose upon the rest of humanity; a
Sunday without a smile, no games, no recreation, no pleasures, no
music, card-playing tabooed, dancing anathematized, the beauties
of art decried as impure-in short, this world reduced to a
barren, forbidding wilderness in which we, its inhabitants, are
to pass our time contemplating the joys of the next. Rather
problematical joys, by the way, if we are to suppose we shall
worship God in the next world in the same somber way as we are
called upon by these worthies to do in this. </p>

<p>To my mind, and that of many others, the hearty, happy laugh
of a human being on a sunny Sunday is music sweeter to the ears
of that being's Creator than all the groaning and moanings, and <i>misericordias
</i>that rise to heaven from the lips of those who would deprive
us altogether of the faculty and the privilege of mirth. That
some overdo hilarity and become coarse and offensive, goes
without saying. There are people without the sense of proportion
or propriety in all matters. Yet none of us think of abolishing
pleasures because a few do not know how to enjoy them in
moderation and with decency, and become an offense to their
neighbors. </p>

<p>The drink evil has existed from time immemorial, just as
sexual excess has, and all other vices to which mankind is and
always will be more or less prone, though less in proportion as
education progresses and the benefits of civilization increased
Sexual excess, curiously enough, has never interested our hyper-
religious friends, the prohibitionists, in anything like the
degree that the vice of excessive drinking does. Perhaps this is
because the best of us have our pet aversions and our pet
weaknesses. Yet this particular vice has produced more evil
results to the human race than all other vices combined, and, in
spite of it, mankind, thanks not to prohibitive laws and
restrictive legislation, but to the forward strides of knowledge
and to patient and intelligent education, is to-day ten times
sounder in body and healthier in mind than it ever was in the
world's history. </p>

<p>Now, if the habit of drinking to excess were a growing one, as
our prohibitionist friends claim that it is, we should to-day,
instead of discussing this question with more or less
intelligence, not be here at all to argue it; for the evil, such
as it is, has existed for so many ages that, if it were as
general and as contagious as is claimed, and its results as
far-reaching as they are painted, the human race would have been
destroyed by it long ago. Of course, the contrary is the case.
The world has progressed in this as in all other respects.
Compare, for instance, the drinking to-day with the drinking of a
thousand years ago, nay, of only a hundred odd years ago, when a
man, if he wanted to ape his so-called betters, did so by
contriving to be carried to bed every night &quot;drunk as a
lord.&quot; Has that condition of affairs been altered by
legislative measures restricting the right of the individual to
control himself ? No. It has been altered by that far greater
power, the moral force of education and the good example which
teaches mankind the very thing that prohibition would take from
it: the virtue of selfcontrol and moderation in all things. </p>

<p>And here we come to the vital distinction between the advocacy
of temperance and the advocacy of prohibition. Temperance and
self-control are convertible terms. Prohibition, or that which it
implies, is the direct negation of the term self-control. In
order to save the small percentage of men who are too weak to
resist their animal desires, it aims to put chains on every man,
the weak and the strong alike. And if this is proper in one
respect, why not in all respects? Yet, what would one think of a
proposition to keep all men locked up because a certain number
have a propensity to steal? Theoretically, perhaps, all crime or
vice could be stopped by chaining us all up as we chain up a wild
animal, and only allowing us to take exercise under proper
supervision and control. But while such a measure would check
crime, it would not eliminate the criminal. It is true, some
people are only kept from vice and crime by the fear of
punishment. Is not, indeed, the basis of some men's religiousness
nothing else but the fear of Divine punishment? The doctrines of
certain religious denominations not entirely unknown in the
prohibition camp make self respect, which is the foundation of
self-control and of all morality, a sin. They decry rather than
advocate it. They love to call themselves miserable, helpless
sinners, cringing before the flaming sword, and it is the flaming
sword, not the exercise of their own enlightened will, that keeps
them within decent bounds. Yet has this fear of eternal
punishment contributed one iota toward the intrinsic betterment
of the human being? If it had, would so many of our Christian
creeds have discarded it, admitting that it is the precepts of
religion, not its dark and dire threats, that make men truly
better and stronger within themselves to resist that which our
self-respect teaches us is bad and harmful? The growth of
self-respect in man, with its outward manifestation,
self-control, is the growth of civilization. If we are to be
allowed to exercise it no longer, it must die in us from want of
nutrition, and men must become savages once more, fretting now at
their chains, which they will break as inevitably as the sun will
rise to-morrow and herald a new day. </p>

<p>I consider the danger which threatens civilized society from
the growing power of a sect whose views on prohibition are merely
an exemplification of their general low estimate of man's ability
to rise to higher things -by his own volition to be of infinitely
greater consequence than the danger that, in putting their narrow
theories to the test, a few billions of invested property will be
destroyed, a number of great wealth-producing industries wiped
out, the rate of individual taxation largely increased, and a
million or so of struggling wage earners doomed to face
starvation. These latter considerations, of course, must appeal
to every thinking mans but what are they compared with the
greater questions involved? Already the government of our State,
and indeed of a good many other States, has passed practically
into the hands of a few preacher-politicians of a certain creed.
With the machine they have built up, by appealing to the
emotional weaknesses of the more or less unintelligent masses,
they have lifted themselves on to a pedestal of power that has
enabled them to dictate legislation or defeat it at their will,
to usurp the functions of the governing head of the State and
actually induce him to delegate to them the appointive powers
vested in him by the Constitution. When a Governor elected by the
popular vote admits, as was recently the case, that he can not
appoint a man to one of the most important offices of the State
without the indorsement of the irresponsible leader of a certain
semi-religious movement, and when he submits to this same
personage for correction and amendment his recommendation to the
legislative body, there can scarcely be any doubt left in any
reasonable mind as to the extent of the power wielded by this
leader, or as to the uses he and those behind him intend putting
it to. </p>

<p>And what does it all mean? It means that government by emotion
is to be substituted for government by reason, and government by
emotion, of which history affords many examples, is, according to
the testimony of all ages, the most dangerous and pernicious of
ail forms of government. It has already crept into the
legislative assemblies of most of the States of the Union, and is
being craftily fostered by those who know how easily it can be
made available for their purposes-purposes to the furtherance of
which cool reason would never lend itself. Prohibition is but one
of its fruits, and the hand that is plucking this fruit is the
same hand of intolerance that drove forth certain of our
forefathers from the land of their birth to seek the sheltering
freedom of these shores. </p>

<p>What a strange reversal of conditions! The intolerants of a
few hundred years ago are the upholders of liberty to-day, while
those they once persecuted, having multiplied by grace of the
very liberty that has so long sheltered them here, are now
planning to impose the tyranny of their narrow creed upon the
descendants of their persecutors of yore. </p>

<p>Let the greater public, which is, after all, the arbiter of
the country's destinies, pause and ponder these things before
they are allowed to progress too far. Prohibition, though it must
callse, and is already causing, incalculable damage, may never
succeed in this country; but that which is behind it, as the
catapults and the cannon were behind the battering rams in the
battles of olden days, is certain to succeed unless timely
measures of prevention are resorted to; and if it does succeed,
we shall witness the enthronement of a monarch in this land of
liberty compared with whose autocracy the autocracy of the
Russian Czar is a mere trifle. </p>

<p>The name of this monarch is Religious Intolerance. </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_alcohol_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="alcohol.htm">Alcohol</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="45071" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>