
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B046-230</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncc3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022212 text/html 105438
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:21:58 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:07 GMT
Content-length: 105219
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Social Impact of Marihuana Use</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse</b> </p>

<p><b>Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding</b> </p>

<p><b>Chapter III</b> </p>

<h1>Social Impact of marihuana use<br>
</h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<p><font size="2">&quot;Man is a creature who lives not upon
bread alone but principally by catchwords.&quot; -Robert Louis
Stevenson,</font> </p>

<p><font size="2"><i>Virginia Puerisque (1881) <br>
</i></font></p>

<hr>

<p>Implicit in existing social and legal policy toward marihuana
is the view that society suffers in some way from use of the
drug. When the widespread practice of marihuana smoking appeared
in the United States in the early decades of the 20th century,
the medical, law enforcement, newspaper, and legislative
communities immediately indicted the drug. They assumed that the
drug posed serious dangers to individual health; but more
importantly, they viewed it as a menace to the public order.
Crime, insanity and idleness were thought to be the inevitable
consequences of its use. </p>

<p>That some of these original fears were unfounded and that
others were exaggerated have been clear for many years. Yet, many
of these early beliefs continue to affect contemporary public
attitudes and concerns. Consequently, one of the Commission's
most important tasks is to evaluate carefully all data relevant
to the social impact of marihuana use. We must determine whether
and in what respects social concern is justified. What is myth
and what is reality? </p>

<p>The literature pertaining to -the presumed effects and
consequences of marihuana use still reveals a wide diversity of
opinion about social impact. Careful scrutiny is inhibited by the
prevalence of hearsay, rhetoric and undocumented assertions about
the effects and consequences of marihuana use. Nonetheless,
evidence is mounting and a number of significant trends have
recently emerged. In the previous Chapter we explored the
evidence regarding the nature and scope of contemporary marihuana
use, and the effects of the drug on the individual user. Now we
must consider the impact on society of behavior resulting from
use of marihuana. </p>

<p>In dealing with the behavioral consequences of marihuana, use,
the Commission has made, a concerted effort to review and
evaluate the enormous body of existing popular and scientific
literature, and has itself initiated new empirical research,
including national surveys, retrospective studies and controlled
laboratory experiments. </p>

<p>Awareness of the difficulties involved in investigating an
inherently complex social phenomenon and applying its research
findings to policy decisions has fostered particular sensitivity
to the quality of previous and Commission-sponsored research. As
such, considerable attention was given to such basic research
questions as: </p>

<p>What behavioral effects are most relevant in assessing the
consequences of marihuana use? </p>

<p>What measures produce the most valid data concerning given
effects? </p>

<p>What reliance should be placed on various research techniques,
such as self-reporting, controlled experiments, clinical
observations and statistical relationships? </p>

<p>What generalizations can be made from particular populations
studied? </p>

<p>What are the limits of given data in terms of inference.
interpredation and attribution of cause?<br>
</p>

<p>With respect to the Commission's own research program, the
process of selection and allocation of resources was indeed
difficult, and some areas of inquiry have undoubtedly been either
neglected or shortchanged. Nonetheless, we believe that the
studies undertaken and information gathered will add
significantly to our understanding of the conditions and
circumstances under which marihuana use is likely to affect
adversely the public safety, public health and welfare, and
dominant social order.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><b>Marihuana and Public Safety<br>
</b></p>

<p>The belief that marihuana is causally linked to crime and
other antisocial conduct first assumed prominence during the
1930's as the result of a concerted effort by governmental
agencies and the press to alert the American populace to the
dangers of marihuana use. Newspapers all over the country began
to publish lurid accounts of &quot;marihuana atrocities.&quot; In
the absence of adequate understanding of the effects of the drug,
these largely unsubstantiated stories profoundly influenced
public opinion and gave birth to the stereotype of the marihuana
user as physically aggressive, lacking in self-control,
irresponsible, mentally ill and, perhaps most alarming,
criminally inclined and dangerous. The combination of the
purported effects of the drug itself plus the belief that it was
used by unstable individuals seemed to constitute a significant
danger to public safety. </p>

<p>Now, more than 30 years later, many observers are skeptical
about the existence of a cause-effect relationship between
marihuana use and antisocial conduct.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>MARIHUANA AND CRIME <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Over the years, there have been several hypotheses about the
relationship between marihuana and antisocial conduct. The
earliest view was that marihuana causes or leads to the
commission of aggressive and violent criminal acts such as
murder, rape and assault. These acts are committed, it has been
argued, because marihuana allegedly produces a relaxation of
ordinary inhibitions, a weakening of impulse control and a
concomitant increase in aggressive tendencies while the user is
under its influence. </p>

<p>Marihuana's alleged criminogenic role is not always limited to
violent or aggressive behavior. Some commentators also postulate
that marihuana leads to or causes non-violent forms of criminal
or delinquent conduct, ranging from sexual promiscuity to grand
larceny. Underlying this second causal hypothesis are the
assumptions that marihuana frequently impairs judgment, distorts
reality and diminishes, at least temporarily, the user's sense of
personal and social responsibility. Regular or heavy use over an
extended period of time is felt to interfere, perhaps
irreversibly, with the orderly development of psychosocial and
moral maturity. </p>

<p>As indicated above, however, a growing uncertainty prevails
about ,the existence of a causal link between marihuana use and
antisocial conduct. In fact, recent surveys, including several
sponsored by the Commission, suggest that large segments of the
professional public, particularly the law enforcement and
criminal justice communities, are no longer willing to assert a,
cause-effect relationship but observe, instead, the existence of
a statistical association. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>The Issue of Cause and Effect<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The controversy over the cause-effect relationship between
marihuana use and criminal, violent or delinquent behavior poses
a number of serious problems for the investigators Proponents and
opponents of the causal view tend to rely on different kinds of
evidence and to call upon different types of experts, thereby
differing substantially in the kinds of information they accept
as relevant, reliable or valid. </p>

<p>Practitioners, such as police and probation officers for
example, frequently cite case examples in which apprehended
offenders are found to be in possession of marihuana at the time
of arrest. The mere presence of the drug or the fact that an
offender is a known user of marihuana is sometimes deemed
sufficient to establish a causal link between the marihuana and
the offense.* </p>

<p>Empiricists, on the other hand, would deny that the simple
presence of the drug constitutes a satisfactory demonstration of
a causal relationship between marihuana use and the crime in
question. They would defer, instead, to the results of empirical
studies designed explicitly to test the assertion. Essentially,
they emphasize that even if some offenders do use marihuana, an
equal or larger number of offenders do not, and there are
certainly large numbers of marihuana users in the
population-at-large who never engage in the kinds of antisocial
conduct deemed to be related to or caused by the use of the drug.
</p>

<p>Proving any positive and direct relationship, be it causal or
otherwise, between two inherently complex social phenomena is
fraught with enormous difficulties. The relationship of marihuana
use to crime, violence, aggression or juvenile delinquency
presents no exception. Before examining the evidence with respect
to the existence of a causal connection, certain basic
considerations deserve at least brief mention here. </p>

<p>To prove, the existence of a positive and direct relationship,
one would be required to demonstrate that the alleged offender
was, indeed, a marihuana, user; that he was under the influence
of the drug at the time he committed the offense; and that the
crime was directly attributable to the effects of the marihuana.
The kinds of evidence necessary to establish these facts are not
easy to obtain. </p>

<p>First, evidence of the use of marihuana by the accused is
generally dependent upon either direct admission of use, hearsay
evidence, or inferences derived from knowledge of possession
(that is, the offender was found to have marihuana on his person
or in his possession at the time of arrest). </p>

<p>Second, because no chemical tests presently exist outside the
laboratory to identify the presence of marihuana in the body of
the accused, it is difficult if not impossible to prove that the
offender was definitely under the influence of marihuana when he
committed the offense. </p>

<p>Third, in order to prove that the marihuana represented the
significant contributory or precipitating variable, all other
factors possibly related to the offense would have to be examined
and excluded. </p>

<p>The problems of validation are further compounded by
additional variations in behavior attributable to: (a) the
pharmacological potency of the drug; (b) possible adulteration of
the marihuana; (c) the interaction of marihuana with other drugs
simultaneously ingested; (d) differing individual response to
similar dosage levels; (e) the time-action function; (f) the
cumulative effect of marihuana use; and (g) various social,
psychological and situational variables such as set and setting,
individual expectations, personal predispositions or preexisting
impulse disorders. </p>

<p>Despite the inherent complexities of the issue and the
difficulties in securing reliable and valid evidence, a
relatively large body of research is now available pertaining to
the criminogenic effects of marihuana upon the individual and the
nature and extent to which the drug constitutes a danger to
public safety. In the following section, we present the available
evidence and assess the strength and direction of the alleged
relationships between marihuana use and violent or aggressive
behavior and also non-violent forms of criminal and delinquent
behavior.<br>
</p>

<p>*In the widely publicized Licata case of the 1930's. for
example, a 16-year-old cannabis user was charged with the ax
murder of his family and the offense was directly attributed to
the effects of marihuana. There was, however. no precise
information available regarding the use of marihuana in relation
to the crime. Nor. in the various accounts of the case, was there
generally any reference to the fact that several of the boy's
relatives had previously been committed to mental institutions;
that the police hall, about one year prior to the offense (and
presumably before the youth's alleged use of marihuana) attempted
to commit him for his bizarre behavior; or that shortly after the
crime, the boy began to exhibit the symptoms of paranoid
schizophrenia.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Marihuana and Violent Crime <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>As indicated earlier, the belief that marihuana causes or
leads to the commission of violent or aggressive acts first
emerged during the 1930's and became deeply embedded in the
public mind. Until recently, however, these beliefs were
generally based on the anecdotal case examples of law enforcement
authorities, a few clinical observations and several
quasi-experimental studies of selected populations comprised of
military offenders, convicted or institutionalized criminals or
delinquents and small groups of college students. Few efforts
were made to compare the incidence of violent or aggressive
behavior in representative samples of both user and non-user
populations. </p>

<p>Even in these early observations and investigations, however,
no substantial evidence existed of a causal connection between
the use of marihuana and the commission of violent or aggressive
acts. Indeed, if any relationship was indicated, it was not a
positive and direct causal connection but in inverse or negative
statistical correlation. </p>

<p>Rather than inducing violent -or aggressive behavior through
its purported effects of lowering inhibitions, weakening impulse
control and heightening aggressive tendencies, marihuana was
usually found to inhibit the expression of aggressive impulses by
pacifying the user, interfering with muscular coordination,
reducing psychomotor activities and generally producing states of
drowsiness lethargy, timidity and passivity. </p>

<p>In fact, only a small proportion of the marihuana users among
any group of criminals or delinquents known to the authorities
and appearing in study samples had ever been arrested or
convicted for such violent crimes as murder, forcible rape,
aggravated assaultor armed robbery. When these marihuana-using
offenders were compared with offenders who did not use marihuana,
the former were generally found to 'have committed less
aggressive behavior than the latter. </p>

<p>In an effort to accumulate data on the relationship between
marihuana use and aggressive or violent criminal behavior, the
Commission sponsored several studies designed to assess the
purported causal relationship. </p>

<p>First, the Commission wanted to tap the unique experience of
the law enforcement and criminal justice communities.
Representative samples of prosecuting attorneys, judges,
probation officers and court clinicians were asked their opinions
about the relationship between marihuana use and the commission
of aggressive or violent criminal acts. When asked to evaluate
the statement that &quot;most aggressive acts or crimes of
violence committed by persons who are known users of marihuana
occur when the offender is under the influence of
marihuana,&quot; three-quarters of the judges, probation officers
and clinicians indicated either that the statement was probably
untrue or that they were unsure of its accuracy. Of these three
groups, a greater proportion of clinicians (76.5%) thought the
statement false than did the probation officers (60%)and judges
(44.2%). </p>

<p>In a separate mail survey of the chief prosecuting attorneys
in the 50 states-the group which has often supported the causal
hypothesis-52% of the respondents stated that they either did not
believe or were uncertain of the truth of the proposition that
use of marihuana leads to aggressive behavior. </p>

<p>We have already noted that only a small fraction of the
offender populations in past studies were found to have been
arrested for crimes of violence. Similarly, in a
Commission-sponsored study of 1,776 16to-21-year-olds arrested in
five New York counties for marihuana law violations between 1965
and 1969, onlv a small percentage bad either previously or
subsequently come to the attention of authorities for such
offenses as assault or robbery. In fact, less than 1% of the
offenders in this sample had been arrested for these offenses
prior to their first marihuana arrest, and less than 3% were
known to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for these offenses
subsequent to their marihuana violation. </p>

<p>Perhaps more important than professional opinion or the
incidence of violent offenses in an offender population, however,
is the determination of the extent to which marihuana use is
related to violent or aggressive behavior in the general
population. </p>

<p>In a Commission-sponsored survey, face-to-face interviews were
conducted with a representative sample of 559 West Philadelphia
residents in order to ascertain the extent of marihuana use in
this heterogeneous population and the relative involvement of
marihuana users and nonusers in violent criminal behavior. In
corroboration of the earlier findings, the researchers found no
significant differences in the proportions of users and
non-users; who stated that they had committed any of the
aggressive or violent crimes enumerated. </p>

<p>Further, no findings indicated that marihuana was generally or
frequently used immediately prior to the commission of offenses
in the very small number of instances in which these offense's
did occur. In contrast, however, the aggressive and violent
offenders in this sample did report with significantly greater
frequency the use of alcohol within 24 hours of the offense in
question. </p>

<p>These findings should be considered in fight of an earlier
West Coast study of disadvantaged minority-group youthful
marihuana users, many of whom were raised in a combative and
aggressive social milieu similar to that found in several of the
West Philadelphia sampled neighborhoods. The data show that
marihuana users were much less likely to commit aggressive or
violent acts than were those who preferred amphetamines or
alcohol. They also show that most marihuana users were able to
condition themselves to avoid aggressive behavior even in the
face of provocation. In fact, marihuana was found to play a
significant role in youth's transition from a &quot;rowdy&quot;
to a &quot;cool,&quot; non-violent style. </p>

<p>The Commission is aware of the claim that a few emotionally
unstable or impulsive individuals have become particularly
aggressive or impulsive under the influence of marihuana. As we
have noted, some newspaper accounts have attributed sensational
homicides or sexual assaults to marihuana-induced transitory
psychotic states on the part of the user. No evidence exists,
however, to indicate that marihuana was responsible for
generating or creating excessive aggressiveness or impulsivity in
individuals having no prior history of impulse or personality
disorder. The most that can be said is that in those rare
instances, marihuana may have aggravated a preexisting condition.
</p>

<p>In sum, the weight of the evidence is that marihuana does not
cause violent or aggressive behavior, if anything, marihuana
generally serves to inhibit the expression of such behavior.
Marihuana-induced relaxation of inhibitions is not ordinarily
accompanied by an exaggeration of aggressive tendencies. </p>

<p>No evidence exists that marihuana use will cause or lead to
the commission of violent or aggressive behavior by the large
majority of psychologically and socially mature individuals in
the general population.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Marihuana and Non-Violent Crime<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>A second hypothesis reflecting the statements of significant
numbers of government officials is that marihuana plays a major
role in the commission of other, essentially non-violent, forms
of criminal and delinquent behavior. </p>

<p>In general, those espousing this more general cause-effect
relationship assume that the drug frequently produces, in
addition to the lowering of inhibitions, impairment of judgment,
distortion of reality and at least temporary reduction of a sense
of personal and social responsibility. Indeed, the earlier
stereotype of the marihuana user was that of an immoral,
physically debilitated, psychologically unstable and criminally
marginal man whose state of severely and irreversibly
underdeveloped psychosocial and moral maturity was said to derive
directly from his continued use of marihuana. </p>

<p>As indicated earlier, neither the inherent complexities of the
issue nor the previously inconclusive empirical evidence has
deterred the formulation and expression of strong opinions about
the relationship of marihuana use to crime and delinquency.
Opinion in this area, quite apart from the empirical evidence,
has long assumed critical importance in the development of social
policy. </p>

<p>The Commission has addressed the issue in three different
ways. One was to assess the state of current public and
professional opinion relative to the general proposition that
marihuana causes or leads to the commission of criminal or
delinquent acts. A second approach was to review the professional
literature addressed to the issue, and a third was to initiate
empirical investigations of our own. </p>

<p>The opinion surveys found that substantial numbers of persons
raised serious questions about the existence of a causal
relationship between marihuana use and criminal or delinquent
behavior. Confusion and uncertainty about the existence of such a
relationship have been expressed by both youth and adults,
including practicing professionals in the criminal justice
system. </p>

<p>Recent data suggest that some of this confusion may be the
result of a fairly widespread misconception about the addiction
potential of marihuana. To the extent that persons believe
marihuana users are physically dependent on the -drug, they may
assume that, like the heroin user, the marihuana user commits his
offenses in order to support what is perceived as a drug habit;
and that, like the heroin model, offenses are committed more
often in the desperate attempt to obtain the drug rather than
under its influence following use. There is no evidence that this
is the case, even for those who use the drug heavily. </p>

<p>In the Commission-sponsored National Survey, the respondents
were asked whether they agreed or disagreed with the statement
that &quot;many crimes are committed by persons who are under the
influence of marihuana.&quot; Fifty-six percent of the adult
population and 41% of the youth indicated agreement. As in the
Survey generally, there was a significant difference of opinion
according to age in the adult population. While 69% of the
over-50 age group agreed with this statement, only about
one-third of the 18-to-25 age group and the 14-to-17-yearolds
agreed. One of every four youth respondents and 18% of the adults
said they were &quot;not sure&quot; of the existence of such a
relationship between marihuana use and crime. </p>

<p>Much greater consensus exists, even between generations,
regarding the association of alcohol and crime. While 56% of all
adults expressed their belief that many crimes are committed by
persons under the influence of marihuana, 69% of these same
adults believed that alcohol was related in the same way. Only 7%
felt unsure about the alcohol crime relationship, in contrast to
18% who expressed uncertainty about the relationship between
crime and marihuana. </p>

<p>The Commission also surveyed opinion within the criminal
justice community. A sample of 781 judges, probation officers and
court clinicians replied to a questionnaire which asked
respondents to indicate whether or not their professional
experience led them to believe that &quot;use of marihuana causes
or leads to antisocial behavior in the sense that it leads one to
commit other criminal or delinquent acts.&quot; Of all
respondents, 27% believed this to be the case. Within each
professional group, 34% of the judges, 18% of the probation
officers and 2% of the clinicians indicated their agreement. </p>

<p>On the assumption that some, proportion, however small, of
marihuana users might ultimately be arrested for non-drug
offenses, these officials were also asked to assess the relative,
truth of the statement that &quot;most non-drug offenses
committed by persons who are known users of marihuana or are
found to have marihuana on their person or in their possession
occur when the offender is under the influence of
marihuana.&quot; Seventy-one percent of the responding judges,
75% of the probation officers and 85% of the court clinicians
either thought the statement false or were unsure of its
accuracy. </p>

<p>Respondents likewise rejected, however, the proposition that
these crimes perpetrated by marihuana users occur when the
offender is attempting to obtain the drug rather than while under
its influence; 65.6% of the judges, 64.6% of the probation
officers and 78.3% of the court clinicians either denied or were
unsure of the truth of this proposition. </p>

<p>In short, marihuana, is not generally viewed by participants
in the criminal justice community as a major contributing
influence in the commission of delinquent or criminal acts. </p>

<p>This increasing professional skepticism is buttressed by the
weight of research findings. A comprehensive review of the
literature revealed that in the various offender populations
studied for this purpose, only a small percentage were marihuana
users. In only a handful of cases did researchers report that
criminal conduct followed the use of marihuana. Generally, the
rate of self -reported, non-drug crime did not significantly
differ between users and non-users. </p>

<p>Both of the Commission-sponsored studies (the New York and
Philadelphia studies referred to earlier) corroborated this
research consensus. In the Philadelphia study, for example, less
than 10% of the sample were known to the police, and there were
no significant differences among marihuana users and non-users in
the sample who reported the commission of major criminal acts
when statistical controls were applied. Further, most of the
first offenses committed by users occurred prior to their use of
marihuana, and only in rare instances did the offenses
immediately follow (within 24 hours) upon the use of marihuana
(five cases out of 741 first offenses and 19 cases out of 516
most recent offenses). </p>

<p>Likewise, the New York study revealed that about one-fifth of
-the marihuana law violators arrested between 1965 and 1969 were
found to have previous arrest records. Of those with previous
arrests, the great majority of offenses (86%) involved traffic
violations and minor violations of the vagrancy statutes. In but
10% of the cases the previous arrests were for assault, robbery,
burglary or larceny. </p>

<p>In essence, neither informed current professional opinion nor
empirical research, ranging from the 1930's to the present, has
produced systematic evidence to support the thesis that marihuana
use, by itself, either invariably or generally leads to or causes
crime, including acts of violence,, juvenile delinquency or
aggressive behavior. Instead the evidence suggests that
sociolegal and cultural variable's account for the apparent
statistical correlation between marihuana use and crime or
delinquency.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>A Sociocultural Explanation <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The persistent belief that some relationship exists between
marihuana use and crime is not without statistical support.
Undoubtedly, the marihuana user of the 1920's and 1930's was
overrepresented in the nation's jails and penitentiaries and in
the general crime and delinquency statistics. Especially during
the late 1920's and early 1930's when the nation was preoccupied
with lawlessness, the translation of this statistical correlation
into a causal hypothesis is not surprising. </p>

<p>The increasing incidence of use in the mid-sixties by white,
affluent, middle class, high school youth, college students and
adults has occasioned a reevaluation of the marihuana user and a
reexamination of the crime issue. The overwhelming majority of
the new marihuana offenders have had no previous arrests, and
come from the normally low risk, middle and upper socioeconomic
population groups. </p>

<p>Recent public opinion surveys suggest that considerable social
disapproval is attached to the &quot;hippie&quot; life style,
unconventional mode of dress and apparent disregard for the law
displayed by many of these individuals. Nonetheless, fewer
persons are now willing to classify as criminal those marihuana
users whose only contact with the law has been as a result of
their marihuana use. Perceptions have undergone a change as a
result of the increased usage of marihuana among youth of the
dominant social class. Nonetheless, a statistical association
remains. </p>

<p>First, the majority of both marihuana users and offenders
other than actual marihuana law violators fall into the
14-to-25-year age group. Second, the majority of those arrested
for marihuana law violations as well as other delinquent or
criminal acts were, and to a much lesser degree, still are, drawn
from the same &quot;high risk&quot; populations, such as minority
groups, socially and economically disadvantaged, young, male,
inner-city residents. </p>

<p>Third, various offender populations subjected to study often
included a number of marihuana users, although it was not the
marihuana violations per se but other, more serious criminal
conduct that originally brought most of them to the attention of
the authorities. Finally, during the past five years, marihuana
law violators have increasingly swelled the crime and delinquency
statistics; in most cases, their only contact with the law has
been for these marihuanaspecific offenses. </p>

<p>The Philadelphia study corroborated this continuing
statistical association. The simple relationship between using
marihuana and committing offenses was positive and statistically
significant, and there was also a high correlation between
frequency of smoking marihuana and committing offenses. These
direct associations were reduced to insignificance, however, upon
further analysis of the data, and other explanations for the
coincidence of marihuana use and crime became evident. These
included: race, education, age, the use of other drugs, and
having drug-using friends. </p>

<p>We conclude that some users commit crimes more frequently than
non-users not because they use marihuana but because they happen
to be the kinds of people who would be expected to have a higher
crime rate, wholly apart from the use of marihuana. In most
cases, the differences in crime rate between users and non-users
are dependent not on marihuana use per se but on these other
factors. </p>

<p>In summary, although the available evidence suggests that
marihuana use may be statistically correlated with the incidence
of crime and delinquency, when examined in isolation from the
other variables, no valid evidence was found to support the
thesis that marihuana' by itself, either inevitably, generally or
even frequently causes or precipitates the commission of crime,
including acts of violence, or juvenile delinquency. <br>
</p>

<p>Within this framework, neither the marihuana user nor the drug
itself can be said to constitute a danger to public safety. For,
as two researchers have so cogently stated for the Commission,
&quot;Whatever an individual is, in all of his cultural, social
and psychological complexity, is not going to vanish in a puff of
marihuana smoke.&quot;<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>MARIHUANA AND DRIVING <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Within the context of public safety another issue which merits
attention is the extent to which drivers under the influence of
marihuana constitute a hazard on the nation's streets and
highways. Although in recent years increasing attention has been
given to this issue, at present little empirical evidence exists
to inform discussion. </p>

<p>To assess the actual and potential impact of marihuana on
traffic safety, a number of basic research questions must be
answered. </p>

<p>the extent to which marihuana, users actually drive while
under the influence of the drug </p>

<p>the extent to which marihuana users driving while
&quot;high&quot; commit traffic violations and are involved in
traffic accidents </p>

<p>the amounts of marihuana consumed immediately prior to the
commission of traffic violations or the involvement in traffic
accidents and the drug's role in these events </p>

<p>the nature and extent to which marihuana actually impairs
psychomotor skills, judgment and driving performance<br>
</p>

<p>To date, the generalizations made concerning the effects of
marihuana on driving behavior have generally been based on
statistical studies of traffic violations and accidents and
inferences drawn from more general studies of the physiological
and psychological consequences of marihuana use, such as changes
in pulse rate, reaction time, neuromuscular coordination, time
estimation and spatial perceptions. </p>

<p>Such studies pose serious limitations in the nature,
reliability and validity of the data. The basic problems derive
from difficulties in identifying and attributing cause. A major
obstacle in such retrospective analysis is the inability to
separate the effects of marihuana from those possibly engendered
by the use of other drugs, such as alcohol, tranquilizers and
amphetamines. Finally, conclusive analysis is impossible until a
reliable technique is developed for measuring the level of
marihuana present in the body of the driver at the time of his
violation or accident. </p>

<p>Prospective experimental studies of actual reactions to road
conditions and traffic emergency situations would undoubtedly
provide the most reliable and valid data, but such studies would
themselves endanger the public and have not been undertaken.
Researchers have relied, therefore, on controlled laboratory
simulator studies and direct interviews with those who have
admitted to driving while under the influence of marihuana.<br>
</p>

<p>With respect to the simulator studies , the available evidence
suggests that while, in some cases, marihuana has produced
interference with certain motor or mental abilities which affect
driving behavior, these effects were generally believed to be
readily overcome by the exercise of extreme caution by the driver
and a significant reduction in speed. </p>

<p>The few driving simulator tests completed to date have
generally revealed no significant correlations between marihuana
use and driving disabilities. Comparison of the simulator scores
of users and nonusers, however, did reveal small but
nonsignificant differences in the number of speedometer errors
made. </p>

<p>These simulator studies also examined the comparative effects
of alcohol and marihuana on driving scores. The findings of one
study, though controversial, suggested that intoxication
resulting from low doses of marihuana was less detrimental to
driving performance than was the presence of alcohol at the
legally prohibited blood level of .10%. </p>

<p>The methodological limitations of the study raise serious
questions about the reliability and validity of the findings. As
one critic has noted, &quot;It does not follow automatically that
lack of effect of a drug on the simulated task will correlate
with lack of effect on the actual task.&quot; Further , the use
of dissimilar doses of alcohol and marihuana has led another
critic to assert that &quot;finding that a heavy dose of alcohol
caused more impairment than a mild dose of marihuana is neither
surprising nor helpful in assessing the relative effects of the
two drugs in the relative doses in which they are normally
used.&quot; </p>

<p>Recent research has not yet proven that marihuana use
significantly impairs driving ability or performance. The
Commission believes, nonetheless, that driving while under the
influence of any psychoactive drug is a serious risk to public
safety; the acute effects of marihuana intoxication, spatial and
time distortion and slowed reflexes may impair driving
performance. That the risk of injury may be greater for alcohol
than for marihuana matters little. </p>

<p>Obviously, Much more research needs to be undertaken in this
area. Hopefully, recent studies sponsored by the National
Institute of Mental Health and other agencies will soon provide
the concrete information that is needed.<br>
</p>

<p>Marihuana, Public Health and Welfare<br>
</p>

<p>As the feared threat to public safety through violent crime
has diminished in recent years, policy-makers and the public have
begun increasingly to view marihuana and other illicit drug use
as a public health concern. The National Survey indicates that
American adults regard drug abuse as the third most pressing
problem of the day, closely following the economy and Vietnam.
However, public attitudes reflect considerable confusion about
the facts concerning marihuana and drugs in general. </p>

<p>This confusion has resulted from too little understanding of
the motives for drug use as well as inadequate knowledge of the
classification of drugs according to their main effects. Legal
penalties have frequently mirrored this confusion, and the
resulting inconsistencies cause, many young people to lose
confidence in adult authority. Even in the medical profession,
much uncertainty is evident, and for most of the general public
there is no clear authority to whom they can turn for guidance.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2">A PUBLIC HEALTH APPROACH <br>
</font></p>

<p>The Commission broadly defines public health concerns as all
health problems which affect people en masse and are thereby
difficult to treat on a traditional physician-to-patient basis.
This category would include social and economic dependence and
incapacity. A health problem which spreads to other susceptible
members of the society cannot be controlled by the individual
physician. This view coincides with the concept of preventive
medicine, recognizing that all public health problems must be
dealt with on both an individual and societal level. </p>

<p>To illustrate, the increasing incidence of deaths due to lung
cancer subsequent to chronic, heavy tobacco usage is a major
public health concern. In this instance, prevention of smoking
and ascertaining the cause of the malignancies, rather than the
individual treatment of each case by a physician, define the
public health dimension. A major concern exists because the
population at risk is large and growing, and the risk of harm is
great. </p>

<p>In addition to the risk of large numbers of the populace being
affected, the issue of contagion must also be examined. Unlike
infectious diseases such as influenza and smallpox, where the
person affected &quot; catches&quot; the ailment unintentionally,
those individuals who use marihuana choose to come into contact
with it. The contagion model is relevant only insofar as social
pressure from proselytizing friends and social contacts play a
role in spreading the use of the, drug. This dimension exists
with marihuana, as well as alcohol and tobacco. </p>

<p>After assessing the potential harm to the individual and
society, the size of the population at risk and the contagion
aspect, society must determine the nature of the control
mechanism used to deal with the problem, and how nine]) of its
health resources, manpower and facilities will be allocated to
meet the perceived threat to the public health. Therefore, an
analysis of the relative risk of marihuana use must be
undertaken. We must examine not only the effects of the drug on
the individual but also determine which groups are at risk and
why.<br>
</p>

<p>Practically all substances consumed by man are potentially
dangerous to the physical or mental health of the individual if
used irresponsibly or by particularly sensitive persons. Certain
substances are sufficiently complex in their effects that
societal control is necessary to reduce risk, for example,
fluorides added to the water supply, prescription drugs, and food
additives. The degree of concern and control varies, depending on
relative public health dangers. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>The Population At Risk <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Before the dangers can be assessed, the population at risk
must be defined. Viewing the public health picture on a large
scale, the United States in 1972 may still be considered
fortunate with regard to marihuana usage. While it is the third
most popular recreational drug, behind alcohol and tobacco, it
has not been institutionalized and commercialized. </p>

<p>Most of the Americans who have used marihuana have been merely
experimenting with it. As noted in Chapter 1, there are 24
million Americans who have tried marihuana at one time or
another, with 8.3 million still using it. Of those who have quit,
most say they have simply lost interest in it. The same Survey
shows that experience with marihuana peaks in the
18-to-25-year-old group and falls off sharply thereafter. A fact
of some significance is that at least 71% of all adults (18-years
and older) and 80% of youth (12-to-17-years) have never used
marihuana at all.* </p>

<p>The Survey also indicates that the majority of those youth and
adults who continue to use marihuana do so intermittently, that
is, between one and 10 times a month. These individuals are
classified as intermittent marihuana smokers who use the drug for
its socializing effects. They are, for the most part, ordinary
Americans who are either in school or are employed. </p>

<p>About 2% of those who have ever used marihuana, or 500,000
people, now use the drug heavily. They use the drug several times
a day. These individuals use marihuana for its personal drug
effects in addition to its socializing effects. Generally, their
life styles, values, attitudes, behaviors and activities are
unconventional. Marihuana plays an important role in their lives.
Because the risk of psychological, and perhaps physical, harm
from marihuana increases with the frequency quantity and duration
of its use, these heavy marihuana users constitute the greatest
at-risk population in the United States today. </p>

<p>The heavy marihuana user presents the greatest potential
concern to the, public health. It is the Commission's opinion
that these heavy marihuana users constitute a source of contagion
within American society. They actively proselytize others into a
drug-oriented way of life. The effectiveness of peer group
pressure has been described earlier in Chapter II </p>

<p>We anticipate that this at-risk population would increase in
number should a policy of institutionalized availability be
adopted toward marihuana. Although marihuana is readily available
illicitly in the United States today, a policy permitting its
legal distribution could be expected to bring about an increase
in users, with some percentage of them becoming heavy users. It
is the availability of the drug, coupled -with a governmental
policy of approval or neutrality, that could escalate this group
into a public health and welfare concern. While this is
speculative, it is a concern which cannot be dismissed. The
experience with the rise in the use of tobacco and alcohol makes
clear the probable consequences of commercial exploitation. </p>

<p>Another concern of the Commission is the experience of other
countries which have large heavy user populations. While the
pattern of behavior in one country is not automatically similar
to a pattern of behavior in another country, the existence of
heavy user populations constitutes a serious public health
concern which must be avoided in this country. The availability
of the drug alone does not seem to determine increased usage;
supply and governmental inaction appear to tip the balance toward
increased use. The proportion of our population susceptible to
this pattern of use is conjectural but good preventive public
health requires limiting the number to an irreducible minimum. <br>
</p>

<p>*In the self-administered instrument, several separate
questions were utilized to elicit the respondent's experience
with marihuana. This technique permitted an analysis of
consistency of responses, and also minimized the possibility of
nonresponse. Nevertheless, 14% of the adults and 6% of the youth
did not respond to enough of these questions to ascertain whether
they had ever tried marihuana or not. <br>
</p>

<p>Percentage who- Adult Youth </p>

<p>Ever used ------------------------------------- 15 14 </p>

<p>Never used ------------------------------------ 71 so </p>

<p>No response ----------------------------------- 14 6<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Confusion and Fact <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>One of the primary sources of confusion surrounding the use of
marihuana and other psychoactive drugs is the ambiguity of the
term &quot;drug abuse.&quot; In many quarters the excessive use
of any drug is considered drug abuse, regardless of the effect of
the drug on the individual or his behavior. In order to clarify
this issue the Commission defines psychoactive drug abuse as
follows: <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><i>Drug abuse is the use of psychoactive drugs
in a way likely to induce mental dysfunction and disordered
behavior. <br>
</i></font></p>

<p>It should be emphasized that demonstrable pathology of organ
systems, including the brain, is not a necessary characteristic
of psychoactive drug abuse. There are numerous non-psychoactive
drugs which can induce extensive organ pathology but do not
modify behavior; such drugs leave their imprint primarily on the
individual, not on society. The Commission believes that many of
the perplexing issues relating to psychoactive drugs, including
marihuana, can be clarified if drug abuse refers only to the
impact of drug-induced behavior on society. </p>

<p>Three types of such drug-induced behavior are considered
unacceptable in most organized societies: (1) aggressiveness
leading to violence; (2) loss of psychomotor control; (3) mental
or physical disorder leading to social and economic incapacity or
dependency. </p>

<p>This is not to say that society is unconcerned about the
harmful effects of psychoactive drugs on the individual, or that
such effects do not merit the attention of public health
officials. Cigarette smoking, although affecting primarily the
individual, is surely a matter of public health concern. We
believe, however, that the term drug abuse, with its attendant
societal disapprobation, should be reserved for drug taking which
has a more direct effect on society through disordered behavior. </p>

<p>Beyond the confusion surrounding the term drug abuse, a
rational evaluation of the public health impact of marihuana use
is also inhibited by extensive misinformation about the drug.
Recently, a great deal of research has increased significantly
our knowledge about marihuana. Further research data are
necessary before ;a conclusive statement about marihuana and
public health can be made. However, enough is known today to
discuss some of the public perceptions in detail. And sufficient
data are presently available to allow for rational
decision-making.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>ASSESSMENT OF PERCEIVED RISKS<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The Commission believes that marihuana. is perceived by the
American public to present the following risks to the public
health:<br>
</p>

<p>lethality </p>

<p>potential for genetic damage or teratogenicity </p>

<p>immediate adverse physical or mental effects </p>

<p>long-term physical or mental effects including psychosis and
&quot;amotivation&quot; syndrome </p>

<p>&quot;addiction&quot; potential </p>

<p>* progression to other stronger drugs, especially heroin<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Lethality<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The Commission's National Survey revealed that 48% of adults
believe that some people have died from marihuana use. A careful
search of the literature and testimony of the nation's health
officials has not revealed a single human fatality in the United
States proven to have resulted solely from ingestion of
marihuana. Experiments with the drug in monkeys demonstrated that
the dose required for overdose death was enormous and for all
practical purposes unachievable by humans smoking marihuana. This
is in marked contrast to other substances in common use, most
notably alcohol and barbiturate sleeping pills. </p>

<p>Of comparative note, 89% of all adults in the same Survey
believe that some people have died from using alcohol. This
indicates that public opinion regarding alcohol and its potential
lethality is more accurate than it is for marihuana. At the same
time, factual knowledge regarding the inherent danger in using a
substance, for example alcohol, seemingly does not deter many
persons from using it irresponsibly.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Potential For Genetic Damage <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The thalidomide tragedies of the 1950's have taught us to
ponder carefully the possibility of genetic damage subsequent to
any drug use. The much publicized controversy regarding LSD and
subsequent genetic damage has led investigators to study
marihuana and its possible genetic effects. Although a number of
studies have been performed, at present no reliable evidence
exists indicating that marihuana causes genetic defects in man. </p>

<p>Early findings from studies of chronic (up to 41 years), heavy
(several ounces per day) cannabis users in Greece and Jamaica
also failed to find such evidence. In all its studies, the
Commission found no evidence of chromosome damage or teratogenic
or mutagenic effects due to cannabis at doses commonly used by
man. However, since fetal damage cannot be ruled out, the use of
marihuana like that of many other drugs, is not advisable during
pregnancy.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Immediate Effects<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The intoxicant effects of marihuana on the mental function of
the user does have potential health significance both for the
individual and others with whom he may come in contact. Because
marihuana is a psychoactive drug, it is important to examine the
acute toxic effects which may occur in certain predisposed
individuals and which increase with the potency of the
preparation. </p>

<p>The Commission has reviewed numerous clinical studies
describing acute panic reactions and transient psychotic-like
episodes which occur as acute effects of the drug intoxication.
In addition, a predisposed individual might experience
aggravation of a latent psychotic state or other underlying
instability. Although severe abnormal psychological states are
rare when compared to the total number of marihuana users, lesser
problems are not rare, and they may endanger both the individual
and those around him at the time of their occurrence. The
individual contemplating use is not capable of predicting whether
he is predisposed by his particular circumstances to an
undesirable mental reaction. The undesirable consequences
occurring while an individual is involved in complex tasks such
as driving or operating machinery or tasks requiring fine
psychomotor precision and judgment are all too imaginable. </p>

<p>From a public health point of view, the immediate effects of
marihuana intoxication on the individual's organs or bodily
functions are of little significance. By and large these effects,
which have been carefully outlined in Chapter 11 of the Report,
are transient and have little or no permanent effect upon the
individual.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Effects Of Long-Term, Heavy Use<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>To determine the long-term chronic effects of heavy marihuana
use, the Commission has carefully reviewed the world literature
and contemporary studies of heavy, chronic (up to 41 years)
cannabis users in the world. In addition, lower socioeconomic
populations in Afghanistan, Greece, and Jamaica have been
examined.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b><i>Effects On The Body <br>
</i></b></font></p>

<p>These recent studies in Greece and Jamaica report minimal
physical abnormalities in the cannabis users as compared with
their non-using peers. </p>

<p>Minimal abnormalities in pulmonary function have been observed
in some cases of heavy and very heavy smokers of potent marihuana
preparations (ganja or hashish). However, one study concluded the
cause was smoking in general no matter what the substance. The
other study could not express any conclusion because of the
absence of a control population. Such decrements in normal
pulmonary capacity may represent early warning signals in the
development of chronic lung disease. They must be considered in
any program of early prevention of disease and future disability.
</p>

<p>No objective evidence of specific pathology of brain tissue
has been documented. This fact contrasts sharply with the
well-established brain damage of chronic alcoholism.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b><i>Effects On The Mind <br>
</i></b></font></p>

<p>No outstanding abnormalities in psychological tests,
psychiatric interviews or coping patterns have been conclusively
documented in studies of cannabis users in other countries of the
world. Further research in this important area is necessary
before definite conclusions can be drawn relating or linking
marihuana to mental dysfunction because available psychological
tests do not measure certain higher mental functions very
accurately.<br>
</p>

<p>Cannabis use has long been known to precipitate short-term
phychotic-like episodes in predisposed individuals or those who
take excessive doses. Some observers report that the prevalence
of shortterm psychoses as well as the psychotic episodes of
longer duration in heavy cannabis users are compatible with the
prevalence rate of psychosis in the general population and,
therefore, may not be attributable to cannabis use. In fact, some
believe that in populations under stress where marihuana is
widely used, occurrence of the acute psychotic-like episodes
occur less often than one would expect in such a population.
Other researchers have disagreed with these conclusions, and the
matter is still controversial. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b><i>Effects On Motivation <br>
</i></b></font></p>

<p>The Commission is deeply concerned about another group of
behavioral effects that have been described in other nations as
being associated with the heavy, long-term use of cannabis. This
behavioral condition has been termed the &quot;amotivational
syndrome.&quot; An extreme form has been reported in populations
of lower socioeconomic males in several developing nations. These
reports describe lethargy, instability, social deterioration, a
loss of interest in virtually all activities other than drug use.
This state of social and economic disability also results in
precipitation and aggravation of psychiatric disorders (overt
psychotic behavior) and possible somatic complications among very
heavy, very long-term users of high potency cannabis products.
However, in the populations so far observed in Jamaica, Greece,
and Afghanistan, physical and psychosocial deterioration was not
reported. The life styles of these populations appeared to be
conditioned by cultural and socioeconomic factors. Some
researchers believe cannabis' may serve to keep these individuals
stratified at this lower socioeconomic level. </p>

<p>The occurrence of a similar, though less intense, syndrome has
been identified recently with heavy marihuana use among young
persons in the Western world, including the United States. Some
clinicians have described the existence of a complex of subtle
social, psychological and behavioral changes related to a loss of
volitional goal direction in certain individuals, including some
long-term heavy users of marihuana. Such persons appear to orient
only to the present. They appear, alienated from generally
accepted social and occupational activities, and they tend to
show a reduced concern for personal hygiene and nutrition. </p>

<p>Some clinicians believe that this picture is directly caused
by the action of marihuana. However , other behavioral scientists
believe that among impressionable adolescents, marihuana-induced
suggestibility may facilitate the rapid adoption of new values
and behavior patterns, particularly when the drug is taken in a
socially alienated subculture that advocates and strongly
reinforces such changes. </p>

<p>Whichever interpretation one accepts, the fact is apparent
that the chronic, heavy use of marihuana may jeopardize social
and economic adjustments of the adolescents We believe this is
one concern which merits further research and evaluation. On the
basis of past studies, the chronic, heavy use of marihuana, seems
to constitute a high-risk behavior, particularly among
predisposed adolescents. This consideration is especially
critical when we consider the adolescent who is in the throes of
a normally turbulent emotional process. The Commission has
reviewed numerous reported studies and heard the testimony of
several clinicians dealing with heavy users of marihuana who
exhibit this particular behavior pattern. Although the United
States does not, at the present time, have a large number of such
persons within its population, the incidence is too frequent to
ignore. Expanded epidemiologic studies are imperative to obtain a
better understanding of this complex behavior.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Addiction Potential<br>
</font></p>

<p>Unfortunately, fact and fancy have become irrationally mixed
regarding marihuana's physiological and psychological properties.
Marihuana clearly is not in the same chemical category as heroin
insofar as its physiologic and psychological effects are
concerned. In a word, cannabis does not lead to physical
dependence. No torturous withdrawal syndrome follows the sudden
cessation of chronic, heavy use of marihuana. Although evidence
indicates that heavy, long-term cannabis users may develop
psychological dependence, even then the level of psychological
dependence is no different from the syndrome of anxiety and
restlessness seen when an American stops smoking tobacco
cigarettes.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2">Progression To Other Drugs<br>
</font></p>

<p>As noted in Chapter 11, to say marihuana leads to any other
drug avoids the real issue and reduces a complex set of variables
to an oversimplified premise of cause and effect. If any one
statement can characterize why persons in the United States
escalate their drug use patterns and become polydrug users, it is
peer pressure. Indeed, if any drug is associated with the use of
other drugs, including marihuana, it is tobacco, followed closely
by alcohol. Study after study which the Commission reviewed
invariably reported an association between the use of tobacco,
and, to a lesser extent, of alcohol with the use of marihuana and
other drugs. </p>

<p>The fact should be emphasized that the overwhelming majority
of marihuana users do not progress to other drugs. They either
remain with marihuana or foresake its use in favor of alcohol. In
addition, the largest number of marihuana users in the United
States today are experimenters or intermittent users, and 2% of
those who have ever used it are presently heavy users. Only
moderate and heavy use of marihuana is significantly associated
with persistent use of other drugs. </p>

<p>Some persons in our society are interested in experimenting
with a series of drugs, and there is no uniformity regarding
which drug these multidrug users take first. In some cases, the
drug used is a matter of preference; in others, a matter of
availability; and in further instances, it matter of group
choice. </p>

<p>Citizens concerned with health issues must consider the
possibility of marihuana use leading to use of heroin, other
opiates, cocaine or hallucinogens. This so-called stepping-stone
theory first received widespread acceptance in 1951 as a result
of testimony at Congressional hearings. At that time, studies of
various addict populations repeatedly described most heroin users
as marihuana users also. The implication of these descriptions
was that a causal relationship existed between marihuana and
subsequent heroin use. When the voluminous testimony given at
these hearings is seriously examined, no verification is found of
a causal relationship between marihuana use and subsequent heroin
use. </p>

<p>Again, we must avoid polarity on this issue. To assume that
marihuana use is unrelated to the use of other drugs would be
inaccurate. As mentioned earlier, the heavy or very heavy
marihuana users are frequently users of other drugs. The
stepping-stone theory holds that the adolescent begins the use of
illicit drugs with marihuana, and later proceeds to heroin in the
search for greater thrills. The opposing viewpoint holds that the
large majority of marihuana users never become heroin addicts and
denies the validity of a causal relationship. </p>

<p>In the National Survey, among the adult respondents, 70%
thought that marihuana makes people want to try stronger drugs
such as heroin; 56% of the youth in the 12-to-17-year-old
category agreed with the same statement. These perceptions
contrast with another finding in the same Survey which revealed
that 4% of current marihuana users have tried heroin. On the
other hand, very few respondents perceived alcohol and tobacco to
be precipitants of other drug use. </p>

<p>Studies of the escalation process demonstrate that the rates
of progression vary from one group to another and from one
segment of the population to another. There is no set proportion
of marihuana users who &quot;escalate&quot; to the use of other
drugs. The other drugs which some marihuana smokers use vary
according to the social characteristics of the population in
question. Within some groups, heroin may be the choice; in other
groups, it may be LSD. </p>

<p>Marihuana use per se does not dictate whether other drugs will
be used; nor does it determine the rate of progression, if and
when it, occurs, or which drugs might be used. As discussed in
Chapter 11, the user's social group seems to have the strongest
influence on whether other drugs will be used; and if so, which
drugs will be used.<br>
</p>

<p>PREVENTIVE PUBLIC HEALTH CONCERNS <br>
</p>

<p>The hallmark of a good health care delivery system is
preventing as much illness as possible. This objective is
achieved by means of immunizations, regular routine checkups, and
educational programs. </p>

<p>Education programs regarding marihuana have been notably
ineffective, partly due to an exaggeration of the effects of
using the drug and partly because the effects of the opiates and
marihuana have been compared inaccurately. As a result, many
persons have developed a conscious or unconscious denial of
nearly all dangers associated with marihuana use. Some educators
believe that drug programs merely sharpen the curiosity of
children and tempt them to use drugs which they otherwise would
not use. Others believe that the responsibility should not be
lodged with the schools but rather with the home or the
community. </p>

<p>Because of the uncertainty about the efficacy of these,
programs, education programs dealing with drug usage simply do
not exist in the school systems of a number of major cities; in
others, token programs are offered in response to the demand that
something be done. Health educators have the responsibility to
help this vulnerable group of Americans become aware of all
options so that they are able to make enlightened choices. </p>

<p>The educational role of physicians and other clinical health
personnel should not be underestimated. The National Survey shows
that the public believes young people should receive information
concerning marihuana first from schools and second from family
physicians. The health professional has a unique position as both
teacher and confidant to an individual struggling with a
&quot;drug abuse&quot; problem. Honest, sincere, and confidential
guidance from a physician may prevent later difficulties to both
the individual and the society. The Commission believes that
action must be taken to inform and support the physician in his
role as confidant and counsellor to those seeking assistance. </p>

<p>Considering the current patterns of marihuana use in the
United States, the need for treatment and/or rehabilitation does
not appear necessary for the vast majority of persons who are
experimenting with the drug or using it intermittently. Rather,
these persons need to be realistically educated regarding the
potential hazards they face. To this end, a comparison of the
personal and public health risks of marihuana and those of
heroin, cocaine, amphetamines, and other drugs would be useful. <br>
</p>

<p>A concern for public health also requires thoughtful
consideration of the consequences of any change in public policy.
We have objectively appraised the present scope of public health
concerns concluding that the most serious risk lies with the
population of heavy users, which is, at this time, quite small in
this country. </p>

<p>Now, we must soberly consider the likely effect of adoption of
a social policy of neutrality or approval toward marihuana use.
Any legal policy which institutionalizes availability of the drug
carries with it a likely increase in the at-risk population. This
factor is not necessarily conclusive in itself , but it does
weigh heavily for the policymaker. Even though the proportion of
heavy users in the total using population might not increase if
such a social or legal policy were adopted, the absolute number
of heavy users would probably increase. Thus, we would have an
increase in the at-risk segment of the populace. A greater stress
would thereby be placed on the general health care delivery
system in all the areas of health concern described earlier. </p>

<p>Regardless of emerging social policy, greater emphasis must be
placed on educating our youth regarding the prospective dangers
inherent in expanded marihuana use. This anticipatory guidance
can serve to defuse or at least forestall a potentially serious
social phenomenon.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Summary<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>From what is now known about the effects of marihuana, its use
at the present level does not constitute a major threat to public
health. However, this statement should not lead to complacency.
Marihuana is not an innocuous drug. The clinical findings of
impaired psychological function, carefully documented by medical
specialists, legitimately arouse concern. These studies identify
marihuana-related problems which must be taken into account in
the development of public policy. Unfortunately, these
marihuana-related problems, which occur only in heavy, long-term
users, have been over generalized and overdramatized. </p>

<p>Two percent of those Americans who have ever used marihuana
are now heavy users and constitute the highest risk group. Strong
evidence indicates that certain emotional changes have taken
place among predisposed individuals as a result of prolonged,
heavy marihuana use. The clinical reports in the literature
describing transient psychoses, other psychiatric difficulties,
and impairment of cognitive function subsequent to use of
marihuana and of other drugs do not prove causality but cannot be
ignored. </p>

<p>The causes of these emotional difficulties are much too
complex to justify general conclusions by the public or the
press. The mass media have frequently promoted such clinical
reports to appear as far reaching events affecting the entire
population. The clinician sees only the troubled Population of
any group. In evaluating a public health concern, the essential
element is the proportion of affected persons in the general
group. The people responsible for evaluating public health
problems must concern themselves with the proportion of people
out of the total population who are affected by any specific
condition. The highest risk groups should be identified as the
source of primary concern. A recognition that a majority of
marihuana users are not now a matter of public health concern
must be made so that public health Officials may concentrate
their attention where it will have maximum impact. </p>

<p>The concept of relative risk is crucial to an evaluation of
the impact of marihuana on public health. We believe that
experimental or intermittent use of this drug carries minimal
risk to the public health, and should not be given overzealous
attention in terms of a public health response. We are concerned
that social influences might cause those who would not otherwise
use the drug to be exposed to this minimal risk and the potential
escalation of drug-using patterns. For this group, we must
deglorify, demythologize, and deemphasize the use of marihuana
and other drugs. </p>

<p>The Commission reemphasizes its concern about the small
minority of heavy, long-term marihuana users who are exposed to a
much greater relative risk of impaired general functioning in
contemporary America. Public health officials should concentrate
their efforts on this group. Fortunately, the group has to date
not grown sufficently in size to warrant its being considered a
major public health concern. </p>

<p>We retiterate, too, the public health implications of an
increase in the at-risk population. We suspect that such an
increase is most likely if a sudden shift in social policy
significantly increased availability of the drug. One of the
factors we consider in Chapter V when evaluating the various
social policy options and legal implementations is the effect of
each policy on incidence and patterns of use. Regardless of how
heavy this particular variable will weigh in that process, we
must state that a significant increase in the at-risk population
could convert what is now a minor public health concern in this
country to one of major proportions.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Marihuana And The Dominant Social Order<br>
</b></p>

<p>For more than 30 years it has been widely assumed that the
marihuana user constitutes a threat to the well-being of the
community and the nation. Originally, the users were considered
to be &quot;outsiders&quot; or marginal citizens. Included were
such people as hustlers, prostitutes, itinerant workers, merchant
seamen, miners and ranchhands, water-front day laborers and
drifters, many of whom were drawn from the lower socioeconomic
segments of the population. </p>

<p>Concerns about marihuana use expressed in the 1930's related
primarily to a perceived inconsistency between the life styles
and values of these individuals and the social and moral order.
Their potential influence on the young was especially worrisome.
When marihuana was first prohibited, a recurrent fear was that
use might spread among the youth. And in the late 1930's and
1940's, the attraction of young people to jazz music was thought
to be in part related to marihuana use by this
&quot;outsider&quot; population. </p>

<p>Throughout this early period, American society, in reaction to
its fear of the unfamiliar, translated rumor about the
criminality and immorality of the marihuana user into
&quot;unquestioned fact&quot; which, in turn, was translated into
social policy. </p>

<p>From the mid-thirties to the present, however, social
perceptions have undergone significant change in response to the
emergence of new and challenging social problems. As marihuana,
use has spread to include the affluent, middle class, white high
school and college-age youth as well as minority group members of
lower socioeconomic circumstances in urban core areas, the
concept of marginality has become blurred. </p>

<p>Also, as the use of marihuana has increased, those individuals
formerly labeled as marginal and threatening have been replaced
by a more middle class, white, educated and younger population of
marihuana smokers. A stereotyped user no longer exists, and
therefore, the question now properly focuses on who poses a
threat to the dominant order.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>The Adult Marihuana User <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Despite the fact that substantial numbers of adults use
marihuana, society does not appear to feel greatly threatened by
this group, probably because included in the group are a
considerable number of middle class individuals who are regularly
employed and whose occupational and social status appear to be
similar to those of peers and colleagues who do not use
marihuana. </p>

<p>In the course of its fact-finding effort, the Commission has
met with several groups of socially and economically
&quot;successful&quot; marihuana users in the professions of law,
medicine, banking, education and business. In most cases, these
persons, in their external appearances, seemed to be mature and
responsible adults whose social attitudes and behavior did not
mark them as radical ideologues or essentially irresponsible
individuals. </p>

<p>For the most part, use of marihuana by adults has been found
to be more directly related to the facilitation of social
interaction (much like the adult use of alcohol in social
gatherings) than to any other factor. Although their marihuana
smoking behavior is illegal, most adult users are not ordinarily
considered by their peers to be criminal nor is their use
generally likely to result in arrest. </p>

<p>Because the adult user generally maintains low visibility, is
primarily a recreational user, is not usually involved in radical
political activity and maintains a life style largely
indistinguishable from his non-using neighbors, he is not
ordinarily viewed as a threat to the dominant social order. In
short, aside from his use of marihuana, the adult recreational
user is not generally viewed as a significant social problem.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>The Young Marihuana User <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The widespread use of marihuana by millions of young people of
college and high school age has been viewed by many as a direct
threat to the stability and future of the social order. </p>

<p>Many parents, adults in general, and government officials have
expressed concern that young people who use marihuana often
reject the essential values and traditions upon which the society
is founded. Some have suggested that youthful marihuana use is,
in itself, an indication of the rejection of responsibility and a
sign of reckless hedonism which may well interfere with an
orderly maturation process. Others see youthful marihuana use as
part of a pattern of conduct which produces dropping out,
underachievement and dependency. </p>

<p>In short, the mass character of youthful marihuana use has
been frequently interpreted as a rejection of the
institutionalized principles of law and a lack of concern for
individual social responsibility, which threatens the social and
political institutions. </p>

<p>Implicit in this view is the assumption that a young person
who uses marihuana in spite of the law cannot be expected to
assume an individually and socially responsible, adult role. The
strength of this fear is drawn largely from the vocal and visible
&quot;counterculture&quot; to which marihuana is often tied. Not
surprisingly, the concerns posed by an alternate youthful life
style are extended to the drug itself. </p>

<p>Threats to the social order are often seen, for example, in
the character of youthful leisure time activities, such as
attendance at rock concerts, occasioned by the high mobility and
affluence of today's youth. They are also seen in the new modes
of speech and dress and in the seemingly casual manner of their
day-to-day living. Equally troublesome for many, however, is the
idea of intentional intoxication for purposes of recreation. </p>

<p>Such conduct and the more casual attitude toward sexual
relationships as well as participation in radical politics have
provoked increasing concern throughout the adult society. The
National Survey illustrates the extent to which the older adult
perceives youthful marihuana use as part of a much larger pattern
of behavior which bodes ill for the future of the nation.<br>
</p>

<p>First, the older the adult respondent, the more likely he was
to picture the marihuana user as leading an abnormal life. Only
9% of the over-50 generation agreed with the statement that
&quot;most people who use marihuana lead a normal life.&quot;
Nineteen percent of the 35to-49 age group and 29% of the
26-to-34-year-olds were of the same belief. Conversely, half of
the young adults (18-to-25) considered most marihuana users
normal. This fact is not surprising since many of their
contemporaries are marihuana users. </p>

<p>Second, the marihuana user, as envisioned by adults, is
typically a youthful dropout from society. He doesn't like to be
with other people, is uninterested in the world around him, is
usually lazy and has an above-average number of personal
problems. </p>

<p>Third, the less optimistic the adult respondent was about the
nation's youth, the more likely he was to oppose alteration of
the marihuana laws and to envision major social dislocations if
the laws were changed. Fifty-seven percent of the adult
population in general agreed with the statement, &quot;if
marihuana were legal, it would lead to teenagers becoming
irresponsible and wild.&quot; Among those adults who most
disapproved of youthful behavior in general, 74% agreed with the
quoted statement. Similarly, 84% of the non-approving adults
favored stricter laws on marihuana. </p>

<p>As we discussed in Chapter I, marihuana's symbolic role in a
perceived generational conflict has brought marihuana use into
the Category of a social problem. Today's youthful marihuana user
is seen as a greater threat to the social order than either the
marginal user of earlier times or the adult user of the present.
Since the concerns about marihuana today relate mostly to youth,
the remainder of this section will focus on these youth-related
issues. <br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>'THE WORLD OF YOUTH <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Youth of today are better fed, better housed, more mobile,
more affluent, more schooled and probably more bored with their
lives than any generation which has preceded them. </p>

<p>Adults have difficulty understanding why such privileged young
people should wish to offend by their language and appearance and
spend so much effort trying to discredit those institutions of
society which have made possible the privileges which those youth
enjoy. Many adults perceive the present level of youthful
discontent to be of a greater intensity than has been true of
past generations. </p>

<p>Marihuana has become both a focus and a symbol of the
generation gap and for many young people its use has become, an
expedient means of protest against adult values. </p>

<p>Adults in positions of authority, parents, teachers, policy
officials, judges, and others often view marihuana use as the
sign of youth's rejection of moral and social values and of the
system of government under which they live. The problem is that
both youth and adults tend to make pronouncements and are
frequently unable to reason together in logical fashion. Instead
they overstate their positions in such a way that effective
resolution of their differences becomes very difficult. </p>

<p>In effect, each group takes the rhetoric of the other at face
value. For youth, however, marihuana use plays many roles, only
one of which is a symbolic assault on adult authority and values.
</p>

<p>Marihuana use, for many young people, has become a part of a
ritual. It takes on the aspect of participating in a shared
experience which, for some if not all, is enjoyable in itself.
For many, it becomes an even more interesting experience because
it is forbidden. </p>

<p>Some of the rituals concerned with the purchase, storage,
preparation, and use of marihuana take on a mystique similar to
the time of Prohibition when people went through certain rituals
necessary to get a drink in a speak-easy. The three knocks and
&quot;Joe sent me&quot; cues have been replaced by the
not-so-secret handshakes, the new vocabulary of youth and other
exclusionary devices to delineate the &quot;in&quot; group. </p>

<p>The use of marihuana is attractive to many young people for
the sense of group unity and participation which develops around
the common use of the drug. This sense tends to be intensified by
a sense of &quot;common cause&quot; in those circumstances where
users are regarded as social or legal outcasts. </p>

<p>They know, too, that many of their peers who share the
marihuana experience and also share the designation of lawbreaker
are, in reality, productive and generally affirmative individuals
who are interested neither in promoting the downfall of the
nation nor in engaging in acts which would harm the general
well-being of the community. </p>

<p>In short, many youth have found marihuana use to be a
pleasurable and socially rewarding experience. They have found
that the continuance of this behavior has brought them more
pleasure than discomfort, more reward than punishment. </p>

<p>Youth have increasingly come to see law enforcement activity
directed at marihuana use as an unreasonable and unjustifiable
rejection of their generation. Most of these youth have grown up
with a positive image of the police as protectors of society.
Now, many are confronted with the possibility of police intrusion
into their private lives and the threat of a criminal record. The
unfortunate result, in many instances, has been a blanket
rejection and distrust of both the agents and institutions of
government. </p>

<p>In part, marihuana use as a social behavior is an unintended
byproduct of the formal and informal educational process. Some
persons even suggest that youthful drug usage is a
&quot;success&quot; in terms of the educational and socialization
process. Our society values independence of thought,
experimentation, and the empirical method, often reinforcing this
attitude by such advertising cliches as &quot;make up your own
mind,&quot; &quot;be your own man...... judge for yourself.&quot;
</p>

<p>Although experimentation with regard to drugs should not be
considered a &quot;success, the Commission does believe that the
educational efforts necessary to discourage this curiosity, which
may be valuable in other matters, have not succeeded. We
understand why teenagers and young adults encouraged over the
years to make up their own minds have not been restrained by
exaggerated accounts of marihuana's harmful effects, or by the
more recent assertions that a true evaluation of marihuana uses
requires more research. The Scottish verdict of &quot;not
proven&quot; does little to restrain youthful curiosity. </p>

<p>In the previous Chapter, we emphasized the difference between
the vast majority of experimenters and intermittent users and the
small group of moderate and heavy users who generally use drugs
other than marihuana as well. The former do not differ
significantly from non-users on many indices of social
integration. Various studies indicate that they maintain normal
patterns of living and social interaction, and are employed,
competent citizens. </p>

<p>On the other hand, there undoubtedly are a number of persons
who have used marihuana and have exercised poor judgment,
performed inadequately, or behaved irresponsibly while under the
drug's influence, thus jeopardizing themselves or others. The
fact remains, however, that a certain number of these persons
were immature and irresponsible individuals even prior to
marihuana use, who would be expected to have poor or impaired
judgment whether or not marihuana was involved. </p>

<p>The marihuana user is not, for the most part, a social
isolationist or a severely disturbed individual in need of
treatment or confinement. Most users, young or old, demonstrate
an average or above-average degree of social functioning,
academic achievement and job performance. Their general image of
themselves and their society is not radically different from that
of their non-marihuana-using peers. The majority of both groups
tends to demonstrate equal interest in corporate concerns. </p>

<p>Based upon present evidence, it is unlikely that marihuana
users will become less socially responsible as a result of their
marihuana use or that their patterns of behavior and values will
change significantly.<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><font size="2"><b>WHY SOCIETY FEELS THREATENED<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Society appears to be concerned about marihuana use primarily
because of its perceived relationship to other social problems.
We noted in the discussion of marihuana and public health that
the focus of social concern should be the heavy users and the
possibility that their numbers will increase. Here we consider
the perceived impact of marihuana use upon the institutions and
proclaimed goals of the society.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Dropping Out <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Many parents have a genuine fear that marihuana use leads to
idleness and &quot;dropping out.&quot; During the 1960's,
marihuana use, as well as the use of other psychoactive drugs,
became equated with unconventional youth life styles. When a
number of young people adopted unconventional life styles, many
adults tended to view long hair, unkempt appearance and drugs as
symbols of counterculture. </p>

<p>They concluded that anyone who allowed his hair to grow or
gave little attention to his clothing or appearance was probably
a drug user with little or no motivation to achieve and no
interest in conventional goals. </p>

<p>A number of researchers and clinicians have observed the use
of marihuana or hashish in other societies, particularly among
poor, lower class males. Some have observed that many of these
individuals are generally unmotivated and ordinarily appear to
show little aspiration or motivation to improve their way of
life, regardless of whether they are judged by the standards of
the more prosperous members of their own society or by middle
class standards of contemporary American society. </p>

<p>One of the problems with this type of analysis is that it
fails to perceive the social and cultural realities in which the
phenomenon takes place. In the Middle East and in Asia where
hashish is used, the societies, in all instances, are highly
stratified with people in the lower classes having virtually no
social or economic mobility. Poverty, deprivation and disease
were the conditions into which these people were born and in
which they remain, regardless of whether they use cannabis. In
this context, a person's resignation to his status in life is not
likely to be caused or greatly influenced by the effects of
cannabis. Any society will always have a certain number of
persons who, for various reasons, are not motivated to strive for
personal achievement or participate fully in the life of the
community. Therefore, the determination is difficult to make
whether cannabis use influences a person to drop out and, if it
does, to what extent. </p>

<p>Some individuals possess particular personality as well as
psychosocial characteristics which in specified instances could
produce amotivation or dropping out. However, little likelihood
exists that the introduction of a single element such as
marihuana use would significantly change the basic personality
and character structure of the individual to any degree. An
individual is more likely to drop out when a number of
circumstances have joined at a given point in his lifetime,
producing pressures with which he has difficulty in coping. These
pressures often coincide with situations involving painful or
difficult judgments resulting from a need to adjust to the
pressures of the social environment. </p>

<p>Many young people, particularly in the college population, are
shielded in their earlier years from experiences which might be
emotionally stressful or unpleasant. Some young people, so
sheltered, are neither equipped to make mature and independent
judgments nor prepared to enjoy the new-found freedom of the
university or college in a mature and responsible way. Some of
these students are often unable to cope with social or academic
adversity. After being sheltered for so long, some of these young
people may be easily attracted to experiences which promise new
excitement and to fall under the influence of a peer group whose
values and living patterns may be inimical to a productive,
healthy and continuous process of personal growth and maturity.
In these instances, marihuana serves as the medium by which these
individuals encounter social and psychological experiences with
which they are ill-equipped to cope. </p>

<p>Certain numbers of these young people have demonstrated what
is described as amotivation long before the smoking of marihuana
became fashionable. Adolescence is often a particularly difficult
period of searching in many directions at the same time. In
addition to seeking a concept of &quot;self&quot; the adolescent
is, at the same time, attempting to comprehend the nature of the
world around him and to identify his status and role in society. </p>

<p>Different individuals, with different backgrounds,
socialization patterns, belief systems and levels of emotional
maturity cope with the period of transition from childhood to
adulthood in different ways., For a small number, dropping out
might be one of these coping mechanisms whether or not they use
marihuana. For others, the response to the difficult adjustments
of adolescence takes other forms, some of which are more,
acceptable, &quot;normal&quot; and easier for adults to
understand. </p>

<p>The young person who does not find it possible to cope with
the pressures of his adolescent developmental period in ways
convenient to the understanding of adult society should not be
rejected, stigmatized or labeled. He requires both support and
understanding and the opportunity to participate in roles which
have meaning for him and in ways in which he feels comfortable.
For a certain number of young people, marihuana and the mystique
of the experience eases this passage by helping them share their
feelings, doubts, inadequacies and aspirations with peers with
whom they feel safe and comfortable. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Dropping Down<br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Apart from the concern over youthful dropping out and
idleness, there is also widespread concern about &quot;dropping
down&quot; or underachieving. </p>

<p>Parents frequently express fear that marihuana will undermine
or interfere with academic and vocational career development and
achievement by focusing youthful interests on the drug and those
associated with the drug subculture. Some parents make
considerable sacrifices for their children to go to school, and
the fears that marihuana might undermine the academic, emotional
and vocational development of their young are quite
understandable. </p>

<p>The Commission reviewed a number of studies related to
marihuana use by high school and college youth. No conclusive
evidence was found demonstrating that marihuana by itself is
responsible for academic or vocational failure or &quot;dropping
down,&quot; although it could be one of many contributory
reasons. Many studies reported that the majority of young people
who have used marihuana received average or above-average grades
in school. </p>

<p>In part, underachievement is related to a view of what one
individual judges to be the achievement capacity of another. This
judgment is often made without concern for what the individual
himself feels about his potential, his interests and his goals.
Perceptions about achievement also frequently fail to take into
consideration the individual feelings about the goals of his
peers and the values of the larger society, including the
relative prestige and status attached to various academic
programs, occupations and professions. <br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Youth and Radical Politics <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Aside from the issue of unconventional life styles and the
concerns evoked by them, the other major concern of the sixties
which related to youth and drugs was radical politics. </p>

<p>During the latter half of the decade, youthful anti-war groups
were organized on many of the nation's college campuses and high
schools. These groups could be divided into two segments. The
largest segment consisted of concerned, sometimes confused,
frustrated and well-meaning petition signers and demonstrators.
Within this large group there was a small coterie of individuals
who constantly sought to turn the demonstration into a
confrontation and to protest for peace by means of violence. The
second segment consisted of organizations of individuals whose
stated purpose was to undermine the social and political
stability of the society through violent means. </p>

<p>What must be clearly understood, however, is that among the
young people, and some not so young, who protested against the
war in Vietnam, only a minority were bent on violence and
manipulated and corrupted these otherwise peaceful demonstrations
for their own purposes. </p>

<p>At the various gatherings, a number of the young people
protesting in these mass groups did smoke marihuana. We will
never know how many were initiated to marihuana use during the
course of these peace demonstrations. The fact remains, however,
that in the large campins, such as those in Washington, marihuana
was involved in two ways. First, there was the &quot;normal&quot;
use in which the smoking was part of the social experience.
Individuals came together and smoked, in part, to acknowledge and
strengthen group solidarity. Second, another quite different
aspect of the marihuana use at these gatherings said, in effect,
&quot;we know it's illegal but go and arrest all of us for doing
it. . . .&quot; This aspect can perhaps best be characterized as
a symbolic challenge to authority. </p>

<p>Unfortunately, however, the media, particularly television and
some of the news magazines, sometimes portrayed the image of a
group of young people plotting the overthrow of the nation by
violent means while under the influence of marihuana. In those
relatively few instances where explosives and other violent means
were employed, the evidence points to a cold and calculated plan
which was neither conceived nor executed under the influence of
marihuana. </p>

<p>As a result of these protests and demonstrations, therefore,
radical politics has been seen by many as a mechanism through
which large numbers of young people would be introduced to
marihuana as well as to other drugs. Radical political activity
or mass political protest is viewed by some as a threat to the
welfare of the nation and is assumed to be aided and encouraged
by our enemies. </p>

<p>The involvement of large numbers of youth in political
activism and the concomitant public concern about drug use have
beclouded the issue of marihuana use and have led to a broadening
of the concerns about marihuana on the part of adults. </p>

<p>Some of the radical movement's leaders abetted this tendency
by pointing out the alleged irrationality and unfairness of the
marihuana laws to recruit members to their ranks. Not surprising
is the fact that 45% of the adult respondents in the National
Survey felt that marihuana is often promoted by people who are
enemies of the United States. Nor is it surprising that this
belief is a function of age. While 22% of all young people
(12-to-17 years of age) and 26% of young adults (18-to-25 years)
identified marihuana with national enemies, more than one-half
(58%) of those persons 50 years and older did so.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>Youth and the Work Ethic <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>Of the many issues related to youth and the use of marihuana,
one that greatly troubles many adults, is youthful attitudes
toward work. The work ethic in our society is based on a belief
that work is a good and necessary activity in and of itself. </p>

<p>The traditional view holds that work is not only a right and
moral act but that it keeps people from mischief and from wasting
time on harmful recreational pleasures. The rationale for this
thesis is that work in American society has served as the primary
means by which persons acquired the treasured symbols of society.
</p>

<p>In fact, throughout much of our history, with the exception of
the small number who inherited or married wealth, no ethical
alternative to work existed. In recent years, the increased
emphasis placed upon leisure time activities has resulted in
shorter work weeks, longer vacation periods and more paid
holidays. </p>

<p>Among the concerns of the adults about today's youthful
attitudes toward work and leisure are that young people seem to
enjoy their recreational pursuits so much that they forget that
to a considerable degree their enjoyment is paid for by the labor
of others. </p>

<p>Many young people do not express the same level of concern as
their parents did about preparing themselves for a career and
&quot;getting ahead in the world.&quot; In part, this attitude is
attributable to the fact that increasingly, the results of this
labor are not tangible, material goods. Service occupations
generally do not produce such tangible products, and even in
manufacturing industries the individual worker is usually too
remote from the product to feel any pride or interest in it. In
both instances, the traditional symbol of the &quot;manhood&quot;
of work, a tangible product, is no longer present. </p>

<p>In sum, society has become increasingly disturbed by certain
attitudes of today's youth which seem to stress pleasure, fun,
and enjoyment without a counterbalancing concern for a
disciplined and sustained work effort. Nevertheless, the number
of young people who view work as unimportant is small when
compared to the total number of young people. The Commission has
found no evidence to suggest that the majority of youth are
unwilling or incapable of productive and disciplined work
performance. In fact, the great majority of young people are
performing their tasks in industry, the professions and education
quite effectively. </p>

<p>Although many young people delay entry into the work force to
enjoy the fruits of our prosperous society, this delay does not
mean they will not one day contribute their best efforts to the
continued growth and advancement of the nation.<br>
</p>

<p><font size="2"><b>The Changing Social Scene <br>
</b></font></p>

<p>The present confusion about the effects of youthful marihuana
use upon the dominant social order is caused by a variety of
interrelated social concerns, many of them emotionally charged
issues, including anti-war demonstrations, campus riots, hippie
life styles, the rising incidence of crime and delinquency and
the increased usage of all illicit drugs. The focus of concern
about marihuana is aggravated by the data overload mentioned in
Chapter 1, by the outpouring of incidental information about the
drug and its effects in a form and volume far beyond the capacity
of the readers or listeners to assimilate or interpret. Rather
than informing the public, much of the data disseminated has
produced frustration and misinterpretation of the information
presented. </p>

<p>Adult society, including parents and policy-makers, finds it
difficult to comprehend and account for many of the attitudes and
behavior of the young, including the use of marihuana. In many
cases the adults are still influenced by the myths of an earlier
period which overstated the dangers of the drug. At a time of
great social change and turbulence, the tendency to depend on the
&quot;traditional wisdom,&quot; and its moral justification, is a
strong one. </p>

<p>Just as youth must try to understand and appreciate the
strengths of the institutions of our society, adults must try to
understand the times through the eyes of their children. Where
marihuana is concerned, society must try to understand its role
in the lives of those who use it. The key to such understanding
lies in the changes which have taken place in society within
recent years and the effects these changes have had on succeeding
generations of youth. The increased use of marihuana is only one
of these effects. </p>

<p>One focal point in discussion between generations is the
contrast between the use of marihuana and the use of alcohol.
Many young people perceive that marihuana is less dangerous than
alcohol in terms of its addiction potential and long-term
physical and psychological consequences. Many believe also that
marihuana - and other psychoactive drugs make it possible to
expand their perceptions and see this as a perfectly legitimate
objective. </p>

<p>Viewed against the background of the profound changes of
recent years in the fields of economics, politics, religion,
family life, housing patterns, civil rights, employment and
recreation, the use of marihuana by the nation's youth must be
seen as a relatively minor change in social patterns of conduct
and as more of a consequence of than a contributor to these major
changes. </p>

<p>When the issue of marihuana use is placed in this context of
society's larger concerns, marihuana does not emerge as a major
issue or threat to the social order. Rather, it is most
appropriately viewed as a part of the whole of society's concerns
about the growth and development of its young people. </p>

<p>In view of the magnitude and nature of change which our
society has experienced during the past 25 years, the thoughtful
observer is not likely to attribute any of the major social
problems resulting from this change to marihuana use. Similarly,
it is unlikely that marihuana will affect the future strength,
stability or vitality of our social and political institutions.
The fundamental principles and values upon which the society
rests are far too enduring to -go up in the smoke of a marihuana
cigarette.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>