
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-13</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B017-180</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/dare4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122102436 text/html 9986
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:24:29 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:40:45 GMT
Content-length: 9769
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>DARE Scare: Turning Children Into Informants? </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>DARE Scare: Turning Children Into Informants? </h1>

<p> WP 1/29/94 9:00 PM </p>

<p> By James Bovard </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> DRUG ABUSE Resistance Education (DARE) is currently being
taught by police officers to more than 5 million children in more
than 250,000 classrooms each year. The brainchild of former Los
Angeles police chief Daryl Gates, the DARE program is directed
mostly at fifth and sixth graders, though its activities can span
kindergarten through 12th grade. Gates made headlines in 1989
with his suggestion that drug users be taken out and shot, and
his brand of philosophical moderation permeates the DARE approach
to drug abuse. </p>

<p> On its face, DARE seems unobjectionable. It seeks to maximize
youngsters' hostility to drugs by teaching them perils of drugs
and reinforcing the message with DARE frisbees, DARE wristwatches
and an official DARE song (&quot;Dare to keep a kid off dope/Dare
to give a kid some hope&quot;). Students are also able to win or
purchase DARE pencils, erasers, workbooks and certificates of
achievement. </p>

<p> But along with the anti-drug paraphernalia may come a more
ominous effect: children informing on their drug-using parents. </p>

<p> The program was created partly as a result of Gates's
frustrations with police sting operations in the schools. Until
the late 1980s, Los Angeles police officers routinely went
undercover as high school students in order to implore real
students to buy drugs from them. In 1987, the American Civil
Liberties Union complained, &quot;When other adults try to get
young people involved with drugs, we call it contributing to the
delinquency of a minor. When the LAPD does it, we call it the
school-buy program.&quot; </p>

<p> Finding young people who would buy drugs proved quite easy.
Unfortunately, it had little effect on drug use by students. As
Gates told the Los Angeles Times last September, &quot;We kept
buying more and more. It was appalling, depressing. I finally
said: `This is crazy. We've got to do something.' &quot; </p>

<p> The result was DARE. Winning the trust of youngsters is an
essential feature of DARE. Policemen sit and talk with children
during lunch hour and play games with them during recess. The
federal Bureau of Justice Assistance noted in a 1988 report that
DARE &quot;students have an opportunity to become acquainted with
the (police) officer as a trusted friend who is interested in
their happiness and welfare. Students occasionally tell the
officer about problems such as abuse, neglect, alcoholic parents,
or relatives who use drugs.&quot; </p>

<p> One of the first lessons found in DARE teaching materials
stresses the &quot;Three R's&quot;: &quot;Recognize, Resist and
Report.&quot; The official DARE Officer's Guide for Grades K-4
contains a worksheet that instructs children to &quot;Circle the
names of the people you could tell if . . . a friend finds some
pills&quot;; the &quot;Police&quot; are listed along with
&quot;Mother or Father,&quot; &quot;Teacher&quot;or
&quot;Friend.&quot; The next exercise instructs children to check
boxes for whom they should inform if they &quot;are asked to keep
a secret&quot; - the police are again listed as an option. </p>

<p> Roberta Silverman, a spokeswoman for national DARE
headquarters in Los Angeles, rejects the idea that DARE teaches
or encourages informing. &quot;When students begin the DARE
program they are specifically advised not talk about their
parents or friends. We are very clear that when DARE instructors
are in the classroom, they are there as teachers, not law
enforcement officers.&quot; </p>

<p> Silverman says that the DARE Officer's Guide for Grades K-4
is not part of the DARE core curriculum. &quot;It lays the
groundwork for what the officers do later. It's more like generic
safety instruction, teaching kids about personal safety. The part
about keeping a secret is to get kids talking about molestation.
It has nothing to do with drugs or with getting them to turn
their parents in.&quot; Silverman also says that &quot;any time a
child makes a disclosure (of parental drug use) to an officer,
the DARE officer would be required like any other teacher to
report that to the proper authorities or agencies.&quot; </p>

<p> Not surprisingly, children sometimes confide the names of
people they suspect are illegally using drugs. A mother and
father in Caroline County, Md., were jailed for 30 days after
their daughter informed a police DARE instructor that her parents
had marijuana plants in their home, according to a story in The
Washington Post in January 1993. The Wall Street Journal reported
in 1992 that &quot;In two recent cases in Boston, children who
had tipped police stepped out of their homes carrying DARE
diplomas as police arrived to arrest their parents.&quot; In
1991, 10-year-old Joaquin Herrera of Englewood, Colo., phoned
911, announced, &quot;I'm a DARE kid&quot; and summoned police to
his house to discover a couple of ounces of marijuana hidden in a
bookshelf, according to the Rocky Mountain News. The boy sat
outside his parents' home in a police patrol car while the police
searched the home and arrested the parents. The policeman
assigned to the boy's school commended the boy's action. </p>

<p> Police and DARE officials keep no statistics on how many drug
busts result from the program. And DARE officials say that
reports of kids informing on their parents cannot fairly be
attributed to DARE. </p>

<p> &quot;I think to focus on these few incidents is to do a
disservice to people who are at the forefront of prevention
efforts in this country,&quot; DARE's Silverman said. &quot;There
are 25 million kids who have been exposed to DARE and a handful
of cases of informing that may or may not be related to DARE at
all.&quot; </p>

<p> Nine-year-old Darrin Davis of Douglasville, Ga., called 911
after he found a small amount of speed hidden in his parent's
bedroom because, as he told the Dallas Morning News, &quot;At
school, they told us that if we ever see drugs, call 911 because
people who use drugs need help . . . . I thought the police would
come get the drugs and tell them that drugs are wrong. They never
said they would arrest them. . . . But in court, I heard them
tell the judge that I wanted my mom and dad arrested. That is a
lie. I did not tell them that.&quot; The arrest wrecked his
parents' lives, said the Dallas newspaper; both parents lost
their jobs, a bank threatened to foreclose on their homes and his
father was kept in jail for three months. </p>

<p> Silverman says that the details of the case prove how murky
such cases are. While Darrin Davis had been in a DARE program,
she says that he did not report his parents to the DARE officer
and that there was evidence that the parents were also involved
in drug trafficking, thus putting their child at risk. </p>

<p> &quot;It's making a mountain out of a molehill,&quot; she
says. </p>

<p> Whatever DARE's effect on families, its record at
discouraging drug use is the subject of some controversy. A study
financed by the National Institute on Drug Abuse on the effect of
DARE on Kentucky students between 1987 and 1992 reported &quot;no
statistically significant differences between experimental groups
and control groups in the percentage of new users of . . .
cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, alcohol and marijuana.&quot; </p>

<p> More recently, the National Institute of Justice hired
Research Triangle Institute (RTI) to survey and evaluate all the
published research on DARE, and RTI's preliminary conclusions
were largely negative. </p>

<p> The RTI's evaluation concluded that only eight published
studies of DARE's effectiveness were statistically valid. Susan
Ennett, one of the lead researchers on the RTI project, concluded
that these eight studies found that DARE's effects on drug use by
children ranged from &quot;limited to nonexistent.&quot; DARE
says that other experts have criticized the methodology of the
RTI study and notes that it has not yet completed the peer review
process. DARE claims that of 23 studies of DARE, 20 found the
program effective in shaping anti-drug attitudes and behavior. </p>

<p> At a March 1993 conference about drug education at the
University of California at San Diego, social science researchers
agreed that after 10 years of operation there is little evidence
that DARE actually reduces drug use among the young. William
Hanson, one of the early advisers to DARE and currently a
professor at Wake Forest University, said, &quot;I think the
program should be entirely scrapped and redeveloped anew.&quot; </p>

<p> Many Americans, numbed by politicians' harsh rhetoric
regarding drug use, may feel that policemen should be able to use
any means available to detect drug users. Many DARE instructors
have the best of intentions. But is that an excuse for government
programs that endanger the bonds between children and parents? </p>

<p> James Bovard is the author of the forthcoming book,
&quot;Lost Rights: The Destruction of American Liberty&quot; (St.
Martin's Press). Copyright 1994 The Washington Post <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>