
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-66</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B006-264</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/lag/psycho.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122134828 text/html 20678
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:48:17 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:01:58 GMT
Content-length: 20460
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>La Guardia Committee Report - Psychotic Episodes</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<p><b>The LaGuardia Committee Report on Marihuana</b> </p>

<h1>Psychotic Episodes</h1>

<hr>

<h2>Psychotic Episodes</h2>

<p>What has been referred to as psychotic episodes occurred in 9
subjects, 7 men and 2 women. A description of the happenings in
each instance is given. (2) </p>

<p>(2) Throughout this section fictitious initials are used to
avoid any disclosure of the subjects' identities. </p>

<p>A.V. Male. Non-user. Given 4 cc. of marihuana concentrate.
About three hours later he became restless, tremulous, agitated,
fearful of harmful effects, suspicious of examiners. For short
periods he was euphoric. At one time he had visual hallucinations
of figures making gestures suggesting harm. He talked
continuously, mainly expressing fear. His answers to questions
were delayed but intelligent. </p>

<p>W.P. Male. Occasional user. Given 3 cc., repeated two hours
later. At first there was a euphoric state; later he became
resistant and negativistic. He showed antagonism to the examiner,
demanding to be left alone. He vomited twice. Throughout he was
highly excited and talked to himself. The effects in general
resembled those seen in a maniacal state. He returned to his
normal state in about three hours after the second dose. </p>

<p>F.D. Male. Occasional user. Given 4 cc. Five hours later he
became confused, disoriented and slow in answering questions.
There were periods of elation and depression with laughter and
weeping. The effects passed off in six hours. </p>

<p>R.W. Male. Non-user. Given 5 cc. Three hours later he became
disoriented with continued talkativeness and rapid shifting of
thought. He had fits of laughter and weeping, grandiose ideas,
some paranoid trends. He answered questions clearly but without
perseveration. He returned to normal after six hours. </p>

<p>I.N. Female. Occasional user. Also heroin addict for many
years. Given 8 cc. Three hours later she became confused and
anxious with periods of laughing and weeping. There were several
short episodes resembling hysterical attacks and dyspnea, pallor
and rapid pulse during which she felt that she was dying and
screamed for the doctor and for a priest. Throughout, her
response to questioning was intelligent but delayed. There was a
return to her normal state in three hours. </p>

<p>E.C. Male. Non-user. Given 6 cc. Two hours later he developed
a marked state of anxiety accompanied by a sensation of
difficulty in breathing. This began during a basal metabolism
test. In the Sanborn equipment used there is a nose clip
occluding nasal breathing and a rubber mouthpiece through which
the air is inspired and expired. During the test the subject
became confused, panicky and disoriented as to time. The anxiety
over breathing continued for four hours but could be interrupted
by distraction. He was then given 4 cc. more. The breathing
difficulty lasted five hours more. The condition here had
features seen in claustrophobia. Before the episode, the subject
had taken marihuana on five occasions in 2, 4, 5, 5, and 2 cc.
dosage, without any symptoms of respiratory distress. However,
after the episode he took marihuana on three occasions in 2, 5,
and 6 cc. dosage and each time the respiratory symptoms occurred.
A certain degree of nervousness was present but there was no
mental confusion. The subject realized that there was no physical
obstruction to his breathing and had learned that by
concentrating his thought on other lines he could keep his
respiratory difficulties in abeyance and would not suffer from
real anxiety. Smoking up to as many as thirteen marihuana
cigarettes did not bring about the respiratory effect. It
appeared then that the respiratory symptoms were precipitated by
the wearing of the apparatus while under the influence of
marihuana, and through suggestibility there resulted a
conditioning to the marihuana concentrate which was given
subsequently. </p>

<p>The description of these six psychotic episodes fits in with
many others found in marihuana literature. They are examples of
acute marihuana intoxication in susceptible individuals which
comes on shortly after the drug has been taken and persists for
several hours. </p>

<p>The main features of the poisoning are the restlessness and
mental excitement of a delirious nature with intermittent periods
of euphoric and an overhanging state of anxiety and dread. </p>

<p>Three other subjects presented the features of marihuana
psychosis. </p>

<p>R.H. Male. White. Age 23. Non-user. In prison for the offense
of living on prostitution. The family history was bad. His father
never supported his wife or family and there was continual
discord at home. When the subject was 9 years old the father
deserted the family. Three brothers received court sentences, one
for stealing a taxi, one for rape, and one for striking a
teacher. R.H. was a problem child at school and on account of
truancy and waywardness he was sent to the Flushing Parental
School. </p>

<p>He ran away from this school several times and was transferred
to the House of Refuge on Randall's Island. At the age of 16 he
was discharged. Since that time he had had two jobs, one for
three months in a factory, the other for four and one-half months
in the W.P.A. When he was 16 he was run over by a truck and was
unconscious for a time. After his return to the Riker's Island
Penitentiary from Welfare Hospital further questioning concerning
his past revealed that he was subject to &quot;fits&quot;
occurring once or twice every two months. During the attacks his
body became rigid and his mouth felt stiff. </p>

<p>The subject was admitted to Welfare Hospital for the marihuana
study on February 20th. After the usual program of examinations
he was given 2 cc. of the concentrate on February 27th and
February 28th. These doses brought on the symptoms of dizziness
and tremor and heaviness of the head and the state called
&quot;high&quot; which is characterized by periods of laughter
and talkativeness. These effects passed off in a few hours and
were followed by drowsiness and a sense of fatigue. On March 1st
at 1 p.m. he smoked one marihuana cigarette. Immediately
afterwards he became agitated and restless and suddenly lost
consciousness. He recovered quickly and stated that he had had
visions of angels and had heard choirs singing. Later he had a
second short period of unconsciousness. During the afternoon he
continued to be agitated and restless and had periods of laughing
and weeping. After he was given phenobarbital he went to sleep.
On the next day his only complaint was that he felt dizzy.
Following this episode he was given 4 cc. Of marihuana
concentrate on March 3rd and 2 cc. on March 10th and 2 cc. of
tetrahydrocannabinol on March 5th and 4 cc. on March 8th. The
effects corresponded to those seen after the earlier
administrations of 2 cc. doses of the concentrate. </p>

<p>On March 11th R.H. was given 5 cc. (75 mg.) of the
tetrahydrocannabinol at 11 a.m. and 3 cc. at 2 p.m. No unusual
effects were noted during the afternoon and he ate his supper
with appetite at 4:30 p.m. At 6 p.m. he became restless,
apprehensive and somewhat belligerent. He felt that something had
happened to his mother, that everybody was acting queerly and
picking on him. He continued to be agitated and fearful, refused
medication and slept poorly. This condition persisted and on
March 13th he was returned to Riker's Island. After four days
there he became quiet and composed. The psychotic state cleared
up completely. The resident psychiatrist's report was: Impression
1. Psychosis due to drugs. (Marihuana experimentally
administered.) Acute delirium, recovered. 2. Convulsive disorder,
idiopathic epilepsy. Petit mal on history. </p>

<p>H.W. Female. White. Age 28. Non-user. Drug peddler, serving
three years' indefinite sentence for unlawfully possessing a
drug. Her parents died when she was about 10 years old and she
was raised in an orphanage. At the age of 19 she entered a
training school for nurses, but gave this up after four months
and supported herself by prostitution. Her sister and her
sister's husband were drug addicts and through them she began
taking morphine and heroin, being, according to her account,
depressed and dissatisfied at the time. She continued using these
drugs up to the time of her arrest, a period of eight years. In
1938 she married a man who was also a drug addict, and engaged in
the drug traffic. </p>

<p>On May 7th she was given 2 cc. of marihuana. Aside from a
headache and a feeling of muscular weakness and uncoordination,
the effect was to make the subject feel gay and very good-natured
On May 8th she was given 3 cc. Of the concentrate and became
somewhat confused and unsteady, irritated and upset at carrying
out tests, and greatly worried about the physical symptoms. Five
hours after she had taken the drug the effects had largely passed
off. Six hours later, however, she became restless and agitated,
moving about constantly, and worried about past conduct. This
state continued for a few hours. On other occasions the subject
was given marihuana in doses of 2, 3, and 4 cc. Twice after the
administration of 3 cc. The general effect was of a euphoric
type, and after 4 cc. Had been given a state of sadness set in on
two occasions and one of euphoria on a third. Toward the end of
her stay the subject became depressed and moody, constantly
dwelling on the belief that she had committed unpardonable sins. </p>

<p>She was returned to the House of Detention on June 2nd,
transferred to the Psychiatric Division of Bellevue Hospital on
June 9th, and from there was sent to Matteawan State Hospital on
July 10th. On admission to the State Hospital she appeared
confused, retarded, apprehensive, and depressed. She had a marked
feeling of guilt. She began to improve in September and was
discharged, cured, in January. Since her return to New York she
reports at frequent intervals to the parole officer. She has
secured employment in a food shop and is to be promoted to the
position of manager of the shop. </p>

<p>The diagnosis made at the State Hospital was: Psychosis, due
to drugs and other exogenous poisons (morphine and heroin). </p>

<p>D.P. Male. Colored. Age 23. Occasional user. Sentenced for
unlawful possession of drugs. Since graduation from high school
at the age of 16 he had had no occupation. His criminal record
dated from his graduation. He was arrested in 1934 for disorderly
conduct and in the same year sentenced to Elmira Reformatory for
five years for second-degree assault. He was paroled in 1936, but
during the same and the following year was arrested three times
for assault or robbery. He was returned to Elmira where he
remained until his discharge in 1940. In August 1940 he was
arrested for the possession of drugs and sentenced to a
three-year indefinite term. He had served eight months of this
sentence when he was admitted to Welfare Hospital as a subject
for the marihuana study. </p>

<p>During his stay at Welfare Hospital, D.P. was given marihuana
in the form of a concentrate and as cigarettes on numerous
occasions. His symptoms and behavior corresponded to those
usually seen, lasting a few hours with no after-effects. When the
time came for his return to Riker's Island he urged that he be
allowed to stay at the hospital and assist in the study. Two
weeks after his return to the penitentiary he developed a
psychosis characteristic of schizophrenia. He was transferred to
Matteawan where the diagnosis made was: Psychosis with
psychopathic personality. </p>

<p>These three cases are of special interest from the standpoint
of the relationship of marihuana to the psychosis. The first
subject, R.H., had a definite history of epileptic attacks. After
smoking one marihuana cigarette he experienced an acute
confusional state which lasted a few hours. In the second episode
which lasted six days there was a more prolonged confusional
state. Epileptics are subject to such attacks, epileptic or
epileptic equivalents, which may be brought on by any number of
upsetting circumstances. In this case marihuana is the only known
factor which precipitated the attack. </p>

<p>The second subject, H.W., was a heroin addict of long
standing. During her stay in the hospital, in her retrospective
reports on her marihuana experiences there were usually included
expressions of worry and remorse at her failure to answer
questions or perform tests honestly, informing on the other women
in her group, and denials concerning a syphilitic infection she
thought she had had. Prior to this incarceration she had had no
prison experience. The mental picture developed from the study at
the hospital and at Matteawan and the subject's subsequent
history represent a fairly typical example of what is termed a
prison psychosis. </p>

<p>The third subject, D.P., did not develop his psychosis until
two weeks after he had been returned to the Riker's Island
Penitentiary. He had shown no unexpected effects from marihuana
and had hoped to be allowed to stay on at the hospital instead of
going back to prison to complete more than two years of an
unexpired sentence. At Matteawan this subject was considered to
have an underlying psychopathic personality. His case also may be
taken as an example of prison psychosis. With both the second and
third subjects, the exact role of marihuana in relation to the
psychosis cannot be stated. </p>

<p>Dr. Peter F. Amoroso, Commissioner of Correction of the city
of New York, has given us information concerning the prisoners
sentenced to the penitentiary at Riker's Island from whom our
subjects were drawn. During the year beginning July 1, 1941, and
ending June 30, 1942, there were 1,756 inmates in this
institution. They had received an indeterminate sentence, that
is, from a minimum of a few months to a maximum of three years.
Of this group, 175 were subjected to intensive study by the
psychiatrist because they were considered possible psychotic
cases, 117 were sex offenders, and 200 were miscellaneous cases
referred for mental observation, making a total of 492.
Twenty-seven of these cases were committed to state institutions
for the criminal insane, namely, 25 to Matteawan and 2 to
Dannemora. </p>

<p>Commissioner Amoroso, after reviewing these cases, writes as
follows: </p>

<p>&quot;The prison atmosphere may place a most severe strain on
those who are physically or mentally abnormal upon commitment . .
. Emotionally unstable persons find themselves during
incarceration denied the assertion and enjoyment of the basic
human urges and impulses and it is natural to expect, therefore,
that prison life may result in various types of explosions, such
as psychoses, neuroses, sex perversion, and even physical and
moral deterioration.' </p>

<p>&quot;I am indeed surprised that we had so little trouble with
our volunteers upon completion of their study and sojourn at
Welfare Hospital, and the few psychotic episodes that occurred
are exactly what we would expect in the whole group without
considering the administration and effects of excessive doses of
marihuana.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<h2>Summary</h2>

<p>In the study of the actions of marihuana in respect to
subjective and objective symptoms and behavior, the marihuana was
given a number of times to each of the subjects in the form of
the concentrate taken by stomach. The amount given ranged from 2
to 22 cc., in most cases from 2 to 5 cc. After marihuana was
taken, the systematic action became evident in from one- half to
one hour and the maximum effects were seen in from two to three
hours. They passed off gradually, usually in from three to five
hours, although in some instances they did not completely
disappear until twelve or more hours. </p>

<p>Of the symptoms occurring, a feeling of lightness in the head
with some dizziness, a sensation of floating in the air, dryness
of the throat, hunger and thirst, unsteadiness and heaviness in
the extremities were the most frequent. Tremor and ataxia,
dilation of the pupils and sluggishness in responsiveness to
light were observed in all subjects. </p>

<p>From observations on the behavior and responses of the
subjects, it was found that a mixture of euphoria and
apprehension was generally present. If the subjects were
undisturbed there was a state of quiet and drowsiness, and
unawareness of surroundings, with some difficulty in focusing and
sustaining mental concentration. If they were in company,
restlessness, talkativeness, laughter and joking were commonly
seen. A feeling of apprehension, based on uncertainty regarding
the possible effects of the drug and strengthened by any
disagreeable sensations present, alternated with the euphoria. If
the apprehension developed into a state of real anxiety, a spirit
of antagonism was shown. However, any resistance to requests made
to the subjects was passive and not physical and there was no
aggressiveness or violent behavior observed. Erotic ideas or
sensations when present took no active expression. </p>

<p>Six of the subjects developed toxic episodes characteristic of
acute marihuana intoxication. The dosage varied from 4 to 8 cc.
of the concentrate, and the episodes lasted from three to six
hours, in one instance ten hours. The effects were mixtures of
euphoric and anxiety states, laughter, elation, excitement,
disorientation and mental confusion. </p>

<p>The doses given were toxic to the individuals in question but
not to others taking the same or larger ones. Once the drug had
been taken the effects were beyond the subject's control. The
actions described took unusual expression because for the
particular subject at a particular time the dose was unusually
effective. A corresponding toxicity did not occur from cigarettes
for here the effects came on promptly and on the appearance of
any untoward effects, the smoking was stopped. </p>

<p>In three of the subjects a definite psychotic state occurred,
in two shortly after marihuana ingestion, in one after a two week
interval. Of the first two, one was an epileptic and the other
had a history of heroin addiction and a prepsychotic personality.
The third was considered a case of prison psychosis. The
conclusion seems warranted that given the potential personality
make-up and the right time and environment, marihuana may bring
on a true psychotic state. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>