
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-93</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B012-32</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/myths/myths9.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101033 text/html 9409
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:10:25 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:21:44 GMT
Content-length: 9192
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Individual Rights and the Legalization of Drugs</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<p>Myths and Misconceptions of Drug Legalization - US Dept. of
Justice</p>

<h2>Chapter Eight: Individual Rights and the Legalization of
Drugs </h2>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><b>DISCUSSION</b> </p>

<p><b>I. Their Argument</b> </p>

<p>Although proponents of legalization do not rely upon this
argument very much any more, a traditional response of the
legalizers was that &quot;It's my body and I have a right to do
with it as I please so long as I'm the only one affected.&quot;
This is called the Individual Autonomy argument. </p>

<p><b>II. Our Argument</b> </p>

<p>The obvious flaw with the Individual Autonomy argument, and
the reason why it is not used much any more, is the simple fact
that drug use does affect other people. Indeed, this entire
manual is in large part a collection of reasons and examples as
to how drug use affects not only the individual, but also
innocent third-parties and society at large. But for the sake of
clarity, let us iterate and expand upon these points. </p>

<p>First, drug use increases crime - and consequently harms other
people - in at least three different ways. For a discussion of
this, please see Chapter Two. </p>

<p>Second, drug use by pregnant women causes in utero damage to
the fetus. Children born of cocaine mothers have three times the
mortality rate and four times the low birth-weight as children
born of normal mothers.143 Similarly, &quot;coke babies&quot;
tend to have emotional traits similar to those found in people
with antisocial personality disorders.144 Unfortunately, the same
mothers who are most likely to damage their children in this way
are also the least likely to seek professional help and
treatment.145 </p>

<p>Third, drug abuse closely correlates to child abuse. For
example, in Philadelphia, cocaine is implicated in half of the
cases in which parents beat their children to death, and in 80%
of all abuse cases. 146 In the District of Columbia, 90% of those
reported for child abuse were substance abusers. 147 In 1984 the
Legal Aid Society in New York City handled 3,3 10 abuse and
neglect cases in the city. By 1989 it was handling more than
24,000.148 What happened? Crack did, beginning in 1985. Sixty
percent of abuse and neglect cases involved drug allegations. 149
The number of children wounded and killed by stray bullets in
tragic drive-by shootings pales in comparison to the impact of
cocaine in the over 1,200 child abuse murders in 1989.150 But
these problems are not mere statistics - they are horror stories.
In San Francisco, a woman who was freebasing cocaine gave birth
to twins on her living room floor. She continued to freebase and
let her children die unattended. </p>

<p>Fourth, drug use, like alcohol use, is responsible for a large
percentage of automobile accidents in the United States. In
Maryland, 32% of car crash victims tested positive for
marijuana.152 </p>

<p>Fifth, drug use among pilots and train operators also leads to
accidents. Recall the Conrail disaster discussed in Chapter Four,
wherein 16 people were killed and 175 were injured because the
train operators were high on marijuana. Furthermore, a study
conducted by Stanford University found that 24 hours after
smoking one joint, pilots could not safely land a plane.153 </p>

<p>Sixth and finally, consider all of the economic and social
costs associated with drug use in our </p>

<p>society-costs that equate to tens of billions of dollars in
lost productivity, higher taxes, and increased insurance
premiums. </p>

<p>In short, few people use the Individual Autonomy argument any
more because it is painfully </p>

<p>obvious that drug use affects not only the individual user,
but also the user's family, innocent third parties, and society
as a whole. </p>

<p>143 Ken Auletta, &quot;Six doses of reality are injected in
the argument for legal drugs,&quot; New York </p>

<p>Daily News, December 17, 1989 (citing Dr. Karla Damus,
director of research and epidemiology for the Bureau of Maternity
Services). </p>

<p>144 Id. </p>

<p>145 James Q. Wilson, &quot;Against the Legalization of
Drugs,&quot; Commentary, February 1990. </p>

<p>146<b> </b>Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Legalization: The Myth
Exposed,&quot; in <i>Searching for Alternatives:</i> </p>

<p><i>Control Policy in the United States, </i>Hoover Institution
Press, 1991 </p>

<p>147 Id. </p>

<p>148 George Will, &quot;The Children's Passage of Pain,&quot;
Washington Post, May 1, 1994. </p>

<p>149 Id. </p>

<p>150 Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Legalization: The Myth
Exposed,&quot; in <i>Searching for Alternatives: Drug Control
Policy in the United States, </i>Hoover Institution Press, 1991 </p>

<p>151 Arguments Against the Legalization of Drugs,&quot; Drug
Abuse Update, September 1988. </p>

<p>152 Marsh Keith Schuchard, &quot;Marijuana: An Environmental
Pollutant,&quot; Publication of the </p>

<p>National Parent's Resource Institute for Drug Education. </p>

<p>153 Rosanna Creighton &amp; Jeffrey Kushner, &quot;Legalizing
Drugs is Not the Answer,&quot; Drug </p>

<p>Awareness Information Newsletter. </p>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<h2>Chapter Eight Summary Sheet: Individual Rights and the
Legalization of Drugs </h2>

<p><img src="blueline.gif" align="bottom" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>If
they say...</b> </p>

<p>I should be allowed to use drugs because I'm the only one
affected. </p>

<p><img src="golddot1.gif" align="bottom" width="22" height="22"><b>Then
you say...</b> </p>

<p>Drug use causes increased crime. [see<b> </b>Chapter Two]. </p>

<p>Drug use by pregnant mothers causes in utero damage to the
fetus. Specifically, it increases the risk of mortality
three-fold and the risk of low birth-weight four-fold. [Ken
Auletta, &quot;Six doses of reality are injected in the argument
for legal drugs,&quot; New York Daily News, December 17, 1989
(citing Dr. Karla Dainus)]. </p>

<p>Drug use causes child abuse. In Philadelphia, cocaine is
implicated in half of the cases in which parents beat their
children to death, and in 80% of all abuse cases. In the District
of Columbia, 90% of those reported for child abuse were substance
abusers. [Robert E. Peterson, &quot;Legalization: The Myth
Exposed,&quot; <i>in Searching for Alternatives: Drug Control
Policy in the United States, </i>Hoover Institution Press, 1991
]. </p>

<p>Drug use plays a large part in automobile accidents. In
Maryland, 32% of car crash victims tested positive for marijuana.
[Marsha Keith Schuchard, &quot;Marijuana: An Environmental
Pollutant,&quot; Publication of the National Parent's Resource
Institute for Drug Education]. </p>

<p>Drug use also causes pilots and train conductors to have
accidents. Recall the Conrail disaster discussed in Chapter Four,
in which 16 people died and 175 were injured. [see Chapter Four].
Also, a study conducted by Stanford University showed that 24
hours after smoking one joint, pilots could not safely land a
plane. [Rosanna Creighton &amp; Jeffrey Kushner, &quot;Legalizing
Drugs is Not the Answer,&quot; Drug Awareness Information
Newsletter]. </p>

<p>Drug use costs society billions of dollars in lost
productivity, taxes, and higher insurance premiums. [see Chapter
Four]. <br>
<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="12074" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>