
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-57</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B036-141</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/child11.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064545 text/html 28202
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:45:32 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:29:34 GMT
Content-length: 27983
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>My Problem Child · LSD Experience and Reality</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Albert Hofmann">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<hr>
<center>

<h3>11. LSD Experience and Reality</h3>
</center>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <p>Was kann ein Mensch im Leben mehr gewinnen <br>
    Als dass sich Gott-Natur ihm offenbare? <br>
    </p>
    <p> What more can a person gain in life <br>
    Than that God-Nature reveals himself to him? </p>
    <p>&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &#151;Goethe </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I am often asked what has made the deepest
impression upon me in my LSD experiments, and whether I have
arrived at new understandings through these experiences.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Valious Realities </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; Of greatest significance to me has been the
insight that I attained as a fundamental understanding from all
of my LSD experiments: what one commonly takes as &quot;the
reality,&quot; including the reality of one's own individual
person, by no means signifies something fixed, but rather
something that is ambiguous&#151;that there is not only one, but
that there are many realities, each comprising also a different
consciousness of the ego. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; One can also arrive at this insight through
scientific reflections. The problem of reality is and has been
from time immemorial a central concern of philosophy. It is,
however, a fundamental distinction, whether one approaches the
problem of reality rationally, with the logical methods of
philosophy, or if one obtrudes upon this problem emotionally,
through an existential experience. The first planned LSD
experiment was therefore so deeply moving and alarming, because
everyday reality and the ego experiencing it, which I had until
then considered to be the only reality, dissolved, and an
unfamiliar ego experienced another, unfamiliar reality. The
problem concerning the innermost self also appeared, which,
itself unmoved, was able to record these external and internal
transformations. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Reality is inconceivable without an experiencing
subject, without an ego. It is the product of the exterior world,
of the sender and of a receiver, an ego in whose deepest self the
emanations of the exterior world, registered by the antennae of
the sense organs, become conscious. If one of the two is lacking,
no reality happens, no radio music plays, the picture screen
remains blank. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; If one continues with the conception of reality as
a product of sender and receiver, then the entry of another
reality under the influence of LSD may be explained by the fact
that the brain, the seat of the receiver, becomes biochemically
altered. The receiver is thereby tuned into another wavelength
than that corresponding to normal, everyday reality. Since the
endless variety and diversity of the universe correspond to
infinitely many different wavelengths, depending on the
adjustment of the receiver, many different realities, including
the respective ego, can become conscious. These different
realities, more correctly designated as different aspects of <i>the
</i>reality, are not mutually exclusive but are complementary,
and form together a portion of the all-encompassing, timeless,
transcendental reality, in which even the unimpeachable core of
self-consciousness, which has the power to record the different
egos, is located. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The true importance of LSD and related
hallucinogens lies in their capacity to shift the wavelength
setting of the receiving &quot;self,&quot; and thereby to evoke
alterations in reality consciousness. This ability to allow
different, new pictures of reality to arise, this truly
cosmogonic power, makes the cultish worship of hallucinogenic
plants as sacred drugs understandable. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; What constitutes the essential, characteristic
difference between everyday reality and the world picture
experienced in LSD inebriation? Ego and the outer world are
separated in the normal condition of consciousness, in everyday
reality; one stands face-to-face with the outer world; it has
become an object. In the LSD state the boundaries between the
experiencing self and the outer world more or less disappear,
depending on the depth of the inebriation. Feedback between
receiver and sender takes place. A portion of the self overflows
into the outer world, into objects, which begin to live, to have
another, a deeper meaning. This can be perceived as a blessed, or
as a demonic transformation imbued with terror, proceeding to a
loss of the trusted ego. In an auspicious case, the new ego feels
blissfully united with the objects of the outer world and
consequently also with its fellow beings. This experience of deep
oneness with the exterior world can even intensify to a feeling
of the self being one with the universe. This condition of cosmic
consciousness, which under favorable conditions can be evoked by
LSD or by another hallucinogen from the group of Mexican sacred
drugs, is analogous to spontaneous religious enlightenment, with
the unio mystica. In both conditions, which often last only for a
timeless moment, a reality is experienced that exposes a gleam of
the transcendental reality, in vihich universe and self, sender
and receiver, are one. [The relationship of spontaneous to
drug-induced enlightenment has been most extensively investigated
by R. C. Zaehner, <i>Mysticism Sacred and Profane </i>(The
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1957).] <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Gottfried Benn, in his essay &quot;Provoziertes
Leben&quot; [Provoked life] (in <i>Ausdnckswelt,</i> Limes
Verlag, Wiesbaden, 1949), characterized the reality in which self
and world are separated, as &quot;the schizoid catastrophe, the
Western entelechy neurosis.&quot; He further writes: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>. . . In the southern part of our continent this concept
    of reality began to be formed. The Hellenistic-European
    agonistic principle of victory through effort, cunning,
    malice, talent, force, and later, European Darwinism and
    &quot;superman,&quot; was instrumental in its formation. The
    ego emerged, dominated, fought; for this it needed
    instruments, material, power. It had a different relationship
    to matter, more removed sensually, but closer formally. It
    analyzed matter, tested, sorted: weapons, object of exchange,
    ransom money. It clarified matter through isolation, reduced
    it to formulas, took pieces out of it, divided it up. [Matter
    became] a concept which hung like a disaster over the West,
    with which the West fought, without grasping it, to which it
    sacrified enormous quantities of blood and happiness; a
    concept whose inner tension and fragmentations it was
    impossible to dissolve through a natural viewing or
    methodical insight into the inherent unity and peace of
    prelogical forms of being . . . instead the cataclysmic
    character of this idea became clearer and clearer . . . a
    state, a social organization, a public morality, for which
    life is economically usable life and which does not recognize
    the world of provoked life, cannot stop its destructive
    force. A society, whose hygiene and race cultivation as a
    modern ritual is founded solely on hollow biological
    statistics, can only represent the external viewpoint of the
    mass; for this point of view it can wage war, incessantly,
    for reality is simply raw material, but its metaphysical
    background remains forever obscured. [This excerpt from
    Benn's essay was taken from Ralph Metzner's translation
    &quot;Provoked Life: An Essay on the Anthropology of the
    Ego,&quot; which was published in <i>Psychedelic Review</i> <b>1</b>
    (1): 47-54, 1963. Minor corrections in Metzner's text have
    been made by A. H.] </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As Gottfried Benn formulates it in these sentences,
a concept of reality that separates self and the world has
decisively determined the evolutionary course of European
intellectual history. Experience of the world as matter, as
object, to which man stands opposed, has produced modern natural
science and technology&#151;creations of the Western mind that
have changed the world. With their help human beings have subdued
the world. Its wealth has been exploited in a manner that may be
characterized as plundering, and the sublime accomplishment of
technological civilization, the comfort of Western industrial
society, stands face-to-face with a catastrophic destruction of
the environment. Even to the heart of matter, to the nucleus of
the atom and its splitting, this objective intellect has
progressed and has unleashed energies that threaten all life on
our planet. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A misuse of knowledge and understanding, the
products of searching intelligence, could not have emerged from a
consciousness of reality in which human beings are not separated
from the environment but rather exist as part of living nature
and the universe. All attempts today to make amends for the
damage through environmentally protective measures must remain
only hopeless, superficial patchwork, if no curing of the
&quot;Western entelechy neurosis&quot; ensues, as Benn has
characterized the objective reality conception. Healing would
mean existential experience of a deeper, self-encompassing
reality. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The experience of such a comprehensive reality is
impeded in an environment rendered dead by human hands, such as
is present in our great cities and industrial districts. Here the
contrast between self and outer world becomes especially evident.
Sensations of alienation, of loneliness, and of menace arise. It
is these sensations that impress themselves on everyday
consciousness in Western industrial society; they also take the
upper hand everywhere that technological civilization extends
itself, and they largely determine the production of modern art
and literature. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There is less danger of a cleft reality experience
arising in a natural environment. In field and forest, and in the
animal world sheltered therein, indeed in every garden, a reality
is perceptible that is infinitely more real, older, deeper, and
more wondrous than everything made by people, and that will yet
endure, when the inanimate, mechanical, and concrete world again
vanishes, becomes rusted and fallen into ruin. In the sprouting,
growth, blooming, fruiting, death, and regermination of plants,
in their relationship with the sun, whose light they are able to
convert into chemically bound energy in the form of organic
compounds, out of which all that lives on our earth is built; in
the being of plants the same mysterious, inexhaustible, eternal
life energy is evident that has also brought us forth and takes
us back again into its womb, and in which we are sheltered and
united with all living things. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; We are not leading up to a sentimental enthusiasm
for nature, to &quot;back to nature&quot; in Rousseau's sense.
That romantic movement, which sought the idyll in nature, can
also be explained by a feeling of humankind's separation from
nature. What is needed today is a fundamental reexperience of the
oneness of all living things, a comprehensive reality
consciousness that ever more infrequently develops spontaneously,
the more the primordial flora and fauna of our mother earth must
yield to a dead technological environment.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Mystery and Myth </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; The notion of reality as the self juxtaposed to
the world, in confrontation with the outer world, began to form
itself, as reported in the citation from Benn, in the southern
portion of the European continent in Greek antiquity. No doubt
people at that time knew the suffering that was connected with
such a cleft reality consciousness. The Greek genius tried the
cure, by supplementing the multiformed and richly colored,
sensual as well as deeply sorrowful Apollonian world view created
by the subject/object cleavage, with the Dionysian world of
experience, in which this cleavage is abolished in ecstatic
inebriation. Nietzsche writes in <i>The Birth of Tragedy:</i> </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>It is either through the influence of narcotic potions, of
    which all primitive peoples and races speak in hymns, or
    through the powerful approach of spring, penetrating with joy
    all of nature, that those Dionysian stirrings arise, which in
    their intensification lead the individual to forget himself
    completely.... Not only does the bond between man and man
    come to be forged once again by the magic of the Dionysian
    rite, but alienated, hostile, or subjugated nature again
    celebrates her reconciliation with her prodigal son, man. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The Mysteries of Eleusis, which were celebrated
annually in the fall, over an interval of approximately 2,000
years, from about 1500 B.C. until the fourth century A.D., were
intimately connected with the ceremonies and festivals in honor
of the god Dionysus. These Mysteries were established by the
goddess of agriculture, Demeter, as thanks for the recovery of
her daughter Persephone, whom Hades, the god of the underworld,
had abducted. A further thank offering was the ear of grain,
which was presented by the two goddesses to Triptolemus, the
first high priest of Eleusis. They taught him the cultivation of
grain, which Triptolemus then disseminated over the whole globe.
Persephone, however, was not always allowed to remain with her
mother, because she had taken nourishment from Hades, contrary to
the order of the highest gods. As punishment she had to return to
the underworld for a part of the year. During this time, it was
winter on the earth, the plants died and were withdrawn into the
ground, to awaken to new life early in the year with Persephone's
journey to earth. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The myth of Demeter, Persephone, Hades, and the
other gods, which was enacted as a drama, formed, however, only
the external framework of events. The climax of the yearly
ceremonies, which began with a procession from Athens to Eleusis
lasting several days, was the concluding ceremony with the
initiation, which took place in the night. The initiates were
forbidden by penalty of death to divulge what they had learned,
beheld, in the innermost, holiest chamber of the temple, the <i>telesterion</i>
(goal). Not one of the multitude that were initiated into the
secret of Eleusis has ever done this. Pausanias, Plato, many
Roman emperors like Hadrian and Marcus Aurelius, and many other
known personages of antiquity were party to this initiation. It
must have been an illumination, a visionary glimpse of a deeper
reality, an insight into the true basis of the universe. That can
be concluded from the statements of initiates about the value,
about the importance of the vision. Thus it is reported in a
Homeric Hymn: &quot;Blissful is he among men on Earth, who has
beheld that! He who has not been initiated into the holy
Mysteries, who has had no part therein, remains a corpse in
gloomy darkness.&quot; Pindar speaks of the Eleusinian
benediction with the following words: &quot;Blissful is he, who
after having beheld this enters on the way beneath the Earth. He
knows the end of life as well as its divinely granted
beginning.&quot; Cicero, also a famous initiate, likewise put in
first position the splendor that fell upon his life from Eleusis,
when he said: &quot; Not only have we received the reason there,
that we may live in joy, but also, besides, that we may die with
better hope.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; How could the mythological representation of such
an obvious occurrence, which runs its course annually before our
eyes&#151;the seed grain that is dropped into the earth, dies
there, in order to allow a new plant, new life, to ascend into
the light&#151;prove to be such a deep, comforting experience as
that attested by the cited reports? It is traditional knowledge
that the initiates were furnished with a potion, the <i>kykeon,</i>
for the final ceremony. It is also known that barley extract and
mint were ingredients of the <i>kykeon.</i> Religious scholars
and scholars of mythology, like Karl Kerenyi, from whose book on
the Eleusinian Mysteries (Rhein-Verlag, Zurich, 1962) the
preceding statements were taken, and with whom I was associated
in relation to the research on this mysterious potion [In the
English publication of Kerenyi's book <i>Eleusis</i> (Schocken
Books, New York, 1977) a reference is made to this
collaboration.], are of the opinion that the <i>kykeon </i>was
mixed with an hallucinogenic drug. [In <i>The Road to Eleusis</i>
by R. Gordon Wasson, Albert Hofmann, and Carl A. P. Ruck
(Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York, 1978) the possibility is
discussed that the <i>kykeon</i> could have acted through an
LSD-like preparation of ergot.] That would make understandable
the ecstatic-visionary experience of the DemeterPersephone myth,
as a symbol of the cycle of life and death in both a
comprehensive and timeless reality. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; When the Gothic king Alarich, coming from the
north, invaded Greece in 396 A.D. and destroyed the sanctuary of
Eleusis, it was not only the end of a religious center, but it
also signified the decisive downfall of the ancient world. With
the monks that accompanied Alarich, Christianity penetrated into
the country that must be regarded as the cradle of European
culture. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The cultural-historical meaning of the Eleusinian
Mysteries, their influence on European intellectual history, can
scarcely be overestimated. Here suffering humankind found a cure
for its rational, objective, cleft intellect, in a mystical
totality experience, that let it believe in immortality, in an
everlasting existence. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This belief had survived in early Christianity,
although with other symbols. It is found as a promise, even in
particular passages of the Gospels, most clearly in the Gospel
according to John, as in Chapter 14: 120. Jesus speaks to his
disciples, as he takes leave of them: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
    Comforter, that he may abide with you forever; </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <i><p>Even the Spirit of truth;</i> whom the world cannot
    receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but
    ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you. Yet
    a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see
    me: because I live, ye shall live also. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <i><p>At that day ye shatl know that I am in my Father, and
    ye in me, and I in you.</i> </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This promise constitutes the heart of my Christian
beliefs and my call to natural-scientific research: we will
attain to knowledge of the universe through the spirit of truth,
and thereby to understanding of our being one with the deepest,
most comprehensive reality, God. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Ecclesiastical Christianity, determined by the
duality of creator and creation, has, however, with its
nature-alienated religiosity largely obliterated the
Eleusinian-Dionysian legacy of antiquity. In the Christian sphere
of belief, only special blessed men have attested to a timeless,
comforting reality, experienced in a spontaneous vision, an
experience to which in antiquity the elite of innumerable
generations had access through the initiation at Eleusis. The <i>unio
mystica</i> of Catholic saints and the visions that the
representatives of Christian mysticism&#151;Jakob Boehme, Meister
Eckhart, Angelus Silesius, Thomas Traherne, William Blake, and
others&#151;describe in their writings, are obviously essentially
related to the enlightenment that the initiates to the Eleusinian
Mysteries experienced. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The fundamental importance of a mystical
experience, for the recovery of people in Western industrial
societies who are sickened by a one-sided, rational,
materialistic world view, is today given primary emphasis, not
only by adherents to Eastern religious movements like Zen
Buddhism, but also by leading representatives of academic
psychiatry. Of the appropriate literature, we will here refer
only to the books of Balthasar Staehelin, the Basel psychiatrist
working in Zurich. [<i>Haben und Sein </i>(1969), <i>Die Welt als
Du </i>(1970), <i>Urvertrauen und zweite Wirklichkeit </i>(1973),
and <i>Der flnale Mensch</i> (1976); all published by
Theologischer Verlag, Zurich.] They make reference to numerous
other authors who deal with the same problem. Today a type of
&quot;metamedicine,&quot; &quot;metapsychology,&quot; and
&quot;metapsychiatry&quot; is beginning to call upon the
metaphysical element in people, which manifests itself as an
experience of a deeper, duality-surmounting reality, and to make
this element a basic healing principle in therapeutic practice. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In addition, it is most significant that not only
medicine but also wider circles of our society consider the
overcoming of the dualistic, cleft world view to be a
prerequisite and basis for the recovery and spiritual renewal of
occidental civilization and culture. This renewal could lead to
the renunciation of the materialistic philosophy of life and the
development of a new reality consciousness. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As a path to the perception of a deeper,
comprehensive reality, in which the experiencing individual is
also sheltered, meditation, in its different forms, occupies a
prominent place today. The essential difference between
meditation and prayer in the usual sense, which is based upon the
duality of creatorcreation, is that meditation aspires to the
abolishment of the I-you-barrier by a fusing of object and
subject, of sender and receiver, of objective reality and self. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Objective reality, the world view produced by the
spirit of scientific inquiry, is the myth of our time. It has
replaced the ecclesiastical-Christian and mythical-Apollonian
world view. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But this ever broadening factual knowledge, which
constitutes objective reality, need not be a desecration. On the
contrary, if it only advances deep enough, it inevitably leads to
the inexplicable, primal ground of the universe: the wonder, the
mystery of the divine&#151;in the microcosm of the atom, in the
macrocosm of the spiral nebula; in the seeds of plants, in the
body and soul of people. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Meditation begins at the limits of objective
reality, at the farthest point yet reached by rational knowledge
and perception. Meditation thus does not mean rejection of
objective reality; on the contrary, it consists of a penetration
to deeper dimensions of reality. It is not escape into an
imaginary dream world; rather it seeks after the comprehensive
truth of objective reality, by simultaneous, stereoscopic
contemplation of its surfaces and depths. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It could become of fundamental importance, and be
not merely a transient fashion of the present, if more and more
people today would make a daily habit of devoting an hour, or at
least a few minutes, to meditation. As a result of the meditative
penetration and broadening of the natural-scientific world view,
a new, deepened reality consciousness would have to evolve, which
would increasingly become the property of all humankind. This
could become the basis of a new religiosity, which would not be
based on belief in the dogmas of various religions, but rather on
perception through the &quot;spirit of truth.&quot; What is meant
here is a perception, a reading and understanding of the text at
first hand, &quot;out of the book that God's finger has
written&quot; (Paracelsus), out of the creation. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The transformation of the objective world view into
a deepened and thereby religious reality consciousness can be
accomplished gradually, by continuing practice of meditation. It
can also come about, however, as a sudden enlightenment; a
visionary experience. It is then particularly profound, blessed,
and meaningful. Such a mystical experience may nevertheless
&quot;not be induced even by decade-long meditation,&quot; as
Balthasar Staehelin writes. Also, it does not happen to everyone,
although the capacity for mystical experience belongs to the
essence of human spirituality. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Nevertheless, at Eleusis, the mystical vision, the
healing, comforting experience, could be arranged in the
prescribed place at the appointed time, for all of the multitudes
who were initiated into the holy Mysteries. This could be
accounted for by the fact that an hallucinogenic drug came into
use; this, as already mentioned, is something that religious
scholars believe. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The characteristic property of hallucinogens, to
suspend the boundaries between the experiencing self and the
outer world in an ecstatic, emotional experience, makes it
possible with their help, and after suitable internal and
external preparation, as it was accomplished in a perfect way at
Eleusis, to evoke a mystical experience according to plan, so to
speak. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Meditation is a preparation for the same goal that
was aspired to and was attained in the Eleusinian Mysteries.
Accordingly it seems feasible that in the future, with the help
of LSD, the mystical vision, crowning meditation, could be made
accessible to an increasing number of practitioners of meditation
<br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; <b>I see the true importance of LSD in the
possibitity ofproviding material aid to meditation aimed at the
mystical experience of a deeper, comprehensive reality. Such a
use accords entirely with the essence and working character of
LSD as a sacred drug.</b> </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <!--webbot bot="Include"
    u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
    startspan --><p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
    href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
    href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>
    <p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
    href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
    href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
    <!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="52671" -->
</blockquote>
</body>
<!--
 This file is transmitted under the "Fair Use" rulings regarding the 1976 Copyright Act for NON-profit academic and general information purposes. -->
</html>
</DOC>