
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-42</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B021-263</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123349 text/html 47310
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:33:38 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:55:04 GMT
Content-length: 47092
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Acute Effects of Marijuana (Delta 9 THC)</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and
Drug Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Acute Effects of Marihuana </h1>

<p> <b>(Delta 9 THC)</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> <b>SUBJECTIVE EFFECTS</b> </p>

<p> Descriptive accounts of marihuana intoxication have been
written by noted authors, Beaudelaire (1961), scientists, Moreau
(1945), and common users Tart, 1970, 1971; Isbell et al., 1967;
Report by Advisory Committee, 1968). Adequate description of the
state of mind produced by low doses is difficult because it is
not approximated in the usual states of consciousness or by other
commonly used drugs. The closest non-drug approximation may be
the altered state of consciousness experienced in the hypnotic
trance or transcendental meditation or the, transition zone
between waking and sleep (Weil, 1971). Due to the highly
subjective nature of the experience, there is much individual
variation in the effects described. </p>

<p> Tart (1970, 1971) studied the range of potential common
effects in an extensive survey of 150 users. Changes noted by
these studies at low doses (usually smoked dose about five mg.
THC) include euphoria, with restlessness and mild mental
confusion. Sensory perception of the external environment. is
altered. Users often perceive an overestimation or slowing of
elapsed time and expansion of space, enhanced sense of tactile,
olfactory, gustatory perceptions and often a feeling of hunger.
Visual alterations reported are more vivid imagery and seeing
forms and patterns in objects that are usually amorphous.
Increased awareness of subtle qualities of sound such as purity,
distinctness or rhythm are characteristically perceived by users.
A dreamy, relaxed state and disinhibition, with uncontrollable
laughter is reported and users often believe that interpersonal
relations are altered, and act to potentiate social interaction. </p>

<p> At moderate doses intensifications of changes experienced are
reported. Users' reports include disturbed associations, dulling
of attention, vivid visual imagery, fixed ideas, rapidly changing
positive and negative emotions, fragmentation of thought, flight
of ideas, impaired immediate memory, altered sense of identity,
increased suggestibility and a feeling of enhanced insight. At
higher doses, interpersonal relations are dulled and the user
feels less social and more withdrawn. </p>

<p> At larger doses psychotomimetic (hallucinogenic-like)
phenomena are experienced in a wavelike fashion. These include
distortion of body image, depersonalization, visual illusions and
distortions, synesthesia, dream-like fantasies and vivid
hallucinations.<br>
</p>

<p> Data from Isbell et a]. (1967) and Perez-Reyes et al. (1971)
have indicated that the hallucinogenic oral dose is in the range
of 0.4 to 0.5 mg./kg Delta 9 THC. Thus, the hallucinogenic dose
is 80 times larger than the delivered dose of smoked marihuana
producing minimal subjective effects (five micrograms/kg.) or
about 11 to 14 times larger than the usual smoked dose.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>LETHALITY</b> </p>

<p> There is no conclusive evidence that short-term marihuana use
alone directly results in any physical damage to man. A few
scattered fatalities associated with marihuana use are
occasionally reported. Most are from 19th century Indian
experiences with large oral doses of charas (Deakin, 1880;
Bouquet, 1951; Ewens, 1904, Walton, 1938; Indian Hemp Drugs,
1893). Brill et al. (1970) and Smith (1968) have noted that there
have not been any reliable reports of human fatalities
attributable purely to marihuana, although very high doses have
been administered by users. </p>

<p> A frequently cited recent report from Belgium by Heyndrickx
et al. (1970) describes an essentially negative pathological and
toxicological study of a 23-year-old man found dead in the
presence of marihuana, and hashish. A cannabinoid was detected in
his urine. However, this finding in no way inculpates marihuana
as the responsible agent. There are many possible causes of
sudden death which are not toxins and do not produce observable
pathology; e.g. anaphylactic reactions, insulin shock, cardiac
arhythmias, etc. </p>

<p> A case report (Nahas, 1971) of an attempted suicide by
smoking hashish, recently in France is even more anecdotal. An
individual was reported to have smoked consecutively ten pipes of
hashish containing approximately 200 mg of Delta 9 THC each
before losing consciousness. But recovery occurred after
supportive treatment. </p>

<p> Another case report (Hughes et al., 1970) relates severe
diabetic coma with ketoacidosis after the ingestion of huge
amounts of marihuana by a mental patient. However, it appears
that the pronounced vomiting secondary to the marihuana ingestion
caused a severe electrolyte imbalance and alkalosis. Possibly a
vulnerable glucose-regulating system responded to the severe
stress inappropriately. Retrospectively, there was no history of
diabetes noted previously but this was not confirmed or ruled out
by lab tests prior to the episode. </p>

<p> Several case reports (Henderson and Pugsley, 1968 King and
Cowen, 1970; King et al., 1970; Lundberg et al., 1971; Gary and
Keylon, 1970) noted acute severe, physiological disturbances and
acute collapse (shock, chills and fever) subsequent to
intravenous injection of suspensions of marihuana. These symptoms
may have been due to an allergic reaction to injected foreign
plant material, to a bacteremia and/or to the injection of
insoluble particles which are filtered by the organs. The
symptoms may be considered a complication of the mode of use,
rather than results of the drug. </p>

<p> Although a median lethal dose has not been established in man
(Brill et al., 1970), one has been found in laboratory animals.
Earlier reports (Lowe, 1946; Joachimoglu, 1965) used materials of
uncertain potency and composition. Recent studies utilized
carefully quantified materials. One group, Phillips et al.
(1971), utilizing THC extracted from marihuana, demonstrated the
following LD50 (the dose that causes death in 50% of the animals)
in units of mg/kg of Delta 9 THC from mice,/rats: oral 481.9/666,
intraperitoneal 454-9/ 372.9, intravenous 28.6/42.47. </p>

<p> Thompson et al. (1971) under contract to the National
Institute of Mental Health have recently carried out extensive
studies in rats, dogs and monkeys in order to define the range of
toxicity of the drug. The group used synthetic Delta 9 and A' THC
and a crude marihuana extract (CME) of carefully define
composition. Delta 9 THC was more potent than Al THC. CME was
less potent than a similar quantity of A' THC. </p>

<p> Acute toxicity was studied using intravenous, intraperitoneal
and oral routes of administration in rats. An LD50 similar to
that reported by Phillips et al. (1971) was found by the
intravenous route (20 mg/kg of THC) and intraperitoneal route
(400 mg/kg) but higher values were noted with oral administration
(1140 mg/kg). Interestingly, the LD50 for males was 1400 mg/kg
while for females it was 700 mg/kg by the oral route. The minimal
lethal dose orally was between 225 and 450 mg/kg. </p>

<p> An LD50 was not attainable in monkeys and dogs by the oral
route. Enormous dose levels (over 3000 mg/kg of Delta 9 THC) were
administered without lethality to most animals. A dose of about
1000 mg/kg THC was the lowest dose which caused death in any
animals The completeness of intestinal absorption of THC at these
high doses is unknown. Behavioral changes in the survivors
included sedation, huddled posture, muscle tremors,
hypersensitivity to sound and hypermobility. </p>

<p> The cause of death in the rats and mice subsequent to oral
THC was profound central nervous system depression leading to
dyspnea, prostration, weight loss, loss of Fighting reflex,
ataxia, and severe fall in body temperature which led to
cessation of respiration from 10 to 46 hours after single dose
oral administration. No consistent pathological changes were
observed in any organs. The cause of death when it rarely
occurred in the higher species did not appear to be related to
the same mechanism as in the rats. </p>

<p> Using intravenous administration, the acute one dose LD50 for
Delta 9 THC was 100 mg/kg in dogs and 15.6 to 62.5 mg/kg in
monkeys depending on concentration of the solution. The minimal
lethal intravenous dose for dogs, also depending upon
concentration, was 25 to 99 mg/kg and for monkeys 3.9 to 15.5
mg/kg. </p>

<p> In contrast to the delayed death observed in rats after oral
administration, lethality in rats, dogs and monkeys after
intravenous injection occurred within minutes after injection.
When sublethal amounts were injected, central nervous system
depression with concomitant behavioral changes similar to those
observed after oral doses were observed. However, their onset was
more rapid and the intensity of effect more severe with
anaesthesia, and convulsions noted after injection. The monkeys
and dogs that survived the intravenous injection of THC recovered
completely within five to nine days. </p>

<p> The only consistent pathological changes were noted in the
animals which succumbed. Pulmonary changes including hemorrhage,
edema, emphysema and generalized congestion were found and death
resulted from respiratory arrest and subsequent cardiac failure.
The investigators presumed one mechanism possibly accounting for
these findings was due to the concentration of the THC solution
and its insolubility in water. Presumably, when these highly
concentrated solutions mixed with the blood, the THC precipitated
out of solution. The precipitated foreign material then formed
aggregates (or emboli) that were filtered out in the lung
capillaries causing a physical blockage of pulmonary blood flow. </p>

<p> Subsequently, intravenous studies were repeated using Delta 9
THC emulsified in a sesame oil-Tween 80-saline vehicle at 15
mg/ml or 40 mg/ml. The emulsions were administered at a uniform
rate of 2 ml/15 sec. Doses administered were 1, 4, 16, 64,
92,128, 192 and 256 mg/kg. All monkeys injected with 92 mg/kg or
less survived and completely recovered from all effects with two
to four days. All monkeys injected with 128 mg/kg or more
succumbed within 30 minutes for all but one (180 minutes). </p>

<p> Histopathological changes found in the lungs of the deceased
monkeys were like those described after the, previous intravenous
experiment. All the monkeys that died exhibited severe
respiratory depression and bradycardia within five minutes after
the injection. Respiratory arrest and subsequent cardiac failure
occurred within minutes. Behavioral changes preceding death were
salivation, prostration, coma and tremors. </p>

<p> Behavioral and physiological changes described clinically in
the surviving monkeys followed a consistent developmental
sequence and were roughly dose related in severity and duration.
Onset was 15 minutes following injection and duration was up to
48 hours. Huddled posture and lethargy were the most persistent
changes. Constipation, anorexia and weight loss were noted.
Hypothermia, bradycardia and decreased respiratory rate generally
were maximal two to six hours post injection. Tremors with motion
but not at rest were believed to be caused by peripheral muscle
inadequacy. </p>

<p> In summary, enormous doses of Delta 9 THC, All THC and
concentrated marihuana extract ingested by mouth were unable to
produce death or organ pathology in large mammals but did produce
fatalities in smaller rodents due to profound central nervous
system depression. </p>

<p> The non-fatal consumption of 3000 mg/kg A THC by the dog and
monkey would be comparable to a 154-pound human eating
approximately 46 pounds (21 kilograms) of 1%-marihuana or 10
pounds of 5% hashish at one time. In addition, 92 mg/kg THC
intravenously produced no fatalities in monkeys. These doses
would be comparable to a 154-pound human smoking at one time
almost three pounds (1.28 kg) of 1%-marihuana or 250,000 times
the usual smoked dose and over a million times the minimal
effective dose assuming 50% destruction of the THC by smoking. </p>

<p> Thus, evidence from animal studies and human case reports
appears to indicate that the ratio of lethal dose to effective
dose is quite large. This ratio is much more favorable than that
of many other common psychoactive agents including alcohol and
barbiturates (Phillips et al. 1971, Brill et al. 1970).<br>
</p>

<p> <b>PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS</b> </p>

<p> Much research has been reported on the effect of single doses
of marihuana or THC on a wide variety of indices of physiologic
function in animals. Most animalt studies involved large doses
a-rid produced profound changes similar in nature but less in
magnitude than those described in the previous paragraphs. These
have been comprehensively reviewed elsewhere (Secretary HEW 1972,
Forney, 1971; Secretary HEW, 1971) and should be consulted if
more detailed information is required. </p>

<p> Similarly, much research has been done in man. As discussed
in the previous section on factors influencing the
psychopharmacological effect in man, an acute dose-response
relationship has been clearly defined over a dose range relevant
to human usage patterns for these effects. Thus, with increasing
dose, the larger the effect on the index being observed and the
longer the effect persists. However, there is a wide variation
between individuals' responses but each individual is quite
consistent. </p>

<p> The most consistent physiological sign is an increased pulse
rate (Mendelson et al., 1972; Johnson and Domino, 1971; Renault
et al., 1971; Galanter et al., 1972; Domino, 1970; Hollister et
al., 1968 Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee 1944; Waskow et
al., 1970; Isbell and Jasinski, 1969; Meyer et al., 1971; Weil et
al., 1968; Jones and Stone, 1970; Clark and Nakashima, 1968).
This does not appear to be a direct drug effect on the heart
(Manno et al., 1970). Instead, the drug appears to cause complex
changes in the autonomic nerves regulating heart rate. Thus,
Kiplinger et al. (1971) demonstrated that the increase produced
by marihuana in heart rate is prevented by pretreatment with a
Beta-sympathetic nervous system blocking agent, propranolol. A
comparable increase rate was produced by treatment with
isoprotemol, a Beta-sympathetic like drug. One subject developed
an abnormal bigeminal rhythm after both marihuana and
isoproternol. </p>

<p> Renault et al. (1971) noted a consistent effect of marihuana
on the cardiac rhythm which also produced an increased heart
rate. The effect was the suppression of the normal sinus
arrhythmia usually produced by respiration. Respiration usually
produces a slowing of heart rate mediated by the vagal
parasympathetic nerve supply. This depression of normal vagal
tone was further evidenced by the absence of heart rate slowing
during forced expiration against a closed glotis (valsalva
maneuver). This effect seemed to wax and wane over several
minutes producing alternate periods of rapid and slowed heart
rate. </p>

<p> Both autonomic nervous systems seem to be affected by
marihuana; the sympathetic is stimulated while the
parasympathetic is inhibited. </p>

<p> Kiplinger et al. (1971) clearly demonstrated that the amount
of increase in _pulse rate was directly related to the dose of
THC administered as did Renault et al. (1971) and Johnson and
Domino (1971) over a wide range of doses. Both experienced and
inexperienced marihuana smokers demonstrated increases regardless
of the subjective state described. Tachycardia is noted rapidly
and reaches a peak about 15 to 20 minutes after finishing
smoking. The pulse rate returns to normal within one to
one-and-a-half hours. </p>

<p> Other than the one report of bigeminy (Kiplinger et al.,
1971), little or no alteration of normal heart rhythm were noted
by electrocardiogram (Isbell et al., 1967; Mayor's Committee,
1944) other than sinus tachycardia (Mendelson et al., 1972).
Johnson and Domino (1971) noted premature ventricular
contractions in a few of their subjects, but they felt this
effect was more likely produced by the smoking itself rather than
by the drug. </p>

<p> Conjunctival injection, reddening of the eyes due to
increased prominence of the conjunctival blood vessel and
dilation of the scleral vessels, (Hepler et al., 1971; Kiplinger,
et al., 1971) is another highly consistent occurrence (Mendelson
et al., 1972, Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Ames, 1958; Hollister,
et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967; Manno et al., 1970; Waskow et
al., 1979; Weil et al., 1968) produced by orally ingested and
smoked al., 1968). This finding is produced by orally ingested
and smoked marihuana (or THC). And thus the effect must be a
direct drug effect and not caused by irritation from smoke
(Perez-Reyes and Lipton, 1971). Kiplinger et al. (1971) noted
that this finding was dose-related although it develops slowly
reaching a maximum about one hour after smoking. </p>

<p> Reported effects on blood pressure are inconsistent. Some
investigators find lowered pressure (Hollister et al., 1968;
Isbell et al., 1967; Waskow, et al., 1970) while others report a
slight increase (Johnson and Domino, 1971; Domino, 1970; Mayor's
Committee, 1944) and still others report increases and decreases
(Mendelson et al., 1972; Perez-Reyes et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Preliminary results of a carefully performed study of the
cardiovascular effects (Weiss, 1971) demonstrated orthostatic,
hypotension in the erect position and hypertension when supine. </p>

<p> Little or no effect has been demonstrated in humans on a wide
variety of parameters investigated. Body temperature is unchanged
(Mendelson et al., 1971; Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al.,
1967; Brooks, 1896) as is respiratory rate (Domino, 1970; Isbell
et al., 1967; Weil et al., 1968), lung vital capacity and acute
bronchospasni (Mendelson et O., 1972) and basal metabolism
(Mayor's Committee, 1944). </p>

<p> Several studies (Mendelson et al., 1972; Mayor's Committee,
1944; Personal Communication, 1970) have examined changes in
blood cells and blood chemistry. No acute effects were
demonstrated on red blood cell number, or structure; differential
and total white blood cell count; platelet count; reticulocyte,
count; serum electrolyte concentrations; calcium and phosphorous
serum levels; liver function tests; uric acid concentration; type
or quantity of serum proteins. Although increased frequency of
urination is often reported, increased urine volume has not been
demonstrated (Ames, 1958; Mayor's Committee, 1944) and no
alteration of kidney function identified (Personal Communication,
1970; Hollister et al., 1968; Mayor's Committee, 194-4; Mendelson
et al. 1972). </p>

<p> Reports of increased hunger, especially for sweets (Allentuck
and Bowman, 1942; Ames, 1958; Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's
Committee, 1944), have focused attention on blood sugar and food
intake. No consistent significant change in blood sugar has been
demonstrated (Dornbush and Freedman, 1971; Hollister, 1971;
Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967; Manno et -al., 1970;
Personal Communication, 1970; Weil et al., 1968) with some
investigators finding decreases (Beringer et al., 1932;
Lindemann, 1933-1934), others finding increases (Manno, 1970;
Mayor&quot;s Committee, 1944), still others finding both
increases and decreases (Miras, 1965). </p>

<p> Podolsky (1971) found that although fasting blood glucose was
unchanged by smoking marihuana, higher 30 and 60 minute glucose
levels were noted after a standard dose of glucose. No
corresponding alteration in insulin or growth hormone levels was
demonstrated. </p>

<p> Hollister and Gillespie (1970) found an increased total food
intake when the drug was administered after breakfast but not
after an overnight fast. Half the subjects reported subjective
increased hunger. Subjects' free fatty acid levels and blood
glucose remained unchanged while the placebo controls' free fatty
acid values decreased. Another study suggested increased appetite
and food intake but was without adequate controls (Personal
Communication, 1970). </p>

<p> An investigation of physiological parameters of stress after
marihuana (Hollister, 1969; Hollister et al., 1970) revealed only
a minimal increase in white blood cells and a minimal decrease in
cosinophils but no changes in serotonin, cortisol level and
urinary catecholamines. However, another investigator (Chopra,
1969) demonstrated increased catecholamine excretion especially
those from the adrenal medulla. <br>
</p>

<p> Hepler and Frank (1971) and Frank et, al(1971) have carefully
studied ophthalmological changes produced by marihuana. Swelling
of the eyelids (Ames, 1958), ptosis (Isbell et al., 1967),
photophobia and nystagmus (Allentuck and Bowman, 1942) and
dilated, sluggish reacting pupils (Mayer-Gross et al., 1960;
Mayor's Committee, 1944) were all mentioned in earlier
discussions but were not demonstrated (Hepler et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Findings which were quantifiable (Hepler et al., 1971) were a
slight pupillary constriction with normal responsiveness to light
and accommodation and an increase in glare recovery time. No
change was evident on near and far visual acuity, fundiscopic
exam, visual field acuity and depth and color perception.
However, a decrease in tear secretion and an increase in
conjunctival injection was demonstrated.<br>
</p>

<p> Hepler and Frank (1971) reported an average of about 25%
decrease in the intraocular pressure of most normal subjects
after smoking marihuana. A preliminary trial in one patient with
glaucoma demonstrated similar findings (Frank, 1971).<br>
</p>

<p> No objective impairment of improvement invisual acuity or
brightness perception (Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al.,
1969) nor effect on depth perception and duration of after image
(Clark and Nakashima, 1968) was noted in other studies.<br>
</p>

<p> Neurological examinations have consistently revealed no major
abnormalities during marihuana intoxication. (Mayor's Committee,
1944; Rodin and Domino, 1970; Rodin et al., 1970; Personal
Communication, 1970). Subjects often report muscle weakness.
Minimal decreased leg, hand and finger maximum muscle strength
have been demonstrated objectively (Fere, 1901; Hollister et al.,
1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944). However, electromyography was
reported to be normal (Personal Communication, 1970<br>
</p>

<p> A slightly increased briskness in the knee jerk has been
detected (Domino, 1971 - Rodin and Domino, 1970) while no change
in threshold or elicitation of deep tendon reflexes is usually,
reported (Hollister et al., 1968; Isbell et al., 1967). </p>

<p> Incoordination, fine tremor and ataxia are often experienced
by the user (Ames, 1958; Beringer et al., 1932; Clark et al.,
1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944). The presence of a fine tremor and
decrements in hand steadiness and static body equilibrium leave
been demonstrated with refined measuring devices when they are
not grossly observable (Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee,
1944; Mendelson et al., 1972). Kiplinger et al. (1971) using
sensitive apparatus demonstrated these fine hand tremors and
changes in body equilibrium are also dose related.<br>
</p>

<p> Cranial nerve function and somatic sensation have not been
significantly impaired or improved. Subjective reports of
increased auditory sensitivity contributing to greater esthetic
appreciation of music (Winick, 1960) have been generally
unconfirmed in objective tests of auditory acuity and pitch,
frequency or intensity or threshold discrimination (Aldrich,
1944; Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al., 1969; Clark and
Nakashima 1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Meyers and Caldwell,
1969). Objective improvement in auditory acuity in several
subjects was noted (Walton, 1938; Williams et al., 1946).<br>
</p>

<p> Similarly, improvement in visual acuity and discrimination
and altered depth perception reported by users has been
unconfirmed objectively (Caldwell et al., 1970; Caldwell et al.,
1969; Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Mayor's Committee, 1944;
Hollister and Gillespie, 1970; Jones and Stone, 1970; Frank et
al., 1971). </p>

<p> A slight improvement in vibratory sensation (Rodin and
Domino, 1970), no change in touch or two-point discrimination
(Rodin and Domino, 1970; Williams et al., 1946) nor olfactory and
gustatory senses (Williams et al., 1946) have been demonstrated.
Decreased sensitivity to pain has been objectively demonstrated
(Personal Communication, 1970) which corroborates its past
therapeutic use as an analgesic. </p>

<p> One of the most frequently reported subjective effects of
marihuana intoxication is a distortion of time sense (Tart,
1971). Actual elapsed time is overestimated or perceived as being
longer than actual clock time. Thus, present events are perceived
as prolonged when intoxicated and isolated from the past and
future. They are in the &quot;hereand-now&quot; (Melges et al.,
1971). Many have confirmed this experimentally (Ames, 19,58;
Clark et al., 1970; Mendelson et al., 1972; Dornbush and Freeman,
1971; Hollister and Gillespie, 1970; Weil et al., 1968; Williams
et al., 1946). The over-estimate is much greater during periods
lit which the subject is performing a task than for unfilled
time, and the error is (greater as the time period is longer
(Clark et al., 1970). </p>

<p> Melges et al. (1971) have demonstrated that marihuana
intoxication induces temporal distortions with a greater
concentration on the present and a shortening of span of
awareness into the past and future. They believe that under the
drug's influence, as the, subject becomes less able to integrate
past, present and future, his awareness becomes more concentrated
on present events. These present events are experienced as
prolonged or timeless because they no longer appear to the
intoxicated individual as transitions from the past to the
future.<br>
</p>

<p> Melges and Bowlby (1969) have described habitual marihuana
smokers who specifically use the drug to achieve the
&quot;here-and-now&quot; orientation. These smokers claim this
focus on the present permits them to be more open to immediate
experience while being less troubled by past and future concerns.
This focus may also explain the belief that perceptions during
intoxications are both unexpected and never experienced
previously.<br>
</p>

<p> The effect of intoxication on the resting
electroencephalogram are still unclear but generally have been
minimal, inconsistent and within normal limits. In early studies
(Wikler and Lloyd, 1945; Williams et al., 1946) a decrease in
alpha activity was noted. More recently (Ames, 1958) noted a
delayed alpha increase with concomitant increases in beta and
theta activity. Rodin and Domino (1971) reported a slight shift
toward slower alpha frequencies. </p>

<p> Three other studies (Jones and Stone, 1970; Hollister et al.,
1971; Rickles et al., 1970), failed to find consistent changes
but noted increased alpha frequency, increased synchronization
and occasional paroxysmal activity. These effects were ascribed
to relaxation and drowsiness. </p>

<p> Two investigators (Chopra, 1935; Miras, 1969) reported
decreased fast activity and other variable effects. Most
recently, Volavka et al. (1971) and Fink et al. (1971), reported
a significant rapid onset effect occurring during the five-minute
smoking period and of short duration (less than 30 minutes) in
continuously alert individuals. The principal changes detected by
computer analysis were a dose related increase in percent alpha
time and an associated reduction in theta and beta hands.<br>
</p>

<p> Roth et al. (1972), demonstrated that auditory evoked
responses were decreased in amplitude by marihuana and THC
particularly during the first few minutes of stimulation. These
results may indicate that the intoxicated individual may receive
external auditory stimuli differently during the intoxication
period.<br>
</p>

<p> The prominent and frequently reported sedative effects of
marihuana and the dreamlike states occurring during intoxication
directed several investigators to study the effects of marihuana
on sleep. Fragmentary data from one sleep laboratory (Pivik et
al., 1969) indicated decreased rapideye-movement (REM) sleep
time. Another sleep lab (Rickles et al., 1970), in preliminary
work demonstrated an increase in REM sleep time. Fink et al.
(1971) noted that EEG defined sleep (stages one and two) were
dose dependent but THC did not act like a classical sedative. The
occurrence of EEG sleep was much more frequent in the placebo and
low dose (10 mg THC) conditions than in the high dose condition
(20 mg THC). <br>
</p>

<p> Mendelson et al. (1972) noticed an increased amount of total
sleep as well as an increase in discrete episodes of sleep
related to marihuana smoking. These findings correlate well with
questionnaire data (Tart, 1970) indicating that at moderate
doses, users found it easier to induce sleep and that sleep was
considered to be more refreshing, while at higher doses both
aspects were impaired. <br>
</p>

<p> In summary, marihuana containing Delta-9-THC is a
pharmacologically active drug with minimal acute physiological
effects at the low to moderate doses used by man.<br>
</p>

<p> Based on its few consistently observed physiological effects,
marihuana is a rather unexciting compound of negligible acute
physiological toxicity at the usual doses consumed by man. The
subjective state characteristically described by the intoxicated
user is far more interesting to both the user and the scientist
than the objective one observed by the investigator.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>EFFECTS ON MENTATION AND PSYCHOMOTOR PERFORMANCE<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Characteristically, intoxication with psychoactive materials
effect psychomotor and mental functions. It is apparent from the
subjective assertions of users and a wide range of experimental
studies that marihuana is no exception (Clark and Nakashima ,
1968; Clark et al., 1970; Dornbush and Freedman, 1971; Hollister
and Gillespie, 1970; Manno et al., 1970; Mayor's Committee, 1944;
McGlothlin et al., 1971; Melges et al., 1970; Meyer et al., 1971;
Weil and Zinberg, 1969; Weil et al., 1968; Volavka et al., 1971;
Galanter et al., 1972; Kiplinger et al., 1971; Mendelson et al.,
1972; Dornbush et al., 1971). </p>

<p> Psychomotor tasks which have been tested include tapping
speed, handwriting and free-hand writing and free handdrawing,
simple and complex reaction time, pursuit rotor and tracking
tasks and continuous performance tests. Cognitive tasks
frequently tested are simple arithmetic problems, serial addition
or subtraction, fine judgment tasks, 'digit-symbol substitution
test, digit-code memory, reading comprehension, speech or verbal
out-put, forward and backward digit spans, goal directed complex
serial subtractions and additions to reach a set end sum, and
short-term or immediate memory functions.<br>
</p>

<p> In general, Kiplinger et al. (1971) have clearly demonstrated
that the degree of impairment is dose related and varies in
degree during the period of intoxication exerting its maximal
effect at the peak intoxication. </p>

<p> Naive subjects commonly demonstrate greater decrement in
performance than experienced users but report less subjective
effect (Weil et al., 1968). Experienced users appear to better
compensate to the effect of the drug especially for ordinary
performance at lower doses (Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Clark et
al., 1970; Crancer et al., 1969; Jones and Stone, 1970; Meyer et
al., 1971; Weil and Zinberg, 1969; Jones, 1971; Mendelson et al.,
1972). Performance of simple or familiar tasks (i.e. simple
reaction time) during intoxication is minimally effected.
However, on unfamiliar or complex tasks (i.e., complex reaction
time), performance decrements occur (Weil and Zinberg, 1969;
Dornbush et al., 1971; Moskowitz et al., 1970).<br>
</p>

<p> Performance decrements are further enhanced when verbal tasks
are performed during delayed auditory feedback (Kiplinger et al.,
1971). Also marked individual differences in performance are
noted between similar subjects. (Clark and Nakashima, 1968; Clark
et al., 1970; Manno et al., 1970; Kiplinger et al., 1971). A
cyclical waxing and waning of the intensity of the intoxication
and concomitant performance occurs periodically (Clark et al.,
1970; Melges et al., 1970). </p>

<p> Finally, when subjects concentrate on the task being
performed at &quot;normal social high,&quot; objective evidence
of intoxication is not apparent and the individual may perform
better than when drug free (Rodin and Domino, 1970; Mendelson et
al., 1972).<br>
</p>

<p> Obviously, these observations raise practical doubts
regarding the intoxicated individuals' ability to function at
jobs requiring memory, concentration, and organization of
thinking.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>THE INTOXICATED MENTAL STATE<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Several investigators have suggested that shortterm memory is
the mental function most significantly affected by marihuana and
contributes to the subtle alterations of mental functioning
noted. Generally an impairment of recent or short term memory is
demonstrated (Abel, 1970,1971; Dornbush et al., 1971; Menges,
1970-71; Tinklenberg, 1970; Clark et al., 1970; Weil et al.,
1968). Thus, mental tasks requiring immediate information
acquisition (Abel, 1971) and/or retrieval (Weil et al., 1968) are
effected. </p>

<p> Abel (1971) recently showed that marihuana blocks the
acquisition process involved in the storage of new interferes
with the retrieval of already stored information. Decrements are
produced in decisions requiring recent memory or sustained
alertness (Clark et al., 1970) ; conversation (Well et al., 1968)
; calculations, or reading which requires retention, coordinating
and indexing sequential information termed temporal
disintegration (Melges et al., 1970, 1971). </p>

<p> Melges eta]. (1970, 1971) theorizes that episodic impairment
of immediate memory produces voids which are filled with
perceptions and thoughts extraneous to the organized mental
processes. He suggests that this leads to temporal disintegration
producing a fragmented and disorganized temporal experience in
which past and future time frames are blurred and the present is
experienced as prolonged or boundless. Thus, depersonalization
occurs as the individual experiences himself temporally in a
strange and unreal manner during marihuana intoxication. </p>

<p> <b>UNPLEASANT REACTIONS: &quot;TOO STONED&quot; AND
&quot;NOVICE-ANXIETY&quot; <br>
</b> </p>

<p> These substantial cognitive and psychomotor effects are
probably responsible for many of the acute adverse reactions to
marihuana. One, of the most common is the heavy, drugged feeling
where the individual feels mentally and physically sluggish so
that every motion and thought seems to require extreme effort
(Smith and Mehl, 1970). This probably reflects impaired cognitive
function and psychomotor retardation from getting &quot;too
stoned.&quot; This most frequently occurs after oral ingestion of
a large dose of drugs or in inexperienced smokers who have, not
learned to selftitrate their dose to achieve the desired high. </p>

<p> In these instances, depression, anxiety, fatigue, short-term
memory loss, dizziness, nausea, incoordination, palpitations are
experienced as generalized discomfort, and ill-being. </p>

<p> &quot;Novice anxiety reactions&quot; or panic reactions
account for a majority of acute toxic reactions to marihuana
(Baker and Lucas, 1969; Baker-Bates, 1935; Gaskill, 1945;
Grossman, 1969; Persyko, 1970; Bialos, 1970; Sonnenreich and
Goes, 1962; Sigg, 1963; Dally, 1967; Hamaker, 1891; Marten, 1969;
Smith and Mehl, 1970; Walton, 1938). </p>

<p> When dosage, set and setting are optimal the distortion of
self (depersonalization) and temporal disintegration
(timelessness of the present moment) common to marihuana
intoxication is recognized by the individual as time-limited and
drug-induced. It is usually experienced as pleasurable. But, if
dose, set and setting are not optimal the experience may cause
the intoxicated individual to fear that loss of his identify and
self control may not end or that he is dying or losing, his mind.
Acute, anxiety or panic results (Mel et al., 1970). </p>

<p> Non-drug factors of set and setting play a most important
role in these, reactions. Of course, the great variability of
individuals makes the effect of marihuana on any specific
individual rather unpredictable. </p>

<p> The large majority of these anxiety reactions occur in
novices who have intense underlying anxiety surrounding marihuana
use such as fears of arrest, of disruption of family and
occupational relations and of possible physical and mental
dangers. Also, individuals with relatively rigid personality
structures, whose values are more in line with those of the
&quot;straight&quot;society and have little desire for new and
different experiences, appear to experience these, anxiety
reactions much more frequently than those, individuals who are
members of the &quot;counterculture&quot; (Smith and Mehl, 1970).<br>
</p>

<p> In addition, simple episodes of neurotic depression may be
observed in these, same types of individuals during periods of
unusual psychological stress (Well, 1970). Both of these types of
reactions are transient and abate as the drug effects wear off
over a few hours. Treatment should consist of gentle but
authoritative. reassurance that nothing is seriously wrong and
that the drug effects will wear off and the individual will feel
normal&quot; again (Smith and Mehl, 1970; Well, 1970).<br>
</p>

<p> <b>ACUTE PSYCHOSES<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Rare cases of full-blown acute psychotic episodes
precipitated by marihuana use are reported in individuals with
histories of mental disorder, with marginal psychological
adjustments or with poorly developed personality structures and
ego defenses (Talbott, 1968; Heiman, 1968; Kaplan, 1971; Pernot,
1969; Keeler, 1968; Defer and Diehl, 1968; Wurniser et al., 1969;
Allentuck and Bowman, 1942; Bromberg, 1939; Bromberg, 1934;
Curtis and Wolfe, 1939; Hughes et al., 1970; Isbell et al., 1967;
Keup , 1970; Keeler, 1967; Talbott and Teague, 1969 Mayor's
Committee, 1944). </p>

<p> Marihuana intoxication may hinder the ability of these,
individuals to maintain structural defenses to existing stresses,
or, alternatively produce a keener awareness of personality
problems or existing stresses (Smith, 1968). Psychotherapy and
antipsychotic medications are useful in controlling and
preventing this reaction (Weil, 1970). </p>

<p> Exceptionally rare reports from North America of nonspecific
toxic psychosis or actite brain syndrome have occurred after
extremely high drug dose consumption, although such reports are,
more common in the eastern countries. These conditions are
self-limited and clear spontaneously as the drug effect abates
(Weil et al., 1968; Bartolucei et al. 1969 Ames, 1958; Isbell et
al., 1967; Mayor's Committee, 1944; Williams et al., 1946). </p>

<p> Finally, marihuana intoxication may trigger delayed anxiety
reactions or psychotic episodes in a small percentage of persons
who have prior experience with hallucinogenic drugs (Ungerleider
et al., 1968; Ungerleider, 1969; Weil et al., 1968; Favazza and
Domino, 1969). </p>

<p> In summary, the acute psychomotor-cognitive effects of
marihuana intoxication are, interesting academically to gain
understanding of normal and abnormal mental function. Also, for
practically determining the danger-risk factor for the individual
including determination of his functional level personally,
vocationally and socially in this society. The effect on
personal-social-vocational function is highly individualized and
difficult to predict at present. </p>

<p> Although reports of anxiety attacks and psychotic episodes
are more frequent as marihuana use spreads, they are still
exceedingly rare and their incidence appears to be decreasing as
use becomes more acceptable to more diverse populations. For
example, during the nine-year period of 1961 to 1969, out of
701,057 admissions to Los Angeles County Hospital, located in a,
city with very high marihuana use, only three patients required
hospitalization for psychic sequelae of marihuana smoking
(Lundberg, et al., 1971). <br>
</p>

<p> In contrast, many cases are being seen in Vietnam soldiers
where a extremely potent material is available and daily stresses
are high, but, these probably represent only a small fraction of
marihuana, users (Talbott and Teague, 1969; Talbott, 1968;
Heiman, 1968). </p>

<p> During the, academic year 1968 and 1969, eight students were
seen in the mental hygiene division of a private Eastern
University student population (8,500) with acute anxiety
reactions (Bialos, 1970). The frequency of marihuana-associated
acute adverse, anxiety reactions requiring attention at Boston
University Student Health Service (student population 20,000) is
between five and seven yearly (Pillard, 1970). </p>

<p> In a recent survey of newly admitted patients to a large
mental hospital, marihuana was the direct cause of the
hospitalization in only 0.9 per thousand admissions (Keup, 1970).<br>
</p>

<p> <b>PERSISTENT EFFECTS AFTER ACUTE DOSE<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Investigators have not noted persistent effects after smoking
marihuana for periods of more than three to five hours (Fink et
al., 1971; Weil et al., 1968; Pillard, 1970). </p>

<p> Users report only minimal hangover effects (Mayor's
Committee, 1944; Haines and Green, 1970; McGlothlin et al., 1971)
after very heavy use. Feelings of lassitude and heaviness of the
head, lethargy, irritability, headaches and loss of concentration
are reported especially when associated with lack of sleep
(Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Indian Hemp, 1893). This may be related
to preliminary data (Rickles et al., 1970) suggesting a subtle
increase in REM sleep time primarily seen in the last one-third
of the night in individuals who smoked one to two cigarettes per
day usually at night for at least a year.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA USE ON CONCOMITANT BEHAVIOR<br>
</b> </p>

<p> Mendelson et al. (1972), under contract to the Commission,
analyzed the effects on behavior of acute marihuana intoxication
on an extensive variety of assessine nts including a simple
operant task, mood states, individual and group observations
before, during and after smoking and clinical psychological
evaluations. </p>

<p> Sleep-inducing properties were confirmed. Increased amounts
of total sleep were observed in both number and length of shorter
and longer blocks of consecutive hours of sleep related to
marihuana smoking.<br>
</p>

<p> Examination of mood assessments prior, during and after
marihuana smoking indicates that the acute effects were a
reduction of negative moods (anxiety, hostility, and guilt-shame)
and an increase in the positive moods (carefreeness and
friendliness). Examinations of the mood prior to smoking revealed
that the subjects tended to smoke marihuana when they reported
generally positive moods. The effect of the drug was to increase
this positive mood. One paradoxical finding was that the subjects
also reported feeling more depressed after smoking.<br>
</p>

<p> Acute effects of marihuana on cognitive and motor functions
were studied with a battery of tests sensitive to brain function
(Halstead Category Test, Tactile Performance Test, Seashore
Rhythm Test, Finger Tapping Test, Trail Making Test and the
Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale). No alterations in performance
as a result of acute intake of marihuana were noted in any of
these. </p>

<p> The acute effect of marihuana smoking on social behavior was
investigated, by observing the individual and his interaction in
small groups. The data indicated very strongly that marihuana
smoking, in addition to being a subjective drug experience, is
also a social activity around which verbal interaction and other
types of social behavior are centered. </p>

<p> Although marihuana smoking tended to be, a group activity,
subjects did not always engage in verbal communication while
smoking. Subjects often were observed withdrawing from the social
interaction and then participating in some type of
noncommunicative passive activity, such as watching television,
listening to music, reading or staring at objects or people. This
decrement in total interaction appeared to be a drug effect. </p>

<p> Heavy marihuana users tended to be more withdrawn than the
intermittent users, often listening to the stereo and focusing on
the personal effects of the drug. The intermittent users tended
to watch television which provided group entertainment, thus
enhancing the social effects of the drug. </p>

<p> Verbal interaction in formal task-oriented discussion groups
diminished when several group members were simultaneously
intoxicated. How-ever, groups engaged in problem-solving tasks
performed more efficiently because less suggestions and
discussion ensued before proposing a workable solution. The
groups tended to become more convivial and less task-oriented
although none failed to arrive, at the goal. Marihuana did not
appear to increase hostility during these sessions and
furthermore tended to change the nature of hostile communication
from direct criticism to indirect sarcasm. </p>

<p> Assessment of risk-taking behavior revealed that under the
influence of marihuana, users tend to become more conservative in
the decision making. </p>

<p> In summary, it appears that marihuana does exert subtle
effects on measurable components of social behavior and
interaction.<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>