
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-53</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B021-19</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/mjleg1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045859 text/html 14417
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:58:47 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:46:41 GMT
Content-length: 14199
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>The Legalization of Marijuana - By Dennis Yates</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general/general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="41429" -->

<h1>The Legalization Of Marijuana: Part I </h1>

<p>Ole Miss Is The Center For Growing </p>

<p>Legal Marijuana In The U.S. </p>

<p>by </p>

<p>Dennis M. Yates </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19"> </p>

<p>Every person in the United States has heard of the illicit
substance called marijuana. Yet, unknown to most people, there is
one place in the United States where marijuana is grown legally.
That place is the Medicinal Plant Garden, right here at the
University of Mississippi. </p>

<p>The Medicinal Plant Garden, a part of the Research Institute
of Pharmaceutical Sciences (RIPS) is part of the Marijuana Plant
Facility The garden is over 20 years old, but the laboratory was
created only four years ago. </p>

<p>According to Dr. Mahmoud Elsohly, research scientist for RIPS,
the laboratory of the Medicinal Plant Facility is used to study
various applications of marijuana. For example, the scientists
grow marijuana to test its physical makeup, analyze marijuana
confiscated by the DEA, law enforcement agencies, and various
narcotics groups, to find the potency ratings of the drugs, and
extract THC (the active ingredient in marijuana) from plants they
harvested. </p>

<p>One project that the Medicinal Plant Facility is currently
working on is a medicine made from THC for use in a suppository
form to replace Marinol, a capsule made of 95 percent THC and
used for nausea and vomiting problems in cancer patients as well
as fighting the wasting sickness, or anorexia-cachexia, suffered
by 70 to 90 percent of AIDS patients. </p>

<p>Another practice done by the lab is to send marijuana to the
Research Triangle Institute in North Carolina for use in the
Compassionate IND program. This program gives marijuana to people
who use it to allieviate symptoms of their diseases, such as
glaucoma, cancer, and AIDS victims. However, there are only a
small handfull (about eight people) receiving the marijuana, out
of several thousand who have applied. </p>

<p>Marijuana has been used by many cultures for various ailments.
Israeli scientists, for example, found the skeleton of a fourth
century woman who they believed died in childbirth. Ashes nearby
were found to be the burned remains of the cannabis, or
marijuana, plant. The scientists say this suggests that ancient
Middle Eastern women used inhaled marijuana smoke to reduce labor
pains. </p>

<p>These days, the medical profession have found several
applications for the marijuana plant. In medicine, THC (the
active ingredient in marijuana) has been found again and again to
help patients battling the life-threatening diseases of cancer
and AIDS to fight the intense nausea that causes their wasting
sickness. Marijuana also helps glaucoma (an eye disease that
causes blindness) victims by reducing the interocular pressure.
It reduces, sometimes eliminating altogether, the seizures of
epileptic patients, along with reducing nerve disorders of
multiple sclerosis patients. As a final interesting note, a
recent discovery by a South Florida doctor concerns the fact that
if THC is placed in a test tube with the herpes virus, the THC
will kill the herpes virus. </p>

<hr>

<h2>The Legalization Of Marijuana: Part II </h2>

<p>Many Opposed, But Some Support </p>

<p>Making Marijuana A Legal Crop </p>

<p>by </p>

<p>Dennis M. Yates </p>

<p>On April 6, 1995, ABC News ran a special titled
&quot;America's War On Drugs: Searching For Solutions&quot; in
which an alternative to the currently failing War On Drugs was
given: legalization. It showed the American public a new way to
look at the situation. New for most of America, at least. Several
people have been saying for years that marijuana should be a
legal crop and that possession should no more be a crime than
alcohol. </p>

<p>Take for example the case of Judge James P. Gray, a California
state superior court judge with what most people would consider
conservative views. His proposal to legalize marijuana, along
with heroin and cocaine, has generally been well received from
the people that have heard him speak on the subject. In an
interview, Gray recalled one person in particular. </p>

<p>&quot;I got one letter recently from a man who started out
disagreeing with me but by the time he finished his letter he was
volunteering to go out and speak publicly in favor of
legalization. He basically convinced himself just by going over
it.&quot; </p>

<p>Several other people, both famous and not, agree that
legalization is an answer that deserves consideration. The Board
of Directors of NORML (the National Organization to Reform
Marijuana Laws) reads like a &quot;Who's Who&quot; of science.
The board consists of Dr. Kary Mullis, winner of the 1993 Nobel
Prize in chemistry; Dr. Lester Grinspoon, Harvard Medical School
professor and author of Marijuana: The Forbidden Medicine; Dr.
Louis Lasagna, chairman of the National Academy of Sciences
committee that studied marijuana and dean of the Sackler School
of Biomedical Sciences at Tufts University; Ann Druyan, secretary
of the Federation of Scientists and, along with husband Carl
Sagan, co-producer of the PBS series Cosmos; Dr. John Morgan,
author of the drug abuse section in the Merck Manual of Diagnosis
and Therapy; David Boaz of the Cato Institute; Dr. Barbara
Ehrenreich, columnist for The Guardian in London and essayist for
Time; Richard Evans, Esq.; New York State Senator Joseph Galiber;
Dr. Dale Gieringer of the California NORML chapter; Dr. Ansley
Hamid of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice; Dr. John
Morgan from the City University of New York Medical School; Dan
Viets, Esq., of the Missouri NORML chapter; Dr. Lynn Zimmerman of
Queens College; and Keith Stroup, Esq., founder of NORML. </p>

<p>Three other people who feel marijuana should be legalized are
Robert Randall from Washington and Kenny and Barbra Jenks of
Panama City, Florida. All three receive marijuana cigarettes from
the medical marijuana fields right here in Oxford, Mississippi.
For Randall, the marijuana keeps his glaucoma, a degenerative eye
disease that is the leading cause of blindness, at bay, something
conventional medications failed to do. In 1988, the Jenkses began
AZT treatment for AIDS, a treatment that causes extreme nausea in
its users. It caused Barbra to lose 40 pounds within a month,
one-third of her body weight. With marijuana, the nausea both
suffered from disappeared. </p>

<p>Another person suggesting legalization comes from the Drug
Enforcement Agency's own organization. Francis L. Young,
administrative judge for the DEA, recommended that marijuana be
moved from a Schedule I substance (no therapeudic uses) to
Schedule II (a useful drug that can be prescribed by a doctor).
In his report, he stated that &quot;In layman's terms...in order
to induce death a marijuana smoker would have to consume 20,000
to 40,000 times as much cannabis as is contained in one marijuana
cigarette... A smoker would theoretically have to consume nearly
1,500 pounds of cannabis to induce a lethal response...&quot; and
concluded with &quot;The administrative law judge recommends that
the Administrator conclude that the cannabis plant considered as
a whole has a currently accepted medical use in treatment in the
United States, that there is no lack of accepted safety for use
of it under medical supervision and that it may be lawfully be
transferred from Schedule I to Schedule II.&quot; Unfortunately,
in docket number 90-1020 in April 1991, the DEA made their
position clear: &quot;The DEA Administrator exercised with a
vengeance his prerogative to reject the recommended
decision.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<h2>The Legalization Of Marijuana: Part III </h2>

<p>When Prosecuted, Violators </p>

<p>Face Harsh Penalties </p>

<p>by </p>

<p>Dennis M. Yates </p>

<p>There is one overriding danger to today's average marijuana
consumer. It isn't brain damage, it isn't lung cancer, it isn't
going crazy and shooting every thing that moves. No, the largest
danger is the fact that, if they are caught, they will be
arrested. </p>

<p>Marijuana is illegal for one simple reason: marijuana is
illegal. Currently, it is considered by many health officials to
be one of the safest therapudic substances known to man. In a
nationwide survey of cancer therapists, 50 percent of them said
they would prescribe marijuana if it were legal, while 44 percent
admitted they did recommend marijuana to patients. Francis L.
Young, the administrative judge for the Drug Enforcement Agency,
said &quot;Marijuana, in its natural form, is one of the safest
therapeudically active substances known to man.&quot; </p>

<p>Mississippi is a state that has decriminalized marijuana
possession, meaning that a first offense for possession for
personal useage cannot include prison time or a criminal record.
Instead, it is treated much like a traffic violation. For
possession of marijuana with a total weight of less than or equal
to an ounce, the fine is $100 to $250. From one ounce up to a
kilogram, however, the fine goes to $1,000 and jail time for a
year can be served. A kilogram or over can give the possessor up
to 20 years and a fine from $1,000 to $1,000,000. For sale or
delivery of less than one ounce of marijuana, the criminal can be
jailed for up to three years and face fines for $3,000. For
amounts greater than or equal to an ounce, the jail time jumps to
up to 20 years and the fines to $30,000. </p>

<p>Amounts greater than or equal to a kilogram entail jail time
for up to 30 years and fines from $100,000 to $1,000,000. If the
possessor has over ten pounds, the punishment is life in prison
without parole. In addition, the punishment for any sale to a
minor and sale within 1,500 feet of a school will both double the
punishment. </p>

<p>The federal laws on marijuana possession are even more harsh.
Possession of any amount has a fine of $10,000 and a possible one
year prison term. Growing, delivering or selling less than 100
kilograms has a fine of $1,000,000 and up to 20 years in prison,
whereas 100 kilograms or more has a fine of up to $2,000,000 and
a prison term from 5 to 20 years. Over 1,000 kilograms, the fine
becomes $10,000,000 and the prison term jumps to 10 years to
life. Distribution within 1,000 feet of a playground or school
(including public or private colleges or sales to minors) or
within 100 feet of a youth center, public pool, or video arcade,
the penalty doubles with a mandatory minimum of one year in
prison unless the amount is under five grams. </p>

<p>A relatively new practice that flew across the U.S. within the
past few years are what are known as the forfeiture laws. These
rules allow law enforcement to confiscate items from a
marijuana-user's possession if there is a belief the item in
question was bought with &quot;drug money,&quot; money gained
from illegal drug trades. </p>

<p>Unfortunately, many people are frightened from possible abuses
from the forfeiture laws. For example, in Ventura County,
California, District Attorney Michael D. Bradford released a
document titled &quot;Report on the Death of Donald Scott,&quot;
which claimed that Los Angeles County Deputy Sheriff Gary R.
Spenser filed a false affidavit to receive a search warrant to
the 200-acre ranch of Donald Scott. In the raid following
issuance of the search warrant, Spenser shot the 61-year-old
Scott twice, killing him. The report concluded &quot;Based in
part upon the possibility of forfeiture, Spencer obtained a
search warrant that was not supported by probable cause. This
search warrant became Donald Scott's death warrant.&quot; When
Bradbury was interviewed by ABC's 20/20 and asked if the lure of
revenue gained by the forfeiture laws were corrupting law
enforcement officials, Bradbury said &quot;In my opinion,
yes.&quot; </p>

<p>Another problem with the current marijuana laws is prison
overcrowding. According to the Federal Bureau of Justice
statistics, 59,000 inmates were added to the already overcrowded
prisons in 1992 to a record 833,600 inmates nationwide. This is a
greater than 160 percent increase since 1982 and is mostly
attributed to drug violators. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schhemp_general_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="general/general.htm">General Hemp/Marijuana Information</a>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="41429" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>