
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B30-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B003-296</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133929 text/html 42390
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:39:18 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:28:26 GMT
Content-length: 42172
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Portrait of Drug Production and Use</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter II Portrait of Drug Production and Use </h2>

<p>Cocaine Scope of the Problem </p>

<p>Once considered a fashionable drug for the wealthy, cocaine
and its deleterious effects are now beginning to be better
understood. In the past scientists made a clear distinction
between physical and psychological drug dependence, but the
health and social consequences of cocaine use have demonstrated
that the two courses lead to the same end: cocaine, like other
addictive drugs, ruins lives and kills. Widely available across
the United States, cocaine is now used by individuals of all
socioeconomic groups. The cocaine industry generates an estimated
$11 billion in illicit income annually, and it is growing.
Cocaine production, importation to the United States and
consumption have all increased significantly in recent years. The
cocaine industry is fueled by the approximately 25 million
Americans who have tried cocaine, of which five to six million
use it at least once per month. Of the regular users, it is
estimated that almost half may be considered addicted. Although
the total number of users appears to have leveled off in the last
few years, cocaine consumption has increased 12 percent between
1983 and 1984, from 50-68 metric tons to 55-76 metric tons. As
cocaine consumption has increased, so too have more dangerous
forms of use of the drug and the deleterious effects associated
with it. Cocaine-related deaths increased 77 percent from 1983 to
1984 and cocaine-related emergency room visits increased 51
percent. Requests for treatment for cocaine use have increased
600 percent during the past three years. In 18 states, cocaine is
reported as the primary drug of abuse for clients in treatment
facilities. There is no indication that without a comprehensive
effort at reduction of both the supply of and demand for cocaine,
the increases in cocaine use or its deleterious medical and
social effects will subside in the near future. From a law
enforcement perspective, the consequences of this tolerance and
addiction are the intense, steady and increasing demand for the
product, which generates vast revenues for organized crime.
Today's Cocaine User </p>

<p>The cocaine industry is sustained by the appetite of the
cocaine user. With the possible exception of marijuana, cocaine
is used by a wider demographic cross-section of society than any
other controlled substance. Facts demonstrate that the popular
belief that cocaine use is restricted to the wealthy is a myth.
For example, a study of 6,406 males arrested for serious crimes
and processed in New York City's Manhattan Central Booking police
office in 1984 reveals that 42 percent tested positively for
cocaine in their system, the drug most frequently detected. The
use of cocaine in combination with other drugs appears to be
increasing. Fifty-nine percent of the cocaine-related deaths in
1984 involved other drugs, particularly alcohol, heroin and PCP.
In addition, more dangerous routes of cocaine administration are
now being used. Use of &quot;speedballs,&quot; injections of
heroin and cocaine, which are often lethal, increased 37 percent
from 1983 to 1984. Smoking of coca paste and base, forms of
consumption with particularly dangerous health consequences, have
also increased. Surveys of cocaine users demonstrated there is no
&quot;typical&quot; cocaine user. Results of a 1983 survey of
callers to the national 800-COCAINE hotline indicate that the
average caller was a 31-year old, white, middle class male with
at least some college education and a job with an annual salary
exceeding $25,000. Results of the 1985 survey of callers to the
hotline reveal that more women, minorities and adolescents called
than just two years earlier, and 73 percent of callers in 1985
reported an income of less than $25,000 per year. While almost
half of the calls to the hotline in 1983 came from the northeast,
calls were fairly evenly geographically distributed in 1985. Just
as it has spread geographically and to different socioeconomic
groups, cocaine use has increased among certain age groups. Most
alarmingly, an increase in adolescent use of cocaine has been
reported in the 1984 and 1985 surveys of drug use among high
school seniors. The surveys found that current use of cocaine
among respondents climbed from 4.9 percent in 1983 to 5.8 percent
in 1984, and to 6.7 percent 1985. According to the surveys,
annual and lifetime use of cocaine also increased. Health
Consequences of Cocaine Use One reason that use of cocaine is so
widespread is because of the properties of the drug itself.
Cocaine is derived from the leaves of the coca plant
(Erythroxylon coca) and has been identified by Dr. Donald Ian
MacDonald, administrator of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental
Health Administration, as one of the most powerfully addictive
substances known to man. Cocaine is a stimulant traditionally
used to produce euphoria. Other initial effects, however,
typically include excitation, increased alertness, insomnia, loss
of appetite, increased heart rate, increased respiration and
increased blood pressure after even one use. Death can also
result from first time use as discussed below. Repeated use of
cocaine can cause chronic fatigue, convulsions, depression,
irritability, loss of sex drive, memory problems, nasal bleeding,
paranoia, severe headaches, increased body temperature and death.
These symptoms are neither theoretical nor infrequent. Chronic
cocaine use causes tolerance, withdrawal symptoms and addiction.
Tolerance is evidenced by the fact that chronic cocaine users
need to increase their dosage of cocaine to achieve the same
effects as lower dosages. As dosage increases, the effect of
cocaine use become more pronounced. According to cocaine
researcher Dr. Reese T. Jones, &quot;The existence of a true
withdrawal syndrome following cocaine use seems compelling.&quot;
This syndrome includes &quot;depression, social withdrawal,
craving, tremor, muscle pain, eating disturbance,
encephalographic changes and changes in sleep patterns.&quot; </p>

<p>The addictive nature of cocaine and its toxicity have been
documented in both animal studies and human experience. According
to the results of a study reported in the July 5, 1985 issue of
the Journal of the American Medical Association, 90 percent of
rats self-administering cocaine intravenously died within 30
days, while the mortality rate for rats self-administering heroin
was only 36 percent. The study found that rats using cocaine lost
up to 47 percent of their body weight, ceased grooming themselves
and deteriorated in general health. Several rats experienced
seizures, but immediately self-administered more cocaine after
the cessation of convulsions. The study concludes that in regard
to human cocaine use: As the intake of cocaine increases and the
concentration of this compound becomes greater (through the
availability of higher-purity drugs, by IV injections or by
'free-basing') the number of fatalities associated with cocaine
abuse is likely to increase. Hundreds of fatalities each year are
associated with cocaine use. According to Dr. Mark Gold, director
of research at Fair Oaks Hospital in New Jersey: &quot;We have no
way of predicting who'll die from the drug and who won't. It
could be a regular user or it could be a first-time user.&quot;
Although overdose is the primary cause of cocaine deaths, death
can also result after a regular cocaine user takes the same
amount of the drug that he usually takes. This phenomenon is
known as &quot;kindling&quot; and is not well understood by
scientists. According to Miami's Deputy Chief Medical Examiner
Dr. Charles Wetli, &quot;What was a safe dose one day becomes a
fatal dose the next.&quot; The precise cause of cocaine-related
deaths, regardless of dosage, include respiratory failure,
cerebral hemorrhage, cardiac arrest or seizures. Because cocaine
increases blood pressure and heart rate, individuals with
cardiovascular problems are at particular risk. Cocaine's
tendency to induce convulsions also creates special risks for
epileptics. Death by cocaine is often preceded by anxiety,
hallucinations, high body temperature and seizures. One common
myth about cocaine is that addiction and death cannot result from
intranasal use, or &quot;snorting,&quot; which is the most common
route of administration. While cocaine deaths are usually
associated with intravenous use, coroners have documented cases
of death from intranasal use of cocaine. One particular danger
associated with intravenous use of cocaine, or any drug, is
infection. Hepatitis and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
(AIDS) have both been associated with intravenous drug use.
Cultivation The cultivation, refinement and trafficking necessary
to bring cocaine from the fields of South America to the streets
of the United States obviously requires organization. Coca bushes
are grown primarily in the South American countries of Peru,
Bolivia and Colombia. The plants are first harvested as early as
18 months after planting, and can usually be harvested from three
to four times annually for up to 20 years. The cultivation of
coca has increased significantly in recent years, primarily as a
result of the cultivation of new coca plants and the maturation
of previously existing coca plants. Notwithstanding increased law
enforcement pressure in Colombia, the tremendous profits
associated with cocaine trafficking have encouraged the spread of
coca cultivation throughout the region. Processing In a
relatively simple chemical process, coca leaves are converted
first to cocaine paste, then base, then cocaine hydrochloride
(HCl), the form of coca most commonly abused in this country. The
conversion of leaf to paste to base usually occurs near the
cultivation site. The dried leaves are first moistened in an
alkaline solution and then soaked in kerosene. The kerosene is
removed leaving a cocaine precipitate. This in turn is filtered,
producing a paste. The paste is dissolved in a solution of
sulfuric acid and then potassium permanganate. This mixture is
then filtered, ammonium hydroxide is added and the precipitate
that forms is coca base. Traditionally, base has been smuggled
out of Peru and Bolivia by small aircraft or boats to Colombia,
where most of the refining from base to HCl takes place. In
numerous cocaine laboratories in the jungles of Colombia, coca
base is transformed into pure cocaine HCl by adding ether and
acetone, and filtering this mixture, which is then dried. To
produce one kilo of pure cocaine, approximately 500 kilos of coca
leaves are needed. The pattern of processing and transshipment is
somewhat different from that of cultivation. In the area of
refining and smuggling cocaine, it is estimated that 75 percent
of the drug available in the United States comes from Colombia,
15 percent from Bolivia, 5 percent from Peru and 5 percent from
Ecuador, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. However, these figures are
subject to frequent changes because of the mobility of drug
traffickers. For example, while most of the conversion to HCl
takes place in Colombia, and other South American countries, an
increasing number of cocaine laboratories are being seized in the
United States. Six such laboratories were seized here in 1982, 11
in 1983, 21 in 1984 and 25 during the first half of 1985. Reasons
for this trend include increased law enforcement in Colombia and
the increasing cost of ether and acetone in Colombia. The cost of
these chemicals has increased as a result of controls imposed by
the Colombian government on their importation and sale and a
concerted effort initiated by the U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration to disrupt the supply of chemicals essential in
the cocaine refinement process. A 55-gallon drum of ether now
costs approximately $7,000 in South America, while the same
amount costs only $500 to $600 in the United States. Further,
acetone and ether are widely available for commercial purposes in
the United States, making control of their illicit use much more
difficult than it has been in South America. </p>

<p>Heroin </p>

<p>Scope of the Problem </p>

<p>Traditionally viewed as the &quot;hardest drug,&quot; heroin's
reputation is well-earned. Although there are fewer heroin
addicts than users of other illicit drugs, more deaths and
emergency room visits are associated with heroin than with any
other drug. Heroin's &quot;worst drug&quot; status has also
developed because of the crime generally associated with heroin
use, a stereotype of the heroin addict as an inner-city street
dweller who commits crimes as his sole means of support, the fact
that heroin is most often used intravenously, the dramatic
addiction and withdrawal symptoms associated with use of the
drug, and the relatively quick and generally lethal effects of a
heroin overdose. </p>

<p>The Drug Enforcement Administration estimates there were
490,000 heroin addicts and users in 1981. It is estimated that
thousands more individuals use heroin occasionally, but are not
included in this number. While the addict population has remained
relatively steady since 1979, indicators of heroin consumption
and effects have increased in recent years. Annual heroin-related
deaths reached 1,046 in 1984, a 31 percent increase from 1983.
Emergency room visits involving heroin use increased 55 percent
from 1981 to 1984, with 10,901 such visits in 1984. This
represents a decrease from the 11,028 emergency room visits in
1983. Estimated heroin consumption increased 55 percent from 1981
to 1984, with 5.97 metric tons of heroin consumed in 1984. As a
result of increased heroin purity and increased use of the drug
in combination with other drugs, the number of heroin addicts and
the number of deaths and emergency room visits associated with
heroin use should be expected to increase. </p>

<p>Heroin is thus an extremely valuable commodity for organized
crime: in fact, an ounce of pure heroin is approximately ten
times more expensive than an ounce of gold. Heroin users provide
organized crime with billions of dollars each year: it is
estimated that illegal income from heroin sales in the United
States totaled $6.12 billion in 1982. </p>

<p>The Heroin Addict </p>

<p>Historically, data collection and law enforcement experience
support the view that heroin use has been an urban phenomenon,
confined in large part to minority populations. One recent study
of black inner-city heroin users across the country suggests the
extent of heroin's grip in those areas: </p>

<p>Because of the regular availability of heroin and the
structure of the relationship of intercity residents to society,
the heroin lifestyle has become firmly established as an
alternative lifestyle for Black youngsters. </p>

<p>Such studies typically reveal a portrait of the heroin addict
as an unemployed, minority male with little education who commits
crime to support his habit: A 1985 study of heroin users in East
and Central Harlem found the following: 75 percent were male; 55
percent were black and 44 percent Hispanic; 36 percent were under
30 years of age; 61 percent had less than 11 years of education;
and 81 percent were unemployed. The annualized crime rate for
these heroin users was 1,075 crimes per person. Crimes committed
by heroin addicts includes property crime, violent crime and drug
offenses. </p>

<p>While regular use of heroin is generally addictive, there
appears to be a group of users, known as &quot;chippers,&quot;
who are able to use heroin occasionally over a long period of
time without becoming addicts. In his study of heroin, Stanford
University professor John Kaplan maintains: </p>

<p>It is now clear that there exists a sizable population of
non-addicted but regular heroin users who seem well integrated
into society and in many ways indistinguishable from the rest of
the population. </p>

<p>Recently a new group of heroin users has emerged that includes
both addicts and non-addicts. These are the &quot;middle
class&quot; users, who are involved with heroin as a result of
their cocaine habits. In order to counteract the effects of heavy
cocaine use, many began to use heroin intranasally, and
eventually became addicted to the drug. Dr. Forest Tennant,
director of a number of drug abuse clinics in the Los Angeles
area, observes: </p>

<p>As cocaine use increases, we're seeing more addicts because
heroin is the strongest neutralizer around for cocaine toxicity .
. . And we're not talking about gang members and derelicts. I'm
treating people who pay their union dues, go to the PTA, take
their kids to Little League. We've even got a program for
executives. </p>

<p>Health Effects of Heroin Use </p>

<p>While narcotics serve an essential medicinal purpose as
analgesics, or painkillers, they are often abused. Heroin, the
most abused opiate, is derived from the opium poppy (Papaver
somniferum). Heroin is generally used intravenously, the most
efficient and dangerous route of administration.
&quot;Speedballs,&quot; injections of heroin mixed with cocaine,
are particularly dangerous. Heroin can also be used
subcutaneously, called &quot;skin-popping.&quot; All of these
intravenous forms of use are associated with AIDS and hepatitis,
as discussed earlier. In addition, heroin can be smoked or used
intranasally. </p>

<p>Heroin is a particularly dangerous drug because of the ease
with which a user can overdose, A lethal dose of heroin is only
10 to 15 times a normal dose. According to Dr. Donald C. Thomas
III, former director of emergency care at the District of
Columbia General Hospital: </p>

<p>Heroin numbs you to pain, gives you a euphoria, takes you away
from reality, makes you slower and changes appetites . . . The
real problem for an addict is that the threshold between the dose
of heroin that gives that effect, as opposed to the dose that
will kill him by suppressing respiratory or cardiac centers in
his brain, is very narrow. </p>

<p>Multiple overdose deaths sometimes result from one
&quot;batch&quot; of heroin. In March 1985, for example,
according to local press accounts, 8 people died and 14 were
hospitalized in a few days in Washington, D.C., after injecting
some particularly potent heroin. Seven months earlier, 10 people
died in Washington within 8 days in a similar incident. It is
striking evidence of the drug's overpowering influence that this
risk of sudden death apparently poses no deterrent to the
seasoned user. As expressed by one heroin addict: </p>

<p>A true, full-blown drug addict would follow a morgue wagon to
its origin of overdose to obtain that substance. </p>

<p>Cultivation </p>

<p>Heroin entering the United States is produced from opium
poppies, which are harvested in Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan
(Southwest Asia, the Golden Crescent); Burma, Thailand and Laos
(Southeast Asia, the Golden Triangle); and Mexico. In 1984, an
estimated 51 percent of United States heroin came from Southwest
Asia, 32 percent from Mexico and 17 percent from Southeast Asia. </p>

<p>From 1983 to 1984 illicit opium production decreased in
Southwest Asia. This change resulted from decreased figures for
opium production in Afghanistan caused by adverse weather
conditions and a change in the methodology used to estimate opium
production in Afghanistan. While total opium production for
Southwest Asia decreased in 1984, significant production
increases were noted in Southeast Asia and Mexico. </p>

<p>Opium poppy cultivation has begun to appear in the United
States as well. During a Federal raid in August 1985, more than
4,000 opium plants were discovered in Vermont, Washington,
Michigan and California. Although officials of the Drug
Enforcement Administration believe this opium was used for
smoking, the potential for domestic heroin production exists. </p>

<p>While America's heroin addict population has remained
relatively stable, the problem of heroin addiction in Europe has
increased significantly in recent years. According to a 1984
United Nations report: </p>

<p>The drug abuse and trafficking situation in Western Europe is
grim and deteriorating . . . Western Europe remains seriously
affected by heroin abuse which is a major public health problem. </p>

<p>The number of heroin addicts in the opium producing and other
countries is also significant. </p>

<p>There is a greater sense of the need for international
cooperation on the problem of drugs, in part because drug
producing nations are now feeling the effects of drug abuse, with
which the industrialized world has dealt for decades. This
development is critical if drug control efforts, including crop
eradication, interdiction and drug education, are to be
successful. </p>

<p>Processing </p>

<p>The production of heroin begins after the petals of the opium
poppy flower have fallen. Several incisions are then made in the
seed pod from which sap oozes. The sap dries, darkens and becomes
gummy, and is scraped from the pod. This dried sap is raw opium.
Each pod can be incised up to five different times. </p>

<p>To produce one kilogram of heroin, a precipitating agent is
added to 10-12 kilograms of opium. This mixture is pressed,
leaving one kilogram of morphine base. This base is treated with
acetic anhydride, which yields one kilogram of heroin. In another
production method, poppies are allowed to mature and dry.
Alkaloids are then extracted from these plants leaving poppy
straw concentrate, which is sold in a brownish powder form. </p>

<p>Marijuana </p>

<p>Scope of the Problem </p>

<p>According to the most recent National Survey on Drug Abuse,
which was conducted in 1982, 50-60 million Americans,
approximately 20-25 percent of the entire population, have tried
marijuana; and 20 million people use the drug at least once per
month. Marijuana use has been widespread in this country for the
last two decades. Both the number of users and the duration of
marijuana's popularity indicate that marijuana use is firmly
entrenched in American society. </p>

<p>Although some surveys indicate that the number of marijuana
users has been declining recently, levels of use remain
significantly higher than for any other illicit drug. The
National Survey on Drug Abuse indicates a decline in marijuana
use for some age groups. Yet the survey shows that in 1982, 11.5
percent of 12-17-year-olds and 27 percent of 18-25 year olds used
marijuana at least once per month. The study indicates a slight,
but steady, increase in marijuana use among people over age 25.
In 1977, 3.3 percent reported monthly marijuana use, compared
with 6.0 percent in 1982. According to the survey of high school
seniors conducted each year by the University of Michigan
Institute for Social Research, marijuana use among high school
seniors peaked in 1978, when 37 percent of these students
reported monthly use of marijuana and 11 percent reported daily
use of the drug. By 1984 these figures had dropped to 25 percent
and 5 percent respectively. However, this decline in marijuana
use ended in 1985 when 26 percent of the survey respondents
reported monthly marijuana use. </p>

<p>Marijuana consumption and the number of marijuana-associated
emergency room visits have remained relatively steady in recent
years. In 1984 Americans consumed an estimated 7,800-9,200 metric
tons of marijuana, as compared with 8,000-9,600 metric tons in
1983. Use of marijuana in conjunction with other drugs,
particularly PCP, diazepam and cocaine, increased in 1984. </p>

<p>The Marijuana User </p>

<p>Marijuana is probably used by a wider demographic
cross-section of American society than any other drug. This
widespread use was recognized by the 1972 National Commission on
Marihuana [sic] and Drug Abuse: </p>

<p>The stereotype of the marihuana [sic] user as a marginal
citizen has given way to a composite picture of large segments of
American youth, children of the dominant majority and very much
part of the mainstream of American life. </p>

<p>While it appears that marijuana, like other drugs, is most
commonly used by those between the ages of 18 and 25, its use is
by no means confined to that age group. One analysis of marijuana
use found that: </p>

<p>Marijuana is now found at the Friday afternoon brainstorming
sessions of a New York publishing house. In the cabs of long-haul
trucks. In the office of a president of a cosmetic firm. Even, it
is alleged, among executives of major American banks. </p>

<p>According to the 1982 National Survey on Drug Abuse, 23
percent of 16 and 17 year olds, 8 percent of 14 and 15 year olds,
and 2 percent of 12 and 13 year olds used marijuana at least once
per month. Surveys have indicated marijuana use in children as
young as nine years old. </p>

<p>Health Effects of Marijuana Use </p>

<p>Marijuana includes any part of the plant Canabis sativa. In
addition to marijuana, the following forms of cannabis are also
abused: hashish, a resin of the plant; hashish oil, a liquid
concentrate derived from cannabis; and sinsemilla, from the
female cannabis plant. </p>

<p>The effects of marijuana use have been the subject of
exaggeration and misunderstanding for decades. In 1936, for
example, the film &quot;Reefer Madness&quot; portrayed those
effects as instant violence and insanity. In 1972 the National
Commission on Marihuana [sic] and Drug Abuse embraced the
opposite extreme: </p>

<p>No conclusive evidence exists of any physical damage,
disturbances of bodily processes or proven human fatalities
attributable solely to even high doses of marijuana . . . [The]
few consistently observed transient effects on bodily function
seem to suggest that marihuana [sic] is a rather unexciting
compound of negligible immediate toxicity at the doses usually
consumed in this country. </p>

<p>Both views have been refuted by medical evidence gathered
since the early 1970's. Today marijuana is described as &quot;the
most chemically complex of all commonly used illegal drugs.&quot;
Marijuana contains 421 known chemicals, which when smoked are
combusted into more than 2,000 chemical compounds. Marijuana is
variously classified as a stimulant, depressant and hallucinogen
because its effects vary among users. </p>

<p>Those chemicals found only in cannabis are called
cannabinoids. The primary intoxicant in marijuana is
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). The concentration of The in
marijuana has steadily increased over the last decade as a result
of improved agricultural techniques. Analysis of marijuana
samples indicates that the average percentage of The in marijuana
has increased from .7 percent in 1973, to 3.1 percent in 1982, to
5.6 percent in 1983. The potencies have been reported as high as
14 percent in domestically produced sinsemilla. </p>

<p>Since 1967 when the first intensive government research
program on marijuana began, over 7,000 scientific papers have
been published on the subject. Contrary to the findings of the
1972 National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse, adverse
physical and psychological effects associated with marijuana use
have been demonstrated. The measurement of long-term effects of
marijuana use are at present problematic because marijuana
smoking has been prevalent in the United States for only
approximately 15 to 20 years, shorter than the latency period for
many marijuana-related diseases. In the case of tobacco it was
not until after 50 years of heavy use that there was ample
evidence to issue warnings about its effects. </p>

<p>Despite the common public perception that marijuana is less
harmful than tobacco, scientific evidence indicates that
marijuana, in fact, causes substantially more adverse health
effects, due in part to the properties of the drug itself and the
manner in which it is smoked. Marijuana is not filtered, as are
most tobacco cigarettes, and marijuana smoke is generally inhaled
more deeply and held in the lungs longer than tobacco smoke.
Marijuana smoke has been found to contain many of the same
chemicals as tobacco smoke; indeed it has 50 percent more of
cancer-causing hydrocarbons than tobacco smoke. </p>

<p>According to the American Lung Association, marijuana smoking
harms the lungs and may cause bronchitis, emphysema and lung
cancer. Evidence supporting this conclusion has been building for
a number of years. For example, a 1976 study reported that
examinations of human lung tissue &quot;have found malignant
cellular changes after shorter periods of exposure to marijuana
smoke than to tobacco smoke.&quot; One comprehensive review of
marijuana projects that: </p>

<p>Starting in the latter 1980's, we predict an increase in the
rate of lung cancer among middle-aged people, representing the
marijuana epidemic that began in the mid-sixties. Those smoking
both tobacco and marijuana are most at risk. </p>

<p>Marijuana use can also adversely affect both male and female
reproduction. Marijuana use by pregnant women is particularly
dangerous and has been linked to lowered birth weight, fetal
abnormalities and nervous disorders in offspring. These adverse
physical effects are magnified because cannabinoids, being fat
soluble, collect in the fatty organs of the body, such as the
testis or ovaries, brain and liver. This is of particular concern
because marijuana is used by a large population of young people
whose lungs, reproductive organs, and other parts of their bodies
are still maturing and are particularly vulnerable to the adverse
effects of drugs. </p>

<p>In addition to these physical effects of marijuana use,
several psychological and behavioral effects have also been
associated with the drug. These behavioral changes have been
called &quot;the amotivational syndrome.&quot; Although lack of
motivation may often precede marijuana use, many clinicians have
concluded that: </p>

<p>Motivational effects are directly related to use and . . .
following cessation of marijuana use normal motivation may
return. </p>

<p>In addition to the effects of marijuana on motivation,
marijuana use has been found to affect short-term memory,
concentration, and logical thinking. A 1982 report concerning the
impact of marijuana use on education concludes that: </p>

<p>Every element of learning is incompatible with either the
acute intoxication or the chronic mental change that marijuana
use can bring. </p>

<p>A 1980 study reported that use of marijuana 20 times or more
per month is &quot;positively correlated with absenteeism and
poor school achievement among high school seniors.&quot; These
conclusions are particularly disturbing given the fact that tens
of thousands, perhaps even hundreds of thousands, of adolescents
use marijuana every day. </p>

<p>A final concern in this area, marijuana's role as a
&quot;gateway&quot; to subsequent use of more dangerous drugs,
cannot be categorized as either physical or psychological. While
many beliefs about marijuana have been proven wrong by subsequent
research, this concept has been affirmed. This
&quot;gateway&quot; theory does not indicate that marijuana use
will definitely lead to the use of other drugs; however,
according to a review of marijuana studies conducted by the
Department of Health and Human Services, </p>

<p>Statistically, there is little question that use, particularly
heavier use, is associated with a likelihood of experimentation
with other drugs. </p>

<p>Synthetic Drugs </p>

<p>Scope of the Problem </p>

<p>Many illicit drugs do not occur naturally. Unlike cocaine,
heroin and marijuana, which are derived from plants, synthetic
drugs are produced solely from chemicals. These synthetic drugs
include stimulants, depressants and hallucinogens, known as
dangerous drugs; synthetic narcotics, such as methadone; and
controlled substance analogs, often called &quot;designer
drugs.&quot; A controlled substance analog has a chemical
structure similar to a controlled substance, and is designed to
produce a similar effect. </p>

<p>Use of synthetic drugs is widespread in the United States.
More than six million Americans used synthetic drugs for
non-medical purposes in 1982. Over 2.5 million people abused
depressants, approximately 2.8 million abused stimulants, and
almost 1 million abused hallucinogens. Consumption of
&quot;dangerous drugs&quot; increased 15 percent between 1983 and
1984, from an estimated 2.66 billion dosage units to 3.06 billion
dosage units. The greatest increases were associated with
methamphetamine and phencyclidine (PCP). Methamphetamine-related
emergency room visits increased 20 percent from 1983 to 1984, and
deaths associated with both amphetamine and methamphetamine also
increased in 1984. </p>

<p>Statistics regarding the use of controlled substance analogs
are difficult to compile. This is because the use of these
substances is a relatively new phenomenon, and medical examiners
have generally failed to identify controlled substance analogs as
a cause of death. Despite these difficulties, one synthetic
analog has been responsible for the deaths of at least 100 people
on the West Coast. While most of these deaths occurred in
California, many law enforcement authorities fear that production
and use of controlled substance analogs might spread across the
country because of the ease of production and large profit margin
associated with these drugs. This spread has already occurred in
at least one instance: drug treatment program directors in
California, Florida, New York, Texas and Virginia have reported
cases of use of the controlled substance analog MDMA. </p>

<p>Synthetic Drug Users </p>

<p>While synthetic drugs are used for a wide range of medicinal
purposes, they are also widely abused by individuals from all
socioeconomic groups. According to a 1978 study of individuals in
treatment for stimulant and/or depressant drug abuse, 68 percent
were men, 61 percent were white, 20 percent black and 19 percent
of another ethnicity, 59 percent were unemployed, 77 percent had
previously been treated for drug abuse, 59 percent were 25 years
of age or older, and 46 percent had less than a twelfth grade
education. </p>

<p>While most people associate heroin use with crime, a 1982
study by the RAND Corporation found violent crime to be committed
most often by multi-drug users, particularly those using
combinations including dangerous drugs. Certain synthetic drugs
are particularly associated with crime. A study of all arrestees
in Washington, D.C., from May 1984 to April 1985 found that PCP,
an hallucinogen, is the drug most often detected in these
arrestees. An average of over 30 percent of all adults arrested
in Washington, D.C., during this period tested positive for PCP
use. A study of almost 5,000 male arrestees in New York City in
1984 found that 12 percent of those arrested had PCP in their
bodies. </p>

<p>Health Effects of Synthetic Drug Use </p>

<p>Tolerance to stimulants develops quickly. Because of the
&quot;crash,&quot; or depression, followed by stimulant use,
users tend to take stimulants more often in order to compensate
for or avoid the post-stimulant letdown. Stimulant users are
subject to a vicious cycle in which they must take depressants at
night to be able to reverse the stimulant's effects. Stimulants
can cause physical dependence and death. Withdrawal is
characterized by depression, fatigue and excessive sleep, which
may last for several days. Other withdrawal symptoms, including
anxiety and thoughts of suicide, may last for weeks or months. </p>

<p>Depressants can also cause tolerance and physical dependence.
Abuse of depressants is marked by impaired judgment, slurred
speech and loss of motor coordination. Depressants are
particularly dangerous when used in combination with alcohol or
other drugs. Heavy use of depressants can cause a weak, rapid
pulse, shallow respiration, coma and death. </p>

<p>Hallucinogens alter mood, and, in large doses, cause delusions
and hallucinations. This impaired judgment can lead a user to
physically harm himself or others. &quot;Flashbacks,&quot; in
which the user has a brief recurrence of the psychedelic effects
of hallucinogens, sometimes occur long after the drug is used.
Tolerance and psychological dependence can also result. PCP,
often called &quot;Angel Dust,&quot; is one of the most dangerous
and widely abused hallucinogens. Reactions to PCP are
unpredictable and include euphoria, depression, anxiety or panic.
PCP use is associated with extremely violent behavior, including
assault, rape, and murder. Feelings of omnipotence sometimes lead
a PCP user to suicidal behavior, including walking in front of
moving vehicles or jumping out of windows. </p>

<p>Controlled substance analogs are designed to mimic the effects
of various drugs and are particularly dangerous because of their
toxicity. One synthetic analog, 3-methyl fentanyl, is up to 1,000
times more potent than morphine. According to Dr. Robert J.
Roberton of California's Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs,
&quot;You could kill 50 people with the amount that fits on the
head of a pin.&quot; </p>

<p>Fentanyl analogs, the most commonly abused controlled
substance analogs, produce a feeling of euphoria similar to that
associated with heroin use. These drugs also produce respiratory
depression and muscle rigidity. MPTP, which is a synthetic analog
of the narcotic meperidine, causes brain damage, Parkinson's
disease and death. Although Parkinson's disease usually strikes
people in their fifties and sixties, people of various ages, who
have used MPTP, have contracted the disease, which causes slowed
movement, tremors, rigidity, dementia and death. The neurological
damage associated with use of MPTP is irreversible. </p>

<p>Drug Abuse Fuels Drug Trafficking </p>

<p>Drug abuse in the United States is a problem of vast and
growing proportions Millions of Americans use cocaine, heroin,
marijuana, or synthetic drugs, or combinations of these drugs.
Consumption of cocaine and dangerous drugs has increased recently
as have the deleterious health effects associated with then. The
downward trend in marijuana use which began in 1979 appears to
have ended at least temporarily in 1985. </p>

<p>Particularly dangerous forms of drug use have increased during
the last few years. Use of &quot;crack,&quot; coca base which is
smoked and which has been called the most potent, addictive, and
cheapest form of cocaine, has become prevalent in the New York
City area. Use of &quot;designer drugs,&quot; some of which have
caused Parkinson's disease, have been blamed for over 100 deaths.
There is evidence of a link between intravenous drug use and the
contraction of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). </p>

<p>Drug abuse affects much more than the individual drug user; it
also impacts on families, communities and entire governments. The
taint of drugs has reached into virtually every aspect of
American life, from public safety to the integrity of
professional sports. These problems and the full range of massive
government and private responses discussed in this report,
including increased education and enforcement efforts, expanded
intelligence and interdiction programs, and diversions of
military resources, costing billions of dollars, is the direct
result of a single cause: the destructive self-indulgence of
individual drug purchasers. Each time a drug user buys cocaine,
heroin, or other drugs, he makes a contribution to organized
crime. Such contributions are the sole sustenance of the
violence, corruption, illness and death that trafficking groups
bring to this and other societies. </p>

<p> </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>