
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-22</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B036-228</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/soldis.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122125005 text/html 87163
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:49:48 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:28 GMT
Content-length: 86945
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Mythical Roots of US Drug Policy - Soldier's Disease and
Addicts in the Civil War</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<p><b>THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY: </b></p>

<p><b>SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTS IN THE CIVIL WAR</b> </p>

<p>by Jerry Mandel* </p>

<p>1779 Haight St. </p>

<p>San Francisco, CA 94117<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>Special thanks to Marvin Scott for kind encouragement and
superb editing. </p>

<p align="center"><b><u>THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY:</u></b>
</p>

<p align="center"><b><u>SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTION IN THE
CIVIL WAR <br>
</u></b></p>

<p align="center"><b>Abstract<br>
</b></p>

<p>Soldier's Disease -- widespread addiction following massive
administration of opiates during the Civil War -- is the earliest
and most often repeated example of a drug problem before the
narcotics laws. The story exemplifies several basic themes used
in support of continued drug prohibition -- addiction is easy to
acquire, hard to kick, and is a publicly noticed, i.e. <i>asocial,
</i>problem. Soldier's Disease, though, is a myth. Not one case
of addiction was reported in medical records or the literature of
the time; under ten references were made in the Nineteenth
Century to addiction the cause of which was the Civil War; and no
perjorative nickname for addicted veterans, like Soldier's
Disease, appeared in the literature until 1 9 15, and it did not
become part of the Conventional Wisdom of drug experts until
almost a century after Appomattox. </p>

<p align="center"><b>THE MYTHICAL ROOTS OF U.S. DRUG POLICY:</b> </p>

<p align="center"><b>SOLDIER'S DISEASE AND ADDICTS IN THE CIVIL
WAR<br>
</b></p>

<p><b>myth ... 1: </b>a usu. traditional story of ostensibly
historical events that serves to unfold part of the world view of
a people or explain a practice, belief, or natural phenomena ... <b>3
... b: </b>an ill-founded belief held uncritically esp. by an
interested group.<br>
</p>

<p>Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary, 1973<br>
</p>

<p>The earliest (and often the only) example of opiate addiction
as a social problem which is frequently cited by drug experts is <b>Soldier's
Disease -- </b>widespread addiction resulting from widespread
opiate use in the Civil War. Most writers who report Soldier's
Disease devote no more than three sentences to it. It is the
brevity, clarity, &quot;catchiness,&quot; and conceptual
implication of &quot;Soldier's Disease&quot; which accounts for
the contemporary significance of such a fleeting reference.
Possibly the lengthiest and most graphic description of opiate
use in the Civil War, resulting in massive addiction among
veterans, was provided by Gerald Starkey, a century after that
war: </p>

<p><i>In 1862 (sic) the Civil War broke out.... They would charge
each other, literally pound chains down cannons and fire point
blank at the enemy and these young men were presented to their
field surgeons with terrible shrapnel wounds ... along with
terrible pain.</i> </p>

<p><i>About all the field surgeon could do was use the two new
invented tools that had been presented to him in the previous
five or six years I the hypodermic needle and syringe, along with
Morphine Sulfate .... They injected the young wounded veterans
with huge amounts of Morphine daily (every four hours) to kill
their pain.... It was necessary for the surgeons to do
full-quarter amputations -- literally take the arms and legs off
right at the start of the body, usually to stop infectious
gangrene.</i> </p>

<p><i>In 1865 there were an estimated 400,000 young War veterans
addicted to Morphine.... The returning veteran could be. .
identified because he had a leather thong around his neck and a
leather bag (with) Morphine Sulfate tablets, along with a syringe
and a needle issued to the soldier on his discharge.... (T)his
was called the &quot;Soldier's Disease.&quot;</i> </p>

<p>(Starkey, 1971:482-84)1 </p>

<p>The lesson to be learned from &quot;Soldier's Disease&quot;
involves four linked hypotheses, phrased as fact, which form a
paradigm justifying today's U.S. Drug policy. This paradigm is:<br>
</p>

<p>Free access to opiates sooner or later breeds a massive use of
opiates. </p>

<p>Widespread use of opiates leads to a lot of addicts. </p>

<p>Addiction is long-term, often enough, forever. </p>

<p>Addiction is a publicly manifest problem.<br>
</p>

<p>In sum, free availability leads to a social problem.<br>
</p>

<p>The historical record shows, however, that Soldier's Disease
is a fanciful reconstruction of the past by writers I 00 years or
more after the Civil War. There was not, to my knowledge, a
single mention of Soldier's Disease, Army Disease, or any other
sobriquet referring to addicted veterans, until a half -century
after the Civil War; not one addict was noted in any writing or
statistic compiled during or immediately after the Civil War; and
reports of addicted veterans who began using during that War are
only rarely mentioned throughout the rest of the 19th Century.<br>
</p>

<p>Soldier's Disease is a modern creation that has very little to
do with the facts of 19th Century drug use. Rather, it is an idea
which fits, which shores up, modern drug policies. It is an
assertion about what opiates are supposed to do, applied to a
past situation. <br>
</p>

<p>In the next part -- Section I -- of this paper, the relevance
of Soldier's Disease to contemporary drug policy is addressed.
Soldier's Disease is the only tale of a pre-Harrison Act opiate
problem which a self-respecting scholar in recent years could
point to as a pre-1914 social problem due to opiates. In Section
2, the modern creation of Soldier's Disease, and its recent
popularity among drug experts, is shown by noting the first who
mention the concept and when, a generation or two later, it
became accepted by scholars of all persuasions. Then the focus
turns to the historical evidence which would test, in order, the
four steps in the above paradigm. In Section 3 the questions are:
&quot;were opiates widely used by soldiers during the Civil
War?&quot; and &quot;was addiction among them widespread <i>during
</i>the war?&quot; In Section 4 the questions are: &quot;was
there wide-scale addiction among veterans <i>after </i>the
war?&quot; and &quot;was this a publicly manifest problem?&quot;
What follows is the evidence for answering these four questions:
in order, &quot; a tentative yes...... no,&quot; &quot;no,&quot;
and &quot;no.&quot; The conclusions will expand further on how
the mythic and the actual situation of Civil War opiate use
relates to the current Drug policy debate. </p>

<p align="center">1. <b><u>The Relevance of Soldier's Disease</u></b>
</p>

<p align="center"><b><u>To Contemporary U.S. Drug Policy</u></b> </p>

<p>The paradigm justifying U.S. opiate policy -- availability
leads to use; use leads to addiction; addiction is long-term; and
addiction becomes a publicly manifest problem -- conveys the idea
that unavoidable <b>Social </b><i>consequences </i>of free access
to opiates justify the enormous costs of contemporary U.S. drug
policy. Of all the stories about the &quot;bad old days&quot;
when opiates were legal, only Soldier's Disease provides
convincing </p>

<p>I. evidence&quot; that opiate availability led to a publicly
manifest problem, beyond merely a substantial increase in the
numbers of addicts. Thus, only the tale of Soldier's Disease
demonstrates Step 4 of the paradigm. The very phrase
&quot;Soldier's Disease&quot; connotes a publicly manifest
problem. Otherwise, the tales told about opiates before the laws
banning them were either too far-fetched to be repeated in modern
times, or reflect a social problem only if you believe the
paradigm, (and often not even then). During and just before 1914,
the type of stories carried by the press about opiates did not
indicate a social problem which might lead to a need for
prohibition, and the absence of media coverage of the Harrison
Act during the year it was passed by Congress further suggests
the irrelevance of opiate use to a social problem. </p>

<p>There were, in the medical as well as the mass media of the
late 19th and early 20th Centuries, occasional alarms sounded
about other publicly manifest opiate problems, but no scholar in
recent years believes that these were real or significant. (For
example, the press periodically reported an opium problem,
particularly white women smoking opium in Chinatown, with Chinese
men. A racist, not an opiate problem). Even the moralistic
anti-opium writers of about a century ago, with rare and often
unbelievable exceptions, did not point to a publicly noticed
problem.2<br>
</p>

<p>Today, there are <i>imputed </i>social problems, but not a <i>demonstrated
</i>one, beyond Soldier's Disease. Historians David Musto and
David Courtwright (Musto, 1972:2-4; and Courtwright, 1982:16-28)
extend a tradition3 of research into the megatonnage of opiates
annually imported into the U.S. from well before the Civil War
through the early 20th Century. Additionally, opiates were
typically a key ingredient in patent medicines, and there was a
huge national campaign against them resulting in the Pure Food
and Drug Act. Neither the level of imports nor the widespread use
of opiates in patent medicines, in the absence of belief in a
paradigm such as we noted, suggest anything beyond widespread
availability. <br>
</p>

<p>The medical literature of the 19th Century is filled with
discussions about opiates, many written by experts who believed
its use was terrible. To them, a loss of &quot;moral will,&quot;
perhaps best exemplified by secretiveness, including husbands and
wives keeping large scale addictions hidden from their spouses
for many years,4 was a major problem. Addicts were deemed liars,
which was only natural given the opprobrium attached to addiction
in much of U.S. society long before there were drug laws.<b> </b>The
medical and pharmaceutical literature also had an on-going
contest, essentially, to report the oldest, most long-time,
addict with the largest habit. None of the above indicates that
the behavior of 19th or early 20th Century addicts was a publicly
evident problem. </p>

<p>In the years just before national drug prohibition, there was
barely a sign of an opiate-caused social problem, Two newspapers,
to my knowledge, were indexed for 1906-1912 -- the New York Times
and the San Francisco Call.5 In each, there were three basic
types of stories: recent state laws<u> </u>which were forerunners
of the Harrison Act in that they criminalized opiate use; arrests
(over half being of Chinese Americans); and international
stories. Opiates are assumed to be &quot;evil&quot; but the only
allusion to a possible social consequence in any Times story is
headlined &quot;Says Opium Aids Music Composers.-6 The only
public problem with opiates recounted in the Call, besides white
women in Chinese opiate dens7 and problems which result from the
local laws, is lethargy among the troops at The Presidio.
(&quot;It destroys the vitality of the user, and would in time
make the soldier a useless charge.&quot;) (S.F. Call, 1910b) 8 </p>

<p>The year the nation's major opiate prohibition law was passed,
the mass media, (at least the New York Times, San Francisco
Chronicle, Washington Post, and the Hearst Press), gave virtually
no coverage to Congressional discussion or passage of the
Harrison Act, or when it was signed into law or took effect.
(Aldrich, 1979) Fourteen months after it was signed, a medical
journal presented the results of a one-question survey -&quot;In
your opinion what are the five most useful and important drugs in
the materia medica?&quot; -- answered by teachers at leading
medical schools. &quot;Not only did it (opium) receive 102 votes
out of 107, but in 60 instances it was named first.&quot;
(Robinson, 1916) </p>

<p>What the above suggests is not only that the rationales to
justify opiate prohibition circa 1914 could not be repeated by
self-respecting <i>scholars </i>as rationales for continued
prohibition today, but that hardly a rationale was offered at
all. The Harrison Act crept in on tip-toes, called a tax act,
with no fanfare, no public interest or debate. When, a few years
later, it became clear that this was a criminal law with
considerable consequences, there was a brief flurry of criticism
and a rationale provided for continuing opiate prohibition,
namely the vileness and criminality of &quot;junkies&quot; and
the criminal cartels supplying them. Obviously, the consequences
of the law provided the rationale for justifying the law, but
there were not that many opiate addicts and it was not that big a
social problem for the debate to continue. </p>

<p>&quot;Evidence&quot; of a social problem is needed to justify
opiate prohibition only when such prohibition is a significant
social issue (which it was not in the years preceding the
Harrison Act) and when criticism of drug laws crescendoes. Only
then do scholars reconsider the rationales for the drug laws, and
turn to the historical record for insights into contemporary
concerns. It is only in these periods when the four parts of the
paradigm, enunciated above, have to be demonstrated if
contemporary drug policy is to be accepted. It is the final step
-- the manifestation of a problem, in public -- which makes the
other three socially significant. The only currently cited
example of the complete paradigm, in the absence of opiate
prohibition, is Soldier's Disease ... and it's a myth.<br>
<br>
</p>

<p><b>2. </b><u>Tracking The Develogment of The MM<br>
</u></p>

<p><b>A. </b><u>It's Roots</u> </p>

<p>The earliest portrayal of Soldier's Disease among Civil War
veterans appeared as World War I erupted over Europe (also the
year the Harrison Act, took effect). In &quot;The Curse of
Narcotism in America -- A Reveille,&quot; Marks, a Yale
professor, intended to alert the U.S. to an enormous addiction
problem among Civil War veterans that would be replicated in
another war: </p>

<p>Did you know that there is practically no old American family
of Civil War reputation which has not had its addicts?.... (I)t
was the &quot;army disease&quot; because of its prevalence?....
(W)ith the war that hangs over us, the drug evil will spread into
a giantism of even more terrible growth than the present?....
(T)here are something like 4,000,000 victims of opium and cocaine
in this country today? </p>

<p>(Marks, 1915:315)9 </p>

<p>Marks feared the return of the &quot;hydra-headed
drug-curse&quot; of the Civil War, but others writing during
World War I about the consequences of combat upon drug use among
servicemen made no reference to the War Between the States.
(Crothers, 1916; N.Y. Times, 1917; Stanley, 1918; and Weber,
1918)<br>
</p>

<p>In the nine years after World War I, a handful of authors
mentioned Civil War-related addiction, though none mentioned Army
Disease or any such synonym. (Bishop, 1919 and 1920; Illinois
Medical journal, 192 1; World's Work, 1924; and Fell, 1924).<br>
</p>

<p>&quot;Army Disease&quot; was next noted in <u>The Opium
Problem</u>. Terry and Pellens' encyclopedic work of 1928, which
became &quot;regarded as the single most comprehensive work in
the field&quot; only several decades later.10 (Ball, 1970) For
Terry and Pellens, &quot;the Civil War gave it (chronic opium
intoxication) a considerable impetus (which) seems definitely
established.&quot; (Terry and Pellens, 1928: 5) Between 1928 and
the late 1950's, only a handful of scholars noted &quot;Army
Disease&quot; (Terry, 193 1; Woods, 193 1: Dai, 1937: Barnes,
1939; and Lindesmith, 1947), and even in the early 1960's it was
infrequently mentioned (Isbell, 1960 and 1963; Kolb, 1960 and
1962; Clausen, 196 1; Maurer and Vogel, 1962; and Sonnedecker,
1963), though prior to the drug explosion of the mid- 1960's
there were few scholars in the drug field. For the experts who
the past quarter century have claimed Soldier's Disease, if they
cite any reference it is typically Terry and Pellens. </p>

<p><b>B. </b><u>The Contemporary Conventional Wisdom<br>
</u></p>

<p>Since 1964, Soldier's Disease, in essence, was mentioned in
about 100 works by drug experts, half of these since 1973.11 It
was also mentioned in several studies by prestigious government
agencies and Drug and Crime Commissions.12 Among the experts are
many renowned critics of U.S. drug policies -- including Edward
Brecher, Alan Dershowitz, John Kaplan, Arnold Trebach and Norman
Zinberg. In the early 1970's a few writers questioned the
factuality of Soldier's (Kramer, 1971 and 1972; Swatos, 1972;
Musto, 1973; and Quinones, 1975), but shortly thereafter they
were rebutted in a detailed historical analysis. (Courtwright,
1978 and 1982)13 Since the mid- 1970's the mention of Soldier's
Disease has diminished, maybe because the critics had an impact
or because most experts stopped probing the roots of U.S. drug
policy after the early 1970's. <br>
</p>

<p>Soldiers Disease is, however, still mentioned by many experts
... and no one, yet, has responded to Courtwright. </p>

<p>Though briefly stated, a consistent theme involving three
components is reiterated by almost all the cited drug experts,
the only variation being in the synonyms used. First, morphine in
particular, and opiates in general, were administered by naive
doctors &quot;indiscriminately&quot; (also termed &quot;
promiscuous&quot;, &quot;imprudent&quot;,
&quot;uncontrolled&quot;, &quot;overdosage&quot;,
&quot;ignorant&quot;, etc.). Second, as a consequence of such
medical naivete, addiction among soldiers was massive (also
termed &quot;prevalent&quot;, &quot;commonplace&quot;,
&quot;thousands&quot;, wholesale usage&quot;,
&quot;rampant&quot;, etc.). Third, so widespread was the
addiction among soldiers and veterans that it became known as
Soldier's Disease (also termed &quot;army disease&quot;,
&quot;soldier's illness&quot;, or &quot;soldier's
sickness.&quot;),14 </p>

<p>The only clear disagreement is the few who estimate the number
of addicted Civil War veterans. Some claim 45,000 (Ashley, 1972
and 1978; Geis, 1973; Health PAC, 1970; and Kenny, 1972); others
400,000. (H. Jones and Jones, 1977; Lingeman, 1969; Schwartz,
1980; Starkey, 197 1; Summers et. al., 1975; and Westin and
Shaffer, 1972) Since no writer in either camp provides one clue
for their claim, the possibility that both estimates arose out of
the thin air circa 1970 is not ruled out. </p>

<p>Is today's conventional wisdom about Soldier's Disease an
intellectual version of the children's game of Telephone where a
simple message, after innumerable repetitions, becomes distorted
and a new &quot;catchy&quot; message takes on a life of its own
... or have recent writers captured the essence of opiate
addiction in a past era? That depends on the evidence during and
just after the Civil War.<br>
</p>

<p><b>3. </b><u>Opiate Use and Addiction During The Civil War<br>
</u></p>

<p><b>A. </b><u>The Need For and Use Of Opiates</u> </p>

<p>During the Civil War, and at least until 1914, opiates were
considered the best medicine for controlling dysentery and
diarrhea and for containing the pain from war wounds. The Surgeon
General's history of the just ended Civil War was often lavish in
its praise of opium. </p>

<p><i>&quot;Opium -- </i>this medicine merits first place among
these remedies. It was used almost universally in all cases of
severe wounds, and was particularly useful in penetrating wounds
of the chest, in quieting the nervous system and, indirectly in
moderating hemmorhage. </p>

<p>(US Surgeon General, 1870 :645) </p>

<p>But, how great was the need? How widely was it used? Given the
need, and the use, of opiates then, how many soldier addicts were
there in the Civil War?<br>
</p>

<p>Official records from the Civil War show more incidents of
severe <u>illness</u> for which opiates were the main remedy than
there were <u>wounds</u>. More died from disease than were killed
in battle or succumbed to wounds (For Union troops, 62%
&quot;disease,&quot; 19% &quot;battle,&quot; and 12%
&quot;Wounds&quot; of 360,000 deaths among Union troops).
(Duncan, 1912:397) Union medical records (for medical problems,
not deaths) show approximately 1,400,000 acute and 200,000
chronic cases of diarrhea or dysentery, 250,000 wounds, and
300,000 cases, combined, of typhoid, typhus, continued fever,
venereal disease, scurvy, delerium tremens, insanity and
paralysis. (Brooks, 1966:127) There were 30,000 amputations
reported performed by the Union's doctors. (US Surgeon General,
1883) Among Confederate prisoners, 32% of the almost 19,000 who
died in captivity in the north succumbed to diarrhea or
dysentery. (Brooks, 1966:126) In Andersonville prison from
February 1864 to April 1865, of 12,541 recorded Union soldier
captives who died, 45% did so from diarrhea or dysentery, and
only 7% from wounds, gangrene or &quot;debility.&quot; (US
Surgeon General, 1879:32) There was obviously a great <u>need</u>
for opiates. </p>

<p>Civil War physicians frequently dispensed opiates. The
Secretary of War just after 1865 stated the Union Army was issued
10 million opium pills, over 2,840,000 ounces of other opiate
preparations (such as laudunum or paregoric which, by weight,
were well under half opium), and almost 30,000 ounces of morphine
sulphate. (Courtwright, 1978:106-7 and 1982) <br>
</p>

<p><b>B. </b><u>Not One Report of Addiction In The Field<br>
</u></p>

<p>Yet for all the quantities dispensed, <i><u>there was not one
report from 1861-1865 of an addicted soldier.</u></i> </p>

<p>Could opiate addiction pass unnoticed, and have no
consequences, among troops living in raw conditions and often
moving from one place to another? Could so much morphine and
opium preparations get used without generating a single addict?<br>
</p>

<p>The 30,000 ounces of morphine is most easily explained.
Probably, most of it was <b><i>dusted </i></b>or <b><i>rubbed </i></b>into
wounds or, during anesthetization, <b><i>rubbed </i></b>into raw
tissue. (Adams, 1952; and Brooks, 1966) In the campaign of
Fredericksburg in December of 1862, &quot;hypodermic syringes
were unknown, such drugs as morphine being doled out on the point
of a knife&quot; by surgeons. (Duncan, 1985: 200) By the end of
the war, the hypodermic needle was beginning to be used, in
places -- &quot;roughly 19 per cent of Union Army physicians were
capable of administering morphine hypodermically.... and even
fewer Confederate physicians were (so) capable.&quot;
(Courtwright, 1978:105) Whether the hypodermic administration of
morphine during the Civil War was extremely rare as some have
claimed (US Surgeon General, 1888:547) or as others have implied
by their failure to note such use in medical histories of the war
(Courtwright, 1978:104-105), or was frequent as one neurologist
noted (Courtwright, 1978:106), there is not one case mentioned
where morphine was injected for pleasure, or to stave off
withdrawal pains. </p>

<p>The Civil War lasted four years, with 1,500,000 three year
enlistments on the Union side. Thus, those ten million opium
pills dispensed by Union doctors average roughly two per soldier
per year (assuming the pills survived combat conditions). Prior
to amputations or other battlefield surgery, the patient
routinely expected and was routinely given one of these pills.
Similarly, the 2,84 1,000 ounces of opiate preparations works out
to about a half -ounce per Union soldier per year. Though
physicians argued about the benefits of opiates for the relief of
pain which accompanied &quot;the fluxes&quot; (diarrhea and
dysentery), &quot;the partisans of opium were very much in the
majority&quot; and used opium for dysentery and other forms of
flux including &quot;chronic fluxes.&quot; Army physicians
&quot;united opium with almost every medicine employed to check
the progress of the disease,&quot; and despite typical failure to
cure returned &quot;almost always to opium as the drug which at
least alleviated, if it did not cure.&quot; Where the sufferings
of the patient were very great and continuous, and where
sleeplessness and restlessness had become a medical danger,
opiates were highly recommended, even by the otherwise skeptical
physician. (US Surgeon General, 1879: 743-747) Again, applying
basic arithmetic, and taking into account that there were many
more than the <i>reported </i>1.6 million cases of dysentery and
diarrhea, it is easy to understand why there were periodic
shortages of opiates. As with morphine, there is not a single
report during the Civil War of a soldier rising opium for
pleasure, and the single claim of opiates used to stave off
withdrawal pains (published 16 years after the War) was the
&quot;confession&quot; of an officer charged with &quot;deserting
in the face of the enemy, and sentenced to be shot.&quot;15
(Nolan, 1881) </p>

<p>Though modern writers have accused the military doctors in the
Civil War of not fully appreciating the addictive qualities of
opiates, one historian of Civil War medicine writes that
physicians in the field did not fully appreciate the benefits of
opium.<br>
</p>

<p>Tincture of opium and paregoric were always available, but
nowhere in the records does one get the impression that they were
used routinely in the management of the fluxes. </p>

<p align="center">(Brooks, 1966:117) <br>
</p>

<p>Morphine, too, may well have been underused, to judge from a
leading, albeit unusual, neurologist at the time, S. Weir
Mitchell, who: </p>

<p>(S)colded the medical profession for its reluctance in using
this mighty painkiller, pointing out that some patients' agonies
were so severe the choice must lie between Morphine and
amputation. </p>

<p>(Adams, 1952:138)<br>
</p>

<p>The naivete of military physicians regarding the negative
effects of opiates, often noted shortly after the Civil War, had
to do basically with their misunderstanding the medical effects
of opiates, not the addictive properties of the drug.16 (US
Surgeon General, 1879:735-750) </p>

<p>There were no reports of addiction in situations which, a
century or so later, generated numerous such references. For the
Civil War, one virtually never reads of a soldier suffering
withdrawal pains, or dying of an OD; or a physician in the field
besieged for an opiate for feeding a habit (as distinct from
easing pain or controlling diarrhea). In Wait Whitman's
description of the 80,000 to 100,000 sick and wounded he saw in
600 hospital visits during three years of the Civil War, he notes
that many patients craved tobacco, sweets, or alcohol, yet he
never once mentions opium. (Whitman, 1895) The sickness form
submitted by physicians to the Surgeon General from mid- 1 862 to
the end of the war listed 152 categories of disease, including
&quot;serpent bite,&quot; &quot;apoplexy,&quot;
&quot;insanity,&quot; &quot;night blindness,&quot;
&quot;poisoning,&quot; &quot;inebriation,&quot; &quot;delirium
tremens&quot; and &quot;chronic alcoholism&quot;, but not
addiction or opiate deprivation. (US Surgeon General, Pt. 1, V.
1). In the Surgeon General's history of the Civil War,
&quot;nostalgia ... .army itch .... poisoning .... alcoholism
.... and venereal disease,&quot; but not opiate use, are singled
out for special comment. Under &quot;nostalgia&quot; the problem
of boredom is given prominence and smoking tobacco, drinking
alcohol, and gambling are singled out for their &quot;sedative
influence,&quot; to &quot;pass the dull hours&quot; in lieu of
satisfying the craving for excitement. (US Surgeon General, 1888:
886) In sum, there is no hard evidence of addicts during the
Civil War, and it is hard to believe it would have been missed
had addiction been significant.<br>
</p>

<p><u>C. Not One Report of Addiction Immediately After The Civil
War</u> </p>

<p>If addiction among Civil War veterans was significant, it
should have been most noticed in the immediate post-War years.
There were 63,000 soldiers whose chronic diarrhea carried on
after the war, (Adams, 1889) and over 20,000 survivors of
amputations reported by Union doctors. (US Surgeon General, 1883)
When the Civil War ended, and veterans filled the prisons, New
York State prison keepers at Auburn and Sing-Sing told of
contraband smuggled into prisons, such as &quot;whiskey,
tobacco... yellow covered literature.... sugar, tea, coffee,
butter, pies, cakes, liquor, looking glasses, combs, brushes,
etc.&quot;, yet opiates were not mentioned. (North American
Review, 1867:572-74) In the Mississippi State Hospital, whose
admission records of the mentally ill go back to 1855, the first
narcotism case was recorded in 1884. (Jaquith, 1965) The edition
of the United States Dispensatory, (the enormous physician's desk
reference of the time), which appeared just after the Civil War
devotes 27 pages to &quot;opium&quot; without noting the Civil
War. (Wood and Bache, 1868) Surely a significant minority of
those 63,000 diarrhetics and 30,000 amputees were advised to take
opiates by their physicians, and willingly took what at the time
was the best relief of their problems. Yet only two references to
veterans who began using opiates during the Civil War were
published before 1880. (Day, 1868; and Oliver, 1872) (A third
pre-1880 case-history of an addicted veteran, cited by some as
demonstrating Soldier's Disease, started using opiates after the
war). (Anon, 1876) </p>

<p><b>D. </b><u>The Logic For Claiming The Existence of Many
Civil War Addicts</u> </p>

<p>How, then, could recent experts agree on massive addiction
during the Civil War? Almost certainly it has to do with trust in
the statements of Terry and Pellens without bothering to check
the original sources. The one exception -- the one historian who
has checked those sources and maintains the validity of addiction
during the Civil War -- is Courtwright, who believes that
addiction must exist ... even though it is not in evidence. For
morphine, Courtwright cites S. Weir Mitchell's claim that 40,000
morphine injections were given at one army hospital in one year.
This number is far beyond any other -- in fact, except for it
there would be no consideration of the <i>widespread </i>use of
morphine other than what was rubbed and dusted into wounds.
Courtwright considers the claim &quot;puzzling, to say the
least,&quot; (and there are reasons for doubting Weir,
personally),17 but he concludes if that number &quot;is even half
correct, it seems impossible that a substantial portion of the
patients ... did not end the war as addicts.&quot;
&quot;Impossible&quot; as it seems, not a single addict was
reported during the Civil War. </p>

<p>Courtwright also notes &quot;the frequency and casualness with
which opiates were administered&quot; and states that &quot;vast
quantities of opium preparations other than morphine were
dispensed under circumstances (such as to those with chronic
diarrhea, dysentery or malaria) which could very easily lead to
addiction.&quot; The only trouble is &quot;very easily&quot; did
not occur. </p>

<p>Disregarding the lack of documentation on a single addict
during the Civil War, Courtwright contends &quot;that the war
contributed to the spread of addiction,&quot; and <b><i>&quot;</i></b>offer<b><i>
</i></b>the fighting, sick and wounded veterans greatly expanded
the pool for iatrogenic addiction.&quot; (Courtwright,
1982:55-56, emphasis added) Since opiates were widely
administered in the early as well as last years of the Civil War,
<b>it </b>is hard to imagine why addiction would only develop
after the war. Nonetheless, accepting Courtwright's contention
for the moment, the test of the validity of Soldier's Disease
thus depends on analysis of post-war addiction among veterans.<br>
</p>

<p><b>4. </b><u>Reports of Addicted Veterans Through the 19th
Century <br>
</u></p>

<p>Were it not for Horatio Day's <u>The Opium Habit</u>,
published in 1868, the modern day notion of Soldier's Disease
might never have developed. The latter of these two sentences by
Day (quoted by Terry and Pellens) is, by far, the most widely
cited writing on Soldier's Disease: </p>

<p><i>The events of the last few years [Civil War] have
unquestionably added greatly to their [confirmed opium eaters']
number. Maimed and shattered survivors from a hundred
battlefields, diseased and disabled soldiers released from
hostile prisons, anguished and hopeless wives and mothers made so
by the slaughter of those who were dearest to them, have found,
many of them, temporary relief from their sufferings in Opium.</i>
</p>

<p>(Day, 1868:1) </p>

<p>This remark, quoted by several modern writers,18 is the only
reference to the Civil War in Day's 335 page tome. Day recounts
many types of persons who were addicts, but not one specific case
of a soldier or veteran.19 in context, Day's two-sentence
allusion to the Civil War suggests an extremely minor problem
recounted by an encyclopedic problem-seeker.<br>
</p>

<p><b>A. </b><u>Courtwright's Evidence Is Skimpy<br>
</u></p>

<p>Courtwright recognizes that &quot;army disease&quot; was not
an &quot;epidemic,&quot; but still concludes: &quot;It is
possible to document numerous references to addicted veterans
both as a class and as individuals.&quot; (Courtwright, 1978:1 1
1) Using the same evidence, and more, I reach opposite
conclusions. Why? <br>
</p>

<p>In <u>Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction In America Before 1940</u>,
Courtwright cites 1 18 books and articles published between the
Civil War and the end of the century (Courtwright, 1982) yet in
his studies of Soldier's Disease he lists nine references to
addicted veterans, and only five appeared in the 19th Century2O
and were to veterans who had used opiates during the Civil War.
Adding two more which I uncovered (Earle, 1880; Nolan, 188 1),
and including two other brief and vague references (Crothers,
1892 and 1893), this averages one reference every 4 years between
18651899. The overwhelming majority of articles about opiate use
written in the fifteen years following Appomatox, including
several by writers who presented lists of the types of people who
were addicts, do not single out the Civil War,21 nor can I find
such a reference in newspapers of the time.22 </p>

<p>None of these nine sources demonstrates that opiate addiction
by Civil War veterans was of social significance. In addition to
those previously quoted (Day and Nolan, who writes of the alibi
used by a deserter), there were three references by the most
prolific writers of the period, Mattison and Crothers (twice).23
Mattison's sole mention appears at the end of his career, 3 years
after the War ended. (Mattison, 1898) Crothers wrote
prolifically. If a &quot;drug problem&quot; could be unearthed,
trust Crothers to lead the digging party.24 In the context of his
encyclopedic writings, Crothers' few mentions of the Civil War
suggests its role in subsequent addiction was miniscule.
(Crothers, 1892 and 1893) Further, when World War I broke out in
Europe, Crothers urged combat physicians_to use opiates
liberally, and fears of a subsequent addiction problem were
groundless. (Crothers, 1916) Two other references are of tone
addicts, one -- of a long-time successful minister --
demonstrating the difficulty of detecting addiction at the time.
(Russell, 1887; and Keeley, 198 1) </p>

<p>B. <u>&quot;Only Your Pharmacist Knows For Sure&quot;<br>
</u></p>

<p>The two other references suggest that for a while, in some
places, there were some addicted veterans ... reported by those
who would notice addicts even if the general public did not
recognize them -- i.e. the apothecaries who sold opiates. Terry
and Pellens, reviewing an 1 878 study , noted that even
physicians did not recognize the extent of addiction: <br>
</p>

<p><i>Druggists were in a much better position to know the truth
.... when counter sales were legal, and as a matter of common
practice, physicians were called upon only by those opiate users
seeking (cure).</i> </p>

<p>(Terry and Pellens, 15)<br>
</p>

<p>A Massachusetts study of 1871 &quot;consulted&quot; 20-30
druggists and got mailed responses from 125 physicians. 40 of
these physicians did not know of a single case of &quot;opium
eating,&quot; and of 46 who commented on whether &quot;the
injurious use of opium has increased of late years,&quot; 6 1 %
answered it had not and another 13% answered it was diminishing.
Only one physician, but at least two druggists, stated that
opiate use begun during the late war was an important cause for
addiction. (Oliver, 1872) Without denying the significance of
this report, these mentions of addicted veterans had no
ramifications in the drug literature at the time. It was a state
publication with very limited circulation, the few summaries or
reviews of the report in the medical literature at the time did
not mention the Civil War,25 and save for Terry and Pellens'
lengthy excerpt from it in 1928 we might never have known that
some pharmacists, at least, recognized that addicted veterans, as
a class, were among the ranks of addicts.26 </p>

<p>In Chicago in 1880, 50 pharmacists were surveyed about the
cause of addiction of their regular opiate using customers. The
most mentioned were &quot; rheumatism and neuralgia&quot; (38
each); &quot;some&quot; respondents, (but less than four),
believed addiction was caused by sickness and pain and/or the
&quot;loss of property and position in society&quot; due to the
recent war. (Earle, 1880) (On another government survey, of
doctors in Michigan in 1878, the Civil War was not mentioned).
(Marshall, 1966) </p>

<p>In toto, these surveys indicate that there was a small,
temporary phenomenon of addicted veterans, which was not a social
problem in the sense that anyone but a few pharmacists recognized
it in the quarter century after the Civil War. </p>

<p><b>C. </b><u>&quot;Any&quot; Vs. &quot;Many&quot;</u> </p>

<p>No one doubts that all the opiates used to alleviate the pain
from all the chronic diseases and continuous pain resulting from
the Civil War resulted in some soldiers using and becoming
addicted to opiates. The issue, however, is not whether there
were <u>any</u> addicted veterans but if there were <u>many</u>.
Courtwright's contention that <b>&quot;a </b><i>substantial </i>number
of them (veterans) eventually became addicted to opium or
morphine,&quot; and that &quot;two events, the Civil War and the
spread of hypodermic medication, triggered a <b><i>massive </i></b>increase
in iatrogenic opium and especially morphine addiction,&quot;
(emphasis not in the original). (Courtwright, 1982) is
unwarranted.<br>
</p>

<p>In arguing that the importance of Soldier's Disease should not
be discounted, Courtwright stresses the importance on later 19th
Century addiction of the wrenching impact that War had on society
as a whole, such as the loss of loved ones, property, fortunes
and social position. By such reasoning, any social event or
condition which occurs in reasonable proximity before an increase
in drug use can be considered a &quot;cause.&quot; Ergo, the iron
horse can be blamed for late 19th century addiction, or movies
and television for the increased drug problems of the last few
decades. (In the Massachusetts study noted above, more
pharmacists reported state restrictions on the use of alcohol a
&quot;cause&quot; of recent opiate use than reported the Civil
War). However, Soldier's Disease is cited in the drug literature
the past few decades to imply something quite specific -- namely,
the presence of opiates, outside of strict and knowledgeable
medical control, ipso facto causes massive publicly noted
addiction, Nothing less. </p>

<p><b>5. </b><u>Soldier's Disease and Drug Policy</u> </p>

<p>In sum, Soldier's Disease proves to be another myth. In
reality, the widespread use of opiates during the Civil War
generated so infinitesimal a problem that only two or three
apothecaries, and two or three of the most encyclopedic drug
experts, even speculated on the possibility of addicted soldiers
from that War for almost half a century. Soldier's Disease did
not become the Conventional Wisdom until almost a century after
that war. </p>

<p>Implicit in the concept of Soldier's Disease are four aspects
of addiction which, together, are a paradigm used to justify
current opiate laws -- easy access leads to widespread use,
addiction is easy to acquire, hard to kick, and its consequences
are powerful and publicly obvious. In the popular contemporary
idiom, the paradigm consists of &quot;it's so good, don't even
try it once&quot;; &quot;once an addict, always an addict&quot;;
and in the image of the &quot;junkie&quot;. (Belief in this
paradigm, in the early 1970's, led many experts, and particularly
critics of U.S. military policy, to sound the tocsin about opiate
use by GIs for inevitably this would lead to a huge problem of
addicted veterans ... which it didn't)27 Since each aspect of the
paradigm is contradicted by the historical evidence, Soldier's
Disease is a mythic reconstruction of the past to make it
coincide with contemporary assumptions. <br>
</p>

<p>How significant is the paradigm in justifying opiate laws?
Each year over the past two decades the nation has spent billions
in drug law enforcement, resulting in an annual average of over a
half million drug arrests, and has spent billions for trying
those arrestees and incarcerating scores of thousands of them.
Until the mid-1980's, when cocaine replaced opiates as the most
often used and most frightening &quot;hard drug,&quot; the
dangers of opiate addiction formed the core of the nation's
perceived drug problem and most of the prisoners serving drug
sentences had been convicted on opiate charges. Additionally,
drugs are a major economic alternative for young poor people, as
well as a major source of police corruption. None of this --
neither the public money, arrests, incarcerations, the
competitive illegal economy, and police corruption -existed
regarding drugs until there were prohibitory laws. </p>

<p>How significant is Soldier's Disease for the paradigm which
shows opiate availability ipso facto causes a massive social
problem? As noted in Section I of this paper, there is no other
pre-Harrison Act example of a currently believable social
problem. Though an ancient and seemingly minor issue, addiction
among Civil War veterans functions as a lynchpin or cornerstone.
Strip away Soldier's Disease, and the only problem suggested by
the paradigm are the medical consequences of addiction, which
occurs in a large percentage of opiate users. The facts about
addiction among the Civil War's soldiers and veterans indicates
that widespread addiction, too, is a natural result of free
access to drugs. </p>

<p>The facts about Civil War drug use indicate open availability
and no recognizable negative consequences; the facts, the past
few generations, show extremely limited access to opiates and an
immense &quot;drug problem.&quot; It is in the illegal context
that the modern &quot;opiate problem&quot; arises, rather than in
a legal context such as the Civil War. The chemistry lesson of
the Civil War is that opiates per se do not cause the problem,
the context does.<br>
<br>
</p>

<p align="center"><b><u>FOOTNOTES</u></b> </p>

<p><b>1 </b>The imagery of the &quot;leather thong around his
neck and a leather bag&quot; is, to my knowledge, unique to
Starkey. </p>

<p>2 Occasionally a moralistic author of the late 19th Century
cited a social problem with opiates which no-one else ever
noticed, but two problems were repeated enough to warrant
comment. T.D. Crothers in several articles claimed that morphine,
in particular, led to crime. According to one scholar who studied
the period, &quot;No other writer ... asserts the strength and
ubiquity of this association .... (and) it is extremely difficult
to accept the validity of his position.&quot; (Swatos, 1972),
though at least one other expert claimed, as an alibi in a trial
for a property crime, (Kane, 1882b), that the cost of opiates
forced some persons with huge habits to steal. Still, before the
laws all but the extremely poor could easily afford any size
habit. Crothers' unique assertions about opiate-caused crime can
not justify a policy which generates the extraordinary
drug-related crime of today. </p>

<p>There were also occasional reports that addicts were lethargic
and neglectful of personal hygiene and business. However, the
types of people on 19th Century lists of addicts, were typically
in demanding jobs. That, said the experts at the time, was why
they sought the &quot;stimulating&quot; effects of opiates. The
many reports of people not knowing their spouses were long term
addicts suggests that the lethargy and inattentiveness to
business was hardly blatant. Aside from the racist comments about
opiate use in Chinatowns, the allegation that opiates effected
the performance of a class of persons, such as impeding the
performance of soldiers (S.F. Call, 19 1 Ob), was rare. </p>

<p>3 Terry and Pellens, in their encyclopedic classic The Opium
Problem, also report import statistics, as does Kane, the author
of the longest scholarly work in the early 1880's. (Terry and
Pellens, 1928:50-5 1; and Kane, 1880). <br>
</p>

<p>4 &quot;It has been reported that for many years husbands and
wives, to say nothing of other members of a family, have lived in
complete ignorance of the existence of this condition in one or
the other.&quot; (Terry and Pellens: 2)<br>
</p>

<p>5 The <u>S.F. Call</u> index is on index cards at the
University of California, Berkeley library.<br>
</p>

<p>6 The full headline of this story is: </p>

<p align="center">Says Opium Aids Music Composers </p>

<p align="center">Jean Laporte Declares Many Owe Much of Their
Fame to Smoking The Drug </p>

<p align="center">Colleagues Support Him </p>

<p>Two Well Known Musicians Say a Few Pipes a Day Are No Worse
Than Cigarettes - Doctors Contradict Them (N.Y. Times, 1912)<br>
</p>

<p>7 The obvious racism manifest in such headlines as
&quot;Crafty Chinese Are Doubly Accused&quot; (S.F. Call, 1910a),
becomes a &quot;social problem&quot; when white women are
involved, as suggested by the following headline: </p>

<p align="center">200 Seized In 62 Drug Dens </p>

<p>Police and Detectives Sweep Chinatown, Battering In Doors of
Opium Places </p>

<p>Two White Women Are Captured In Dragnet. (S.F. Call, 191lb)<br>
</p>

<p>The S.F. Call on occasion linked opiate use to crime or
lunacy, but each time the details indicated the problem was a
result of the law. (S.F. Call, 1910c and d, and 1911a) New York
City's Commissioner of Corrections said that if addicts are
deprived of opiates on arrest, &quot;normal persons ... very
frequently go insane.&quot; (N.Y. Times, 1914) <br>
</p>

<p>9 Estimates of the number of opiate addicts and &quot;cocaine
fiends&quot; circa 1915 varied enormously. Marks' estimated
4,000,000; a U.S. Public Health Service expert estimated a
minimum of 70,000 and, elsewhere, &quot; I 18,000.... (and)
granting (a) somewhat improbable assertion ... a maximum not more
than 187,000 users of opium,&quot; (Marks, 1915; Wilbert, 1914
and 1915). </p>

<p>10 Had <u>The Opium Problem</u> gained earlier recognition as
a classic, Soldier's Disease might have been the conventional
wisdom of drug experts before the late 1950's. The original 1928
printing of 400 copies not sold out for decades. A 1 970 reprint
sold much better. </p>

<p>11 Soldier's Disease citations attributable to specific
authors, starting with 1973, are: Abel, 1982; Ashley, 1978; Bean,
1974; Bedworth and D'Elia, 1973; Bellis, 198 1; Blaine, Bozzetti
and Ohlson, 1973; Brown, 1973; Califano, 1982; Conrad and
Schneider, 1980; Coombs et. al., 1976; Courtwright, 1978 and
1982; M. Cox, 1984; Cuskey, Johannes and Premkunar, 1973;
Dershowitz, 1973; Ferguson, 1975; Finlator, 1973; Fuqua, 1978;
Geis, 1973; Goode, 1984; Hofmann and Hofmann, 1975; Jacobs and
Fehr, 1987; H. Jones and Jones, 1977; Kaplan, 1983; King, 1974;
Kittrie, 1974; Levine, 1973; Milby, 1981; Morrell, 1973; Muuss,
1974; Pike and Goldstein, 1973; Rice, 1980; Roffman, 1973 and
1976; Rublowsky, 1974; Rydell, 1980; Saper, 1974; Schwartz, 1980;
Seymour and Smith, 1987; Shroeder, 1980; Smith and Seymour, 1986;
Spain, 1975; Stephens and Slatin, 1974; Stimmel, 1975; Summers
et. al., 1975; Trebach, 1982; Weinswig, 1973; Young et. al.,
1977; and Zinberg, 1984. </p>

<p>12 Soldier's Disease was cited in publications by several
influential government agencies and prestigious commissions
created to address the drug issue. Starting with 1973, references
to Soldier's Disease can be found in: Los Angeles Sheriff's
Department, 1974; National Commission on Marihuana, 1973;
Organized Crime Task Force, 1984; President's Commission on
Organized Crime, 1986; Strategy Council, 1975; U.S. Attorney
General, 1984: and U.S. Department of H.E.W., 1975. </p>

<p>13 Despite my many criticisms, I respect Courtwright's
judiciousness and his willingness to grapple with the issue
(which no other expert who claims Soldier's Disease has done), He
recognizes and responds to contrary evidence, and criticizes
simplistic recitations of Soldier's Disease. </p>

<p><b>14 </b>Of the authors the past 30 years who report
widespread addiction by Civil War veterans, over a third mention
Soldier's Disease, a third denote Army Disease, an occasional
author labels it Soldier's Illness or Soldier's Sickness, and the
others describe the phenomenon without noting a sobriquet. </p>

<p>15 The officer confessed at his trial that he was
&quot;suffering for want of the drug (opium) ... (and) so great
was the craving that he temporarily deserted his post to ...
obtain it, though knowing that his life would thereby be
forfeited.&quot; (Nolan, 188 1). This smacks of tales from the
1930's of murderers caught red-handed who, desperate to avoid the
electric chair, claimed marijuana &quot;caused&quot; their crime.
</p>

<p>16 The failure to note opiate addiction as a significant
problem was not due to the absence of the concept of addiction
during and just after the Civil War, The commissioners of the
Prison Association of New York in 1866 reported that men &quot;of
a low order of morals ... (were) addicted to habits of profanity
and intemperance.&quot; (North American Review, 1867:570) </p>

<p>17 An article on opiates by Mitchell -- on the effects of
opiates on birds -confirms him as an eccentric scientist. (Boston
MSJ, 1870) Weir found that morphia did not induce steep
&quot;beyond a slight tendency to quietude, which we can never be
sure is not due to the habit of the wounded or sick pigeon of
seeking a remote corner and remaining at rest,&quot; but
&quot;used hypodermically in excessive amounts ... act as
excitants .... (and) in the duck they approach nearest to the
typical strychnic spasm.&quot; Weir also found &quot;great
difficulty with which pigeons, especially old birds, are poisoned
by opiates.&quot; </p>

<p>In All or part of Day's two sentences on the Civil War are
quoted by five 20th Century writers, (Brecher et. al., 1972;
Courtwright, 1978; Cuskey, </p>

<p>Premkunar and Sigel, 1972; Quinones, 1975; and Terry and
Pellens, 1928), and closely paraphrased without attribution by
some others. </p>

<p>19 Calkins, Day's contemporary, refers to over 200 cases in <u>Opium
and the Opium Appetite</u>. but not one soldier who began opiate
use between 1861-65.<br>
</p>

<p>20 Courtwright and Terry and Pellens cite addicted Civil War
veterans who came to public attention in the 20th Century as
evidence of that war's impact on subsequent addiction. Besides
lending credence to the phenomenon they also demonstrate that
such addiction was benign and unnoticed. The octogenarians cited
in 1928 by Terry and Pellens (&quot;today in more than one old
soldiers' home are cases of chronic opium addiction which date
from this (Civil War) period&quot;) (Terry and Pellens, 69), or
the 82 year old Confederate veteran who &quot;had been shot in
the head during the Civil War&quot; and &quot;had been addicted
55 years&quot; under medical supervision since then, (Waldorf,
1973), reveal that the addiction of veterans was not <i>a social
problem, </i>and not even <i>a medical problem </i>until
prohibition of opiates. </p>

<p>21 Apart from Courtwright's citations, of the 29 books or
largest articles about opiates, published between 1865-1879,
which I have located, there is not an original reference to
soldiers addicted during the Civil War. (Brown, 1972: Calkins,
1867 and 1871; Chaille, 1876; M.D., 1878; Frost, 1870; Gibbons,
1870: Gould, 1878; Harrington, 1878; Ingals, 1877 and 1878;
Layard, 1874 and 1878; Lippincott's, 1868; Ludlow, 1867;
Mattison, 1876 a and b, and 1878 a and b; McFarland, 1877;
National Quarterly Review, 1870; Parrish, 1869 and 1873; Popular
Science, 1875; The Probe, 1869 a and b: Richet, 1878; R.S., 1869;
and Warren, 1867). Several times as many articles were shorter
pieces, and likewise <u>made</u> no mention of addiction linked
to the Civil War. </p>

<p>22 Four lengthy newspaper articles during the 1870's, about
non-Chinese opiate use, do not mention soldiers or veterans of
the Civil War. (New York Daily Herald, 1877 and 1878; and New
York Times, 1877 and 1878). </p>

<p>23 Two of the four 20th Century sources cited by Courtwright
were also works by Crothers. (Crothers, 1900 and 1902). </p>

<p>24 Headings of 7 of the 18 chapters in Crothers' book <u>Morphinism
and Narcomanias From Other Drugs</u> are &quot;Chloralism ....
Chioroformism .... Coffee Addiction .... Tea Inebriety ....
Tobacco Inebriety .... Ether Inebriety .... (and) Addictions From
Other Drugs,&quot; these &quot;others&quot; including arsenic,
ginger, cologne and lavender. (Crothers, 198 lb) </p>

<p>25 Three reviews of the 1872 Massachusetts study appeared in
medical journals at the time. None mentioned the Civil War (Amer.
J of Medical Sciences, 1872; and Lancet, 1873), and one even
considered the reports of opiate habituation &quot;exaggerated
.... a piece of scandal,&quot; witness that in its subsequent
annual report the Massachusetts Board of Health made &quot;no
allusion whatsoever to the subject (of opiates)&quot; (Medical
Times, 1873). </p>

<p>26 Morgan provides a lengthier excerpt of the 1872
Massachusetts study than did Terry and Pellens, but omits the
physician's, and two pharmacists', comments. The single sentence
relevant to the Civil War -- &quot;The taste for opium eating
among soldiers retired from the army is alluded to by a few of
our correspondents&quot; -- follows a listing of other causes of
addiction, (injudicious prescribing, depressed nervous systems,
overwork with deficient nutrition, a vicious mode of life, and
intemperance). </p>

<p>27 In several fundamental respects, the opiate use of soldiers
and veterans of the Vietnam War is not analogous to the Civil War
situation, though the fears about what widespread opiate use
among GIs would engender once they were mustered out exactly
parallels the fears implicit in Soldier's Disease. The soldiers
who used opiates in the Civil War did so to alleviate the pain
from wounds, and to help cure &quot;the fluxes,&quot; but using
such drugs &quot;to get high&quot; or to reduce stress were the
essential reasons for opiate use by Vietnam era GIs. In so far as
a few veterans continued regularly using opiates in the 1970's
and 1980's, they contributed to a social problem because, in the
context of illegality, any regular opiate use tends to be a
financial burden and criminal problem. The counterparts of these
GIs, a century earlier, went unnoticed. Further, the fact that so
many GIs abandoned opiate use once out of Vietnam can be argued
as a demonstration of the effects of the U.S. approach of massive
treatment opportunities and massive enforcement. The handful of
addicted veterans after the Civil War would suggest that
suppression is not the root cause of why regular opiate users
quit before becoming addicted.<br>
</p>

<p><b><u>REFERENCES<br>
</u></b></p>

<p>Abel, Ernest </p>

<p>1982 Marijuana: The First Twelve Thousand Years, N.Y.,
McGrawHill. (P. 189)<br>
</p>

<p>Adams, George Worthington </p>

<p>1952 Doctors in Blue, N.Y., Henry Schuman. (Especially Pp.
50-5 1, 116-19 and 228-29)<br>
</p>

<p>Adams, J.F.A., </p>

<p>1889 &quot;Substitutes For Opium In Chronic Diseases,&quot;
Boston Medical and Surgical Reporter, 21:351-56.<br>
</p>

<p>Aldrich, Michael </p>

<p>1979 The Dope Chronicles - 1850-1950, ed. by Gary Silver with
text by Michael Aldrich, San Francisco. Harper and Row. (P, 9) <br>
</p>

<p>American journal of the Medical Sciences </p>

<p>1872 &quot;Report of the State Board of Health of
Massachusetts,&quot; 64:156-57.<br>
</p>

<p>Anon </p>

<p>1876 Opium Eating, An Autobiographical Sketch By An Habituate,
</p>

<p>Philadelphia, Claxton, Remsen, and Haffelfinger.<br>
</p>

<p>Ashley, Richard </p>

<p>1972 Heroin, N.Y., St. Martin's Press. (P. 5) </p>

<p>1978 &quot;Opiates,&quot; in Andrew Kowl (ed.), High Times
Encyclopedia of Recreational Drugs, N.Y., Stonehill Publishing
Co. (P. 224) <br>
</p>

<p>Ball, John </p>

<p>1970 Foreward to the Reprint Edition of Terry and Pellens, The
Opium Problem, Montclair, New Jersey, Patterson Smith. (P. v) <br>
</p>

<p>Ball, John and Carl Chambers, eds. </p>

<p>1970 The Epidemiology of Opiate Addiction in the United
States, Springfield, Ill., Charles C. Thomas, Publisher. (Pp.
41-43)<br>
</p>

<p>Barnes, Harry Elmer </p>

<p>1939 Society In Transition, NY, Prentice-Hall. (P. 805)<br>
</p>

<p>Bean, Philip </p>

<p>1974 The Social Control of Drugs, N.Y., John Wiley &amp; Sons.
(P. 18)<br>
</p>

<p>Bedworth, Albert, and Joseph D'Elia </p>

<p>1973 Basics of Drug Education, N.Y., Baywood Publishing Co.
(P. 147)<br>
</p>

<p>Bellis, David </p>

<p>1981 Heroin and Politicians, Westport, Conn., Greenwood Press.
(P. 5)<br>
</p>

<p>Billings, John </p>

<p>1905 &quot;Medical Reminiscences of the Civil War,&quot;
Transactions of the College of Physicians (Philadelphia),
27:115-21.<br>
</p>

<p>Bishop, Ernest S. </p>

<p>1919 &quot;Legitimate Use of Narcotics In War Time,&quot;
American journal of Public Health, 9:321-29. </p>

<p>1920 The Narcotic Drug Problem, N.Y., Macmillan. (Pp. 24-5)<br>
</p>

<p>Blaine, Jack, Louis Bozzetti and Kiell Ohlson </p>

<p>1973 &quot;The Narcotic Analgesics: The Opiates,&quot; P. 60
in Drug Use In America - Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers
of the Second Report of the National Commission On Marijuana and
Drug Abuse, Appendix Vol. 1, Patterns and Consequences of Drug
Use, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. <br>
</p>

<p>Boston Medical and Surgical journal </p>

<p>1870 &quot;Effect of Opium and Its Derivative Alkaloids,&quot;
V. n.s. 5:99-1 00.<br>
</p>

<p>Brecher, Edward and Editors of Consumer Reports </p>

<p>1972 Licit and Illicit Drugs, Boston, Little Brown. (Pp. 3 and
I 1)<br>
</p>

<p>Brooks, Stewart </p>

<p>1966 Civil War Medicine, Springfield, Illinois, Charles C.
Thomas Publisher. (Especially Pp. 65, 88, 117 and 126-27)<br>
</p>

<p>Brown, Bertram </p>

<p>1973 &quot;The Treatment and Rehabilitation of Narcotic
Addicts In The United States&quot;, Pp. 127-28 in Drug Use In
America - Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the Second
Report of the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse,
Appendix Vol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 2 &quot;The
Treatment of Drug Dependence,&quot; Washington D.C., U.S.
Government Printing Off ice.<br>
</p>

<p>Brown, H. James </p>

<p>[1872] An Opium Cure Based Upon Science, Skill and Matured
Experi- </p>

<p>1972 ence, in Gerald Grob (ed.) American Perspectives of Drug
Addiction, Five Studies, 1872-1912, N.Y., Arno Press.<br>
</p>

<p>Calkins, Alonzo </p>

<p>1867 &quot;Opium and Its Victims,&quot; Galaxy, 4:25-36. </p>

<p>1871 Opium and The Opium Appetite, Philadelphia, J.B.
Lippincott. <br>
</p>

<p>Chaille, Stanford </p>

<p>1876 &quot;The Opium Habit, and 'Opium-Mania Cures',&quot; New
Orleans </p>

<p>Medical and Surgical journal, NS 3:767-75.<br>
</p>

<p>Clausen, John </p>

<p>1961 &quot;Drug Addiction, P. 24 in Robert Merton and R.
Nisbet (eds.), </p>

<p>Contemporary Social Problems, N.Y., Harcourt Brace Jovanovich </p>

<p>Inc. (Reprinted in Paul Rock (ed.), Drugs and Politics, New </p>

<p>Brunswick, New Jersey, Transaction Books).<br>
</p>

<p>Conrad, Peter and Joseph Schneider </p>

<p>1980 Deviance and Medicalization: From Badness To Sickness,
St. Louis, C.V. Mosby Co. (P. II 4) <br>
</p>

<p>Coombs, Robert, Lincoln Fry, and Patricia Lewis </p>

<p>1976 Socialization In Drug Abuse, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
Schenckman Publishing Co. (P. 27)<br>
</p>

<p>Courtwright, David </p>

<p>1978 &quot;Opiate Addiction As A Consequence of The Civil
War,&quot; Civil War History, 24: 1 0 1 -1 1. </p>

<p>1982 Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction in America Before 1940,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press. </p>

<p>1983 &quot;The Hidden Epidemic: Cocaine Use In The South,
1880-1920,&quot; journal of Southern History, 49:57-72.<br>
</p>

<p>Cox, Meg </p>

<p>1984 &quot;The Drug Trade: Abuse of Narcotics In U.S. Is by No
Means A Recent Phenomenon,&quot; Wall Street Journal, December 3,
1984. (P. 20)<br>
</p>

<p>Crothers, T. D. </p>

<p>1892 &quot;Some New Studies of the Opium Disease,&quot;
journal of the American Medical Association, 18:227-33, </p>

<p>[1893] The Disease of Inebriety From Alcohol, Opium and Other </p>

<p>1981a Narcotic Drugs, The American Association for the Study
and Cure of Inebriety, T.C. Crothers (ed.), New York, Arno Press.
(P. 323) </p>

<p>1899 &quot;Criminal Morphomania,&quot; journal of the American
Medical </p>

<p>Association, 33:388-91. </p>

<p>1900 &quot;New Sources of Danger In The Use of Opium,&quot;
journal of the American Medical Association, 35:338-42. </p>

<p>[1902] Morphinism and Narcomanias From Other Drugs, New York, </p>

<p>1981b Arno Press.<br>
</p>

<p>1916 &quot;Hypnotics in the Treatment of Inebriety,&quot;
American journal of Clinical Medicine, 23:218-21.<br>
</p>

<p>Cuskey, Walter, Johannes Ipsen and T. Premkunar </p>

<p>1973 &quot;An Inquiry Into The Nature of Changes In Behavior
Among Drug Users In Treatment,&quot; P. 199 in Drug Use In
America Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the Second
Report of the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse,
Appendix Vol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 2 &quot;The
Treatment of Drug Dependence,&quot; Washington D.C., U.S.
Government Printing Office,<br>
</p>

<p>D., M. </p>

<p>1878 The Personal Experiences of An Ex-Opium Habitue,&quot;
Medical Record, 13:399-400.<br>
</p>

<p>Dai, Bingham </p>

<p>[1937] Opium Addiction In Chicago, Montclair, New Jersey,
Patterson </p>

<p>1970 Smith. (P. 35)<br>
</p>

<p>Day, Horace </p>

<p>1868 The Opium Habit, With Suggestions As To The Remedy, N.Y.,
Harper Brothers.<br>
</p>

<p>Dershowitz, Alan </p>

<p>1973 &quot;Constitutional Dimensions of Civil
Commitment,&quot; P, 41 1 in Drug Use In America - Problem In
Perspective, Technical Papers of the Second Report of the
National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse, Appendix Vol.
IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 3 &quot;Drug Dependence and
the Legal System,&quot; Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing
Office.<br>
</p>

<p>Duncan, Louis C. </p>

<p>[1912] The Medical Department of the United States Army In The
</p>

<p>1985 Civil War, Gaithersberg, Maryland, Butternut Press.<br>
</p>

<p>Earle, Charles Warrington </p>

<p>1880 &quot;The Opium Habit&quot; Chicago Medical Review,
2:442-46. (Reprinted in H. Wayne Morgan (ed.), Yesterday's
Addicts American Society and Drug Abuse, 1865-1920, Norman,
Oklahoma, 1974).<br>
</p>

<p>Federal Bureau of Investigation </p>

<p>1980-87 Crime In America - Uniform Crime Reports, annual, </p>

<p>Washington D.C., GPO.<br>
</p>

<p>Fell, Robert </p>

<p>1924 &quot;The Social Aspects of Morphine Addiction,&quot;
Institutional Quarterly, (Illinois Department of Public Welfare),
15:103-08. <br>
</p>

<p>Ferguson, Robert </p>

<p>1975 Drug Abuse Control, Boston, Holbrook Press. (Pp.40-1)<br>
</p>

<p>Finlator, John </p>

<p>1973 The Drugged Nation - A Narc's Story, N.Y., Simon and
Schuster. (P. 9)<br>
</p>

<p>Frost, C.P. </p>

<p>1870 &quot;Opium: Its Uses and Abuses,&quot; Transactions of
the Vermont Medical Society, 1869-70, 131-47.<br>
</p>

<p>Fuqua, Paul </p>

<p>1978 Drug Abuse: Investigation and Control, N.Y., Gregg
Division/ McGraw-Hill. (Pp. 26-7)<br>
</p>

<p>Geis, Gilbert </p>

<p>1973 Not The Law's Business? .... Homosexuality, Abortion,
Prostitution, Narcotics, and Gambling, Rockville, MD, N.I.M.H.
Center for Studies of Crime and Delinquency. (P, 109)<br>
</p>

<p>Gibbons, H. </p>

<p>1870 &quot;Letheomania: the Result of the Hypodermic Injection
of Morphia,&quot; Pacific Medical and Surgical journal, N.S.
3:481-95. <br>
</p>

<p>Goode, Erich </p>

<p>1984 Drugs In American Society, 2nd Edit,, N.Y., Alfred
Knopf.(P.217) <br>
</p>

<p>Gould, S.W. </p>

<p>1878 &quot;The Opium Habit,&quot; Medical and Surgical
Reporter, 38:496-97.<br>
</p>

<p>Harrington, H.L. </p>

<p>1878 &quot;Hypodermic Use of Morphia,&quot; Chicago Medical
journal and Examiner, 37:73-5. <br>
</p>

<p>Health Policy Advisory Center </p>

<p>1970 &quot;Drug Law History: Politics and Prohibition,&quot;
Health/PAC Bulletin, (No Volume No.):2-4.<br>
</p>

<p>Hofmann, Frederick and Adele Hofmann </p>

<p>1975 A Handbook on Drug and Alcohol Abuse - The Biomedical
Aspects, N.Y., Oxford University Press. (P. 37)<br>
</p>

<p>Illinois Medical journal </p>

<p>1921 &quot;Drug Addiction From The Lay Point of View,&quot;
Illinois Medical journal, 39:7 1.<br>
</p>

<p>Ingals, Fletcher </p>

<p>1877 &quot;Danger From Hypodermic Injections,&quot; Chicago
Medical journal and Examiner, 35:184-86. </p>

<p>1878 &quot;Danger From The Hypodermic Injection of
Morphine,&quot; Chicago Medical journal and Examiner, 36:491-46.<br>
</p>

<p>Isbell, Harris </p>

<p>1960 &quot;Clinical Research On Addiction In The United
States,&quot; P. II 4 in Robert Livingston (ed.), Narcotic Drug
Addiction Problems, Proceedings of Symposium on the History of
Narcotic Drug Addiction, 1958, Public Health Service Publication
No. 1050, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. </p>

<p>1963 &quot;Historical Development of Attitudes Toward Opiate
Addiction in The United States,&quot; Pp. 154-69 in Seymour
Farber and Roger Wilson (eds.), Conflict and Creativity, (Part II
of Control of the Mind), N.Y., McGraw-Hill. <br>
</p>

<p>Jacobs, Michael and Kevin Fehr </p>

<p>1987 Drugs and Drug Abuse: A Reference Text, 2nd Edition,
Toronto, Addiction Research Foundation. (P. 1 1 2) (Also see lst
Edition, 1983, P. 371).<br>
</p>

<p>Jaquith, W.L. </p>

<p>1965 &quot;The Treatment of Narcotism In Mississippi,&quot;
journal of the Mississippi State Medical Association, 6:15-7.<br>
</p>

<p>Jones, Hardin and Jones, Helen </p>

<p>1977 Sensual Drugs - Deprivation and Rehabilitation of the
Mind, Cambridge and N.Y., Cambridge University Press. (P. 189)<br>
</p>

<p>Kane, H.H. </p>

<p>1882a Opium-Smoking In America and China, N.Y., Putnam's Sons.
</p>

<p>1882b &quot;Some Medico-Legal Aspects of Morphia-Taking,&quot;
Alienist and Neurologist 3:419-433.<br>
</p>

<p>Kaplan, John </p>

<p>1983 The Hardest Drug - Heroin and Public Policy, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press. (P. 6 1) <br>
</p>

<p>Keeley, Leslie </p>

<p>1881 The Morphine Eater: or From Bondage to Freedom, Dwight,
Illinois, C. L. Palmer Co.<br>
</p>

<p>Kenny, Maxine </p>

<p>1972 &quot;Drug Law History - Politics and Prohibitions,&quot;
Pp. I I 0 - I I in Frank Browning and the Editors of Ramparts
(eds.), Smack!, N.Y., Harrow Books (Harper Row).<br>
</p>

<p>King, Rufus </p>

<p>1974 'The American System': Legal Sanctions to Repress Drug
Abuse,&quot; P. 18 in James Inciardi and Carl Chambers (eds.)
Drugs and the Criminal justice System, Beverly Hills, CA, Sage
Publications, <br>
</p>

<p>Kittrie, Nicholas </p>

<p>[19711 <u>The Right To Be Different - Deviance and Enforced
Therapy</u>. </p>

<p>1974 Penguin Books. (P. 217)<br>
</p>

<p>Kolb, Lawrence, </p>

<p>1960 &quot;Factors That Have Influenced the Management and
Treatment of Drug Addicts,&quot; in Robert Livingston, (ed.),
Narcotic Addiction Problems, Bethesda, MD, U.S. Department of
Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service. </p>

<p>1962 Drug Addiction - A Medical Problem, Springfield, Ill.,
Charles C. Thomas Publisher. (P. 145) <br>
</p>

<p>Kramer, John </p>

<p>1971 &quot;Introduction to the Problem of Heroin Addiction in
America,&quot; journal of Psychedelic Drugs, 4:15-2 1. </p>

<p>1972 &quot;A Brief History of Heroin Addiction in
America,&quot; in David Smith and George Gay (eds.), &quot;It's
So Good, Don't Even Try It Once,&quot; Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey, Prentice-Haft. (P. 35)<br>
</p>

<p>Layard, James Coulter </p>

<p>1874 &quot;Morphine,&quot; Atlantic Monthly, 33:697-712. </p>

<p>1878 &quot;Curing The Opium Habit - The Treatment In The
Binghampton Asylum,&quot; N.Y. Times, September 27. (Letter To
The Editor) <br>
</p>

<p>Levine, Samuel </p>

<p>1973 Narcotics and Drug Abuse, Cincinatti, W.H. Anderson Co.
(P. 69)<br>
</p>

<p>Lindesmith, Alfred </p>

<p>1947 Opiate Addiction, Bloomington, Indiana, Principia Press.
(P. 196) (Also see 1968 revision, Addiction and Opiates, Chicago,
Aldine. (P. 225)<br>
</p>

<p>Lingeman, Richard R. </p>

<p>1969 Drugs From A to Z: A Dictionary, N.Y., McGraw-Hill. (P. I
1)<br>
</p>

<p>Lippincott's Magazine </p>

<p>1868 &quot;Opium Eating,&quot; (unsigned), Lippincott's
Magazine, 1:404-09.<br>
</p>

<p>Literary Digest </p>

<p>1919 &quot;The Drug Disease,&quot; Literary Digest, 61:29-30. <br>
</p>

<p>Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department </p>

<p>1974 <u>Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs</u>. (Section 2, P. 12) <br>
</p>

<p>Ludlow, Fitzhugh </p>

<p>1867 &quot;What Shall They Do To be Saved?&quot;, Harpers,
35:377-87. </p>

<p>Marks, Jeannette </p>

<p>19 15 &quot;The Curse of Narcotism In America - A
Reveille,&quot; American journal of Public Health, 5:314-22.<br>
</p>

<p>Marshall, 0. </p>

<p>[1878] &quot;The Opium Habit In Michigan,&quot; in John
O'Donnell and John Ball </p>

<p>1966 (eds.), Narcotic Addiction, Pp. 45-54. (Reprinted from
Annual Michigan State Board of Health, 1878, 6:63-73).<br>
</p>

<p>Mattison, J.B. </p>

<p>1876a &quot;The Impending Danger,&quot; Medical Record, 1
1:69-7 1. </p>

<p>1876b &quot;Opium Inebriety,&quot; Medical Record, 11:793-97. </p>

<p>1878a &quot;Clinical Notes On Opium Habituation,&quot; Medical
Record, 14:66-7. </p>

<p>1878b &quot;The Responsibility of the Profession In The
Production of Opium Inebriety,&quot; Medical and Surgical
Reporter, 38:101-04. </p>

<p>1898 &quot;Narcotic Inebriety In America,&quot; North American
Review, 166:254-55,<br>
</p>

<p>Maurer, David and Victor Vogel </p>

<p>[1954] Narcotics and Narcotic Addiction, Second Edition,
Springfield, </p>

<p>1962 Illinois, Charles C. Thomas Publisher. (P. 6)<br>
</p>

<p>McFarland, S.F. </p>

<p>1877 &quot;Opium Inebriety and the Hypodermic Syringe,&quot;
Transactions of the Medical Society of the State of New York, (No
Volume): 289-93.<br>
</p>

<p>Medical Times </p>

<p>1873 &quot;Opium-Eating In Massachusetts,&quot; editorial,
(Philadelphia) Medical Times, 3:520.<br>
</p>

<p>Milby, Jesse </p>

<p>1981 Addictive Behavior and Its Treatment, New York, Springer
Publishing Co. (P. 242)<br>
</p>

<p>Morgan, H. Wayne </p>

<p>1974 Yesterday's Addicts - American Society and Drug Abuse,
1865-1920, Norman, Oklahoma, University of Oklahoma Press.<br>
</p>

<p>Morrell, Michael </p>

<p>1973 &quot; Maintenance Of Opiate Dependent Persons In The
United States: A Legal Medical History,&quot; Drug Use In America
Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the Second Report of
the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug Abuse, Appendix
Vol. IV, Treatment and Rehabilitation, Pt. 3 &quot;Drug
Dependence and the Legal System,&quot; Washington D.C., U.S.
Government Printing Office. (P. 517)<br>
</p>

<p>Musto, David </p>

<p>1973 TheAmerican Disease, New Haven, Yale University Press.
(Pp. 1-2, 251)<br>
</p>

<p>Muuss, Rolf E. </p>

<p>1974 &quot;Legal and Historical Aspects of Drug Abuse In
Historical Perspective,&quot; Adolescence, 9:495-507.<br>
</p>

<p>National Commission On Marihuana and Drug Abuse </p>

<p>1973 Drug Use In America: Problem In Perspective, Washington
D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office. (P. 15)<br>
</p>

<p>National Quarterly Review </p>

<p>1870 &quot;Opium and the Opium Trade,&quot; National Quarterly
Review, 20:288-310.<br>
</p>

<p>New York Daily Tribune </p>

<p>1877 &quot;Opium and Its Consumers,&quot; July 10, 1877,
(Unsigned). (P. 2) </p>

<p>1878 &quot;Increase of a Dangerous Vice - The Opium Habit
Morphia Syringes - Comments On Their Use By Prominent
Physicians,&quot; December 26, 1878, (Unsigned). (P. 8)<br>
</p>

<p>New York Times </p>

<p>1877 &quot;The Opium Habits Power - Its Extent In The United
States,&quot; December 30, 1877, (unsigned). (P. 8) </p>

<p>1878 &quot;The Opium Habits Power - Popular Errors
Corrected,&quot; January 6, 1878, (unsigned). (P. 5) </p>

<p>1912 &quot;Says Opium Aids Music Composers,&quot; January 21,
1912, (unsigned). (Pt. 4, P. 12) </p>

<p>1914 &quot;New Prison For Drug Users,&quot; June 30, 1914,
(unsigned). (P. 7) </p>

<p>1917 &quot;War Is Increasing The Drug-Consuming Habit,&quot;
April 29, 19 1 7 (unsigned). (Section 8, P. 5) Substantially
reprinted in &quot;The War and The Dope Habit,&quot; Literary
Digest 54:1776-77. (June 9, 1917)<br>
</p>

<p>Nolan, D.W. </p>

<p>1881 &quot;The Opium Habit,&quot; Catholic World 33:827+. (P.
83 1)<br>
</p>

<p>North American Review </p>

<p>1867 &quot;The Reformation of Prison Discipline,&quot; (No
Author), 105:55582.<br>
</p>

<p>O'Donnell, John and John Ball </p>

<p>1966 Narcotic Addiction, N.Y., Harper &amp; Row. (P. 1)<br>
</p>

<p>Oliver, F.E. </p>

<p>1872 Massachusetts State Board of Health, Third Annual Report
(For 1871), Boston, Wright and Potter, State Printers, (Pp.
162-77). (Summarized in 1872, &quot;Report of the State Board of
Health of Massachusetts,&quot; American journal of the Medical
Sciences, 64:156-57; reprinted, in part, Pp. 43-52 in H. Wayne
Morgan (ed.), Yesterday's Addicts; excerpted in Terry and
Pellens'The Opiate Problem, which is partly reprinted, Pp. 41-43
in John Ball and Carl Chambers (eds.), The Epidemiology of Opiate
Addiction in the United States.<br>
</p>

<p>Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force </p>

<p>1984 Annual Report of the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement
Task Force Program - March 1984, Washington D.C. (P. 4)<br>
</p>

<p>Parrish, Joseph </p>

<p>1869 &quot;Opium Smoking,&quot; The Probe, 1:59-6 1. </p>

<p>1873 &quot;Opium Intoxication,&quot; (Reported by T.D.
Crothers), Medical and Surgical Reporter, 29:361-64. <br>
</p>

<p>Pike, Andrew and Eric Goldstein </p>

<p>1973 &quot; History of Drug Use In The Military,&quot; Drug
Use In America Problem In Perspective, Technical Papers of the
Second Report of the National Commission On Marijuana and Drug
Abuse, </p>

<p>Appendix Vol. 1, Patterns and Consequences of Drug Use, Pt. 5
&quot;Drug Use In Selected Populations,&quot; Washington, D.C.,
U.S. </p>

<p>Government Printing Office. (P. II 15)<br>
</p>

<p>Popular Science </p>

<p>1875 &quot;The Use of Narcotics,&quot; (Reprinted From
Chamber's journal, England), (No Author), 7:611-17. <br>
</p>

<p>President's Commission on Organized Crime </p>

<p>1986 America's Habit: Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, and
Organized Crime, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing
Office. (Pp. 190-91)<br>
</p>

<p>Probe </p>

<p>1869a &quot;Hypodermic Use of Opium,&quot; (No Author), The
Probe, 1:7-9. </p>

<p>1869b &quot;Thoughts of An Opium,&quot; (No Author), The
Probe, 1:87-90.<br>
</p>

<p>Quinones, Mark </p>

<p>1975 &quot;Drug Abuse During The Civil War,&quot;
International journal of the Addictions, 10:1007-20.<br>
</p>

<p>Rice, Jerry </p>

<p>1980 &quot;A Chronicle of Federal Drug Enforcement Law,&quot;
(accompanying photo essay), Drug Enforcement (US Drug Enforcement
Administration), December, V. 7. (P. 4)<br>
</p>

<p>Richet, Charles </p>

<p>1878 &quot;Opium and Its Antidote,&quot; Popular Science,
12:555-59. <br>
</p>

<p>Robinson, Victor </p>

<p>1916 &quot;A Symposium on Drugs,&quot; Medical Review of
Reviews, 22:15-26.<br>
</p>

<p>Roffman, Roger </p>

<p>1973 &quot;Heroin and Social Welfare Policy,&quot; Social
Work, 18:22-32.<br>
</p>

<p>1976 &quot;Addiction Concepts and the Vietnam
Experience,&quot; Urban and Social Change Review, 9:16-8.<br>
</p>

<p>Rublowsky, John </p>

<p>1974 The Stoned Age: A History of Drugs In America, New York,
G, </p>

<p>P. Putnam's Sons (Capricorn Books). (Pp. 129-3 1)<br>
</p>

<p>Russell, Ira </p>

<p>1887 &quot;Opium Inebriety,&quot; Medico-Legal journal,
5:144-50. <br>
</p>

<p>Rydell, Wendy </p>

<p>1980 Drugs, North Miami, Florida, Merit Publications. (Pp.
121-22) <br>
</p>

<p>S., R. </p>

<p>1869 &quot;Thirty Grains A Day,&quot; The Probe, 1:50-3.<br>
</p>

<p>San Francisco Call </p>

<p>1910a &quot;Crafty Chinese Are Doubly Accused,&quot; February
4, 19 1 0, (unsigned). (P. 16) </p>

<p>1910b &quot;Opium Dreams Grave Menace To Local Army,&quot;
August 29, </p>

<p>19 1 0, (unsigned). (Pp. I + 2) </p>

<p>1910C &quot;Drug Habit City's Worst Evil,&quot; (by Charlers
Fickert), December 15, 1910. (P. 1) </p>

<p>1910d &quot;Time For A General Crusade Against The Opium
Evil,&quot; (editorial), December 16, 1910. </p>

<p>1911 &quot;200 Seized In 62 Drug Dens,&quot; November 26, 191
1, (unsigned). (P. 17)<br>
</p>

<p>Saper, Anthony </p>

<p>1974 &quot;The Making of Policy Through Myth, Fantasy and
Historical Accident: The Making of America's Narcotics
Laws,&quot; <u>British journal of Addiction</u>, 69:183-193. (P.
184)<br>
</p>

<p>Schwartz, Linda </p>

<p>1980 Heroin: The Strongest Thing You Can Buy Without A
Prescription, (Pamphlet), Phoenix, Arizona, Do It Now Foundation.<br>
</p>

<p>Seymour, Richard and David Smith </p>

<p>1987 Drug Free - A Unique, Positive Approach to Staying Out of
Alcohol and Other Drugs, NY, Sarah Lazin Books, 1987. (P. 37) <br>
</p>

<p>Shroeder, Richard </p>

<p>1980 The Politics of Drugs, 2nd Edition, Washington D.C.,
Congressional Quarterly Inc. (Pp. 3 and 77)<br>
</p>

<p>Smith, David and George Gay </p>

<p>1972 &quot;It's So Good, Don't Even Try It Once&quot;,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall. <br>
</p>

<p>Smith, David and Rick Seymour </p>

<p>1986 &quot;Abuse Folio -- Opiates,&quot; High Times,
(reprinted from High Times, March 1984). (P. 30)<br>
</p>

<p>Sonnedecker, Glenn </p>

<p>1963 &quot;Emergence of the Concept of Opiate Addiction,&quot;
journal Mondial de Pharmacie. (Reprinted Pp. 14-22 in Robert
Livingston (ed.), Narcotic Drug Addiction Problems, Washington
D.C., U.S. Public Health Service. <br>
</p>

<p>Spain, James </p>

<p>1975 &quot;The United States, Turkey and the Poppy,&quot; <u>Middle
East journal</u>, 29(3):295-307. <br>
</p>

<p>Stanley, L.L. </p>

<p>1918 &quot;Drugs and Crime,&quot; journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology, 9:341.<br>
</p>

<p>Starkey, Gerald </p>

<p>1971 &quot;The Use and Abuse of Opiates and
Amphetamines,&quot; Pp. 48 1 484 in Patrick Healy and James Manak
(eds.), Drug Dependence and Abuse Resource Book, Chicago,
National District Attorney's Association.<br>
</p>

<p>Stephens, Richard and Gerald Slatin </p>

<p>1974 &quot;The Street Addict Role: Toward The Definition of a
Type,&quot; Drug Forum, 3:375-89. <br>
</p>

<p>Stimmel, Barry </p>

<p>1975 Heroin Dependency - Medical, Economic and Social Aspects,
</p>

<p>N.Y., Stratton Intercontinental Medical Book Corp. (P. 4)<br>
</p>

<p>Strategy Council on Drug Abuse </p>

<p>1975 Federal Strategy For Drug Abuse-and Drug Traffic
Prevention, 1975, Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing
Office. (P. 5) <br>
</p>

<p>Summers, Marcia, James Trost, E. Leif Zerkin, et. al. </p>

<p>1975 Our Chemical Culture - Drug Use and Misuse, Madison,
Wisconsin, Stash Press.<br>
</p>

<p>Swatos, William H. Jr. </p>

<p>1972 &quot;Opiate Addiction in the Late Nineteenth Century.- A
Study of the Social Problem, Using Medical journals of the
Period,&quot; International journal of the Addictions, 7:739-53.<br>
</p>

<p>Terry, Charles E. </p>

<p>1931 &quot;Development and Causes of Opium Addiction As A
Social Problem,&quot; journal of Educational Sociology, 4:335-42.<br>
</p>

<p>Terry, Charles E. and Mildred Pellens </p>

<p>[ 1928] The Opium Problem, Montclair, New Jersey, Patterson
Smith. </p>

<p>1970<br>
</p>

<p>Trebach, Arnold </p>

<p>1982 The Heroin Solution, new Haven, Conn., Yale University
Press. (P. 38)<br>
</p>

<p>United States Attorney General's Office </p>

<p>1984 Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force Program, 1983
Annual Report, Washington D.C. (P. 4)<br>
</p>

<p>United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare,
Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration </p>

<p>1975 Treatment of Drug Abuse: An Overview, National
Clearinghouse for Drug Abuse Information, Report Series 34, No.
1, DHEW Publication No. (ADM)75-197. Rockville, MD.<br>
</p>

<p>Waldorf, Dan, Martin Orlick and Craig Reinarman </p>

<p>1974 Morphine Maintenance - The Shreveport Clinic 1919-1923, </p>

<p>Washington D.C., The Drug Abuse Council. (P. 20, 30-31)<br>
</p>

<p>Warren, Edward </p>

<p>1867 &quot;A Lecture On The Sub-cutaneous Injection of
Morphia,&quot; Medical and Surgical Reporter, 16:101-4.<br>
</p>

<p>Weber, Albert </p>

<p>1918 &quot;Drugs and Crime,&quot; journal of Criminal Law and
Criminology, 9:351.<br>
</p>

<p>Weinswig, Melvin H. </p>

<p>1973 Use and Misuse of Drugs Subject To Abuse, N.Y., Pegasus.
(P. 19)<br>
</p>

<p>Westin, Av and Stephanie Shaffer </p>

<p>1972 Heroes and Heroin, N.Y., Pocket Books. (P. 8)<br>
</p>

<p>Whitman, Wait </p>

<p>[1895] The Wound Dresser, edited by Richard Maurice Bucke,
Boston, </p>

<p>1975 Folcroft Library Editions. (Orig. Boston, Small, Maynard
&amp; Co.)<br>
</p>

<p>Wilbert, Martin </p>

<p>1914 &quot;Sale and Use of Cocaine and Narcotics,&quot; Public
Health Service Reports, 29: 3180-3183 (November 27, 1914), U.S.
Public Health Service. (P. 3183)<br>
</p>

<p>1915 &quot;The Number and Kind of Drug Addicts,&quot; Public
Health Service Reports, 30(2):2289-2294, U.S. Public Health
Service. (Pp. 2291-92)<br>
</p>

<p>Wood, George B. and Franklin Bache </p>

<p>1868 United States Dispensatory, 12th Edition, Philadelphia,
Lippincott + Co. (Pp. 609-32)<br>
</p>

<p>Woods, Arthur </p>

<p>1931 Dangerous Drugs, New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press.
P. 12)<br>
</p>

<p>World's Work </p>

<p>1924 &quot;Drug Addiction Decreasing in the United
States,&quot; World's Work, 49:17.<br>
</p>

<p>Young, Lawrence, Linda Young, Marjorie Klein, Donald Klein,
and D. Beyer </p>

<p>1977 Recreational Drugs, N.Y., Berkley Book. (P. 167)<br>
</p>

<p>Zinberg, Norman </p>

<p>1984 Drug Set and Setting, New Haven, Conn., Yale Un. Press.
(P. 26)<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>