
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-43</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B018-88</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/grinjama.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052428 text/html 15247
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:24:19 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:52 GMT
Content-length: 15029
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Commentary: Marihuana as Medicine</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p align="center"><font size="5"><em>Marihuana as Medicine: A
Plea for Reconsideration <br>
</em></font>by Lester Grinspoon, MD James B. Bakalar, JD<br>
<b>Journal of the American medical Association, June, 1995</b> </p>

<hr size="4" width="60%">

<p>BETWEEN 1840 and 1900, European and American medical journals
published more than 100 articles on the therapeutic use of the
drug known then as Cannabis indica (or Indian hemp) and now as
marihuana. It was recommended as an appetite stimulant, muscle
relaxant, analgesic, hypnotic, and anticonvulsant. As late as
1913 Sir William Osler recommended it as the most satisfactory
remedy for migraine. </p>

<p>Today the 5000-year medical history of cannabis has been
almost forgotten. Its use declined in the early 20th century
because the potency of preparations was variable, responses to
oral ingestion were erratic, and alternatives became available --
injectable opiates and, later, synthetic drugs such as aspirin
and barbiturates. In the United States, the final blow was struck
by the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937. Designed to prevent nonmedical
use, this law made cannabis so difficult to obtain for medical
purposes that it was removed from the pharmacopeia. It is now
confined to Schedule I under the Controlled Substances Act as a
drug that has a high potential for abuse, lacks an accepted
medical use, and is unsafe for use under medical supervision. </p>

<p>In 1972 the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana
Laws petitioned the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs,
later renamed the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), to
transfer marihuana to Schedule II so that it could be legally
prescribed. As the proceedings continued, other parties joined,
including the Physicians Association for AIDS [acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome] Care. It was only in 1986, after many
years of legal maneuvering, that the DEA acceded to the demand
for the public hearings required by law. During the hearings,
which lasted 2 years, many patients and physicians testified, and
thousands of pages of documentation were introduced. In 1988 the
DEA's own administrative law judge, Francis L. Young, declared
that marihuana in its natural form fulfilled the legal
requirement of currently accepted medical use in treatment in the
United States. He added that it was &quot;one of the safest
therapeutically active substances known to man.&quot; His order
that the marihuana plant be transferred to Schedule II was
overruled, not by any medical authority, but by the DEA itself,
which issued a final rejection of all pleas for reclassification
in Mach 1992. </p>

<p>Meanwhile, a few patients have been able to obtain marihuana
legally for therapeutic purposes. Since 1978, legislation
permitting patients with certain disorders to use marihuana with
a physician's approval has been enacted in 36 states. Although
federal regulations and procedures made the laws difficult to
implement, 10 states eventually established formal marihuana
research programs to seek Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approval for Investigational New Drug (IND) applications. These
programs were later abandoned, mainly because the bureaucratic
burden on physicians and patients became intolerable. </p>

<p>Growing demand also forced the FDA to Institute an Individual
Treatment IND (commonly referred to as a Compassionate IND) for
the use of physicians whose patients needed marihuana because no
other drug would produce the same therapeutic effect. The
application process was made enormously complicated, and most
physicians did not want to become involved, especially since many
believed there was some stigma attached to prescribing cannabis.
Between 1976 and 1988 the government reluctantly awarded about a
half dozen Compassionate INDs for the use of marihuana. In 1989
the FDA was deluged with new applications from people with AIDS,
and the number granted rose to 34 within a year. In June 1991,
the Public Health Service announced that the program would be
suspended because it undercut the administration's opposition to
the use of illegal drugs. After that no new Compassionate INDs
were granted, and the program was discontinued in March 1992.
Eight patients are still receiving marihuana under the original
program; for everyone else it is officially a forbidden medicine.
</p>

<p>And yet physicians and patients in increasing numbers continue
to relearn through personal experience the lessons of the 19th
century. Many people know that marihuana is now being used
illegally for the nausea and vomiting induced by chemotherapy.
Some know that it lowers intraocular pressure in glaucoma.
Patients have found it useful as an anticonvulsant, as a muscle
relaxant in spastic disorders, and as an appetite stimulant in
the wasting syndrome of human immunodeficiency virus infection.
It is also being used to relieve phantom limb pain, menstrual
cramps, and other types of chronic pain, including (as Osler
might have predicted) migraine.2 Polls and voter referenda have
repeatedly indicated that the vast majority of Americans think
marihuana should be medically available. </p>

<p>One of marihuana's greatest advantages as a medicine is its
remarkable safety. It has little effect on major physiological
functions. There is no known case of a lethal overdose; on the
basis of animal models, the ratio of lethal to effective dose is
estimated as 40,000 to 1. By comparison, the ratio is between 3
and 50 to 1 for secobarbital and between 4 and 10 to 1 for
ethanol. Marihuana is also far less addictive and far less
subject to abuse than many drugs now used as muscle relaxants,
hypnotics, and analgesics. The chief legitimate concern is the
effect of smoking on the lungs. Cannabis smoke carries even more
tars and other particulate matter than tobacco smoke. But the
amount smoked is much less, especially in medical use, and once
marihuana is an openly recognized medicine, solutions may be
found. Water pipes are a partial answer; ultimately a technology
for the inhalation of cannabinoid vapors could be developed. Even
If smoking continued, legal availability would make it easier to
take precautions against aspergilli and other pathogens. At
present, the greatest danger in medical use of marihuana is its
illegality, which imposes much anxiety and expense on suffering
people, forces them to bargain with illicit drug dealers, and
exposes them to the threat of criminal prosecution. </p>

<p>The main active substance in cannabis, [delta-9]-
tetrahydrocannabinol ([delta-9]-THC), has been available for
limited purposes as a Schedule II synthetic drug since 1985. This
medicine, dronabinol (Marinol), taken orally in capsule form, is
sometimes said to obviate the need for medical marihuana.
Patients and physicians who have tried both disagree. The dosage
and duration of action of marihuana are easier to control, and
other cannabinoids in the marihuana plant may modify the action
of [delta-9]-THC. The development of cannabinoids in pure form
should certainly be encouraged, but the time and resources
required are great and at present unavailable. In these
circumstances, further isolation, testing, and development of
individual cannabinoids should not be considered a substitute for
meeting the immediate needs of suffering people. </p>

<p>Although it is often objected that the medical usefulness of
marihuana has not been demonstrated by controlled studies,
several informal experiments involving large numbers of subjects
suggest an advantage for marihuana over oral [delta-9]-THC and
other medicines. For example, from 1978 through 1986 the state
research program in New Mexico provided marihuana or synthetic
[delta-9]-THC to about 250 cancer patients receiving chemotherapy
after conventional medications failed to control their nausea and
vomiting. A physician who worked with the program testified at a
DEA hearing that for these patients marihuana was clearly
superior to both chlorpromazine and synthetic [delta-9]-THC.3 It
is true that we do not have studies controlled according to the
standards required by the FDA -- chiefly because legal,
bureaucratic, and financial obstacles are constantly put in the
way. The situation is ironical, since so much research has been
done on marihuana, often in unsuccessful attempts to prove its
dangerous and addictive character, that we know more about it
than about most prescription drugs. </p>

<p>Physicians should offer more encouragement to controlled
research, but it too has limitations. Individual therapeutic
responses can be obscured by the statistical results of group
experiments in which there is little effort to identify the
specific features of a patient that affect the drug response.
Furthermore, much of our knowledge of synthetic medicines as well
as plant derivatives comes from anecdotal evidence. For example,
as early as 1976 several small, methodologically imperfect, and
relatively obscure studies had shown that taking an aspirin a day
could prevent a second heart attack. In 1988 a large-scale
experiment demonstrated dramatic effects. This story is
suggestive, because marihuana, like aspirin, is a substance known
to be unusually safe and to have enormous potential health
benefits. </p>

<p>Cannabis can also bring about immediate relief of suffering
measurable in a study with only one subject. In the experimental
method known as the single patient randomized trial, active and
placebo treatments are administered randomly in alternation or
succession to a patient. The method is often useful when large
scale controlled studies are impossible or inappropriate because
the disorder is rare, the patient is atypical, or the response to
the treatment is idiosyncratic. Many patients, either
deliberately or because of unreliable supplies, have informally
carried out somewhat similar experiments by alternating periods
of cannabis use with periods of no use in the treatment of
various disorders.2(pp.133-135) </p>

<p>The American Medical Association was one of the few
organizations that raised a voice in opposition to the Marihuana
Tax Act of 1937, yet today most physicians seem to take little
active interest in the subject, and their silence is often cited
by those who are determined that marihuana shall remain a
forbidden medicine. Meanwhile, many physicians pretend to ignore
the fact that their patients with cancer, AIDS, or multiple
sclerosis are smoking marihuana for relief; some quietly
encourage them. In a 1990 survey, 44% of oncologists said they
had suggested that a patient smoke marihuana for relief of the
nausea induced by chemotherapy.4 If marihuana were actually
unsafe for use even under medical supervision, as its Schedule I
status explicitly affirms, this recommendation would be
unthinkable. It is time for physicians to acknowledge more openly
that the present classification is scientifically, legally, and
morally wrong. </p>

<p>Physicians have both a right and a duty to be skeptical about
therapeutic claims for any substance, but only after putting
aside fears and doubts connected with the stigma of illicit
nonmedical drug use. Advocates of medical use of marihuana are
sometimes charged with using medicine as a wedge to open a way
for &quot;recreational&quot; use. The accusation is false as
applied to its target, but expresses in a distorted form a truth
about some opponents of medical marihuana; they will not admit
that it can be a safe and effective medicine largely because they
are stubbornly committed to exaggerating its dangers when used
for nonmedical purposes. </p>

<p>We are not asking readers for immediate agreement with our
affirmation that marihuana is medically useful, but we hope they
will do more to encourage open and legal exploration of its
potential. The ostensible indifference of physicians should no
longer be used as a justification for keeping this medicine in
the shadows. </p>

<ol>
    <li>In the Matter of Marijuana Rescheduling Petition, Docket
        86- 22, Opinion, Recommended Ruling, Findings of Fact,
        Conclusions of Law, and Decision of Administrative Law
        Judge, September 6, 1988. Washington, DC: Drug
        Enforcement Agency; 1988. </li>
    <li>Grinspoon L., Bakalar J. Marihuana, the Forbidden
        Medicine. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press; 1993. </li>
    <li>In the Matter of Marijuana Rescheduling Petition, Docket
        86- 22, Affidavit of Daniel Daneac, M.D. Washington, DC:
        Drug Enforcement Agency; 1987. </li>
    <li>Doblin R., Kleiman M.A.R. Marihuana as anti-emetic
        medicine: a survey of oncologists' attitudes and
        experiences. J Clin Oncol, 1991;9:1275-1290. From the
        Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, and the
        Massachusetts Mental Health Center, Boston. Reprint
        requests to Harvard Medical School, 74 Fenwood Rd,
        Boston, MA 02115 (Dr Grinspoon). JAMA, June 21, 1995 --
        Vol. 273, No. 23, pp. 1875-1876 </li>
</ol>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>