
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B23-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B013-303</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/ctpexec.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122050929 text/html 43246
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:09:18 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:00:48 GMT
Content-length: 43028
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Cannabis Therapeutic Program EXECUTIVE SUMMARY</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b><font size="5">California Research Advisory Program</font></b>
</p>

<p> <b><font size="5">Cannabis Therapeutic Program</font></b> </p>

<p> <b><font size="5">EXECUTIVE SUMMARY</font></b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<h2>EXECUTIVE SUMMARY </h2>

<p> The nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy for cancer is
often so severe as to limit treatment. Drugs currently used to
combat that nausea and vomiting have very limited effectiveness
and unpleasant side effects. In 1979, the Legislature became
concerned that the status of marijuana as a stringently regulated
drug might be inhibiting research into its possible therapeutic
effects and that many cancer patients were being deprived of a
possibly effective treatment for nausea and vomiting. The
Legislature therefore directed the Research Advisory Panel,
created by the Legislature in 1969, to provide compassionate
access to marijuana, or its active component
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), by establishing a clinical
trial conforming to federal and ethical standards for research
using human subjects and a new drug. </p>

<p> The Panel recruited 486 oncologists from throughout the State
and 321 of these provided oral THC for 2,356 patients and
marijuana cigarettes for 119. The limited efficacy of THC was in
the meantime being established by double-blind studies carried
out elsewhere. The Panel study was a &quot;Phase III&quot; study
providing experience under conditions of actual practice.
Throughout the program over 1,716,000 dosage units of
investigational drug were provided without charge by the National
Cancer Institute (NCI) and the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(NIDA) to 114 approved pharmacies. The cost of the Cannabis
Therapeutic Program for the eight years was $400,000. </p>

<p> Oral THC has been shown to be clearly efficacious for relief
of nausea and vomiting in some patients, but not a total answer
to the terrible emetogenic effect of current anticancer
chemotherapy. Side effects were frequent but not serious, but
were a factor in limiting patient acceptance. The Panel
established a cumulative dose schedule for THC, not previously
studied, that provided the same efficacy with fewer troublesome
side effects. </p>

<p> In addition to the major study of smoked marijuana or oral
THC alone, the Panel sponsored research into an analogue of THC,
delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol, combinations of THC with other
antiemetics and the use of THC for nausea and vomiting from
causes other than cancer. </p>

<p> In 1984, the Legislature added to its mandate a study of the
same drugs in the treatment of glaucoma. Only 9 patients from the
entire State received THC under the new program. The drug given
chronically is safe, but not demonstrably effective. </p>

<p> The program was effectively ended in October, 1986, when THC
was marketed as dronabinol (Marinol). The California experience
was a factor in the decisions of the U. S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) to permit its marketing. </p>

<p> The Research Advisory Panel does not recommend an extension
of Article 6 of Chapter 5 of Division 21 of the California Health
and Safety Code. California investigators can still carry out
research using human subjects and THC, but the Panel can no
longer provide the drug free. </p>

<p> The Research Advisory Panel wishes to express its
appreciation to the Legislature for directing the establishment
of a program which resulted in meeting the needs of that time for
compassionate access, as well as satisfying a continuing need for
research on the medicinal effects of such a controversial drug. </p>

<p> January 24, 1989 </p>

<hr>

<h2>CANCER CHEMOTHERAPY, NAUSEA AND VOMITING </h2>

<h3>The Problem </h3>

<p> With the development of effective cancer chemotherapeutic
agents and multi-drug regimens, the prognosis for many patients
with even advanced cancer has improved. However, the widely used
chemotherapeutic regimens induce nausea and vomiting with
regularity. as does radiation therapy to the abdominal area. In
some cases, the treatment for cancer may cause more immediate
discomfort than the disease itself, often leaving patients with
nausea and vomiting so severe as to impede their leading even a
semblance of normal life. For many patients, the mere
anticipation of chemotherapy induces vomiting and causes
depression, occasionally leading to the refusal to receive
further potentially life saving treatment. This nausea, vomiting
and loss of appetite may have not only a profound psychological
impact on the patient, but also produce significant weight loss.
Cancer itself may also produce significant anorexia and weight
loss and the problems are compounded by chemotherapy. </p>

<h3>Inadequacy of Drugs in Current Use </h3>

<p> Drugs to control the side effects of nausea and vomiting from
anticancer treatment have proved to be inadequate. When
administered with chemotherapy, phenothiazine derivatives such as
prochlorperazine (Compazine) and thiethylperazine (Torecan) have
been only partially successful in controlling the nausea and
vomiting caused by many anticancer drugs and their side effects,
especially a subjectively unpleasant sedation, are severe.
Patient compliance is therefore limited. Other drugs, e.g..
metoclopramide, loperamide, and high dose corticosteroids have
had brief vogues of extensive use.<br>
</p>

<h3>Early Experience with Marijuana and THC </h3>

<p> Anecdotal reports from cancer patients suggested that smoking
marijuana provided a significant antiemetic effect. In 1975,
Sallan and associates initiated a small controlled study to
evaluate the efficacy of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a
principal active component of marijuana, as an antiemetic agent.
Additional small controlled trials2' including some carried out
in California and approved by the Research Advisory Panel, showed
that THC given by mouth provided some benefit to some patients
suffering from nausea and vomiting of chemotherapy. Although this
preliminary research partially confirmed the anecdotal findings,
the reported degree of effectiveness, as well as reported adverse
effects varied considerably among research studies. </p>

<p> The promising research studies furthered a widespread
interest in marijuana by patients undergoing chemotherapy.
However, marijuana was and is a Schedule I controlled substance
(i.e., a drug with a high abuse potential that lacks an approved
medical use under federal law) and only a very limited number of
people were eligible to legally use it and only at the few
locations of the ongoing research studies. Some very sick people
resorted to illegal use of this Schedule I controlled substance. </p>

<p> 1. Sallan SE. Zinberg RE. Frei NE 111. Antiemetic effect of
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol in patients receiving cancer
chemotherapy. M Engl J Ned 1975: 293: 795-7. </p>

<p> 2. Card S. Beers AL Jr. Bogard M. McMahan RT, Nangalik A.
Ashman AC. Levine S. Two-pronged study of tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) prevention of vomiting from cancer chemotherapy. IRCS Ned
Sci 1980; 8: 203-4. </p>

<p> Orr LE. MKeran JF. Sloome S. Antiemetic affect or
tetrahydrocannabinal compared with placebo and prochlorperazine
in chemotherapy associated nausea and emesia. Arch Intern Ned
1980: 140: 1431-3. </p>

<p> Sallan SE. Cronin C. Zolen 14. Zinberg NE. Antiemetica in
patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer. New Engl J Ned 1980;
302: 135-8. </p>

<hr>

<h2>CANNABIS THERAPEUTIC PROGRAM </h2>

<h3>Legislative History </h3>

<p> The California Legislature found that the potential medicinal
value of Cannabis sativa had received Insufficient -study due to
a lack of financial incentives for the undertaking of appropriate
research by private drug manufacturing concerns. Individual
physicians could not utilize cannabis in their clinical practice
and it was not feasible for them to conduct research because of
governmental controls which include time consuming applications
with rigorous approval and monitoring procedures and reports. The
Legislature decided that 'compassionate access' to this
controversial drug should be provided for cancer patients. At the
same time, the Legislature recognized that treatment should be
provided under the general controls that apply to all new drug
research. To accomplish the two aims: 1) compassionate access 2)
achieved by research meeting the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and ethical standards and without contributing to
the drug's availability through illicit channels, the Legislature
turned to the Research Advisory Panel, an agency established and
utilized by the Legislature since 1969. <br>
</p>

<h3>The Research Advisory Panel </h3>

<p> The Legislature established the Panel as an autonomous
multidisciplinary committee of experts with diverse backgrounds
who serve without pay and without vested interests in the matters
discussed. </p>

<p> Panel members are appointed, not by a single elected official
or State office, but by various public and private agencies: the
Attorney General, the University of California, the Department of
Health Services, the State Board of Pharmacy, a private
University designated by the Governor, the California Medical
Association, and the Governor. For the purposes of this
assignment, the Panel was authorized to appoint two additional
members with expertise in oncology or glaucoma. Appendix I
contains the sections of the California Health and Safety Code
pertaining to the Research Advisory Panel. </p>

<p> The Research Advisory Panel has existed since 1969 when it
was created by the Legislature to encourage research into the
nature and effects of abused drugs, to review and approve
research involving Schedules I and II controlled substances and
to function as a human subjects' protection committee in research
involving scheduled substances. The Panel established, approved
and monitored methadone maintenance programs, providing treatment
under the guise of research, until such programs became legal as
treatment. Because of its legislated mandate and the composition
of its membership, the Panel is in a unique position to provide a
level of control over research beyond that required of an
industrial sponsor or a University. Prior to the new assignment
which is the subject of this report, the Panel had sponsored a
symposium on marijuana research in California And provided seed
funds for twelve California investigators, two of whom have
subsequently developed comprehensive and influential programs
with federal funds. In 1978, the Panel was monitoring some twenty
four research projects involving marijuana or THC. </p>

<h3>Panel's Role in Development of Legislation </h3>

<p> In 1979, when Senator Presley and the Legislature began
consideration of the need to provide compassionate access to
marijuana, the Research Advisory Panel had approved five research
projects employing marijuana or THC and involving as many as five
hundred cancer patients suffering severe nausea and vomiting
caused by their cancer treatment. </p>

<p> The Panel counseled that State sponsored trials would be
required because the patent protection necessary to attract
industrial sponsorship was lacking. It was also pointed out that
standardized THC and marijuana cigarettes from the National
Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) be used rather than confiscated
marijuana that would be of variable and unknown potency and
generally unsuitable for oral use; that initial trials be limited
to patients receiving cancer chemotherapy; and that the treatment
of glaucoma, then seen as unpromising by available experience and
literature, be added later.<br>
</p>

<h3>Summary of Legislation </h3>

<p> The goals of the Legislature and of the Panel, to provide
compassionate access through a multicenter research-project that
complied with FDA regulation were incorporated into Senate Bill
184 (Appendix II) that became law on January 1, 1980, as Chapter
300, Statutes of 1979 (Therapeutic Marijuana Project. Article 6,
Chapter 5, Section 11260 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code).
The law mandated that the Research Advisory Panel establish a
4-year pilot research program into the medical use of cannabis
and its derivatives, particularly in treating patients suffering
from cancer. The law stated that making marijuana available to
individual physicians in a State-sponsored program for the
investigational use of cannabis and its derivatives would enable
qualified physicians and surgeons in the State to study the
benefits of the drug in a controlled clinical setting and to gain
additional knowledge with respect to dosage and effects. </p>

<p> In addition, the law required the Panel to develop guidelines
and protocols for the program and to approve physicians for
participation in the program. It authorized the Panel to contract
for pharmaceutical formulation, distribution and testing of
cannabis and cannabinoids, to obtain such substances from
designated sources, and to charge participating physicians for
the cost of obtaining the materials supplied. The Panel was
required to report ,annually to the Legislature on the status and
results of the program. </p>

<p> The legislation, with its mention of qualified physicians in
diverse geographic areas, was clearly intended to provide
patients with 'compassionate access, to these controlled,
investigational drugs. The intent was not to foster undisciplined
use of marijuana but rather to increase knowledge about the use
of this drug. Thus, both the legislation and the investigational
status of the drug enforced the Panel's obligation to conduct
useful clinical research and to investigate several still
unanswered questions about THC. </p>

<h3>Extension of Law and Provision for Glaucoma Studies </h3>

<p> At the end of 1983, with the Cannabis Therapeutic Program
underway, the Panel made an appraisal of the need for extending
the Program. At that time, because of the expressed need of
patients to continue having compassionate access to marijuana,
and because of the ongoing research into the use of THC with
other antiemetics, the Panel requested an extension of the
program. Noting that over 1700 patients had enrolled in the study
over the past four years, Legislation was introduced by Senator
Presley to extend the original statute. On July 11, 1984,
Governor Deukmejian signed SB 1765 (Chapter 417, Statutes of 1984
-Appendix III) into law. This legislation extended the Cannabis
Therapeutic Program four years beyond its previously scheduled
ending with a termination date of June 30, 1989. </p>

<p> This legislation also directed the Panel to establish another
statewide program to make marijuana and THC available to patients
undergoing treatment for glaucoma. </p>

<hr>

<h2>IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NEW LAW </h2>

<h3>Protocol Development </h3>

<p> The Panel immediately began to prepare an application for
Investigational New Drug Exemption (IND) to the FDA for approval
to study cannabis in humans. The Panel drafted a protocol for the
pilot project, appointed consultantoncology members, and
scheduled public meetings for comments from practicing
oncologists, pharmacists and nurses before finalizing the
protocols and submitting an IND to FDA. The Panel, through
negotiations with the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) arranged a supply of THC
capsules and marijuana cigarettes to approved pharmacies without
charge. </p>

<p> Before the Program was fully implemented, a number of
additional steps were taken: an Investigator's Brochure was
developed; an informed consent document was written and reviewed
by an outside human subjects' committee to assure patient
protection; a data processing unit was contracted to analyze
results of investigators' reports; and a uniform investigator
review and approval process was developed to assure that access
to ordering the drug was controlled. <br>
</p>

<h3>Drug Supply </h3>

<p> Marijuana is available as a raw plant, dried and minimally
processed for smoking or cooking. Its most active ingredient;
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) was available as a
synthetically derived chemical and formulated as a solution in
oil in a soft gelatin capsule. Although the California
legislation provided that seized illegal marijuana could be used,
the Panel decided that the only reliable source of standardized
marijuana would be NIDA and that NCI was the only economical
source of the encapsulated THC. </p>

<p> The investigational drugs would be made available by NCI and
NIDA at no cost to California participants. To further conserve
the limited State funds, the Panel arranged with NCI and NIDA to
ship drug supplies directly to designated pharmacies, a procedure
that cut costs to the State by eliminating warehousing and
distribution. The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA)
retained its authority for accountability and to inspect storage
facilities. </p>

<p> Investigational THC and/or marijuana cigarettes were shipped
to 114 of the 132 approved California pharmacies during the life
of the Cannabis Therapeutic Program. The total quantities shipped
were as follows: </p>

<p> Marijuana cigarettes 27,650 </p>

<p> Tetrahydrocannabinol l0mg capsules 5,640 </p>

<p> Tetrahydrocannabinol 5mg capsules 1,033,300 </p>

<p> Tetrahydrocannabinol 2.5mg capsules 649,900 </p>

<p> Due to limitations of shelf life, the above quantities are
greater than the quantities actually administered to patients. </p>

<p> The Panel is pleased to report its investigators and
pharmacies maintained effective control of this large inventory
of controlled substances. The Panel received no reports of any
diversion, or even inventory discrepancies, of investigational
marijuana or THC capsules. </p>

<h3>Cost </h3>

<h4>The Cannabis Therapeutic </h4>

<p> Program was funded with an initial appropriation of $100,000
for the start-up costs and the first year of program operation.
Funding for subsequent years of this research project was through
the standard budgeting process of the State. Overall, the total
cost of the Cannabis Therapeutic Program from 1979 through 1988
was $400,000. The Principal items over those years were salaries
for one research project coordinator (Research Assistant II), a
parttime student research assistant, data analysis services and
consultation at critical junctures. Panel members or their
employing agencies volunteered their time. </p>

<h3>Investigator Eligibility </h3>

<p> Investigator status was granted to physicians who were board
eligible or board certified medical oncologists. radiation
oncologists, hematologists, or otherwise qualified physicians
(e.g., pediatric oncologists) and who: </p>

<p> a. completed an Investigator Application, </p>

<p> b. held a current license to practice medicine in California,
</p>

<p> c were otherwise qualified by their training and/or
experience, </p>

<p> d. completed the Federal FDA Investigator's Form (FD Form
1573), and </p>

<p> e. agreed and certified in writing that they would follow all
provisions of the protocol. </p>

<p> Participating investigators were required to assume full
responsibility for determining that their patients conformed to
the admission requirements. Continued participation was
conditioned upon the investigator's compliance with the protocol
including adequate record keeping on treatment outcome and timely
submission of data forms to the Panel. The Panel assured all
participants that it would carefully monitor this program, and a
number of site visits were made. </p>

<h3>Physician Enrollment </h3>

<p> The legislation directed that access be provided over
geographically wide areas of the State. The Panel made extensive
efforts to publicize the Cannabis Therapeutic Program throughout
the State to encourage qualified oncologists in diverse
geographical locations to apply. The Panel's program was
announced in the newsletter of the Board of Medical Quality
Assurance which is mailed to all California licensed physicians.
All acute are hospitals were provided with a notice announcing
the program and explaining the enrollment procedures. Recipient
hospitals were asked to circulate the notice to oncology
departments and to post a copy. At the meeting of the American
Society of Clinical Oncology in San Diego in May 1980, the Panel
announced the Cannabis Therapeutic Program to California
oncologists, provided application forms to them and answered
their questions; thus, the application review and approval
process continued through the spring and summer. </p>

<p> In July and September 1980, investigator training meetings
were held in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Sacramento, and San
Diego and two more held in April 1981, one in Los Angeles and one
in San Francisco. Ample time was allowed for questions and
answers. In addition to oncologists, these meetings were attended
by nurses, pharmacists, and data managers. </p>

<p> The agenda of these meetings included presentations on
problems on the clinical pharmacology of marijuana of potential
concern to the seriously ill, the elderly and the very young; a
review of the research procedures; information on drug ordering,
storage and dispensing; and a review of data collection and
reporting requirements. These meetings were considered crucial to
obtaining standardized protocol implementation, statewide, in
this large scale clinical study with only a small staff for
monitoring. Investigators, new to the State or new to practice,
who had no opportunity to attend the training meetings were
instructed individually by project staff. Although newspaper and
television interviews were used to inform the general public, the
Panel relied primarily on oncologists to inform patients of the
program's existence. </p>

<p> At the conclusion of the initial enrollment period in
September 1980, three hundred and twenty physicians applied for
participant status and 218 investigators from 21 counties
actually met all registration requirements by attending one of
the four investigator's seminars. By the time the program ended
in 1988, 486 investigators had registered and 321 had enrolled
patients. </p>

<p> At the conclusion of the enrollment-period in September 1980,
over 80 designated pharmacies were registered with DEA to
dispense Schedule I controlled substances, THC and marijuana. By
the end of the program, 132 pharmacies had been approved to
distribute THC and/or marijuana. </p>

<h3>Research Subjects </h3>

<p> Initially, eligible patients were males and non-pregnant
females, five years of age and older, with histologically
documented malignancies receiving chemotherapy or radiation and
experiencing nausea and vomiting which was not relieved by
treatment with conventional antiemetics. </p>

<p> Participation in the program was completely voluntary.
Therefore the study population was self-selected. The limitations
placed on the Panel by the conflicting aims of the program did
not permit the establishment of a control group. Each patient
acted as his/her own control, and previous experience with
conventional antiemetics was compared with the experience with
THC treatment. </p>

<h3>Research Subject Protection </h3>

<p> The use of either THC or marijuana for therapeutic purposes
was experimental; therefore. the Panel required investigators to
obtain a voluntary, informed consent before enrolling any cancer
patient into the program. The Panel prepared a written consent
form which disclosed the potential benefits as well as the
attendant risks of participation in the experiment. This document
was reviewed and approved by the Human Subjects' Protection
Committee of the California Department of Health Services. The
consent form, written in lay language without unnecessary
technical terms, ambiguous phrases or exculpatory clauses, made
clear, among other conditions, that participation, both initial
and continued, was entirely voluntary. </p>

<p> Pursuant to Section 24170 et seg of the Health and Safety
Code, the Rosenthal 'Protection of Human Subjects in Medical
Experimentation Act,' each subject also received a copy of the
'Research Subject's Bill of Rights.' Physicians practicing in
hospitals or other institutions were also subject to review by
their own research or human subjects committees. At the
investigators' meetings, the Panel stressed that informed consent
is not a mere formality. </p>

<p> English and Spanish versions of the consent form were
provided. Patients who did not speak either language were
enrolled only if a competent translator was available to explain
the consent form pointby-point and to attest in writing to the
patient's understanding of it. Patients aged 5 to 17 were
required to have parental consent before enrolling in the study
and must have joined with their parents in giving consent. </p>

<hr>

<h2>STUDY OBJECTIVES </h2>

<p> There were two objectives set forth in the statutes: </p>

<p> 1. to allow qualified oncologists in diverse geographical
locations to provide the drug on a compassionate basis to
seriously ill persons not responding to conventional treatment,
and </p>

<p> 2. to facilitate clinical trials of Cannabis and its
derivatives in cancer patients pursuant to the federal IND
procedures. </p>

<p> Both the legislation and the investigational status of the
drug under federal law obliged the Panel to conduct useful
clinical research to address several unanswered questions about
THC and marijuana effects. However, compassionate access made
some of the basic research processes unusable, e.g., a
double-blind controlled study. Therefore, to accomplish these two
potentially conflicting objectives, the Panel planned a large
collaborative Phase III3 trial. </p>

<p> At the time the Panel designed its protocols, several
controlled studies of THC's effect on nausea and vomiting had
been completed. Controlled studies demonstrating efficacy results
were variable and optimal dosage was not established. Individual
doses in most other studies were inflexible and ranged from 2.5
to 15mg THC/m2 body surface area. The time at which the first
dose of THC was administered in these studies varied from 1/2
hour to 24 hours prior to the initiation of chemotherapy. The
frequency of THC administration varied from every 2 .hours to
every 8 hours. Therefore, a major research objective was to
determine the optimal THC dose and dosing schedule. </p>

<p> Other research questions to be addressed were: 1) Does the
antiemetic effectiveness of THC (and marijuana) vary with the
anticancer agent? 2) What are the nature and incidence of the
side effects of THC ',,and marijuana) in typical oncological
patients7 3) What is the general acceptance of THC and marijuana
by practicing oncologists and by cancer patients7 4) Once an
effective dose has been established, does tolerance develop to
THC's antiemetic effect7 </p>

<p> 3. Among the safeguards for developing an investigational new
drug in a step-wise testing process: the drug is tested in
animals before humans. in normal volunteers before patients. and
in small groups of people before large groups. Preclinical refers
to non-human experiments. e.g.. toxicity and pharmacology
experiments in animals. Phase I is conducted in small numbers of
normal human volunteers to determine dosage levels and other
pharmacologic parameters. Phase 11 clinical trials typically
involve small numbers of patients and comparisons to other
treatment and must be controlled and almost always double blind.
Phase III is to confirm effectiveness and to assess adverse
effects in a large and diverse patient population. Usually these
studies are uncontrolled. represent the conditions of actual
practice, and evaluate toxicity rather than efficacy. Phase IV is
to report on drug safety and effectiveness after marketing. </p>

<h3>Protocol History </h3>

<p> With all of the above considered. protocols were prepared and
a comprehensive investigational new drug application (IND) was
submitted to the Federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) March
28, 1980. The initial application included four protocols for THC
and marijuana administration. See Appendix IV. </p>

<p> Protocol I was the study of oral THC capsules as an
antiemetic in adult cancer patients receiving cyclic
chemotherapeutic agents known to produce nausea and vomiting.
(Cyclic chemotherapy was defined as single or multiple doses of
chemotherapeutic drugs given within a two-day period, with each
treatment cycle separated by one week or more.) To be eligible,
patients must have failed to benefit from conventional antiemetic
drugs such as Compazine or Tigan during at least one previous
treatment episode. </p>

<p> Protocol II was similar to Protocol I except that adult
patients would be receiving daily anticancer therapy which could
either be chemotherapy or radiation therapy. </p>

<p> Protocol III (Pediatric Protocol) was similar to Protocol I
except that it was designed for pediatric patients aged 5 through
14 years. Also, patients receiving up to five consecutive days of
chemotherapy could be enrolled provided that treatment episodes
were separated by three weeks or more. Special safeguards such as
the minimum age of 5 years, consent by both parents and by the
child. lower starting dosage of THC, and special mental health
evaluation, were incorporated into this protocol. </p>

<p> Protocol IV (Smoked Marijuana Protocol) was an evaluation of
smoked marijuana in adult cancer inpatients receiving one or more
of three extremely emetogenic chemotherapeutic agents, e.g.,
Cisplatin, dacarbazine or 5-azacytidine alone or in combination
with other agents. This protocol was initially limited to
patients 15 years of age or older who were marijuana experienced.
</p>

<p> The goal of these first four protocols was to obtain patient
data rapidly and as safely as possible on the critical issue of
THC dose and side effects. The plan was to quickly define a
practical safe dose and then modify, eliminate or add to the
protocols as necessary. </p>

<p> The above research protocols were modified several times
during the course of the Cannabis Therapeutic Program, to ensure
the broadest compassionate access and as much useful data as
possible. At the outset of the program, pediatric consultants
suggested that the usual treatment lasted for 48 hours or less
with treatment separated by one week or more. The duration of
chemotherapy allowed by Protocol III was limited accordingly.
However, the Panel soon learned that a regimen of 5 days of
chemotherapy repeated every 3 weeks was frequently used in
pediatric practice. Therefore, the Panel modified the criteria
for Protocol III to include those chemotherapy regimens lasting
for five consecutive days, provided that treatments are separated
by three weeks or more. </p>

<p> After the first 150 patients were treated with cannabis under
Protocols I and II, the data were scrutinized by Panel members,
staff and consultants. Two-thirds of patients reported benefit,
but the Panel noted that a large number of patients complained of
troubling, although not dangerous, side effects from THC. It also
appeared that these side effects influenced a patient's
continuation in the program with an initial dropout rate of 48
percent. Therefore, in August 1981, the Panel lowered the
starting dose of THC capsules from 7.5mg THC/m2 to 5mg THC/m2 in
Protocols II and III. The rationale for this change was a
continuation of the attempt to achieve an optimum dose of THC,
balancing antiemetic efficacy with troublesome side effects. </p>

<p> Oral THC Protocol. During site visits the Panel learned that
investigators perceived the Cannabis Therapeutic Program to be
much more complex than it actually was. Therefore, to encourage
the participation of cancer specialists and to provide greater
compassionate access of cancer patients to THC, the Panel revised
its protocols in July 1981. The three protocols for oral THC were
combined into one streamlined protocol to simplify the program
and to avoid investigator confusion. Also, the new unified
protocol, referred to subsequently as the Oral THC Protocol, was
modified to enable radiation patients who experienced nausea or
vomiting to receive THC. </p>

<p> Cumulative Dose Protocol. In September 1981, the Panel
hypothesized that small oral doses (e.g. 2.5mg/m2) of THC would
be more useful than larger doses (e.g. 5.0mg/m2) if the repeated
small doses were started sufficiently long enough before
chemotherapy (e.g. 4 doses prior to chemotherapy). THC is a long
acting drug with an appreciable latent period before its effect
develops. The development of side effects that caused patients to
discontinue THC could be predicted by the size of the single dose
of THC that was used. Given cumulatively, that is, in smaller
doses begun at a longer interval before chemotherapy, an
effective level should be achieved with fewer side effects than
if a single large dose is used in effort to achieve a rapid
effect. See Appendix VI. </p>

<p> Cumulative Protocol for Oral THC Adopted. in 1982, the
cumulative, low-dose regimen was adopted, for the Oral THC
Protocol to reduce the number of patients who stopped THC therapy
because of side effects that were discomforting rather than life
threatening. The lower initial dose (2.5mg/m2) beginning
approximately 24 hours prior to anticancer therapy allowed
patients to accommodate better to THC as an antiemetic. See
Appendix VII. </p>

<p> Combination Antiemetic Protocol. By 1983, it became apparent
that oncologists were prescribing several antiemetics in
combination in an effort to maximize the benefit. This approach
to treatment led investigators in the cannabis study to suggest
using THC in combination with other antiemetics. Only two studies
involving THC used in combination with another drug had been
conducted and in both cases, the other drug was a phenothiazine.
The effectiveness of THC tied in combination with a variety of
other antiemetics was not established and further clinical trials
were needed. Additive effects, particularly if the drugs had
different mechanisms of action, were expected to enhance the
effectiveness of THC. Appendix VIII includes the Combination
Antiemetic Protocol, consent form, patient package insert,
investigator brochure. and the combination protocol for pediatric
patients. </p>

<p> Smoked Marijuana Protocol. In March 1982, the Panel also
revised the protocol for smoked marijuana to broaden access.
Based on suggestions from oncologists and the absence of
associated problems, the protocol was expanded to include
outpatients and marijuana-naive patients who were taught a
standardized smoking technique. </p>

<p> In late 1982, the Panel further revised the Smoked Marijuana
Protocol. This protocol made any cancer patient receiving
radiation therapy or any chemotherapy drugs known to cause nausea
and vomiting eligible to participate, and permitted an
alternative smoking technique to humidify the smoke and reduce
the smoke's harshness by water filtration. Appendix IX contains
the initial versions of the Smoked Marijuana Protocol which
finally was also included in the Combination Protocol above. </p>

<p> Controlled Studies. In addition to the statewide open studies
described above, the Panel sponsored two double-blind, cross-over
controlled studies conducted by a small group of investigators. </p>

<p> THC in Combination with Scopolamine. One protocol was
intended to test the efficacy of THC use in combination with
Transderm V, a patch which is applied to the skin behind the ear
and releases an antinausea drug, scopolamine, through the skin
continuously over a period of two to three days (Appendix X).
Transderm V was supplied by CibaGeigy with double-blind labeling
and was to be randomly substituted with an identical placebo
patch. </p>

<p> THC in Combination with Dexamethasone. The second protocol,
also a double blind cross over study, was intended to test the
efficacy of THC used in combination with dexamethasone, an
antiinflammatory steroid which has been used as an antiemetic
(Appendix XI). Dexamethasone was supplied by Merck Sharp &amp;
Dohme Research Laboratories with double-blind labeling and was to
be randomly substituted with an identical placebo tablet. These
protocols began in late 1983 and continued to be available until
December 1987. </p>

<p> Delta-8-THC. Some reports in the medical literature claim
that delta-8-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-8-THC), a synthetic
cannabinoid not present in natural marijuana, possesses actions
similar to those of delta-9-THC, but possibly caused fewer
central nervous system side effects. The Panel, with the
assistance of Marie Perez-Reyes, M.D., developed a pilot research
project to study the effects of delta-8-THC as an antiemetic. </p>

<p> In October 1983, the Panel submitted IND 124,094 to the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (Appendix XII). Patients were first
enrolled in October 1983. The Pilot Protocol (protocol
exceptions) and the Glaucoma Protocol (Appendix XIV) are
discussed in detail later in the sections on findings. </p>

<p> Each protocol change was duly reported to FDA and discussed
as necessary with that agency's representatives. No revision
request was denied. </p>

<p> Table A provides a summary of the history of protocol changes
for the Cannabis Therapeutic Program. </p>

<h3>Data Collection </h3>

<p> Initially, data on patient history and the physician's
evaluation of treatment were collected at the time of treatment
using three standardized forms. The &quot;Chemotherapy and
Medical History Prior to THC&quot; form requested information
regarding patient characteristics and past chemotherapy and
antiemetic experience. The 'Physician's Treatment Episode Report'
included information on THC dosage, chemotherapy, performance
status of patient, overall THC effectiveness rating on a 4-point
scale, and ratings of the incidence and severity of 13 designated
THC side effects. Every day that patients received THC, they
completed a &quot;THC Evaluation Form,' rating nausea, vomiting,
food intake and overall effectiveness using 4- and 5-point
scales. If a patient dropped out of the study, the specific
reason was noted. Details of serious adverse reactions were
reported separately. </p>

<p> Much of the pilot testing and design of data collection forms
was conducted in collaboration with investigators and their
staff. The Cannabis Therapeutic Program paperwork, including the
Patient Package Insert and the Treatment Report forms were
thoroughly reviewed by many of these persons. </p>

<p> As protocols were changed, data forms were also revised in an
effort to increase enrollment by reducing the burden of paperwork
for investigators and patients. Revisions were color-coded for
easy identification. All data forms are attached to the protocols
included in the appendices. </p>

<p> The latest revision of the protocol (2/11/83) required
completion of only one data form for each treatment episode and
requested only that information which was considered essential. -
</p>

<p> For the purposes of evaluation and analysis, data from the
earlier forms were transcribed by Panel staff to the newer form
for consistency in coding. Independent contractors were utilized
for data entry and analysis for the first phases of the study.
Thereafter, Panel staff conducted the analysis for the concluding
phases. </p>

<h3>Data Quality Control </h3>

<p> In general, there were few problems with protocol compliance.
Physician cooperation was exemplary despite protocol details,
controlled substances prescription forms, and reports to be
completed. This is particularly noteworthy in view of the fact
that the funding usually provided by drug companies. </p>

<p> An important result from the site visits was the initiation
of Cannabis Therapeutic Program Newsletters designed to keep
investigators, nurses, and pharmacists abreast of program
developments and research findings. </p>

<h3>Dissemination of Findings and Results </h3>

<p> The Panel kept the Legislature, the medical community, and
the public informed about the program and its findings through
the Panel's Annual Reports to the Governor and Legislature,
newsletters and announcements to investigators, presentations at
professional meetings and publication in professional journals.
The FDA received quarterly reports as required. </p>

<p> By invitation of the Illinois Dangerous Drug Commission, the
preliminary results of the California Program were presented at
the National Conference on Marijuana and Cannabinoid Therapeutics
in Chicago in March 1982. The legal, administrative and
operational aspects of the California program were shared with
the professionals attending the meeting. </p>

<p> The Panel also published in scientific publications several
reports on research findings and program development: </p>

<p> Gordon J. Dow and Frederick H. Meyers, The California Program
for the Investigational Use of THC and Marijuana in Heterogeneous
Populations Experiencing Nausea and Vomiting from Anticancer
Therapy, Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 21:128S-132S, 1981. </p>

<p> Dow, G.J. and others. Serious reactions to oral delta-9-THC
in cancer chemotherapy patients. Clinical Pharmacy 3:14, 1981. </p>

<p> Meyers, F. and others. Reduced adverse effects with optimal
anti-emetics dosage schedule of delta-9-THC. Proceedings of Am.
Soc. Clin. Oncology, p94, 1984. </p>

<p> Devine, M. and others. Adverse reactions to delta-9-THC given
as an antiemetic in a multi-center study. Clinical Pharmacy
6:319-22, 1987. </p>

<p> Flach, A. and others. </p>

<p> Experience on Treatment of Glaucoma with delta-9-THC,
presentation for meeting of American Academy of Ophthalmology, in
preparation. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>