
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-47</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B022-43</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1j.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123459 text/html 54311
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:34:49 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:28 GMT
Content-length: 54093
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marihuana and Violence</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Marihuana and Violence</h1>

<p>(The evidence to be presented here applies not only to
aggression and to violence but to marihuana's relationship to
crime in general, and is therefore equally relevant to a later
section on marihuana and non-violent crime. The effects of
marihuana on sexual behavior, including the commission of sexual
offenses will be treated in the following section on marihuana
and sexual behavior.) </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The popular and professional literature contains numerous
unsupported and often emotionally charged accusations regarding
marihuana's contribution to violence. </p>

<p>In at least two dozen comparatively recent eases of murder or
degenerate sex attacks, marihuana proved to be a contributing
cause (Anslinger, 1937). </p>

<p>In a recent study of thirty-seven murders in New Orleans in a
year, seventeen were traced directly to marihuana. . . . Evil
marihuana is pock-marking this nation with murders, sex attacks,
suicides, and crimes in every category from bank stick-ups to
petty thievery . . . (LaRoe, 1940). </p>

<p>Marihuana, while giving the hallucinations of cocaine, adds
delusions of impending physical attack by one's best friend or
close relatives. In addition, marihuana is intrinsically and
inherently crime exciting. It has led to some of the most
revolting cases of sadistic rape and murder of modern times
(Rowell and Rowell, 1939: 67). </p>

<p>Even sex does not satisfy the abnormal urges induced by
marihuana. There is still the necessity for further excitement,
more emotional release. That is when the guns are grabbed, the
knives waved and the razors swung. And all that is a marihuana
user's idea of what is normal! (Williams, 1969). </p>

<p>To add greater credibility to their undocumented assertions,
some persons describe the manner in which the drug purportedly
leads to violence. </p>

<p>In the earliest stages of intoxication the willpower is
destroyed and inhibitions and restraints are released; the moral
barricades are broken down and often debauchery and sexuality
result. Where mental instability is inherent, the behavior is
generally violent. An egotist will enjoy delusions of grandeur,
the timid individual will suffer anxiety, and the aggressive one
often will resort to acts of violence and crime ... (Anslinger
and Tompkins, 1953: 22). </p>

<p>Smoking of the weed is habit-forming. It destroys willpower,
releases restraints, and promotes insane reactions ... Robberies,
thrill murders, sex crimes and other offenses result (New York
Daily Worker, 1940, in Solomon, 1968: 288). </p>

<p>Others simply deny these allegations or assert that there is
no evidence to support the thesis of an independent causal
relationship. </p>

<p>The fact that so many witnesses testified to the peaceable and
orderly character of the excessive consumers goes far to prove
that in this country experience shows that as a rule these (hemp)
drugs do not tend to violent crime and violence (Indian Hemp
Drugs Commission, 1969: 258). </p>

<p>A fair summary of the available evidence would be that very
rarely do major (particularly violent) crimes follow upon the use
of the drug, and that, in instances where they do, the
relationship is an indirect one (Ausubel, 1958: 103). </p>

<p>One likely hypothesis is that, given the accepted tendency of
marihuana to release inhibitions, the effect of the drug will
depend on the individual and the circumstances. It might, but
certainly will not necessarily or inevitably, lead to aggressive
behavior or crime (President's Commission on Law Enforcement and
Administration of Justice, 1967: 13). </p>

<p>The relationship between marihuana use land the commission of
aggressive acts or violent crime such as murder, rape and assault
remains one of the most controversial issues relating to the
drug. Persons who believe that such a relationship exists often
argue that marihuana triggers the release of inhibitions and
restraints, destroys the will power and heightens aggressive
tendencies of the user, serving as a catalyst for the commission
of aggressive or violent acts. </p>

<p>This argument raises several fundamental questions: Are the
effects presumably induced by the drug commonly experienced by
marihuana users? Are these effects, to the extent that, they do
occur, generally or frequently translated into overt behavior?
And is the behavior which presumably manifests itself ordinarily
violent or aggressive? </p>

<p>The answers to these questions may be obtained from several
sources, including the results of laboratory experiments designed
to measure certain physiological and psychological reactions and
to identify observable behavioral effects; and retrospective
self-reports of effects purportedly experienced by marihuana
users. Additional clues may be gained from examination of the
criminal records of known marihuana users and the incidence of
marihuana. use among persons arrested for or convicted of violent
crimes. However, while these latter methods may reveal
statistical associations (which could prove to be spurious upon
further analysis), they should riot be interpreted to demonstrate
the existence of a causal connection between marihuana use and
the offenses committed. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE VIOLENT AND CRIMINOGENIC EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA</b> </p>

<p>The empirical evidence gathered to date lends no support to
the hypothesis that marihuana heightens aggressive tendencies in
the user or that its effects significantly increase the
likelihood of inciting the user to violence or crime. However,
those findings summarized below do not mean that marihuana cannot
be related to aggressive or violent behavior but merely suggest
that the effects of the drug and the behaviors in question may
operate independently. </p>

<p>The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) studied the
psychomotor effects of marihuana on 72 prisoners, both users and
non-users. Marihuana was administered experimentally as both an
oral extract and as cigarettes. The data show that the degree of
the drug's effect on psychomotor activities is dependent upon the
complexity of the function and, in some cases, on the strength of
the dose administered. Although simple reaction time and tasks
were only slightly affected, more complex functions like static
equilibrium and body and hand steadiness were significantly and
adversely affected by both large (5 cc.) and small (2 cc.) doses
of the drug. </p>

<p>In contrast to the ability of amphetamines to enhance muscular
performance and to increase physical activity (Weiss and Laties,
1962; Tinklenberg and Stillman, 1970), marihuana has been found
to decrease the inclination toward physical activity and to
actually reduce both physical exertion and activity (Mayor's
Committee on Marihuana, 1944; Hollister, et. a]., 1968;
Hollister, 1971), thereby decreasing the probability of inciting
the user to assaultive behavior. </p>

<p>Although marihuana has been found to reduce inhibitions in
some persons, it has not been shown to exaggerate extant
aggressiveness to any appreciable degree; in some instances it
has, in fact, been shown to reduce aggressiveness, and to induce
timidity, fear and passivity in the user (Bromberg) 1934,1939;
Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Allentuck, 1942; Chopra, and Chopra,
1942; Charen and Perelman, 1946; Carstairs, 1954; Blumer, et.
al., 1967; National Institute of Mental Health, 1970, 1972). </p>

<p>In recent years, a number of studies have been conducted in
which marihuana users were asked to describe the effects they
experienced while under the influence of the drug. On the whole,
their findings are similar to those obtained from the results of
laboratory experiments. </p>

<p>Halikas, Goodwin and Guze (1971) found that the majority of
the users in their sample reported &quot;usually&quot; feeling
relaxed (79%) and peaceful (74%). </p>

<p>Tart (1971) administered a questionnaire to college students
in California, one item containing a list of 206 possible effects
of marihuana. Respondents were asked to indicate whether, within
the last six months, they had experienced the designated effects
never, rarely, sometimes, very often or usually. Of the 153
respondents, 69% gave one of the latter three responses to the
item: &quot;My inhibitions are lowered so that I do things I'm
normally inhibited to do.&quot; </p>

<p>To the item: &quot;I lose control of my actions and do
antisocial things (actions that harm other people) that I
normally wouldn't do,&quot; 22% said rarely, 1% said sometimes,
and the remaining 77% replied &quot;never.&quot; With respect to
other more specific effects, 23% of the users stated they
&quot;usually&quot; felt physically relaxed, and 49% said they
&quot;very often&quot; felt physically relaxed and did not want
to get up or move around when high on marihuana (pp. 703-704). </p>

<p>In a study by Brotman and Suffet (1970) of 74 users in New
York City (both students and nonstudents) no one mentioned any
hostile feelings or actions when asked to describe what happens
when they get high on marihuana (p. 264). </p>

<p>Goode (1970) asked 204 respondents to describe their
experiences when high on marihuana. Table 1 illustrates the
responses of the users to effects possibly related to aggression
or crime (pp. 53-54). </p>

<p>In a more recent, Commission-sponsored survey of 15 to 34 year
old male residents of Philadelphia, respondents were interviewed
about the extent and frequency of their marihuana use, the extent
to which marihuana figured in the commission of criminal or
delinquent acts and the effects they generally experienced while
under the influence of the drug (Goode, 1972). With respect to
the effects experienced, nearly all the marihuana users (about
75% of the total sample reported that they had tried marihuana at
one time or another) denied that the effects of marihuana on them
could be interpreted as criminogenic or violent in nature. Table
2 below presents the subjective effects of marihuana related to
crime and violence which were reported by the 559 respondents. <br>
</p>

<p><b>Table I.-CRIMINOGENIC AND AGGRESSIVE EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA</b>
</p>

<p>(Figures in Percentages) </p>

<p>More relaxed, peaceful, calmer; marihuana acts as </p>

<p>a tranquilizer - -- ---------------- ------ -- -----
---------------- 46 </p>

<p>Exaggeration of mood: greater subjective impact, emotional
significance --- ------ ----- ------------------ -_ -_ 25 </p>

<p>Time seems slowed down, stretched out, think more </p>

<p>time has passed ---------- ----------- ------ ---- ---------
------ 25 </p>

<p>Become more withdrawn, introverted, privatistic-- - __ 22 </p>

<p>Become tired, lazy, lethargic, don't want to move---- - 19 </p>

<p>Feel freer, unrestrained, uninhibited --------- ---- ---
------ 18 </p>

<p>Feel paranoid ----- ----------- -------- ------ ----------
----- -- ------- 15 </p>

<p>Have hallucinations ---------------------- - -- -- ---------
-- ------- 15 </p>

<p>Feel sleepy ------ ----------- --- ----
------------------------------ 14 </p>

<p>More uncoordinated, clumsier, motor skills impaired 9 </p>

<p>Other people annoy me more; find fault in others ------ 8 </p>

<p>Become more active, want to move around more -_ __ - 6<br>
</p>

<p><b>Table 2.-REPORTED EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA AS RELATED TO
CRIMINAL AND VIOLENT BEHAVIOR</b> (Figures in Percentages)<br>
</p>

<p>Almost More Less Never </p>

<p>all than than or </p>

<p>Effects reported the half half almost </p>

<p>time the the never </p>

<p>time time<br>
</p>

<p>Feeling of wanting to </p>

<p>hurt someone 0 3 96 </p>

<p>Feeling of wanting to </p>

<p>do something violent.. * 4 95 </p>

<p>Feel more angry 1 3 8 88 </p>

<p>Feeling of frustration 3 4 16 78 </p>

<p>More willing to follow </p>

<p>others' suggestions 4 12 25 59 </p>

<p>Care less what others </p>

<p>think of what you do. . 16 15 10 18 </p>

<p>Feeling of being able </p>

<p>to do anything 6 5 13 77 </p>

<p>Have hallucinations 9 8 16 66 </p>

<p>Feeling of relaxation.... 50 22 10 18 </p>

<p>Feel less angry 31 22 13 34 </p>

<p>Feeling of drowsiness </p>

<p>or sleepiness 22 25 25 27 </p>

<p>* Less than 1/2 of one percent. Source: Goode, 1972: 21. </p>

<p>The data show that the overwhelming majority of the
respondents report &quot;never or almost never&quot; experiencing
effects which can be characterized as producing frustration,
anger, or aggression, and that they usually do Dot experience
effects which could be taken to indicate an increase in
suggestibility. On the other hand, substantial proportions of the
respondents reported feeling relaxed (72%), less angry (53%) and
drowsy or sleepy (47 %, ) at least half of the time. </p>

<p>In sum, these data suggest that marihuana does not commonly
produce effects which are likely to increase aggression or incite
the user to violence. Numerous studies designed to assess the
relationship more directly demonstrate, on the whole, that
marihuana does not play a significant role in the commission of
violent crimes. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>MARIHUANA AND VIOLENT CRIME: THE EVIDENCE<br>
</b></p>

<p>Over the years a number of approaches have been utilized in an
effort to assess the relationship between marihuana use and
violent crime. Perhaps the simplest approach is to compile a.
list of violent offenses allegedly committed by marihuana users
and to establish, retrospectively, the role of marihuana in the
commission of these offenses. </p>

<p>The Indian Hemp Drugs Commission (1894), for example,
investigated 81 cases of violence allegedly caused by hemp drugs
in in effort to determine whether or not a causal relationship
existed. Of these 81 cases, 11 were too old to permit adequate
investigation. In 23 of the cases examined, however, 18 showed no
evidence of a connection between the crimes and the use of hemp
drugs. The Commission concluded that: </p>

<p><i>In respect to his relations with society, however, even the
excessive consumer of hemp drugs is ordinarily inoffensive,. His
excesses may indeed bring him to degraded poverty which may lead
him to dishonest practices; and occasionally, but apparently very
rarely indeed, excessive indulgence in hemp drugs may lead to
violent crime. But for all practical purposes it may be laid down
that there is little or no connection between the use of hemp
drugs and crime </i>(Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893-1894,
reprinted 1969: 204). </p>

<p>Similarly, in 1938 the Foreign Policy Association published
the accounts of 10 marihuana crimes, including murder and
assault, &quot;culled at random from the files of the U.S. Bureau
of Narcotics&quot; (Merrill, 1938: 28). These cases were
presented in such a way as to imply that marihuana caused the
offenses. According to Grinspoon (1971: 302), they &quot;gave the
reader the distinct impression that the -user of marihuana was a
violent criminal who was given to rape, homicide, and
mayhem.&quot; Bromberg (1939), however, questions the validity of
the causal assumption. </p>

<p>It is difficult to evaluate these statements, because of their
uncritical nature.... Among the ten patients, the second, J. O.,
was described as having confessed how lie murdered a friend and
put his body in a trunk while under the influence of marihuana.
J. 0. was examined in this clinic (Bellevue Hospital) ; although
lie was a psychopathic liar and possibly homosexual, there was no
indication in the examination or history of the use of any drug.
The investigation by the probation department failed to indicate
use of the drug marihuana. The deceased, however, was addicted to
heroin (p. 9). </p>

<p>Based on retrospective case analyses, some observers have
attempted to specify more precisely. the nature of the purported
relationship or the situations in which aggressive behavior may
result from marihuana use. Bromberg (1939), for example,
suggested that aggressive or violent behavior may arise when a
naive subject develops a panic state in response to
marihuana-induced hallucinations. Allentuck and Bowman (1942)
believed that aggressive or antisocial behavior following use may
occur as a reaction to some unpleasant external stimulus during
the phase, of hypersensitivity and heightened psychomotor
activity. Others have suggested that antisocial conduct of an
aggressive or violent nature may occur when marihuana is used, as
alcohol often is, to release repressed feelings of hostility
(Siler, et al., 1933; Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Allentuck and
Bowman, 1942; Freedman and Rockmore, 1946; Murphy, 1963), and to
serve as a fortifier for aggressive or violent crimes (Ewens,
1904; South Africa Interdepartmental Committee on Abuse of Dagga,
1952; Ames, 1958; Watt, 1961; Blumer, et al., 1967; Miller,
1968). </p>

<p>The available evidence bearing on these issues, however,
suggests that panic reactions rarely occur; that psychomotor
activity is more often reduced than enhanced following use; that
aggression rarely follows use, but when it does, it generally
occurs among individuals with histories of maladjustment,
emotional instability or impulse disorders (Bromberg, 1934, 1939;
Charen and Perelman, 1946; Ausubel, 1958; Bloomquist, 1968;
Grinspoon, 1971; Kaplan, 1971; National Institute of Mental
Health, 1972). </p>

<p>After a series of studies of marihuana and crime, Chopra and
Chopra (1939) concluded that if any relationship existed between
marihuana use and violent crime, it was an indirect one. They
stated that: </p>

<p><i>So far as premeditated crime is concerned, especially that
of a violent nature, hemp drugs . . . may not only not lead to
it, but they actually act as deterrents.... One of the, important
actions of these drugs is to quieten and stupify the individual
so there is no tendency to violence. . . . The result of
continued and excessive use of these drugs in our opinion is to
make the individual timid rather than lead him to commit a crime
of a violent nature</i> (p. 92). </p>

<p>Over the years, the conclusion of the Chopras has received
increasing support from many quarters of the research community
(Mayor's Committee on Marihuana, 1944; Maurer and Vogel, 1962;
White House Conference on Narcotic Drug Abuse, 1962; Murphy,
1963; President's Commission on Law Enforcement and
Administration of Justice, 1967; National Institute of Mental
Health, 1970, 1972). </p>

<p>In the absence of possibilities for addressing the issue more
directly, several researchers have relied on statistical studies
and have sought to establish the overall and comparative
incidence of detected violent crimes among cannabis users. One
method has been to compile lists of violent crimes committed
during specific periods of time and to determine the proportion
of these offenses committed by cannabis users. </p>

<p>Lambo (1965) compiled a list of crimes occurring in three West
African countries during a recent two-year period. He claimed
that users of cannabis had committed 51% of the 73 murders, 31%
of the 263 cases of assault and battery and 26% of the 472 cases
against women. </p>

<p>Some have preferred to base their statistical studies on
samples of offenders (rather than lists of offenses) drawn from
the arrest or conviction files of law enforcement agencies.
Several researchers adopting this method are content to identify
the marihuana users in their samples and then simply report the
number of users charged with violent crimes or the proportions of
the total number of violent crimes perpetrated by the users. </p>

<p>The District Attorney of New Orleans, for example, testified
before the House Ways and Means Committee that of the 450 men
convicted of major crimes in 1930, 125 were identified as regular
marihuana users. Approximately one-half of the murderers and
one-fifth of those charged with assault, robbery or larceny were
said to be regular marihuana users (U.S. House of
Representatives, 1937: 23-24). </p>

<p>Bromberg (1939) reviewed the records of 16,854 offenders in
the psychiatric clinic of New York County's Court of General
Sessions during the period 1932 to 1937. Of the 67 marihuana
users identified, only six had been charged with violent crimes.
He concluded that there was no causal relationship between
marihuana use and aggressive crime. </p>

<p>Others go one step further and attempt to compare the users'
rates of violence with those of other selected populations such
as non-marihuana using offenders, offenders using other drugs, or
all of fenders in a given file. </p>

<p>Bromberg and Rodgers (1946) studied the civilian and military
criminal records of 8,280 convicted offenders at the United
States Naval Prison in Portsmouth, Now Hampshire between January
1, 1943 and July 1, 1945. Of the total number of offenders
investigated, 40 or .0048% were identified as marihuana users (23
used to excess, 10 were moderate users and seven were described
as light users). Of these 40, only two reported being more
aggressive while under the influence of marihuana than they would
be under normal conditions and three had been charged with
violent crimes (assault or striking an officer) while in the
military. Comparison of the users' criminal records with those of
40 randomly selected non-using prisoners revealed that the
non-user group had committed more aggressive crimes than the
users. </p>

<p>In conclusion, the researchers stated that: </p>

<ol>
    <li><i>There is no positive relationship between aggressive
        crime and marihuana usage in the Naval service; . . . </i></li>
    <li><i>. . . there is no significant causal relationship
        between aggressive crime in civilian life (of the naval
        offenders studied) and the use of marihuana . . . . </i></li>
    <li><i>Marihuana usage is but an aspect of some type of
        mental disorder or personality abnormality </i>(p. 826). </li>
</ol>

<p>Maurer and Vogel (1962) have stated a similar conclusion. </p>

<p><i>&quot;It has not been our impression from contact with many
hundreds of marijuana users that these people are violent
criminals; ... While there may be occasional violent psychopaths
who have used marijuana, have committed crimes of violence, and
who have, in court, explained their actions as uncontrolled
violence resulting from the use of the drug, these are exceptions
to the general run of marijuana users.... Marijuana is not
possessed of any mysterious power to force people to commit acts
which they would not otherwise perform </i>(p. 281). </p>

<p>Blum (1969) reviewed the data provided in 1966 by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation as part of its Careers in Crime Project.
The data showed that marihuana users did not differ significantly
from either heroin users or from all offenders (drug and non-drug
users) in their rate of violent crime relative to their total
non-drug offenses (28%, 26% and 26%, respectively). </p>

<p>There have been several statistical studies, also using
offender populations, designed to assess the degree to which
persons arrested for cannabis use have previous or subsequent
arrests for violent crimes. </p>

<p>Bromberg and Rodgers (1946) found that of the 40 offenders in
their sample identified as marihuana users, 12 had been charged
with previous offenses, three of them for assault. </p>

<p>Gardikas (1950) reviewed the criminal records of 379 persons
arrested between 1919 and 1950 for publicly using hashish. Of
these, 117 (31%) reportedly progressed from hashish use to other
crimes, about one-third of these subsequent crimes involving
violence or weapons. Gardikas stated that one subgroup of these,
offenders accumulated 420 offenses of assault, woundings,
threats, robberies, and manslaughter (p. 5). </p>

<p>In sum, these statistical studies based on samples of violent
offenses, violent offenders or arrested marihuana law violators
indicate that some individuals identified as marihuana users do
commit violent crimes, have committed them in the past and go on
to commit them in the future. </p>

<p>Their numbers, however, are generally small, both absolutely
and relatively. These studies therefore suggest a very weak and
insignificant statistical association between marihuana use and
violent crime which may itself be completely attenuated when the
proper statistical controls are applied. </p>

<p>These studies do not establish a causal relationship between
cannabis use and violent crime; nor do they permit an affirmative
response to the crucial question of whether the use of marihuana
alters the progression to violent crime at a significantly
greater rate than that which might be expected from some other
criminal subgroups, more representative samples of cannabis
users, or samples drawn from the general population. They also
fail to address themselves to the external conditions and
circumstances which might serve to mitigate the observed
relationships. </p>

<p>Several recent and more sophisticated empirical investigations
have addressed some of the critical questions left unanswered by
statistical studies of offender populations. Namely, they set
about to determine whether marihuana users in the general
population commit acts of aggression or violence significantly
more frequently than do nonusers; and whether any observed
differences between users and non-users may be more directly
attributable to extra-pharmacological (social, cultural,
psychological) variables than to the use of marihuana itself or
to the pharmacological action of the drug per se. </p>

<p>In 1965, Robins and his associates (1970) conducted a survey
of 20 black men born in St. Louis between 1930 and 1934. The
marihuana users in the sample were then compared with the
nonusers relative to their ratings on a &quot;violence
syndrome&quot; constructed by the researchers. </p>

<p>Respondents were rated high on the violence syndrome if they
reported having participated or felt like participating in three
or more of the following items, one of which was a judgment by
the interviewer that the respondent demonstrated hostility during
the interview: </p>

<p>1. Getting hurt in a fight. </p>

<p>2. Ever feeling like killing someone. </p>

<p>3. Ever hitting people when angry. </p>

<p>4. Being quick to lose one's temper. </p>

<p>5. Throwing or breaking things when angry. </p>

<p>6. Ever hurting someone in a fight. </p>

<p>7. Ever fighting with a weapon. </p>

<p>8. Getting mean when drinking. </p>

<p>9. Interviewer's observation of respondent's hostility. </p>

<p>The researchers found that those who had used marihuana during
adolescence were more likely to score high on the violence
syndrome than were those who did not use the drug for the first
time until adulthood; 31% of the respondents who had used
marihuana and no other drug during adolescence exhibited three or
more of these measures, 24% of those who used marihuana only but
started as adults scored high, 16% of the non-users were
classified as high on the violence syndrome, and 45% of those who
used marihuana and other drugs were so classified. </p>

<p>The researchers also found that users were significantly more
likely to report the, commission of &quot; adult person or
property offenses&quot; than were nonusers; 32 % of the nonusers,
48 % of the marihuana only adult starters, 56% of the marihuana
only adolescent starters, and 77% of the multiple drug users
reported committing crimes against persons or property as adults.
</p>

<p>Based on these data, marihuana users were said to be
significantly more likely to have exhibited violent behavior than
were nonusers. This conclusion, however, seems somewhat
premature. </p>

<p>First, upon the application of three &quot;pathological&quot;
controls (dropping out of school, alcoholism and involvement in
juvenile delinquency), the original relationship was reduced to
some unspecified extent; the researchers reported only that these
controls &quot;failed to completely wipe out&quot; the
statistical correlation. Secondly, several of the items would not
appear to be sufficiently discriminating in that large numbers of
people, whether drug users or not, have probably been quick to
lose their temper, hit people when angry (most parents, for
example), or felt like killing someone in a moment of anger. The
subjective nature of the last item the interviewer's observation
of hostility has already been noted. </p>

<p>Thirdly, neither the drinkers nor those who were multiple drug
users were isolated in the analysis, making it impossible to
determine whether or not the apparent relationship between
marihuana use and violence may have been a. function of these
other drugs rather than the marihuana. </p>

<p>Lastly, but perhaps most importantly, the researchers found
several other &quot;pathological&quot; variables correlated with
the use of marihuana in their sample: (a) low income, (b) low
status jobs, (c) unemployment, (d) receiving financial aid, (e)
failing to graduate from high school, (f) fathering illegitimate
children, (g) marrying women who had been married previously or
who had children, and (h) drinking &quot;heavily enough to
create, social or medical problems.&quot; </p>

<p>Because none of these variables was controlled in the data
analysis (despite the fact that most of them have been found to
be significantly related to delinquency and crime and
characteristic of persons involved in delinquent, criminal and
drug subcultures), it is impossible to determine whether or not
any or all of these variables played a mediating role in the
observed relationship between marihuana use and antisocial
behavior in the, sample. As Goode (1972) has noted, the fact that
the three controls which were applied did reduce the
relationship, makes it likely that &quot;additional controls
would reduce the relationship even more, indeed, reduce it to
zero, if applied simultaneously&quot; (p. 13). </p>

<p>As such, although this study represented a significant step
forward in investigating the relationship between marihuana and
crime or violent behavior, its methodological limitations
preclude generalizations of the findings to the larger universe. </p>

<p>In a study of drug use among lower class minority group youth,
Blumer and his associates (1967) found that marihuana users were
much less likely to commit aggressive or violent acts than were
those who used amphetamines or preferred alcohol, and that most
of the marihuana using youths deliberately shunned aggressive
behavior and adopted, instead, a &quot;cool,&quot; non-violent
style. The researchers did find a small group of youths (termed
&quot;the rowdy&quot;) who were oriented toward aggressiveness.
Generally, these youths preferred alcohol over other drugs and
were found, for the most part, to have been raised in an
aggressive and combative social milieu. The researchers point
out, however, that most marihuana users in the sample were not of
the rowdy type, even though it is this small group which often
forms the basis of the public and police image of the youthful
marihuana user. In commenting on the role of marihuana in the
passage of youth from rowdy to a cool style, the authors note,
that the passage from the rowdy type to a cool and mellow
youngster, as it relates to the use of drugs, involves chiefly a
shift to the smoking of marijuana. . . . [The youngsters']
accounts and discussions also stress that the use of marijuana
both produces and symbolizes a &quot;mellow&quot; mode of conduct
that is opposed to that associated with rowdy behavior. They
place great weight on the &quot;socializing&quot; effects of
marijuana use, declaring that its use not only leads youngsters
away from violence but has the effect of changing them into
social human beings (p. 30). </p>

<p>In a large scale, systematic survey (questionnaire and
interview) of more than 1300 students at five West Coast colleges
and universities, Blum and his associates (1969) found that 19%
of the total sample had used marihuana but that 94% had used
alcohol. One, percent of the marihuana users reported fights or
other criminal behavior which they attributed to the drug. Of
those who used alcohol, 8% reported fights and 2% reported
offenses while under the influence of this drug. The researchers
make particular note of the fact that despite the increase of
marihuana use on these campuses since the middle and late
sixties, there has been no comparable increase in assaultive
crimes. </p>

<p>In a Commission-sponsored household survey of 15 to 34
year-old male residents of West Philadelphia, Goode (1972) found
that not one of the violent crimes, including &quot;forcing
sexual intercourse,&quot; was significantly correlated with
marihuana use. Among the five offense types showing a very weak
relationship to the use of marihuana, the only so-called violent
offense, &quot;hurting someone in a minor way,&quot; showed the
weakest association. The author notes that &quot;the statistical
differences in rates of offenses between users and nonusers rest
on adding together a small number of weakly correlated offenses.
. . . [They do not indicate] massive differences, or differences
indicating higher rates of classic, violent crimes among
users&quot; (p. 32a). </p>

<p>These more rigorous studies of the relationship between
marihuana use and violent crime suggest that marihuana users in
the general population do not commit acts of aggression or
violence significantly more frequently than do nonusers; that
marihuana does not heighten aggressive tendencies in most users
and may, in some cases, serve to reduce aggressiveness; and that
much of the observed relationship between marihuana and violence
is probably a function of social, cultural or psychological
variables such as multiple drug use, set and setting and
involvement in a criminal or drug subculture. </p>

<p>There is no reason to believe that marihuana use will cause or
lead to the commission of aggressive or violent acts by the large
majority of psychologically and socially mature individuals in
the general population. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>OPINIONS ABOUT MARIHUANA AND AGGRESSIVENESS: THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMMUNITIES<br>
</b></p>

<p>Several references have already been made to anecdotal case
histories, to the claims made and to the opinions formerly held
by a number of law enforcement authorities relative to the
relationship between marihuana use and aggressive behavior or
violent crime. A few systematic efforts have been made to explore
the current opinions and attitudes of law enforcement and
criminal justice officials. </p>

<p>Probably the first detailed survey of the opinions of police
officers was that conducted by a Stanford University law student
in 1968. Part of this unpublished study has been summarized by
Kaplan (1971) and is reprinted below. </p>

<p>Law enforcement agencies have continuously supported the
existence of a strong causal relationship between the use of
marijuana and acts of aggression and violence. In order to
determine the nature and basis for this belief, sixteen law
enforcement and narcotics officers were interviewed. The officers
selected for the interview from each pollee department were those
who spent the largest percentage of their time actually working
with marijuana users. When the department had several officers
working full time on narcotics, the officer In charge was
interviewed, on the supposition that as chief officer, he would
have the longest and widest range of experience with marijuana
users. </p>

<p>Of those interviewed, seven spent 100% of their time on
narcotics problems; three spent 75% to 100%; I spent about 50%;
and the remaining five spent 10% to 25%. All emphasized that of
their narcotics work, a major proportion of the time is spent on
marijuana problems. </p>

<p>The context in which the officers observe individuals under
the influence of marijuana is an important factor in evaluating
their observations. Only three had done stakeout work where
conduct could be observed while under cover. The remaining
thirteen officers had only encountered marijuana users in either
arrest or questioning situations. In response to the question of
whether they had opportunities for informal contact with people
using marijuana while off duty or in a social situation, the
officers uniformly answered, &quot;no.&quot; </p>

<p>The specific subject of this project, i.e. marijuana and
aggression, was never mentioned to the officers. They were told
only that I was interested in the marijuana question. The first
question which I asked was to briefly characterize, from their
per8onal experience and observations, the behavior of individuals
while under the influence of marijuana. During this original
description, 10 of the officers mentioned violence or aggressive
behavior as a common characteristic. The six other officers
didn't mention aggression as a distinguishing characteristic in
their original description however, in the next question, when
specifically asked if marijuana does lead to aggressive behavior,
all said that it did. </p>

<p>Every one of the officers pointed out the wide range of
conduct which they see exhibited by those that are
&quot;high&quot; on marijuana. They emphasized that how a person
reacts depends on his particular personality. As one officer
commented, &quot;Some individuals are very happy and to them
everything is beautiful, while others are always looking for a
fight.&quot; Six (6) of the officers emphasized how quickly they
can see one mood change into the other-at one moment docile and
passive, at another extremely aggressive. </p>

<p>A few of the officers commented that along with the direct
influence of marijuana, another important factor in aggressive
behavior Is the arresting situation. One officer, Lieutenant A of
the B Police Department, who has done quite a bit of stake-out
work as well as undercover investigation, pointed out that this
change from &quot;silly, joking, funny and talkative&quot; moods
to apprehensive and often aggressive postures is many times
precipitated by the realization that a law enforcement officer is
present. </p>

<p>Sergeant C of the D Police Department also felt the
&quot;arresting situation&quot; was probably the primary factor
in aggressive behavior reports about marijuana users. Sergeant E
also mentioned &quot;the approach of a known policeman&quot; as a
factor in the aggressive behavior which they see. However,
Sergeant E also estimated that one fifth </p>

<p>of the males, when under the influence of [marijuana] and when
aware that they are being arrested, will break and run or resist.
This he feels is a much higher percentage than for other types of
arrests. Similarly most of the officers did maintain that even
considering all other factors such as arrest, the marijuana was
the force in most cases which was responsible for the aggression
and violence. </p>

<p>Mr. F of the G County Sheriff's Office, however, maintained
that in the last few years, those arrested for marijuana offenses
have tended to resist arrest less often than previously. He
stated, &quot;They now feel they don't have to fight the officers
because of the laws-because of legalizing attempts, they feel
they don't have to fight, for they will have their day in
court.&quot; </p>

<p>Sergeant H of the I Police Department stated that recently
(within the last year) he has seen no aggressive reaction to
marijuana because of the extremely weak grades of marijuana now
available. He felt that the determinative factor in how a person
reacts while &quot;high&quot; is the strength of the grass
smoked. He reported that the grass they have recently been
finding has a very low resin content and its effects are merely
&quot;a quick stimulant followed by a depressed mood.&quot;
However, in another part of the interview, when discussing the
type of personality prone to using marijuana, Sergeant H
distinguished between those now smoking and the &quot;old
grasshead.&quot; These latter were, only &quot;Spanish-American
or criminals.&quot; Now, however, &quot;people without criminal
records are joining the ranks of criminals.&quot; This major
shift in the personality type now using marijuana, it would seem,
would be another factor leading to Sergeant H's observation that
the problems with aggressive reactions have decreased. </p>

<p>While all stated their belief that marijuana does lead to
aggressive behavior, it was in most cases very difficult to
elicit from the officers any specific instances where they
personally had observed an aggressive reaction to the use of
marijuana. Four (4) officers stated that they had never
personally seen someone aggressive under marijuana. They all,
however, had heard reports of such instances from other officers.
It should be noted also, that these four officers are from small
police departments located chiefly in middle class residential
areas. </p>

<p>Me officers who did cite specific examples of aggressive
behavior from their personal observations cited such conduct as
individuals who possessed marijuana fighting among themselves,
cases of resisting arrest, a [man] picking a fight in a bar,
beating one's wife, sexual promiscuity, stealing, reckless
driving, and carrying knives and guns. While citing this type of
example most officers emphasized the real difficulty in telling
when someone is &quot;high.&quot; Except for a few symptoms such
as red or dilated eyes, they have to make the judgment from the
general actions of the subject. When the subject is acting
peculiar and there is no alcohol, or they find marijuana in his
possession, then they assume he is &quot;high.&quot; </p>

<p>It was also difficult to limit these discussions solely to
marijuana. When asked for personal case histories, they often
recounted incidents of individuals who had also been using other
drugs or alcohol in combination with marijuana. The officers tend
to group all of the drugs together, and discuss them together in
generalities applying to all. One officer, from J County,
recounted as one of his -personal experience histories with
aggression and marijuana, a boy who went &quot;berserk&quot; on
Christmas day, and who finally had to be shot by the police. On
checking newspaper accounts, it appears that LSD was also
involved in the episode. </p>

<p>The officers all indicated that they have personally seen many
aggressive reactions to the use of alcohol. Most, however, did
not feel they could compare the frequency with that of marijuana.
Most deal mainly with narcotic problems and thus spend most of
their time with marijuana problems. The alcohol problems, and
specifically the aggressive or belligerent drunk, are handled by
the &quot;beat&quot; cops. </p>

<p>It was also difficult to limit the discussion to personal
experiences of the officers themselves. Many of them, when asked
for specific examples, went immediately to their desks for
reports and articles issued by other law enforcement agencies.
This it seems is a problem which developed because of the sample
chosen to interview. Because they were usually the most
experienced and the chief narcotics officers, most of them are
called upon to give speeches before PTA's, church groups, school
classes, etc. They all, therefore, were familiar with the
literature distributed by law enforcement.... </p>

<p>Three of the officers cited as proof of marijuana's danger a
recent distribution which pointed out that the &quot;death
penalty&quot; Is now imposed on marijuana offenders in Nigeria. </p>

<p>When questioned on passive reactions to marijuana, all of the
officers could think of personal encounters with people who were
&quot;high&quot; and who were decidedly passive and docile. Yet
only four of the officers included this trait in their original
characterization of behavior under marijuana. Eight of the
officers, however, in their original description of behavior
while &quot;high&quot; described some persons as
&quot;happy,&quot; &quot;funny,&quot; or &quot;giggly.&quot; </p>

<p>One question asked of the officers was aimed at
differentiating the aggressiveness (chiefly in terms of frequency
of resisting arrest) between those &quot;high&quot; on marijuana
and those arrested for sale or for possession. As mentioned
previously, the officers indicated that generally they have a
very difficult time distinguishing those who are
&quot;high.&quot; The officers interviewed generally work on
[arresting] pushers, and dealers. Their attention is usually not
drawn to individuals because of the particular conduct they might
be exhibiting, but rather because the individual is dealing in
marijuana. When pot parties where everyone is high have been
[broken up], Sergeant 0 of D reported that the places raided have
usually been on the peaceful side. Another officer, K, on the
narcotics detail in D, felt that users are usually &quot;very
easy to arrest. With others, such as pushers, and sellers,
however, officers have to -be more careful.&quot; Captain L of M
disagreed, however, maintaining that those under the influence
must be watched more closely and are usually more aggressive and
violent because of a lessening of concern for the consequences
and a lack of ability to make sound judgments. Deputy Chief N of
the 0 Police Department pointed out that In 0 at any rate, there
is a certain &quot;show&quot; which those arrested feel they must
put on; &quot;it is hard to separate this show from the effects
of the marijuana,&quot; Lieutenant P of the 0 Police Department
said his experience indicated that those under the influence had
to be watched closely. He has arrested people, [when they were]
&quot;high&quot; three of four times without incident; the fifth
time, however, he felt they might go wild. </p>

<p>In response to a question of whether they felt that some
persons smoke pot before engaging in crimes against property,
such as robbery, ten of the officers replied that they did
believe that this occurred often. Seven of these could cite
specific examples of people who had been picked up for stickups,
car thefts, etc. and who reported using marijuana beforehand to
bolster their courage, or sharpen their senses. However, the
other three of the ten had only heard of such conduct. The
remaining six officers answered that they did not think this was
common, and had never seen any examples. . . . </p>

<p>None (of the officers) believed however that marijuana was
responsible for any long-term effects resulting in aggressive
behavior. The relationship between marijuana and aggression, they
feel, is limited strictly to the period of time during which the
user is under the influence. In terms of long-range effects of
marijuana on aggression, the reactions of the officers confirm
that, if anything, there is a negative correlation. That is,
marijuana leads to nonaggressive, non-competitive, passive
conduct, when viewed in the context of chronic use. </p>

<p>Whatever limitations and qualifications one can cite regarding
the conclusions drawn by law enforcement officers, one thing
remains certain: they do believe that the use of marijuana leads
in a significant number of cases to aggressive behavior (Kaplan,
1971, citing Schofield: 110-115). </p>

<p>In seeking to present to the public as much information about
marihuana and its effects, from as many different sources and
approaches as possible, the Commission sponsored the design and
execution of two opinion surveys of the criminal justice
Community. In addition to soliciting their current opinions about
the relationship of marihuana to aggressive or violent behavior,
and to infer from them the extent to which their professional
experience with marihuana users may have changed over the years,
the Commission sought to determine the extent to which current
opinions and attitudes of the criminal justice community reflect
the growing body of empirical evidence on the subject. </p>

<p>To these ends, nationally representative samples of
prosecuting attorneys, judges, probation officers and court
clinicians were surveyed by mail. The questionnaires mailed to
these officials contained items relative to the relationship
between marihuana use and aggressive or violent behavior. The
results of these surveys show that more than three fourths of the
781 judges, probation officers and court clinicians responding to
a mail survey (InTech, 1971) regarded as either questionable or
&quot; probably untrue&quot; the statement that &quot;most
aggressive acts or crimes of violence committed by persons who
are known users of marihuana occur when the offender is under the
influence of marihuana. More than 60% however, regard as equally
questionable or untrue the statement that most such aggressive
acts or crimes of violence occur when the offender is not tinder
the influence of the drug but is attempting to obtain it or the
money to buy it. Table 3 shows the percentage of each of the
three groups of respondents answering in this manner. (InTech,
1971). </p>

<p>These figures give the impression that neither judges,
probation officers nor court clinicians are certain of the role
of marihuana in the commission of violent crime. Their tendency
to deny both statements suggests that at the least, the
relationship, to the extent that it does exist, is a tenuous one.
</p>

<p><b>Table 3.-CRIMINAL JUSTICE OFFICIALS, BELIEFS ABOUT THE
RELATIONSHIP OF MARIHUANA USE TO AGGRESSIVE ACTS</b> </p>

<p>(Figures in Percentages) </p>

<p>A. &quot;Most aggressive acts or crimes of violence committed
by persons who are known users of marihuana occur when the
offender is under the influence of marihuana.', </p>

<p>Probably Probably Not sure </p>

<p>true not true<br>
</p>

<p>Judges 17.3 44.2 29.5 </p>

<p>Probation officers 14.5 60.0 21.8 </p>

<p>Clinicians 6.1 76.5 13.0 </p>

<p>Total 15.2 51.2 26.0 </p>

<p>B. &quot;When the offender is not under the influence of
marihuana but is attempting to obtain marihuana or the money to
buy it.&quot; </p>

<p>Probably Probably Not sure </p>

<p>true not true<br>
</p>

<p>Judges 35.6 30.6 25.0 </p>

<p>Probation officers 27.3 44.5 21.8 </p>

<p>Clinicians 20.0 60.9 15.7 </p>

<p>Total 32.1 37.0 23.2 </p>

<p>In its survey of state prosecuting attorneys, the Commission
likewise found a tendency for these officials to deny a causal
relationship between marihuana use and aggressive behavior; 52%
of the respondents stated that they either did not believe or
were uncertain about the proposition that use of marihuana causes
aggressive behavior. Of those who did believe in a causal
relationship, however, two-thirds of the respondents' beliefs
stemmed front other than personal observation of aggressive
behavior exhibited by marihuana users. </p>

<p>These opinion surveys reveal that at least these members of
the criminal justice community have begun to reexamine their
earlier beliefs. The data suggest that, in their professional
experience, they have not found marihuana users to be aggressive
or violent to such an extent as to elicit strong and consistent
opinions about the causal relationship between marihuana use and
violence. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>