
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-48</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B034-136</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/asap/rose1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070152 text/html 11969
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:01:45 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:34:15 GMT
Content-length: 11751
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Anatomy of a pain summit</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_asap_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="asapmain.htm"><font size="3">ASAP - American Society for
Action on Pain</font></a><font size="2"> </font></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43622" -->

<h1>Anatomy of a pain summit</h1>

<p>NOVEMBER 1994 - SACRAMENTO MEDICINE </p>

<p><b>By Harvey L. Rose, MD</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>In the fall of 1990, three events signaled a new era in the
use of opioids for the management of chronic pain -- particularly
non-malignant pain: </p>

<p>(1) SEDMS published &quot;The Painful Dilemma: The Use of
Narcotics for the Treatment of Chronic Pain;&quot; </p>

<p>(2) Governor Deukmejian signed into law Senator Leroy Greene's
SB 1802, the Intractable Pain Act, which protects physicians from
unwarranted intrusion by regulatory agencies in the treatment of
chronic pain with controlled substances. Under this law, a
physician cannot be disciplined by the Medical Board for such
treatment as long as a consultation was obtained from an
appropriate specialist and good records were maintained on the
patient; </p>

<p>(3) The AMA published &quot;Balancing the Response to
Prescription Drug Abuse,&quot; after becoming aware of the
problem. As Dr. James Sammons stated, &quot;The war on drugs
should not be a war on patients.&quot; But it has been a war on
patients and physicians alike. </p>

<p>In November 1990, I gave testimony before the Medical Board of
California (MBQ and asked them to communicate to the physicians
of this state through their Action Report the significance of the
year's prior events. Finally, in June 1991, the Action Report
carried an article on the use of controlled substances for the
management of chronic pain. While the article did mention Senator
Greene's bill, no mention was made of &quot;The Painful
Dilemma.&quot; </p>

<p>In October 1992, Senator Greene held hearings at the State
Capitol regarding the Intractable Pain Treatment Act because he
was receiving calls from doctors informing him that the
regulatory climate had not improved at all. At the hearing,
physicians and patients testified about the problems they
encountered with prescribing and obtaining controlled substances
for chronic pain, but the Medical Board refused to admit there
was any problem. On October 27, The Sacramento Bee reported
&quot;Legal Fears have Doctors Under-prescribing
Painkillers,&quot; and the following day Ken Wagstaff resigned as
director of the MBC over an internal scandal. Governor Wilson
subsequently appointed Dixon Arnett, a former Republican
assemblyman, to head the MBC. Senator Greene, who knew Arnett
from their days in the legislature, met with him and expressed
his concerns. Arnett, through friends who had encountered
difficulty getting medication for the relief of chronic pain, was
aware of the problem and set up a task force to look into the
situation. In its November 4, 1993 report, the task force
recognized that the undertreatment of chronic pain was a greater
problem than so-called &quot;excessive prescribing.&quot; After
several hearings, the task force's statement on prescribing
controlled substances for chronic pain was published in the July
1994 Action Report (the guidelines are to be published in an
upcoming action report). In reference to the report, Arnett was
quoted in The Bee (8/11/94), saying &quot;Doctors won't have the
Medical Board to blame anymore(for undertreatment of pain).&quot;
In addition, Arnett said in his letter to task force members that
he wanted physicians to achieve a certain level of comfort when
it comes to prescribing these drugs. </p>

<p>In November, Proposition 161, &quot;Physician Assisted
Suicide,&quot; appeared on the state ballot. A coalition of
religious groups strongly opposed to the initiative spent large
sums of money to defeat it, which they did, 54:46 percent. These
groups came to realize that suicide was not the real issue at
stake; rather, it was the pain. Cavalier and Associates, the same
group that ran that campaign against Proposition 161 formed the
California Pain Management Coalition. They worked with
Assemblyman Richard Polanco, who introduced AB 2155 calling for a
pain management advisory committee within the attorney general's
office to advise on pain matters. The wife of an administrative
assistant to Assemblyman Polanco had chronic pain and had
experienced difficulty obtaining pain relief. Her doctors had
been afraid of her getting &quot;addicted&quot; to opioids, but I
maintain it was really the scarlet letter of &quot;arrest&quot;
that kept her from getting what she needed to alleviate her pain.
</p>

<p>AB 2155 passed that state legislature but was vetoed by
Governor Wilson. In his veto message, however, the governor
called for a pain summit to remove the impediments to adequate
prescribing: &quot;The proponents [of AB 21551 make a compelling
argument that the medical community and the law enforcement
community need to work together in a cooperative fashion to make
certain patients are receiving medically necessary pain
treatment. I am directing ... the various boards... to overcome
obstacles that contribute to inadequate pain management.&quot;
10/8/93 </p>

<p>In 1989, the American Pain Society (APS) formed a new
committee on analgesic regulatory issues. Ronald Blum, MD, chief
of oncology at New York University, was the committee's first
chairman. In 1987, Dr. Blum had been arrested in his office by
narcotic agents for alleged overprescribing of Diluadid to his
cancer patients. </p>

<p>They finally reduced the charges against him to not
registering his patients is &quot;ilarcotic addicts&quot; as
required by New York law. The second chair of this committee was
Al Brady, MD, an oncologist from Portland, Oregon who had also
been arrested on charges similar to Dr. Blum's. As a member of
this committee, I worked with C. Stratton Hill, MD, head of
oncology at MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. He was the
author of The Intractable Pain Treatment Act, which had become
law in Texas in 1989. We adopted this law, made a few changes,
and it became law in California the next year. </p>

<p>William Marcus, deputy attorney general in the Los Angeles
office, became a member of the APS' analgesic regulatory
committee and gained awareness of how regulatory agencies had
created a climate that was not conducive to prescribing narcotics
for chronic pain patients. </p>

<p>The pain summit was held in Los Angeles in March 1994 with
Senator Greene, as well as experts from all over the country in
medicine, nursing, pharmaceutical manufacturing, and law
enforcement, in attendance. At about the same time, the Agency
for Health Care Policy Research came out with cancer pain
guidelines, acknowledging that at least half of all cancer
patients are undertreated for pain. Certainly, addiction should
not be an issue in deciding how much pain relief cancer patients
can receive. The report on the pain summit, which was released in
July 1994, stated that patients had a right to relief of their
pain and suffering. The following was the only underlined
statement in the summit report: &quot;We should create by statute
a positive legal duty for physicians to relieve pain.&quot;
Included in the summit report was a chronology of events that had
led up to the summit. The first event listed was Senator Greene's
Intractable Pain Treatment Act. </p>

<p>In June 1994, the 6th District Court of Appeals published a
decision in the Peopic vs. Schade case. Among other charges, Dr.
Schade was accused of illegally prescribing controlled substances
to addicts (of course, these so-called addicts were actually
chronic pain patients). Dr. Otto Neubuerger and I testified on
Dr. Schade's behalf. One of the pivotal issues as seen by the
court of appeals was the definition of addiction. In 1989, SB
711, another bill by Senator Greene, included a definition of
addiction. It was passed by the legislature but vetoed
by.Governor Deukmejian. </p>

<p>The appellate court felt that if the trial court could not
provide a definition of addiction, then how could it convict Dr.
Schade for treating addicts? It overturned that part of Dr.
Schade's conviction by 2:1. While the dissenting justice felt
that Dr. Schade still should have been found guilty, he caught
the essence of tile problem in his opinion: &quot;To be sure,
there was abundant and divergent testimony during the course of
this trial devoted to the meaning of addiction as that concept
relates to pain management. It was apparent that the medical
community is divided on the question of the appropriate use of
narcotics for treatment of patients in chronic pain. One thing
made clear by the expert testimony is that there is no commonly
accepted medical standard by which to measure how much is too
much to prescribe for any given patient presenting with the
complaint of chronic pain. As appellant testified, each case will
depend upon the doctor's assessment of the particular patient's
level of comfort and ability of function.&quot; (Daily Appellate
Report, 6/17/94:8291). </p>

<p>Part of my own testimony, quoted in the appellate courts
decision, reads as follows: &quot;Dr. Rose testified that he has
prescribed narcotics to chronic pain patients with nonmalignant
ailments. According to Dr. Rose, the quality of life is the
bottom line and the doctor should be able to prescribe narcotics.
when necessary to restore function in the patients' lives.&quot;
(DAR, 6/17/94:8275). </p>

<p>With the virtually simultaneous release of the Medical Board's
task force statement and the governor's pain summit report this
year, there is no turning back. Once the full implementation of
these documents is realized, California will become the first
political unit on the planet where the undertreatment of pain and
suffering will be considered illegal. All members of the health
care team will have not only a professional obligation but a
statutory positive legal duty to effectively relieve their
patients' pain and suffering, and no longer will physicians have
to tell their patients in pain to &quot;just learn to live with
it.&quot;<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_asap_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="asapmain.htm"><font size="3">ASAP - American Society for
Action on Pain</font></a><font size="2"> </font></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43622" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>