
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-27</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B024-125</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/HISTORY/dequinc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122104850 text/html 34154
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:48:33 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:39:14 GMT
Content-length: 33936
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Confessions of an English Opium Eater </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>Confessions of an English Opium Eater </h1>

<p> <b>by Thomas de Quincey</b> </p>

<p> <b>THE PLEASURES OF OPIUM</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> It is so long since I first took opium, that if it had been a
trifling incident in my life, I might have forgotten its date:
but cardinal events are not to be forgotten; and from
circumstances connected with it, I remember that it must be
referred to the autumn of 1804. During that season I was in
London, having come thither for the first time since my entrance
at college. </p>

<p> And my introduction to opium arose in the following way. From
an early age I had been accustomed to wash my head in cold water
at least once a day: being suddenly seized with toothache, I
attributed it to some relaxation caused by an accidental
intermission of that practice; jumped out of bed; plunged my head
into a basin of cold water; and with hair thus wetted went to
sleep. </p>

<p> The next morning, as I need hardly say, I awoke with
excruciating rheumatic pains of the head and face, from which I
had hardly any respite for about twenty days. On the twenty-first
day, I think it was, and on a Sunday, that I went out into the
streets; rather to run away, if possible, from my torments, than
with any distinct purpose. By accident I met a college
acquaintance who recommended opium. Opium! dread agent of
unimaginable pleasure and pain! I had heard of it as I had of
manna or of Ambrosia, but no further: how unmeaning a sound was
it at that time! what solemn chords does it now strike upon my
heart! what heart-quaking vibrations of sad and happy
remembrances! Reverting for a moment to these, I feel a mystic
importance attached to the minutest circumstances connected with
the place and the time, and the man (if man he was) that first
laid open to me the Paradise of Opium-eaters. It was a Sunday
afternoon, wet and cheerless: and a duller spectacle this earth
of ours has not to show than a rainy Sunday in London. My road
homewards lay through Oxford-street; and near &quot;the /stately/
Pantheon,&quot; (as Mr. Wordsworth has obligingly called it) I
saw a druggist's shop. The druggist -- unconscious minister of
celestial pleasures! -- as if in sympathy with the rainy Sunday,
looked dull and stupid, just as any mortal druggist might be
expected to look on a Sunday; and, when I asked for the tincture
of opium, he gave it to me as any other man might do: and
furthermore, out of my shilling, returned me what seemed to be
real copper halfpence, taken out of a real wooden drawer.
Nevertheless, in spite of such indications of humanity, he has
ever since existed in my mind as the beatific vision of an
immortal druggist, sent down to earth on a special mission to
myself. And it confirms me in this way of considering him, that,
when I next came up to London, I sought him near the stately
Pantheon, and found him not: and thus to me, who knew not his
name (if indeed he had one) he seemed rather to have vanished
from Oxford-street than to have removed in any bodily fashion.
The reader may choose to think of him as, possibly, no more than
a sublunary druggist: it may be so: but my faith is better: I
believe him to have evanesced,{1} or evaporated. So unwillingly
would I connect any mortal remembrances with that hour, and
place, and creature, that first brought me acquainted with the
celestial drug. </p>

<p> Arrived at my lodgings, it may be supposed that I lost not a
moment in taking the quantity prescribed. I was necessarily
ignorant of the whole art and mystery of opium-taking: and, what
I took, I took under every disadvantage. But I took it: -- and in
an hour, oh! Heavens! what a revulsion! what an upheaving, from
its lowest depths, of the inner spirit! what an apocalypse of the
world within me! That my pains had vanished, was now a trifle in
my eyes: -- this negative effect was swallowed up in the
immensity of those positive effects which had opened before me --
in the abyss of divine enjoyment thus suddenly revealed. Here was
a panacea - a [pharmakon nepenthez] for all human woes: here was
the secret of happiness, about which philosophers had disputed
for so many ages, at once discovered: happiness might now be
bought for a penny, and carried in the waistcoat pocket: portable
ecstasies might be had corked up in a pint bottle: and peace of
mind could be sent down in gallons by the mail coach. But, if I
talk in this way, the reader will think I am laughing: and I can
assure him, that nobody will laugh long who deals much with
opium: its pleasures even are of a grave and solemn complexion;
and in his happiest state, the opium-eater cannot present himself
in the character of /Il Allegro/: even then, he speaks and thinks
as becomes /Il Penseroso/. Nevertheless, I have a very
reprehensible way of jesting at times in the midst of my own
misery: and, unless when I am checked by some more powerful
feelings, I am afraid I shall be guilty of this indecent practice
even in these annals of suffering or enjoyment. The reader must
allow a little to my infirm nature in this respect: and with a
few indulgences of that sort, I shall endeavour to be as grave,
if not drowsy, as fits a theme like opium, so anti-mercurial as
it really is, and so drowsy as it is falsely reputed. </p>

<p> And, first, one word with respect to its bodily effects: for
upon all that has been hitherto written on the subject of opium,
whether by travelers in Turkey (who may plead their privilege of
lying as an old immemorial right), or by professors of medicine,
writing /ex cathedra/, -- I have but one emphatic criticism to
pronounce -- Lies! lies! lies! I remember once, in passing a
book-stall, to have caught these words from a page of some
satiric author: -- &quot;By this time I became convinced that the
London newspapers spoke truth at least twice a week, viz. on
Tuesday and Saturday, and might safely be depended upon for --
the list of bankrupts.&quot; In like manner, I do by no means
deny that some truths have been delivered to the world in regard
to opium: thus it has been repeatedly affirmed by the learned,
that opium is a dusky brown in colour; and this, take notice, I
grant: secondly, that it is rather dear; which I also grant: for
in my time, East-India opium has been three guineas a pound, and
Turkey eight: and, thirdly, that if you eat a good deal of it,
most probably you must -- do what is particularly disagreeable to
any man of regular habits, viz. die.{2} These weighty
propositions are, all and singular, true: I cannot gainsay them:
and truth ever was, and will be, commendable. But in these three
theorems, I believe we have exhausted the stock of knowledge as
yet accumulated by man on the subject of opium. And therefore,
worthy doctors, as there seems to be room for further
discoveries, stand aside, and allow me to come forward and
lecture on this matter. </p>

<p> First, then, it is not so much affirmed as taken for granted,
by all who ever mention opium, formally or incidentally, that it
does, or can, produce intoxication. Now reader, assure yourself,
/meo periculo/, that no quantity of opium ever did, or could
intoxicate. As to the tincture of opium (commonly called
laudanum) /that/ might certainly intoxicate if a man could bear
to take enough of it; but why? because it contains so much proof
spirit, and not because it contains so much opium. But crude
opium, I affirm peremptorily, is incapable of producing any state
of body at all resembling that which is produced by alcohol; and
not in /degree/ only incapable, but even in /kind/: it is not in
the quantity of its effects merely, but in the quality, that it
differs altogether. The pleasure given by wine is always
mounting, and tending to a crisis, after which it declines: that
from opium, when once generated, is stationary for eight or ten
hours: the first, to borrow a technical distinction from
medicine, is a case of acute - the second, of chronic pleasure:
the one is a flame, the other a steady and equable glow. But the
main distinction lies in this, that whereas wine disorders the
mental faculties, opium, on the contrary (if taken in a proper
manner), introduces amongst them the most exquisite order,
legislation, and harmony. Wine robs a man of his self possession:
opium greatly invigorates it. Wine unsettles and clouds the
judgment, and gives a preternatural brightness, and a vivid
exaltation to the contempts and the admirations, the loves and
the hatreds, of the drinker: opium, on the contrary, communicates
serenity and equipoise to all the faculties, active or passive:
and with respect to the temper and moral feelings in general, it
gives simply that sort of vital warmth which is approved by the
judgment, and which would probably always accompany a bodily
constitution of primeval or antediluvian health. Thus, for
instance, opium, like wine, gives an expansion to the heart and
the benevolent affections: but then, with this remarkable
difference, that in the sudden development of kind-heartedness
which accompanies inebriation, there is always more or less of a
maudlin character, which exposes it to the contempt of the
by-stander. Men shake hands, swear eternal friendship, and shed
tears -- no mortal knows why: and the sensual creature is clearly
uppermost. But the expansion of the benigner feelings, incident
to opium, is no febrile access, but a healthy restoration to that
state which the mind would naturally recover upon the removal of
any deep- seated irritation of pain that had disturbed and
quarrelled with the impulses of a heard originally just and good.
True it is, that even wine, up to a certain point, and with
certain men, rather tends to exalt and to steady the intellect: I
myself, who have never been a great wine-drinker, used to find
that half a dozen glasses of wine advantageously affected the
faculties -- brightened and intensified the consciousness -- and
gave to the mind a feeling of being &quot;ponderibus librata
suis:&quot; and certainly it is most absurdly said, in popular
language, of any man, that he is /disguised/ in liquor: for, on
the contrary, most men are disguised by sobriety; and it is when
they are drinking (as some old gentleman says in Athenaeus), that
men [eantonz emfanixondin oitinez eidin]. -- display themselves
in their true complexion of character; which surely is not
disguising themselves. But still, wine constantly leads a man to
the brink of absurdity and extravagance; and, beyond a certain
point, it is sure to volatilize and to disperse the intellectual
energies: whereas opium always seems to compose what had been
agitated, and to concentrate what had been distracted. In short,
to sum up all in one word, a man who is inebriated, or tending to
inebriation, is, and feels that he is, in a condition which calls
up into supremacy the merely human, too often the brutal, part of
his nature: but the opium-eater (I speak of him who is not
suffering from any disease, or other remote effects of opium)
feels that the diviner part of his nature is paramount; that is,
the moral affections are in a state of cloudless serenity; and
over all is the great light of the majestic intellect. </p>

<p> This is the doctrine of the true church on the subject of
opium: of which church I acknowledge myself to be the only member
-- the alpha and the omega: but then it is to be recollected,
that I speak from the ground of a large and profound personal
experience: whereas most of the unscientific{3} authors who have
at all treated of opium, and even of those who have written
expressly on the materia medica, make it evident, from the horror
they express of it, that their experimental knowledge of its
action is none at all. I will, however, candidly acknowledge that
I have met with one person who bore evidence to its intoxicating
power, such as staggered my own incredulity: for he was a
surgeon, and had himself taken opium largely. I happened to say
to him, that his enemies (as I had heard) charged him with
talking nonsense on politics, and that his friends apologized for
him, by suggesting that he was constantly in a state of
intoxication from opium. Now the accusation, said I, is not
/prima facie/, and of necessity, an absurd one: but the defence
/is/. To my surprise, however, he insisted that both his enemies
and his friends were in the right: &quot;I will maintain,&quot;
said he, &quot;that I /do/ talk nonsense; and secondly, I will
maintain that I do not talk nonsense upon principle, or with any
view to profit, but solely and simply, said he, solely and
simply, -- solely and simply (repeating it three times over),
because I am drunk with opium; and /that/ daily.&quot; I replied
that, as to the allegation of his enemies, as it seemed to be
established upon such respectable testimony, seeing that the
three parties concerned all agreed in it, it did not become me to
question it; but the defence set up I must demur to. He proceeded
to discuss the matter, and to lay down his reasons: but it seemed
to me so impolite to pursue an argument which must have presumed
a man mistaken in a point belonging to his own profession, that I
did not press him even when his course of argument seemed open to
objection: not to mention that a man who talks nonsense, even
though &quot;with no view to profit,&quot; is not altogether the
most agreeable partner in a dispute, whether as opponent or
respondent. I confess, however, that the authority of a surgeon,
and one who was reputed a good one, may seem a weighty one to my
prejudice: but still I must plead my experience, which was
greater than his greatest by 7000 drops a day; and, though it was
not possible to suppose a medical man unacquainted with the
characteristic symptoms of vinous intoxication, it yet struck me
that he might proceed on a logical error of using the word
intoxication with too great latitude, and extending it
generically to all modes of nervous excitement, connected with
certain diagnostics. Some people have maintained, in my hearing,
that they had been drunk on green tea: and a medical student in
London, for whose knowledge in his profession I have reason to
feel great respect, assured me, the other day, that a patient, in
recovering from an illness, had got drunk on a beef-steak. </p>

<p> Having dwelt so much on this first and leading error, in
respect to opium, I shall notice very briefly a second and a
third; which are, that the elevation of spirits produced by opium
is necessarily followed by a proportionate depression, and that
the natural and even immediate consequence of opium is torpor and
stagnation, animal and mental. The first of these errors I shall
content myself with simply denying; assuring my reader, that for
ten years, during which I took opium at intervals, the day
succeeding to that on which I allowed myself this luxury was
always a day of unusually good spirits. </p>

<p> With respect to the torpor supposed to follow, or rather (if
we were to credit the numerous pictures of Turkish opium-eaters)
to accompany the practice of opium-eating, I deny that also.
Certainly, opium is classed under the head of narcotics; and some
such effect it may produce in the end: but the primary effects of
opium are always, and in the highest degree, to excite and
stimulate the system: this first stage of its action always
lasted with me, during my novitiate, for upwards of eight hours;
so that it must be the fault of the opium-eater himself if he
does not so time his exhibition of the dose (to speak medically)
as that the whole weight of its narcotic influence may descend
upon his sleep. Turkish opium-eaters, it seems, are absurd enough
to sit, like so many equestrian statues, on logs of wood as
stupid as themselves. But that the reader may judge of the degree
in which opium is likely to stupify the faculties of an
Englishman, I shall (by way of treating the question
illustratively, rather than argumentively) describe the way in
which I myself often passed an opium evening in London, during
the period between 1804-1812. It will be seen, that at least
opium did not move me to seek solitude, and much less to seek
inactivity, or the torpid state of self- involution ascribed to
the Turks. I give this account at the risk of being pronounced a
crazy enthusiast or visionary: but I regard /that/ little: I must
desire my reader to bear in mind, that I was a hard student, and
at severe studies for all the rest of my time: and certainly had
a right occasionally to relaxations as well as the other people:
these, however, I allowed myself but seldom. </p>

<p> The late Duke of Norfolk used to say, &quot;Next Friday, by
the blessing of Heaven, I purpose to be drunk:&quot; and in like
manner I used to fix beforehand how often, within a given time,
and when, I would commit a debauch of opium. This was seldom more
than once in three weeks: for at that time I could no have
ventured to call every day (as I did afterwards) for &quot;/a
glass of laudanum negus, warm, and without sugar/.&quot; No: as I
have said, I seldom drank laudanum, at that time, more than once
in three weeks: this was usually on a Tuesday or a Saturday
night; my reason for which was this. In those days Grassini sang
at the Opera: and her voice was delightful to me beyond all that
I had ever heard. I know not what may be the state of the Opera-
house now, having never been within its walls for seven or eight
years, but at that time it was by much the most pleasant place of
public resort in London for passing an evening. Five shillings
admitted one to the gallery, which was subject to far less
annoyance than the pit of the theatres: the orchestra was
distinguished by its sweet and melodious grandeur from all
English orchestras, the composition of which, I confess, is not
acceptable to my ear, from the predominance of the clangorous
instruments, and the absolute tyranny of the violin. The choruses
were divine to hear: and when Grassini appeared in some
interlude, as she often did, and poured forth her passionate soul
as Andromache, at the tomb of Hector, &amp;c. I question whether
any Turk, of all that ever entered the Paradise of opium-eaters,
can have had half the pleasure I had. But, indeed, I honour the
Barbarians too much by supposing them capable of any pleasures
approaching to the intellectual ones of an Englishman. For music
is an intellectual or a sensual pleasure, according to the
temperament of him who hears it. And, by the bye, with the
exception of the fine extravaganza on that subject in Twelfth
Night, I do not recollect more than one thing said adequately on
the subject of music in all literature: it is a passage in the
/Religio Medici/{4} of Sir T. Brown; and, though chiefly
remarkable for its sublimity, has also a philosophic value,
inasmuch as it points to the true theory of musical effects. The
mistake of most people is to suppose that it is by the ear they
communicate with music, and, therefore, that they are purely
passive to its effects. But this is not so: it is by the
re-action of the mind upon the notices of the ear, (the /matter/
coming by the senses, the /form/ from the mind) that the pleasure
is constructed: and therefore it is that people of equally good
ear differ so much in this point from one another. Now opium, by
greatly increasing the activity of the mind generally, increases,
of necessity, that particular mode of its activity by which we
are able to construct out of the raw material of organic sound an
elaborate intellectual pleasure. But, says a friend, a succession
of musical sounds is to me like a collection of Arabic
characters: </p>

<p> I can attach no ideas to them. Ideas! my good sir? there is
no occasion for them: all that class of ideas, which can be
available in such a case, has a language of representative
feelings. But this is a subject foreign to my present purposes:
it is sufficient to say, that a chorus, &amp;c. of elaborate
harmony, displayed before me, as in a piece of arras work, the
whole of my past life -- not, as if recalled by an act of memory,
but as if present and incarnated in the music: no longer painful
to dwell upon: but the detail of its incidents removed, or
blended in some hazy abstraction; and its passions exalted,
spiritualized, and sublimed. All this was to be had for five
shillings. And over and above the music of the stage and the
orchestra, I had all around me, in the intervals of the
performance, the music of the Italian language talked by Italian
women: for the gallery was usually crowded with Italians: and I
listened with a pleasure such as that with which Weld the
traveller lay and listened, in Canada, to the sweet laughter of
Indian women; for the less you understand of a language, the more
sensible you are to the melody or harshness of its sounds: for
such a purpose, therefore, it was an advantage to me that I was a
poor Italian scholar, reading it but little, and not speaking it
at all, nor understanding a tenth part of what I heard spoken. </p>

<p> These were my Opera pleasures: but another pleasure I had
which, as it could be had only on a Saturday night, occasionally
struggled with my love of the Opera; for, at that time, Tuesday
and Saturday were the regular Opera nights. On this subject I am
afraid I shall be rather obscure, but, I can assure the reader,
not at all more so than Marinus in his life of Proclus, or many
other biographers and auto-biographers of fair reputation. This
pleasure, I have said, was to be had only on a Saturday night.
What then was Saturday night to me more than any other night? I
had no labours that I rested from; no wages to receive: what
needed I to care for Saturday night, more than as it was a
summons to hear Grassini? True, most logical reader: what you say
is unanswerable. And yet so it was and is, that, whereas
different men throw their feelings into different channels, and
most are apt to show their interest in the concerns of the poor,
chiefly by sympathy, expressed in some shape or other, with their
distresses and sorrows, I, at that time, was disposed to express
my interest by sympathising with their pleasures. The pains of
poverty I had lately seen too much of; more than I wished to
remember: but the pleasures of the poor, their consolations of
spirit, and their reposes from bodily toil, can never become
oppressive to contemplate. </p>

<p> Now Saturday night is the season for the chief, regular, and
periodic return of rest to the poor: in this point the most
hostile sects unite, and acknowledge a common link of
brotherhood: almost all Christendom rests from its labours. It is
a rest introductory to another rest: and divided by a whole day
and two nights from the renewal of toil. On this account I feel
always, on a Saturday night, as though I also were released from
some yoke of labour, had some wages to receive, and some luxury
of repose to enjoy. For the sake, therefore, of witnessing, upon
as large a scale as possible, a spectacle with which my sympathy
was so entire, I used often, on Saturday nights, after I had
taken opium, to wander forth, without much regarding the
direction or the distance, to all the markets, and other parts of
London, to which the poor resort on a Saturday night, for laying
out their wages. Many a family party, consisting of a man, his
wife, and sometimes one or two of his children, have I listened
to, as they stood consulting on their ways and means, or the
strength of their exchequer, or the price of household articles.
Gradually I became familiar with their wishes, their
difficulties, and their opinions. Sometimes there might be heard
murmurs of discontent: but far oftener expressions on the
countenance, or uttered in words, of patience, hope, and
tranquility. And taken generally, I must say, that, in this point
at least, the poor are far more philosophic than the rich - that
they show a more ready and cheerful submission to what they
consider as irremediably evils, or irreparable losses. Whenever I
saw occasion, or could do it without appearing to be intrusive, I
joined their parties; and gave my opinion upon the matter in
discussion, which, if not always judicious, was always received
indulgently. If wages were a little higher, or expected to be so,
or the quartern loaf a little lower, or it was reported that
onions and butter were expected to fall, I was glad: yet, if the
contrary were true, I drew from opium some means of consoling
myself. For opium (like the bee, that extracts its materials
indiscriminately from roses and from the soot of chimneys) can
overrule all feelings into a compliance with the master key. </p>

<p> Some of these rambles led me to great distances: for an
opium-eater is too happy to observe the motion of time. And
sometimes in my attempts to steer homewards, upon nautical
principles, by fixing my eye on the pole-star, and seeking
ambitiously for a north-west passage, instead of circumnavigating
all the capes and head-lands I had doubled in my outward voyage,
I came suddenly upon such knotty problems of alleys, such
enigmatical entries, and such sphynx's riddles of streets without
thoroughfares, as must, I conceive, baffle the audacity of
porters, and confound the intellects of hackney- coachmen. I
could almost have believed, at times, that I must be the first
discoverer of some of these /terrae incognitae/, and doubted,
whether they had yet been aid down in the modern charts of
London. For all this, however, I paid a heavy price in distant
years, when the human face tyrannized over my dreams, and the
perplexities of my steps in London came back and haunted my
sleep, with the feeling of perplexities moral or intellectual,
that brought confusion to the reason, or anguish and remorse to
the conscience. </p>

<p> Thus I have shown that opium does not, of necessity, produce
inactivity or torpor; but that, on the contrary, it often led me
into markets and theatres. Yet, in candour, I will admit that
markets and theatres are not the appropriate haunts of the
opium-eater, when in the divinest state incident to his
enjoyment. In that state, crowds become an oppression to him;
music even, too sensual and gross. He naturally seeks solitude
and silence, as indispensable conditions of those trances, or
profoundest reveries, which are the crown and consummation of
what opium can do for human nature. I, whose disease it was to
meditate too much, and to observe too little, and who, upon my
first entrance at college, was nearly falling into a deep
melancholy, from brooding too much on the sufferings which I had
witnessed in London, was sufficiently aware of the tendencies of
my own thoughts to do all I could to counteract them. -- I was,
indeed, like a person who, according to the old legend, had
entered the cave of Trophonius: and the remedies I sought were to
force myself into society, and to keep my understanding in
continual activity upon matters of science. But for these
remedies, I should certainly have become hypochondriacally
melancholy. In after years, however, when my cheerfulness was
more fully re-established, I yielded to my natural inclination
for a solitary life. And, at that time, I often fell into these
reveries upon taking opium; and more than once it has happened to
me, on a summer-night, when I have been at an open window, in a
room from which I could overlook the sea at a mile below me, and
could command a view of the great town of Liverpool, at about the
same distance, that I have sate, from sun-set to sun-rise,
motionless, and without wishing to move. </p>

<p> I shall be charged with mysticism, behmenism, quietism,
&amp;c. but /that/ shall not alarm me. Sir H. Vane, the younger,
was one of our wisest men: and let my readers see if he, in his
philosophical works, be half as unmystical as I am. -- I say,
then, that it has often struck me that the scene itself was
somewhat typical of what took place in such a reverie. The town
of Liverpool represented the earth, with its sorrows and its
graves left behind, yet not out of sight, nor wholly forgotten.
The ocean, in everlasting but gentle agitation, and brooded over
by a dove-like calm, might not unfitly typify the mind and the
mood which then swayed it. For it seemed to me as if then first I
stood at a distance, and aloof from the uproar of life; as if the
tumult, the fever, and the strife, were suspended; a respite
granted from the secret burthens of the heart; a sabbath of
repose; a resting from human labours. Here were the hopes which
blossom in the paths of life, reconciled with the peace which is
in the grave; motions of the intellect as unwearied as the
heavens, yet for all anxieties a halcyon calm: a tranquility that
seemed no product of inertia, but as if resulting from mighty and
equal antagonisms; infinite activities, infinite repose. </p>

<p> Oh! just, subtle, and mighty opium! that to the hearts of
poor and rich alike, for the wounds that will never heal, and for
&quot;the pangs that tempt the spirit to rebel,&quot; bringest
and assuaging balm; eloquent opium! that with thy potent rhetoric
stealest away the purposes of wrath; and to the guilty man, for
one night givest back the hopes of his youth, and hands washed
pure from blood; and to the proud man, a brief oblivion for
Wrongs unredress'd, and insults unavenged; that summonest to the
chancery of dreams, for the triumphs of suffering innocence,
false witnesses; and confoundest perjury; and dost reverse the
sentences of unrighteous judges: -- thou buildest upon the bosom
of darkness, out of the fantastic imagery of the brain, cities
and temples, beyond the art of Phidias and Praxiteles -- beyond
the splendour of Babylon and Hekatompylos: and &quot;from the
anarchy of dreaming sleep,&quot; callest into sunny light the
faces of long-buried beauties, and the blessed household
countenances, cleansed from the &quot;dishonours of the
grave.&quot; Thou only givest these gifts to man; and thou hast
the keys of Paradise, oh, just, subtle, and mighty opium! </p>

<p> ----- </p>

<p> {1} /Evanesced:/ -- this way of going off the stage of life
appears to have been well known in the 17th century, but at the
time to have been considered a peculiar privilege of blood-royal,
and by no means to be allowed to druggists. For about the year
1686, a poet of rather ominous name (and who, by the bye, did
ample justice to his name), viz. Mr. Flat-man, in speaking of the
death of Charles II. expresses his surprise that any prince
should commit so absurd an act as dying; because, says he, </p>

<p> Kings should disdain to die, and only /disappear./ </p>

<p> They should /abscond/, that is, into the other world. </p>

<p> {2} Of this, however, the learned appear latterly to have
doubted: for in a pirated edition of Buchan's /Domestic
Medicine/, which I once saw in the hands of a farmer's wife who
was studying it for the benefit of her health, the Doctor was
made to say -- &quot;Be particularly careful never to take above
five- and-twenty /ounces/ of laudanum at once;&quot; the true
reading being probably five- and-twenty /drops/, which are held
equal to about one grain of crude opium. </p>

<p> {3} Amongst the great herd of travellers, &amp;c. who show
sufficiently by their stupidity that they never held any
intercourse with opium, I must caution my readers especially
against the brilliant author of /&quot;Anastasius.&quot;/ This
gentleman, whose wit would lead one to presume him an
opium-eater, has made it impossible to consider him in that
character from the grievous misrepresenta-tion which he gives of
its effects, at pp. 215-17, of vol. I. - Upon consideration it
must appear such to the author himself: for, waiving the errors I
have insisted on in the text, which (and others) are adopted in
the fullest manner, he will himself admit, that an old gentleman
&quot;with a snow-white beard,&quot; who eats &quot;ample doses
of opium,&quot; and is yet able to deliver what is meant and
received as very weighty counsel on the bad effects of that
practice, is but an indifferent evidence that opium either kills
people prematurely, or sends them into a madhouse. But, for my
part, I see into this old gentleman and his motives: the fact is,
he was enamoured of &quot;the little golden receptacle of the
pernicious drug&quot; which Anastasius carried about him; and no
way of obtaining it so safe and so feasible occurred, as that of
frightening its owner out of his wits (which, by the bye, are
none of the strongest). This commentary throws a new light upon
the case, and greatly improves it as a story: for the old
gentleman's speech, considered as a lecture on pharmacy, is
highly absurd: but, considered as a hoax on Anastasius, it reads
excellently. </p>

<p> {4} I have not the book at this moment to consult: but I
think the passage begins -- &quot;And even that tavern music,
which makes one man merry, another mad, in me strikes a deep fit
of devotion,&quot; &amp;c. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>