
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-53</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B019-100</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/cannabin1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122052813 text/html 16415
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:28:03 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:59:18 GMT
Content-length: 16197
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Cannabinoids Block Release of Serotonin in Migraine
Patients</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/_private/schaffer_logo.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<p><font size="3">CANNABINOIDS BLOCK RELEASE OF SEROTONIN FROM
PLATELETS INDUCED BY PLASMA FROM MIGRAINE PATIENTS&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Int J Clin Pharm. Res V (4) 243-246 (1985)
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Volfe Z., Dvilansky A., Nathan I.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Blood Research, Faculty of Health Sciences,
Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.
Box 151, Beer-Sheva 84101, Israel. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Summary: The effects were assessed of
delta-1-THC* (the psychoactive component of cannabis) and CBD and
DMHP-CBD (the non-psychomimetic components of marijuana
derivatives) on 14C labelled serotonin release from normal
platelets, when incubated with patient's plasma obtained during
migraine attack. A statistically significant inhibitory effect
(p&gt;0.005) of 14C serotonin release was found at 10-5M, 10-6M,
10-7M delta-1-THC concentrations. Plasma of migraine patients
obtained in attack-free periods revealed no significant
inhibitory effect on 14C serotonin release from normal platelets
using the same delta-1-THC concentration. CBD and DMHP-CBD had no
significant effect on 14C serotonin release from normal platelets
when tested either at migraine-free period plasma or plasma
obtained during migraine attack.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;(*Nomenclature for THC is sometimes
different in other countries. delta-1-THC is the same as
delta-9-THC.) &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5">Introduction &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Several mechanisms are involved in the
relationship of platelets to migraine attacks. The first relates
to the platelet itself and is associated with hyperaggregation of
platelets (1-5) and their activation (6). On the other hand, a
plasmatic factor has been reported to induce aggregation of
normal human platelets and release serotonin (7-12). Previous
reports on the beneficial effect of cannabinoids in migraine (13)
raises the possibility that delta-1-3, 4-trans
tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-1-THC), the active psychoactive
components of the crude extract of marijuana, may be beneficial
(14, 15). It is a fact that cannabis has an analgesic effect (16)
decreases intraocular pressure (17), has a vasodilatory effect in
bronchial asthma (18) and prevents vomiting (19). These various
effects of cannabinoids and the effect of delta-1-THC on
preventing release of rat brain serotonin induced by reserpin
(20) and its effect on platelets in vivo (21, 22) and aggregation
of platelets in vitro (23) raised the possibility that it might
affect the previously described plasmatic factor in migraine
patients responsible for 14C serotonin release of normal
platelets (8). </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Therefore, we assessed that in vitro effect of
three marijuana derivatives: delta-1-THC, the psychoactive
component of cannabis (14) and cannabidiol (CBD) which has no
psychomimetic effect (24). The effect of both drugs might discern
the biological specificity of the marijuana derivatives. Also
(6-hydroxydimethylheptyl) (DMHP-CBD) a homologue of cannabidiol
which increases cannabinoid-activity five hundred-fold was also
investigated (25). &nbsp;</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5">Material and methods</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;Plasma was obtained from patients, being
followed at the Neurology Clinic of the Ben-Gurion University
Medical Center, and diagnosed according to a standard clinical
definition of migraine (26). Patients refrained from taking drugs
ten days prior to blood donation. Blood samples were obtained (in
plastic tubes --- 3.8% sodium citrate 1:10 volume) once during an
attack-free period and once during a migraine attack.
Simultaneously, samples were obtained from normal controls of the
same age and sex and platelet rich plasma was prepared and frozen
at -72 degrees C. Plasma samples were incubated at 37 degrees C
for ten minutes with the cannabinoids delta-1-THC, CBD and
DMHP-CBD. The concentrations of cannabinoids varied from 10 -7M
to 10 -3M. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Ethanol 70% was used as control because it is
used as the solvent for the cannabinoids. It did not affect the
serotonin release during the ten minutes' incubation in
comparison with normal saline. 14C labelled serotonin release was
determined from normal donor's platelets blood group 0 Rh-, who
refrained from taking medications for ten days. The assessment of
14C serotonin release was made with plasma of migraine patients
during an attack, and an attack-free period and of normal plasma
controls according to Hirshman and Schulman (27). Radioactivity
was determined using a liquid Scintillation spectrometer TriCard
3255 Packard. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The results were calculated in percentages,
considering the total radioactivity of 14C serotonin uptake by
the platelets tested as 100% value. Statistical evaluation was
done using the Student's t-test. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5">Results</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Normal plasma incubated with delta-1THC at the
range of concentrations 10 -7M to 10 -3M revealed significant
increases of 14serotonin release from normal platelets only at 10
-4M and 10 -3M delta-1-THC of 106+ 1.9%, 117.9+ 2.3% respectively
(p&lt;0.05). The other two cannabinoid derivatives CBD and
DMHP-CBD had no effect on 14C serotonin release from normal
platelets when incubated with normal plasma, and tested at the
same range of drug concentrations.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Table I documents the effect of delta-1-THC,
CBD, and DMHP-CBD on 14C labelled serotonin release from normal
platelets when incubated with the migraine patient's plasma
obtained during a migraine attack. There is a statistically
inhibitory effect of 14C serotonin release (p&lt;0.005) at 10
-5M, 10 -6M, 10 -7M delta-1-THC concentrations. It should be
noted that delta-1-THC added at the same concentrations to plasma
of migraine patients obtained in an attack-free period revealed
no significant inhibitory effect on 14C serotonin release
compared with normal platelets. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The other two cannabinoid derivatives CBD and
DMHP-CBD had no significant inhibitory effect on 14C serotonin
release from normal platelets, when tested either with
migraine-free period plasma or plasma obtained during a migraine
attack. These two derivatives were tested at the same
concentrations as described in Table I. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">Table I Inhibition of 14C serotonin release
from normal platelets. Effect of delta-1-THC, CBD, DMHP-CBD on
plasma of migraine patients obtained during migraine attack (mean
+ s.e. %).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Drug Concentration THC CBD </font></p>

<p><font size="3">DMHP-CBD &nbsp;&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10 -5M 84.10 + 2.8 107.1 + 3.7 </font></p>

<p><font size="3">105 + 3.5&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10 -6M 86.8 + 2.3 106.6 + 3.7 </font></p>

<p><font size="3">106 + 3.6&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10 -7M 87.8 + 2.5 103.99 + 3.4 108</font></p>

<p><font size="3">+ 3.5&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5">&nbsp;Discussion</font><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Plasmatic factor present in migraine patients'
plasma was reported to release serotonin in vitro from normal
platelets (7, 8). Serotonin release induced by this factor
occurred in 60-85% of the patients and is presumed to be a fatty
acid (9), prostaglandin (10) or some immunological factor related
to decrease in complement (11, 12). Previous reports concerning
delta-1-THC, the active component in marijuana derivative (14,
28), documented increased serotonin in rats' brains and prevented
release of serotonin induced by reserpine (20). The present
studies documented significant inhibition of 14C serotonin
release from normal platelets in 10 -7M to 10 -5M delta-1-THC
concentrations, when incubated with plasma from migraine patients
( Table I).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">It should mention that these concentrations
induce a psychosomatic effect in marijuana smokers and stabilize
red blood cells against lysis (29). It is not clear yet how
cannabinoids affect migraine. Is it due to their analgesic effect
(16), vasoconstrictor effect (30) or preventive effect on
migraine (13)?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The two other non psychomimetic components of
marijuana derivatives CBD and DMHP-CBD did not show inhibition
activity of 14C serotonin release from normal platelets induced
by migraine plasma. It was shown that the psychoactive component
of cannabis delta-1-THC did inhibit 14C serotonin release from
platelets and it might give a clue to the effect of cannabinoids
in vivo in respect of migraine attacks and their inhibition.
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><font size="5">References</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1. Hilton B.P., Cumings J.N. An assessment of
platelet aggregation induced by 5HT. J. Clin. Path., 24, 250,
1971</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2. Couch J.R., Hassanein R.S. Platelet
aggregability in migraine and relation of aggregability to
clinical aspects of migraine. Neurol., 26, 348, 1976.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">3. Hanington E. Migraine, a blood disorder.
Lancet, 1, 501, 1978. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">4. Hanington E., Jones RJ., Amess J.A.L.
Wachowica. Migraine, a platelet disorder. Lancet2, 720, 1981.
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">5. Gawel M.J., Burkett M., Rose F.C. The
platelet release reaction during migraine attacks. Headache, 19,
323, 1979. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">6. Manotti C., Manzoni G.C., Moretti G., Poti
R., Tagliafern A. Platelet function in patients with migraine.
Haematologica, 68, 775, 1983. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">7. Anthony M., Hinterberger H., Lance J.W. The
possible relationship of serotonin to the migraine syndrome.
Headache, 2, 29, 1969. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">8. Dvilansky A., Rishpon S., Nathan I., Zolotov
Z., Korczyn A. The release of 5HT by plasma from patients during
and between migraine attacks. Pain, 2, 315, 1976.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">9. Anthony M. Some aspects of clinical
pharmacology of serotonin. Agents Actions, 5, 490, 1975.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">10. Anthony M. Plasma free fatty acids and
prostaglandin E in migraine and stress. Headache, 16, 58, 1975.
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">11. Lord G.D.A., Duckworth J.W., Charlesworth
J.A. Complement activation in migraine. Lancet, 1, 781, 1977.
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">12. Dalesio D.J. Use of platelet agonists in
treatment of migraine. Headache, 16, 129, 1977.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">13. Mikuriya T.H. Marijuana in medicine: Past,
present and future, Calif. Med., 110, 34-40, 1969 &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">14. Mechoulam R. Marijuana chemistry. Science,
168, 1159, 1970.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">15. Mechoulam R., Gaoni Y. A total synthesis of
delta-tetrahydrocannabinol, the active constituent of hashish. J.
Amer. Chem. Soc., 87, 3273, 1965. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">16. Kozersky S., Dewey W.L., Harris L.S.
Antipyretic analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects of
delta-9-THC in the rat. Europ. J. Pharmacol., 24, 1, 1973. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">17. Hepler R.S., Frank J.M. Marijuana smoking
and intraocular pressure. JAMA, 217, 1392, 1971. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">18. Tashkin D.P., Shapiro B.J., Frank J.M.
Acute effects of smoked marijuana and oral delta-9-THC on
specific airway conductance in asthmatic subjects. Amer. Rev.
Resp. Dis., 109, 420, 1974. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">19. Sallan S.E., Cronin C., Zelen M., Zinberg
N.E. Antiemetics in patients receiving chemotherapy for cancer. A
randomized comparison of delta-9-THC land prochlorperazine. New
Engl. J. Med., 302, 135, 1980. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">20. Sofia R.D., Dixit B.N., Barry H. The effect
of delta-9-THC on serotonin metabolism in the rat brain. Life
Sciences, 10, 425, 1971. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">21. King A.B., Cowen D.L. Effect of intravenous
injection of marijuana. JAMA, 210, 724, 1969. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">22. Pechet L., King A.B., Pechet G.S. The
effect of intravenous marijuana on coagulation on platelet and
white cell count. Fed. Proc., 29, 441, 1970.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&nbsp;23. Levi R., Friedlander M., Dvilansky
A., Livne A. Effect of hashish component delta-1-THC on the
lultrastructure of human platelets. Isr. J. Med. Sci., 2, 401,
1975. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">24. Neumeyer J.L., Shagoway R.A. Chemistry and
pharmacology of marijuana. J. Pharmacol. Sci., 60, 1433, 1971.
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">25. Loev B. Bender P.E., Dowals F. Cannabinoids
structure-activity studies related to 1.2 dimethylheptyl
derivates. J. Med. Chem., 16, 1200, 1973.&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">26. Procacci P. A survey of modern concepts of
pain. In: Vinken P.J., Bruyn G.W. eds. &quot;Handbook of clinical
neuroloty,&quot; North Holland, Amsterdam, 1968, pp. 140-143.
&nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">27. Hirshman R.Y., Shulman N.R. The use of
platelet serotonin as sensitive method for detecting antiplatelet
factor in patients with thrombocytopenic purpura. Bri J. Haemat.,
24, 793, 1973. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">28. Mechoulam R. Drugs made from cannabis.
Harefuah, 3, 378, 1976. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">29. Rax A., Schur A., Livne A. The interaction
of hashish component with human erythrocytes. Bioch. Biophys.
Acta, 274, 269, 1972. &nbsp;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">30. Adams M.D., Earnhardt J.T., Dewey W.L.,
Harris L.S. Vasoconstrictor actions of delta-8 and delta-9-THC in
the ralt. J. Pharmacol.l Exp. Therap., 196, 649, 1976.</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>