
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B31-18</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B041-94</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/lag/organiz.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122130611 text/html 13319
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:05:59 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:03:00 GMT
Content-length: 13101
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LaGuardia Committee Report - Organization of Staff</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->

<h1><a name="OLE_LINK2">Organization of Staff</a></h1>

<hr>

<p>In October 1939 Police Commissioner Lewis J. Valentine
designated Deputy Chief Inspector Daniel Curtayne, Lieutenant
Edward Cooper, Sergeant Bernard Boylan and Detective Joseph
Loures of the Narcotic Squad of the Police Department of the City
of New York to cooperate with the Mayor's Committee on Marihuana.
These police officials submitted a list of intelligent young
officers with a suitable background. From this list six officers
were selected: two policewomen, and four policemen, one of whom
was a Negro. They were: Mr. James Coen, Mr. William Connolly, Mr.
Benjamin Weissner, Mr. John Hughes, Miss Adelaide Knowles and
Miss Olive Cregan. These police officers were encouraged to read
literature on the subject of marihuana and to familiarize
themselves with some of the characteristics of the plant, as well
as of marihuana cigarettes. They became expert in detecting the
aroma of burning marihuana, and were thus able to recognize it
and to identify its use in a social gathering. </p>

<p>Regular assignments were made by the director of the survey.
At intervals each officer dictated a general report on his
activities and findings to a stenographer engaged by the
Committee. Frequent conferences were held in the office of the
director of the survey, at which time individual reports were
discussed in detail and evaluated. </p>

<p>An attempt was made to give the &quot;marihuana squad&quot; a
psychological approach to the performance of their duties. At no
time were these officers permitted to make known their activity
to other members of the police force, or to make arrests. This
arrangement was considered essential in order that they might
maintain an effective role of investigator without being in any
respect recognized as police officers. Although they were members
of the police force and constantly in contact with violators of
law, their immediate superiors cooperated to an extreme degree by
allowing the &quot;marihuana squad&quot; to report directly to
the director of the survey. </p>

<p>While on duty the squad actually &quot;lived&quot; in the
environment in which marihuana smoking or peddling was suspected.
They frequented poolrooms, bars and grills, dime-a-dance halls,
other dance halls to which they took their own partners, theatres
-- backstage and in the audience -- roller-skating rinks,
subways, public toilets, parks and docks They consorted with the
habitues of these places, chance acquaintances on the street,
loiterers around schools, subways and bus terminals. They posed
as &quot;suckers&quot; from out of town and as students in
colleges and high schools. </p>

<p>We highly commend these officers individually for their
exceptionally good performances. The aid given by Deputy Chief
Inspector Daniel Curtayne, Lieutenant Edward Cooper, Sergeant
Bernard Boylan and Detective Joseph Loures throughout deserves
mention and appreciation. At times we must have been a source of
annoyance to them, but our requests were always cheerfully met
and assistance heartily extended.<br>
</p>

<p>Method of Retail Distribution </p>

<p>In general, marihuana is used in the form of a cigarette.
Occasionally some individuals chew the &quot;weed&quot; and seem
to get the same effect as do others through smoking. The common
names for the cigarettes are: muggles, reefers, Indian hemp,
weed, tea, gage and sticks. Cigarettes made of marihuana differ
in size as do cigarettes made of tobacco: they are long, short,
thick or thin. </p>

<p>The price varies in accordance with the accepted opinion as to
the potency of the marihuana used in the cigarettes, and this
appears to be determined by the place of origin. The cheapest
brand is known as &quot;sass-fras,&quot; and retails for
approximately three for 50 cents. It is made of the marihuana
that is grown in the United States. Smokers do not consider such
marihuana very potent. They have found that they must consume a
greater number of cigarettes in order to obtain the desired
effect colloquially termed as &quot;high.&quot; This opinion,
expressed by smokers in the Borough of Manhattan, is at variance
with that of some authorities who believe that marihuana grown in
the United States is as potent as the marihuana grown in other
countries. </p>

<p>The &quot;panatella&quot; cigarette, occasionally referred to
as &quot;meserole,&quot; is considered to be more potent than the
&quot;sass-fras&quot; and usually retails for approximately 25
cents each. The hemp from which the &quot;panatella&quot; is made
comes from Central and South America. </p>

<p>&quot;Gungeon&quot; is considered by the marihuana smoker as
the highest grade of marihuana. It retails for about one dollar
per cigarette. The &quot;kick&quot; resulting from the use of
this cigarette is reached more quickly than from the use of
&quot;sassafras&quot; or &quot;panatella.&quot; It appears to be
the consensus that the marihuana used to make the
&quot;gungeon&quot; comes from Africa. The sale of this cigarette
is restricted to a clientele whose economic status is of a higher
level than the majority of marihuana smokers. </p>

<p>A confirmed marihuana user can readily distinguish the quality
and potency of various brands, just as the habitual cigarette or
cigar smoker is able to differentiate between the qualities of
tobacco. Foreign-made cigarette paper is often used in order to
convince the buyer that the &quot;tea is right from the
boat.&quot; </p>

<p>There are two channels for the distribution of marihuana
cigarettes-- the independent peddler and the &quot;tea-pad.&quot;
From general observations, conversations with &quot;pad&quot;
owners, and discussions with peddlers, the investigators
estimated that there were about 500 &quot;tea-pads&quot; in
Harlem and at least 500 peddlers. </p>

<p>A &quot;tea-pad&quot; is a room or an apartment in which
people gather to smoke marihuana. The majority of such places are
located in the Harlem district. It is our impression that the
landlord, the agent, the superintendent or the janitor is aware
of the purposes for which the premises are rented. The
&quot;tea-pad&quot; is furnished according to the clientele it
expects to serve. Usually, each &quot;tea-pad&quot; has
comfortable furniture, a radio, victrola or, as in most
instances, a rented nickelodeon. The lighting is more or less
uniformly dim, with blue predominating. An incense is considered
part of the furnishings. The walls are frequently decorated with
pictures of nude subjects suggestive of perverted sexual
practices. The furnishings, as described, are believed to be
essential as a setting for those participating in smoking
marihuana. </p>

<p>Most &quot;tea-pads&quot; have their trade restricted to the
sale of marihuana. Some places did sell marihuana and whisky, and
a few places also served as houses of prostitution. Only one
&quot;teapad&quot; was found which served as a house of
prostitution, and in which one could buy marihuana, whisky, and
opium. </p>

<p>The marihuana smoker derives greater satisfaction if he is
smoking in the presence of others. His attitude in the
&quot;tea-pad&quot; is that of a relaxed individual, free from
the anxieties and cares of the realities of life. The
&quot;tea-pad&quot; takes on the atmosphere of a very congenial
social club. The smoker readily engages in conversation with
strangers, discussing freely his pleasant reactions to the drug
and philosophizing on subjects pertaining to life in a manner
which, at times, appears to be out of keeping with his
intellectual level. A constant observation was the extreme
willingness to share and puff on each other's cigarettes. A
boisterous, rowdy atmosphere did not prevail and on the rare
occasions when there appeared signs indicative of a belligerent
attitude on the part of a smoker, he was ejected or forced to
become more tolerant and quiescent. </p>

<p>One of the most interesting setups of a &quot;tea-pad,&quot;
which was clearly not along orthodox lines from the business
point of view, was a series of pup tents arranged on a roof-top
in Harlem. Those present proceeded to smoke their cigarettes in
the tents. When the desired effect of the drug had been obtained
they all merged into the open and engaged in a discussion of
their admiration of the stars and the beauties of nature. </p>

<p>Because of the possibility of spreading disease, note should
be taken of what seems to be a custom known as
&quot;pick-up&quot; smoking. It is an established practice
whereby a marihuana cigarette is lit and after one or two
inhalations is passed on to the next person. This procedure is
repeated until all present have had an opportunity to take a puff
or two on the cigarette. </p>

<p>Occasionally a &quot;tea-pad&quot; owner may have peddlers who
sell their wares in other localities and at the same time serve
as procurers for those who wish to smoke marihuana on the
premises. </p>

<p>One also finds other methods of retail distribution. After
proper introduction, one may be able to purchase the cigarette in
certain places. This is not an easy procedure, but it can be
accomplished. In some bar-and-grills, restaurants, and bars our
investigators were able to establish contact with someone who in
turn, would introduce them to a peddler who apparently made
regular rounds of these places in order to sell cigarettes. It
appears that the owners of such places are not aware of this
practice, and in many instances they would discharge any employee
known to be directly or indirectly associated with the sale of
marihuana. </p>

<p>On rare occasions public guides, if properly approached would
refer one to a place where the &quot;reefer&quot; could be
bought. There was no evidence that the guide received money when
acting as go- between. Terminal porters, mainly Negroes, appeared
to be more directly connected with the traffic of marihuana. They
were more conversant with the subject and it was easier for them
to establish contact between purchaser and peddler. </p>

<p>Marihuana smoking is very common in the theatres of Harlem
according to the observations of the investigators. We have
reason to believe that in some instances, perhaps few in number,
employees actually sold cigarettes on the premises. In the Harlem
dance halls smoking was frequently observed either in the
lavatories or on the main floor. The patrons as well as the
musicians were seen in the act of smoking. There was no evidence
of sales being made by employees on the premises, or that there
was any gain on the part of the owners or employees in permitting
this practice. Whereas the smoking of marihuana was not
encouraged, nothing was done to prohibit such practice. </p>

<p>There are specific sections in the Borough of Manhattan where
the sale of marihuana cigarettes appears to be localized: 1) the
Harlem district; 2) the Broadway area, a little east and west of
Broadway and extending from 42nd Street to S9th Street. While it
is true that one may buy the cigarette in other districts, it is
not as easily obtainable as in the two localities mentioned. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/sch__lag_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> | <a href="lagmenu.htm">LaGuardia
Committee Report</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="29464" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>