
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-33</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000614-B046-359</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/studies/nc/ncrec2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122022409 text/html 18684
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 02:23:12 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:53 GMT
Content-length: 18466
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>A Social Control Policy for Marihuana</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> <br>
</p>

<p> <b>Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</b> </p>

<p> <b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and
Drug Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Chapter V </h1>

<h1>marihuana and social policy </h1>

<p> <b>A Social Control Policy for Marihuana<br>
</b> </p>

<h3><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
A Social Control Policy for Marihuana </h3>

<p> In formulating a Marihuana policy, our strongest concern is
with irresponsible use, whether it be too often, too much,
indiscriminate, or under improper circumstances. The excessive or
indiscriminate use of any drug is a serious social concern; and
this is particularly true of marihuana since we still know very
little about the effects of long term, heavy use. We have little
doubt that the substantial majority of users, under any social
control policy, including the existing system, do not and would
not engage in irresponsible behavior. </p>

<p> In identifying the -appropriate social control policy for
marihuana, we have found it helpful to consider the following
policy options: </p>

<p> I Approval of Use. </p>

<p> II Elimination of Use. </p>

<p> III Discouragement of Use. </p>

<p> IV Neutrality Toward Use. <br>
</p>

<h4>APPROVAL OF USE </h4>

<p> Society should not approve or encourage the recreational use
of any drug, in public or private. Any semblance of encouragement
enhances the possibility of abuse and removes, from a
psychological standpoint, an effective support of individual
restraint. </p>

<p> For example, so long as this society (not only the
government, but other institutions and mass advertising as well)
in effect approved of the use of tobacco, the growing medical
consensus about the dangers of excessive use did not make a
significant impression on individual judgment. With the Surgeon
General's Report on Tobacco in 1964, Smoking and Health, a very
real change has occurred in the way society now thinks about
cigarettes. </p>

<p> The institutions of society definitely add their influences
to the variety of social pressures which persuade individuals to
use any kind of drugs. Rational social policy should seek to
minimize such social pressures, whether they come from peers,
from the media, from social custom, or from the user's sense of
inadequacy. Official approval would inevitably encourage some
people to use the drug who would not otherwise do so, and would
also increase the incidence of heavy or otherwise irresponsible
use and its complications. On this basis we reject policy option
number one, approval of use. </p>

<h4>ELIMINATION OF USE </h4>

<p> For a half-century, official social policy has been not only
to discourage use but to eliminate it (option number two). With
the principal responsibility for this policy assigned to law
enforcement, its implementation reached its zenith in the late
1950's and early 1960's when marihuana-related offenses were
punishable by long periods of incarceration. This policy grew out
of a distorted and greatly exaggerated concept of the drug's
ordinary effects upon the individual and the society. On the
basis of information then available, marihuana was not adequately
distinguished from other problem drugs and was assumed to be as
harmful as the others. </p>

<p> The increased incidence of use, intensive scientific
reevaluation, and the spread of use to the middle and upper
socioeconomic groups have brought about the informal adoption of
a modified social policy. On the basis of our opinion surveys and
our empirical studies of law enforcement behavior, we are
convinced that officialdom and the public are no longer as
punitive toward marihuana use as they once were. </p>

<p> Now there exists a more realistic estimate of the actual
social impact of marihuana use. School and university
administrators are seldom able to prevent the use of marihuana by
their students and personnel and are increasingly reluctant to
take disciplinary action against users. Within the criminal
justice system, there has been a marked decline in the severity
of the response to offenders charged with possession of
marihuana. </p>

<p> In our survey of state enforcement activities, only 11% of
all marihuana arrests resulted from active investigative
activity, and most of those were in sale situations. For the most
part, marihuana enforcement is a haphazard process; arrests occur
on the street, in a park, in a car, or as a result of a phone
call. Among those arrested, approximately 50% of the adults and
70% of the juveniles are not processed through the system; their
cases are dismissed by the police, by the prosecutors or by the
courts. Ultimately less than 6% of all those apprehended are
incarcerated, and very few of these sentences are for possession
of small amounts for personal use. </p>

<p> In the law enforcement community, the major concern is no
longer marihuana but the tendency of some users to engage in
other irresponsible activity, particularly the use of more
dangerous drugs. Official sentiment now seems to be a desire to
contain use of the drug as well as the drug subculture, and to
minimize its spread to the rest of the youth population. Law
enforcement policy, both at the Federal and State levels,
implicitly recognizes that elimination is impossible at this
time. </p>

<p> The active attempt to suppress all marihuana use has been
replaced by an effort to keep it within reasonable bounds. Yet
because this policy still reflects a view that marihuana smoking
is itself destructive enough to justify punitive action against
the user, we believe it is an inappropriate social response. </p>

<p> Marihuana's relative potential for harm to the vast majority
of individual users and its actual impact on society does not
justify a social policy designed to seek out and firmly punish
those who use it. This judgment is based on prevalent, use
patterns, on behavior exhibited by the vast majority of users and
on our interpretations of existing medical and scientific data.
This position also is consistent with the estimate by law
enforcement personnel that the elimination of use is
unattainable. </p>

<p> In the case of experimental or intermittent use of marihuana,
there is room for individual judgment. Some members of our
society believe the decision to use marihuana is an immoral
decision. However, even during Prohibition, when many people were
concerned about the evils associated with excessive use of
alcohol, possession for personal use was never outlawed federally
and was made illegal in only five States. </p>

<p> Indeed, we suspect that the moral contempt in which some of
our citizens hold the marihuana user is related to other behavior
or other attitudes assumed to be associated with use of the drug.
All of our data suggest that the moral views of the overwhelming
majority of marihuana users are in general accord with those of
the larger society. </p>

<p> Having previously rejected the approval policy (option number
one), we now reject the eliminationist policy (option number
two). This policy, if taken seriously, would require a great
increase in manpower and resources in order to eliminate the use
of a drug which simply does not warrant that kind of attention.<br>
</p>

<h4>DISCOURAGEMENT OR NEUTRALITY </h4>

<p> The unresolved question is whether society should try to
dissuade its members from using marihuana or should defer
entirely to individual judgment in the matter, remaining benignly
neutral. We must choose between policies of discouragement
(number three) and neutrality (number four). This choice is a
difficult one and forces us to consider the limitations of our
knowledge and the dynamics of social change. A number of
considerations, none of which is conclusive by itself, point at
the present time toward a discouragement policy. We will discuss
each one of them separately. </p>

<h5>1. User Preference Is Still Ambiguous </h5>

<p> Alcohol and tobacco have long been desired by large numbers
within our society and their use is deeply ingrained in the
American culture. Marihuana, on the other hand, has only recently
achieved a significant foothold in the American experience, and
it is still essentially used more by young people. Again, the
unknown factor here is whether the sudden attraction to marihuana
derives from its psychoactive virtues or from its symbolic
status. </p>

<p> Throughout this Commission's deliberations there was a
recurring awareness of the possibility that marihuana use may be
a fad which, if not institutionalized, will recede substantially
in time. Present data suggest that this is the case, and we do
not hesitate to say that we would prefer that outcome. To the
extent that conditions permit, society is well advised to
minimize the number of drugs which may cause significant
problems. By focusing our attention on fewer rather than more
drugs, we may be better able to foster responsible use and
diminish the consequences of irresponsible use. </p>

<p> The more prudent course seems to be to retain a social policy
opposed to use, attempting to discourage use while at the same
time seeking to deemphasize the issue. Such a policy leaves us
with more options available when more definitive knowledge of the
consequences of heavy and prolonged marihuana use becomes
available. </p>

<h5>2. Continuing Scientific Uncertainty Precludes Finality </h5>

<p> In 1933 when Prohibition was repealed, society was cognizant
of the effects of alcohol as a drug and the adverse consequences
of abuse. But, because so many people wished to use the drug,
policy-makers chose, to run the risk of individual indiscretion
and decided to abandon the abstentionist policy. There are many
today who feel that if the social, impact of alcohol use had then
been more fully understood, a policy of discouragement rather
than neutrality would have been adopted to minimize the negative
aspects of alcohol use. </p>

<p> Misunderstanding also played an important part when the
national government adopted an eliminationist, marihuana policy
in 1937. The policy-makers knew very little about the effects or
social impact of the drug; many of their hypotheses were
speculative and, in large measure, incorrect. </p>

<p> Nevertheless, the argument that misinformation in 1937
automatically compels complete reversal of the action taken at
that time is neither reasonable nor logical. While continuing
concern about the effects of heavy, chronic use is not sufficient
reason to maintain an overly harsh public policy, it is still a
significant argument for choosing official discouragement in
preference to official neutrality. </p>

<h5>3. Society's Value System Is In a State of Transition </h5>

<p> As discussed in Chapter 1, two central influences in
contemporary American life are the individual search for meaning
within the context of an increasingly depersonalized society, and
the collective search for enduring American values. In Chapter
IV, we noted that society's present ambivalent response to
marihuana use reflects these uncertainties. </p>

<p> For the reasons discussed in the previous Chapters, a sudden
abandonment of an official policy of elimination in favor of one
of neutrality toward marihuana would have a profound
reverberating impact on social attitudes far beyond the one issue
of marihuana use. We believe that society must have time to
consider its image of the future. We believe that adoption of a
discouragement policy toward marihuana at this time would
facilitate such a reappraisal while official neutrality, under
present circumstances, would impede it. </p>

<h5>4. Public Opinion Presently Opposes Marihuana Use </h5>

<p> For whatever reasons, a substantial majority of the American
public opposes the use of marihuana, and would prefer that their
fellow citizens abstain from using it. In the National Survey,
64% of the adult public agreed with the statement that
&quot;using marihuana is morally offensive` (40% felt the same
way about alcohol). </p>

<p> Although this majority opinion is not by any means
conclusive, it cannot be ignored. We are well aware of the
skeptics in with which marihuana user, and those sympathetic to
their wishes, view the policy making process; and we are
particularly concerned about the indifference to or disrespect
for law manifested by many citizens and particularly the youth. </p>

<p> However, we are also apprehensive about the impact of a major
change in social policy on that larger segment of our population
which supports the implications of the existing social policy.
They, too, might lose respect for a policy-making establishment
which appeared to bend so easily to the wishes of a
&quot;lawless&quot; and highly vocal minority. </p>

<p> This concern for minimizing cultural dislocation must, of
course, be weighed against the relative importance of contrary
arguments. For example, in the case of desegregation in the
South, and now in the North, cult-Lire shock had to be accepted
in the light of the fundamental precept at issue. In the, case.
of marihuana, there is no fundamental principle supporting the
use of the drug, and society is not compelled to approve or be
neutral toward it. The opinion of the majority is entitled to
greater weight. </p>

<p> Looking again to the, experience with Prohibition, when an
abstentionist policy for alcohol was adopted on the national
level in 1918, its proponents were not blind to the vociferous
opposition of a substantial minority of the people. By the late
1920's and early 1930's, the ambivalence of public opinion toward
alcohol use and the unwillingness of large numbers of people to
comply with the new social policy compelled reversal of that
policy. Even many of its former supporters acknowledged its
futility. </p>

<p> With marihuana, however, the prevailing policy of eliminating
use had never been opposed to any significant degree until the
mid-1960's. Unlike the prohibition of alcohol, which had been the
subject of public debate off and on for 60 years before it was
adopted, present marihuana policy has not until now engaged the
public opinion process, some 50 years after it first began to be
used. Majority sentiment does not appear to be as flexible as it
was with alcohol.<br>
</p>

<h5>5. Neutrality Is Not Philosophically Compelled </h5>

<p> Much of what was stated above bespeaks an acute awareness by
the Commission of the subtleties of the collective consciousness
of the American people, as shown in the National Survey. There is
a legitimate concern about what the majority of the non-using
population thinks about marihuana use and what the drug
represents in the public mind. The question is appropriately
asked if we are suggesting that the majority in a free society
may impose its will on an unwilling minority even though, as it
is claimed, uncertainty, speculation, and a large degree of
misinformation form the basis of the predominant opinion. If we
have nothing more substantial than this, the argument goes,
society should remain neutral. </p>

<p> To deal with this contention, one must distinguish between
ends and means. Policy-makers must choose their objectives with a
sensitivity toward the entire social fabric and a vision of the
good society. In such a decision, the general public attitude is
a significant consideration. The preferred outcome in a
democratic society cannot be that of the policy-makers alone; it
must be that of an informed public. Accordingly, the policy-maker
must consider the dynamic relationship between perception and
reality in the public mind. Is the public consensus based on a
real awareness of the facts? Does the public really understand
what is at stake? Given the best evidence available, would the
public consensus remain the same? </p>

<p> Assuming that dominant opinion opposes marihuana use, the
philosophical issue is raised not by the goal but by how it is
implemented. At this point, the interests of the unwilling become
important. For example, the family unit and the institution of
marriage are preferred means of group-living and child-rearing in
our society. As a society, we are not neutral. We officially
encourage matrimony by giving married couples favorable tax
treatment; but we do not compel people to get married. If it
should become public policy to try to reduce the birth rate, it
is unlikely that there will be laws to punish those who exceed
the preferred family size, although we may again utilize
disincentives through the tax system. Similarly, this Commission
believes society should continue actively to discourage people
from using marihuana, and any philosophical limitation is
relevant to the means employed, not to the goal itself.<br>
</p>

<p> <b>FOR THESE REASONS, WE RECOMMEND TO THE PUBLIC AND ITS
POLICY-MAKERS A SOCIAL CONTROL POLICY SEEKING TO DISCOURAGE
MARIHUANA USE, WHILE CONCENTRATING PRIMARILY ON THE PREVENTION OF
HEAVY AND VERY HEAVY USE.</b> </p>

<p> We emphasize that this is a policy for today and the
immediate future; we do not presume to suggest that this policy
embodies eternal truth. Accordingly, we strongly recommend that
our successor policy planners, at an appropriate time in the
future,, review the following factors to determine whether an
altered social policy is in order: the state of public opinion,
the extent to which members of the society continue to use the
drug, the developing scientific knowledge about the effects and
social impact of use of the drug, and the evolving social
attitude toward the place of recreation and leisure in a
work-oriented society. In our second Report next year, we will
carefully review our findings to see if our perceptions have
changed or if society has changed at that time.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>