
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-50</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B014-217</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/cocaine/crackbb.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122042614 text/html 7749
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:26:06 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:31:21 GMT
Content-length: 7532
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>&#145;Crack babies' catch up </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h1>'Crack babies' catch up </h1>

<p> <b>By DANA KENNEDY, The Associated Press, 12/6/92</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> NEW YORK -- When they spooted the playground, looming like a
leafy oasis amid the graffiti-scarred tenements of central
Harlem, the 10 toddlers and pre-schoolers erupted in excitement. </p>

<p> As they entered Morningside Park, the older kids raced to the
swings and slides. The younger ones clapped their hands and
cheered them on. Within seconds, the children were
indistinguishable from the other youngsters in the park, swooping
down slides and climbing monkey bars. </p>

<p> Three-year-old Johnny scrambled up the slide so fast that
kids from a nearby school watching in awe. Two-year-old Tanika
jumped onto the jungle gym like a tiny mountain goat. </p>

<p> This wasn't supposed to happen. These children, on their
daily outing from Hale House, were born exposed to crack. In
recent years, the term &quot;crack babies&quot; has become a
national buzzword, a riveting soundbite that conjures images of
mutant, monster children. </p>

<p> Punchy headlines such as &quot;Crack Babies: Genetic
Inferiors&quot; and &quot;Crack in the Cradle&quot; have helped
shape the stereotype. </p>

<p> But the children themselves may have the last word. Doctors,
social workers and teachers involved with crack-exposed kids
indicate that many are rising above the dire predictions made for
them. </p>

<p> &quot;When people find out what I do, they say 'Ok, those
poor crack babies,'&quot; said Hale House nurse Anne Marie Nedd
as she chased active, giggling 18-month-old Daren around the
park. &quot;I get so mad. I tell them, &quot;There's nothing
really wrong with these kids!'&quot; </p>

<p> --- </p>

<p> Since crack swept the country in 1985, children born to crack
addicts were thought to be physically and mentally damaged,
doomed to a marginal life and an ongoing burden for taxpayers. </p>

<p> The first wave of crack-exposed children entered first and
second grades in New York City this fall, a year after one state
report estimated the cost of special care for them could total $2
billion over the next 15 years. Harlem Hospital researchers
estimated that the cost of caring for crack babies costs the
country $500 million a year. Such statistics have fed the kind of
fear that led Ross Perot to invoke the dread specter of
&quot;crack babies&quot; during the first presidential debate. </p>

<p> &quot;Again and again and again, the mother disappears in
three days and the child becomes a ward of the state because he's
permanently and geneticall damaged,&quot; Perot said. </p>

<p> Permanently and genetically damaged. That's the kind of
description that angers Hale House program director Jackie Edmond
as she feeds beaming, 6-month-old Quashia some apple sauce. Hale
House cares for children 3 and under born addicted to drugs. Like
Quashia, almost all the kids there now were born addicted to
crack. </p>

<p> &quot;Tell me, what does a crack baby look like?&quot; Edmond
says angrily as she recounts the stories she's read about crack
babies and the comments she hears from strangers. &quot;Nobody
who talks about them ever comes in to see them. They'll come in
here and look at our kids any the look normal. So they says,
'Where are the drug babies?' I tell them, 'They're right
here.'&quot; </p>

<p> Across town on Wards Island, watching a group of animated 3-
and 4-year-olds reading aloud from workbooks in a sunny room at
Odyssey House, Cheryl Nazario had the same reaction. </p>

<p> &quot;These kids were labeled a lost cause,&quot; said
Nazario, who directs a residential program helping former crack
addicts and their children. &quot;It was like everyone expected
them to walk into schools like little androids. But they catch
up. They really do catch up.&quot; </p>

<p> --- </p>

<p> While crack-exposed babies may develop more slowly than
others, many experts say they often appear to grow out of early
problems if they receive proper care as infants and toddlers.
Many believe their prognosis is as good as children born
drug-free if they get early intervention. </p>

<p> Such children have to overcome a lot. The gripping image of
the jittery, irritable baby who doesn't want to be touched and
cries all the time is a reality, experts say. But kids born to
mothers addicted to other drugs share the same symptoms, the
result of a disorganized nervous system. </p>

<p> Programs all over the country, including Hale House and
Odyssey House in New York and the Charles R. Drew Head Start in
South-Central Los Angeles, have developed strategies to lessen
the symptoms, help kids adapt to their surroundings and teach
parents how to better care for them. </p>

<p> Many experts who have researched or worked with kids exposed
to cocaine decry what some call the myth of &quot;crack
babies.&quot; </p>

<p> &quot;It's nonsense,&quot; said Claire Coles, a clinical
psychologist at Emory University in Atlanta who has studied crack
kids. &quot;There's no evidence of genetic damage, nothing like
what was originally supposed. It's astonishing that so much fuss
has been raised about cocaine when kids born with fetal alcohol
syndrome are so much worse off.&quot; </p>

<p> The problems suffered by children exposed to cocaine stem
from many factors, Coles said. Many were born prematurely to
mothers who had little or no prenatal care and a returned to a
neglectful environment. But cocaine itself has not been proven to
be any more damaging than any other drug used by pregnant woment,
Coles said. Those familar with crack-exposed children also echoed
Coles' assertion that children with fetal alcohol syndrome are
much more likely to suffer from mental retardation. </p>

<p> Researchers at the National Association for Perinatal
Addiction Research and Education in Chicago have tracked a group
of 300 children born exposed to crack for almost seven years,
while helping the kids and their mothers. </p>

<p> The association's president, Ira Chasnoff, said kids born
exposed to crack, or other drugs, often suffer from a decreased
attention span, more impulsive behavior and have difficulty
concentrating. But environment may play a more key role than drug
exposure in the womb, he said. </p>

<p> In NAPARE's study, researchers found that the IQ scores of
children born exposed to crack were the same as children who were
not crack-exposed but who lived in a similar environment. </p>

<p> Chasnoff painted a dark picture behind society's morbid
embrace of &quot;crack babies.&quot; </p>

<p> &quot;The image of the crack baby really moved out
there,&quot; he said. &quot;Politicians really picked it up. It
worked into the trend of writing about the underclass. It's sexy,
it's interesting, it sells newspapers and it perpetuates the
us-versus-them idea.&quot; </p>

<p> In fact, said Chasnoff, &quot;Poverty is the worst thing that
can happen to a child.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>