
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-90</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B019-55</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/t3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044817 text/html 38045
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:48:08 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:10 GMT
Content-length: 37827
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Statement of H. J. Anslinger, Commissioner of Narcotics</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->

<h1>STATEMENT OF H. J. ANSLINGER, </h1>

<p><b>COMMISSIONER OF NARCOTICS, BUREAU OF NARCOTICS OF THE
TREASURY DEPARTMENT</b> </p>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the
committee, we are having a great deal of difficulty. Last year
there were 338 seizures of marihuana in some 31 states involving
several hundred tons of growing plants, bulk marihuana, and
cigarettes. </p>

<p>The states are asking for our help. We are trying to give it
to them, but we are rather limited in our ability at the present
time. </p>

<p>I have made a statement before the Ways and Means Committee,
which is in the record, but since that time I want to point out
to the committee an incident which occurred on June 28, at
Abingdon, Va. There was a marihuana farm at that point, and the
man who was growing those plants had been connected with a family
that was engaged in smuggling narcotic drugs into Atlanta
penitentiary some years ago. When we heard Dewey Doss was engaged
in the production of marihuana, we went after him, and we got the
state officers to make a case against him. We could not do
anything about that, although the information came to us first. </p>

<p>A month or so ago, down in Texas, a man was arrested on a
Missouri Pacific train going north with a quantity of cannabis,
and another man was arrested in the vicinity of this place,
called Raymondsville, Texas. They had both stripped the plants on
a hemp farm. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: You mean they had taken the leaves off? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: They had taken the leaves off and the flowering
tops. </p>

<p>I received this letter from an attorney at Houston, Texas,
just the other day. This case involves a murder in which he
alleges that his client, a boy 19 years old, had been addicted to
the use of marihuana. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Shall we read this into the record? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; I shall be very glad if you will. </p>

<p>(The letter is as follows:) </p>

<p>Houston, Tex., July 7, 1937 </p>

<p>H. J. Anslinger </p>

<p>United States Commissioner of Narcotics </p>

<p>Washington, DC </p>

<p>Dear sir: </p>

<p>Your article on Marihuana appearing in the July issue of the
American is very useful as well as interesting. </p>

<p>this subject strikes close to home because of a client II have
who not so long ago murdered in a brutal way a man who had
befriended him in giving him a ride. This client is a boy 20
years of age and he explained to me he has been smoking marihuana
for several years. I would like to have about 1 copies of your
article and will gladly pay any necessary charges. I would
appreciate an early reply. </p>

<p>Yours Truly, </p>

<p>Sidney Benbow </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I have another letter from the prosecutor at a
place in New Jersey. </p>

<p>It is as follows: </p>

<p>The Interstate Commission on Crime </p>

<p>March 18, 1937 </p>

<p>Charles Schwarz, Washington, DC </p>

<p>My Dear Mr. Schwarz: </p>

<p>That I fully appreciate the need for action, you may judge
from the fact that last January I tried a murder case for several
days, of a particularly brutal character in which one colored
young man killed another, literally smashing his face and head to
a pulp, as the enclosed photograph demonstrates. One of the
defenses was that the defendant's intellect was so prostrated
from his smoking marihuana cigarettes that he did not know what
he was doing. The defendant was found guilty and sentenced to a
long term of years. I am convinced that marihuana had been
indulged in, that the smoking had occurred, and the brutality of
the murder was accounted for by the narcotic, though the
defendant's intellect had not been totally prostrate, so the
verdict was legally correct. It seems to me that this instance
might be of value to you in your campaign. </p>

<p>Sincerely yours, </p>

<p>Richard Hartshorne </p>

<p>Mr. Hartshorne is a member of the Interstate Commission on
Crime. We have many cases of this kind. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: It affects them that way? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: (viewing a photograph presented by Mr.
Anslinger) Was there in this case a blood or skin disease caused
by marihuana? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: No; this is a photograph of the murdered man,
Senator. It shows the fury of the murderer. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: That is terrible. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: That is one of the worst cases that has come to
my attention, and it is to show you its relation to crime that I
am putting those two letters in the record. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: The first letter is also very interesting. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: This first letter was from an attorney at
Houston. In June of this year, at Geneva, an international
committee of experts in going over the reports received from all
over the world said that the reports thus far indicate that the
medical value of cannabis derivatives is very doubtful. There is
another report here from Dr. Paul Nicholas Leech. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: That is, to make perfectly clear, its medical
value is not very great, and there are many other drugs that may
be used in place of it that are fully as good if not better? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; it is not indispensable. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I think some medical men say that if we had no
such drug at all the medical profession would not be very greatly
handicapped. That is, medical science would not be very greatly
handicapped. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I think they are pretty generally in agreement
that its use could be abandoned without any suffering. </p>

<p>I have a few cases here that I would like to tell the
committee about. In Alamosa, Colorado, they seem to be having a
lot of difficulty. The citizens petitioned Congress for help, in
addition to the help that is given them under state law. In
Kansas and New Mexico also we have had a great deal of trouble. </p>

<p>Here is a typical illustration: A 15-year-old boy, found
mentally deranged from smoking marihuana cigarettes, furnished
enough information to police officers to lead to the seizure of
15 pounds of marihuana. That was seized in a garage in an Ohio
town. These boys had been getting marihuana at a playground, and
the supervisors there had been peddling it to children, but they
got rather alarmed when they saw these boys were developing the
habit, and particularly when this boy began to go insane. </p>

<p>In Florida some years ago we had the case of a 20-year-old boy
who killed his brothers, a sister, and his parents while under
the influence of marihuana. </p>

<p>Recently, in Ohio, there was a gang of very young men, all
under 20 years of age, every one of whom had confessed that they
had committed some 38 holdups while under the influence of the
drug. </p>

<p>In another place in Ohio, a young man shot the hotel clerk
while trying to hold him up. His defense was that he was under
the influence of marihuana. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: When a person smokes the cigarette, how long
does the influence of the drug continue? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: From reports coming to me, I think it might
last as long as 48 hours before the effects of the drug fully
wear off. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I do not know whether it was your article I
read, or an article from some other source, but I understand that
experiments have been conducted, in which the persons smoking the
marihuana have been kept under control after taking the drug. Do
you know whether or not that demonstrated how long the effect
would be felt? </p>

<p>MR. ANLSINGER: As I remember it, the effects in those cases
were something like 48 hours, before they fully returned to their
normal senses. </p>

<p>Here is a case in Baltimore, where a young man committed rape
while under the influence of marihuana. He was hanged for it.
Last fall, about September, we uncovered a field of several
acres, growing right outside the city limits of Baltimore. Those
men were selling it to New York, sending it all over the country,
at $20 a pound. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: And how many pounds to the acre? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: That would depend, Senator. If they just took
the flowering tops the yield would not be so big, but some of
them strip off the leaves and the flowering tops and grind them
up. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: Do the leaves have the same effect as the
flowering tops? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; one of the Treasury's chemists is
here who can verify that, sir. It has been proved by experts in
other countries who have analyzed the leaves. They find that the
resin is also present in the leaf. Our experiments have not shown
the presence of any drug in the mature stalks, though. A one time
we thought that the dangerous principle was only in the flowering
top, but that is not true. What led us to the study as to whether
there was resin in the leaves was the fact that we had seen so
much of this stuff rolled up. In some cases only the leaves had
been crushed, and they seemed to be giving the effect. In New
Mexico, officers sent us about 4 or 5 pounds of nothing but
leaves, and some of that particular shipment had been the cause
of the killing of a police officer, and also the killing of a man
within the ring. Every day we have such seizures, reports. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Is the cigarette that is made form the
flowering top more potent than the one made from the leaves? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir, it would be, because the tops have
the resin concentrated. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Do I understand that the seed is ground up,
too. and used to any extent? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Well, we have heard of them smoking the seed.. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Does it produce the same effect? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I am not qualified to say. We have not made any
experiments as to that, but we do know that the seed has been
smoked. I think that the proposition of the seed people
sterilizing the seed by heat and moisture will certainly do a lot
to kill this traffic. I think that that one thing might cut this
traffic in half, because much of the trouble we encounter is due
to the trafficker going to a feed store and buying the birdseed
and planting cannabis, and all due to the birdseed being
scattered during the winter. Hempseed is thrown out in the garden
or in the vacant lot. The following year you have a growth of
cannabis. That is what happened in Baltimore, and particularly in
Philadelphia. I know of a case there where the State officers got
over 200,000 pounds of growing plants, as the result of
dissemination by birdseeds. A lot of that growth was being used
illicitly. The traffickers knew where to get it. The plant
reseeded itself. </p>

<p>The action that will be taken under this bill by the birdseed
people in sterilizing the seed should have a remarkable effect in
killing the traffic. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: The sterilized seed will not reproduce? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: It will re-seed itself. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I am referring to the birdseed. What are they
going to do to the birdseed? </p>

<p>MR.ANSLINGER: They are going to kill the germinating power. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: When the seed is then thrown out, what will
happen? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Nothing will happen. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: Will it be of any use as a birdseed? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Oh, yes. It will still have food properties. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: The birds will sing just the same? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: There is some question about that.
Sterilization is a voluntary act by the birdseed people. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: That is not in this bill? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: It is not in there. They voluntarily agreed to
do that under this act. </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: Yes, it is in the bill. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I wan to bring out one fact that you have not
touched upon yet. As I understand it marihuana is not a
habit-producing drug, at least to the same extent that opium is,
for instance. It is somewhat easier to break the habit in the
case of marihuana than it is in the case of opium smoking? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, you have stated that correctly, Senator.
It is a very difficult matter to break the opium habit. However,
this habit can be broken. There is some evidence that it is
habit-forming. The experts have not gone very far on that. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: There is the impression that it is stimulating
to a certain extent? It is used by criminals when they want too
go out and perform some deed that they would not commit in their
ordinary frame of mind? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: That was demonstrated by these seven boys, who
said they did not know what they were doing after they smoked
marihuana. They conceived the series of crimes while in a state
of marihuana intoxication. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: How many cigarettes would you have to smoke
before you got this vicious mental attitude toward your neighbor?
</p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I believe in some cases on cigarette might
develop a homicidal mania, probably to kill his brother. It
depends on the physical characteristics of the individual. Every
individual reacts differently to the drug. It stimulates some and
others it depresses. It is impossible to say just what the action
of the drug will be on a given individual, of the amount.
Probably some people could smoke five before it would take that
effect, but all the experts agree that the continued use leads to
insanity. There are many cases of insanity. </p>

<p>SENATOR HERRING: Is it every type off hemp that contains this
drug, or is it just some particular type? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLIINGER: Yes, sir; there are different forms, but only
one species. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: This thought has impressed me: I read with care
the supplemental statement which you placed in the record before
the Ways and Means Committee, in which you brought out quite
clearly that the use, which will be &quot;illicit&quot; if we may
describe it that way, in the event this bill becomes a law, has
been known to the peoples of Europe and Mexico and the United
States for centuries. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: That is right. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Do you think that the recent great increase in
the use of it that has taken place in the United States is
probably due to the heavy hand of the law, in its effect upon the
use of other drugs, and that persons who desire a stimulant are
turning to this because of the enforcement of the Harrison
Narcotics Act and the State laws? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: We do not know of any cases where the opium
user has transferred to marihuana. there is an entirely new class
of people using marihuana. The opium user is around 35 to 40
years old. These users are 20 years old, and know nothing of
heroin or morphine. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: What has happened to the new dissemination of
it? We did not hear anything of it until the last year or so. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I do not think that the way against opium has
very much bearing upon the situation. That same question has been
discussed in other countries; in Egypt particularly, where a
great deal of hasheesh is used, they tried to show that the
marihuana user went to heroin, and when heroin got short he
jumped back to hasheesh, but that is not true. This is an
entirely different class. </p>

<p>I do not know just why the abuse of marihuana has spread like
wildfire in the last 4 or 5 years. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Could you give us any estimate of the number of
persons that are engaged in this illicit traffic? Please state
that as nearly as you can. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I can only give you what our records show,
Senator. There were about 400 arrests throughout the States in
the year. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: That is for violations of State law? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: For violations of State law. That would not
include the arrests in California, where I understand they have
several hundred a year; but the figure I am giving you of 400
arrests would be about the average number that are being picked
up now, under just a noncoordinated enforcement policy , every
State doing its own work, and bringing us in occasionally. When
they run into &quot;dope&quot; work, and bringing it to us
occasionally. When they run into &quot;dope&quot; we down and
say, &quot;It is marihuana and you take the case.&quot; </p>

<p>The state of Ohio recently seized what we call a
&quot;plant&quot;. It was a seizure of marihuana. These people
had a mailing list of 6,000 customers scattered throughout the
States. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: How were they dispensing it? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: They were selling it in lots from a pound down,
just selling it by mail. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: There was nothing in the law to prevent a man
in Columbus, Ohio, using the mail in selling it to a person in
Louisville, Kentucky? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: No, they are doing it every day. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: Is there anything in the present bill to
prevent them using the mail? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Under this bill it would have to be tax-paid,
and all of that would be illicit, sir. </p>

<p>SENATOR HERRING: You say there are several hundred arrests in
California alone, and about that same number throughout the rest
of the United States? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLNGER: There are about the same number in the rest of
the United States. </p>

<p>SENATOR HERRING: How do you account for that? Is it because of
their state law? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: It is because they have a state enforcement
agency there. They vigorously enforce the law. I might say that
Pennsylvania is doing important work also. </p>

<p>SENATOR HERRING: It might be just as prevalent in other
states; but for the fact that we do not have the law enforced as
efficiently? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I would not say it is as prevalent, but
certainly the use has increased in the last few years. In
Pennsylvania the enforcement people are very active today,
particularly in Pittsburgh and Philadelphia, and the are
constantly calling upon us. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: Are they endorsing the Harrison Narcotics Act
in manner satisfactory to you? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir; that is satisfactory, but they are
asking us for help every now and then when they run into a rather
large situation. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I think that while you are on that point you
had better make clear the need for Federal legislation. You say
the States have asked you to do that. I presume it is because of
the freedom of interstate traffic that the States require this
legislation? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: We have had requests from states to step in
because they claimed it was not growing in that state, but that
it was coming in from another state. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: And they could not touch that? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: And they could not touch it and we could not
touch it. </p>

<p>There is need for coordinated effort. We are required to
report ot the League of Nations, under a treaty arrangement, all
of the seizures of marihuana made throughout the United States.
It is rather difficult to get, I would say, half of them. One
particular reason and one primary reason for this is -- usually
these complaints come to us first -- that there is
&quot;dope&quot; being used in a certain place, and that there is
a supply of it on a certain street. Our men go and investigate
it, and they find that it is marihuana. Well, we have to call in
the state officers and there is a lot of lost effort. Very often
by the time the state officer comes the case is gone. I would say
in most of these cases we get the information first and turn it
over to the state officer. Now, we want to coordinate all of that
work throughout the states. By state and Federal cooperation we
can make a good dent in this traffic. </p>

<p>For instance, all states had narcotics laws before the
enactment of the Harrison Narcotics Act, but until the Federal
Government stepped in no substantial progress was made. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: What have you to say about the extent of the
production of hemp? May it be produced in practically any state
in the Union? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir, it can be produced. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: There is climatically no reason why it could
not be produced everywhere in the United States? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: No. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Growing as a weed could take place anywhere? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Anywhere; yes, sir. That has been demonstrated.
</p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: A moment ago I asked you what was the yield per
acre, and you then told me so much of the flower and so much of
the leaves. What is the combined yield per acre of both the
flower and the leaves? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I would not be able to say that, sir. That
would be impossible. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: Is there any way of getting that information? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: We are growing an experimental crop over here
on the Agricultural Farm. We can find out that way, or we can
take a plant and strip the leaves and the flowers, and find out
how many plants there are in an acre and multiply it. I think
that would give a reasonably accurate estimate. I think I can
find that out. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: I wish you would. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Now, Commissioner Anslinger, I do not know
whether you are the best man to answer this question, or Mr.
Hester. What dangers, if any, does this bill have for the persons
engaged in the legitimate uses of the hemp plant? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I would say that they are not only amply
protected under this act, but they can go ahead and raise hemp
just as they have always done it. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: It has been represented to me that the farmer
might hesitate to grow hemp when he is not only subjected to a $5
tax but also to the supervision by the Government, or what you
might call the &quot;nosing&quot; of the Government into his
business. What have you to say to this proposition? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Well, I would say the answer to that is the
fact that they are already controlled under state legislation. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: In practically every state in the Union. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Not all the states, but certainly in a lot
hemp-growing states they are controlled. In most of the states
cultivation is prohibited but in some states they are regulated
by license. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Administratively, it seems you have charge of
the administration of the tax and the collection of the tax? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Just what would happen? We will take a farmer
living the other side of Alexandria, over in Virginia. Just what
would happen to him if he wanted to grow 2 acres of hemp? What
would he have to do? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: He would go down to the collector of internal
revenue and put down his $5 and get a registration, a stamp tax.
That would permit him to grow under the act, and at the end of
year ---- </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: That is a stamp tax similar to the one a doctor
gets who uses a narcotic? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir, the same kind of tax. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: He would hang that up in his house? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Yes, sir. At the end of the year we would just
ask how much he grew. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Would you not go down and look his field over,
to ascertain whether he was making any illicit use of the
otherwise worthless byproduct? As I understand it, there is no
legislation about the use of the petals or the flowers or of
these leaves. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: So far very few of these hemp people have been
involved. Well, they have not been involved in the illicit
traffic at all.. This case in Texas is the only case I know of.
We were not going to supervise his crop. It would be impossible. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I do not mean that, but suppose that some
fellow come along and says, &quot;I will give you $100 to let me
go in and strip your leaves and top flowers from your hemp
crop.&quot; How would you ever cover that? How would you meet a
situation of that kind? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Certainly under the act, if the farmer agreed
ot that, they would both be guilty of conspiracy to violate the
act. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: But you would exercise no particular
supervision over the growing of that crop? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: The exercise would be in this way: If we see
Mr. Dewey Doss, the photograph of whose place I showed you, go in
and pay $5 to the collector, we would watch that. We would be
very careful to see what disposition he made of that, but we
would certainly know the sheep from the goats without any close
general supervision. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I do not think that you would have any trouble
with legitimate manufacturers, because they are dealing with the
Government; but the farmer himself might be a little disposed not
to grow the hemp, knowing the illicit use that might be made of a
part of his crop. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: It is just an information return. That is all
we would be interested in, unless he would conspire with someone
else to have the crop stripped. But one saving feature about this
whole thing so far as the farmer is concerned is that the crop is
cut before the resin reaches the nth state. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Before it reaches its greatest potency? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: In other words, before it reaches its greatest
potency. There is some resin that comes up through the plant, but
if he is a legitimate hemp producer he will cut it down before
the resin makes its appearance. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: You had before the Ways and Means Committee two
samples of the plant. Do you happen to have any of those samples
here? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: We do not have them here this morning. We can get
those samples for you. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: The plant which I have in my hand now can be
easily distinguished as you go along the road. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS. You can see that along all the highways of the
country. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Well, Senator Davis, that will grow up 16 feet.
</p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: How high? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Sixteen feet. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: Sixteen feet? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Sixteen feet. Of course when they are small
like that you cannot distinguish them. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: At what height are they usually harvested? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: About 14 or 16 feet. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: At that height? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Not for hemp production. That is for resin. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I mean for hemp production. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: Oh, for hemp production, I would say around 10,
12, 14 feet. But it is certainly before the resin gets up there
to do the damage. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Are there any other questions that any member
wants to ask Mr. Anslinger? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER (sic): What is the return to the farmer per
acre? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I do not know. The hemp people here could tell
you what the return is, but I understand it is around $30. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Does it require intense cultivation? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: I do not think so. </p>

<p>SENATOR HERRING: It is a weed that will grow, is it not? </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: It will grow without any trouble. In fact, a
lot of these illicit traffickers will try to hide their field
with corn. They will grow corn all around it. Well, the hemp will
shoot right up above the corn and will grow 4 or 5 feet higher. </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: Before we complete our case I think we ought to
say one word on the regulations, if I may? </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Yes; we shall be glad to have that. </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: From time immemorial it has been the policy of
Congress in imposing taxes and in providing exemptions under
certain conditions from the imposition of certain taxes, to
provide that the exemption will be made under regulations to be
prescribed by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue. </p>

<p>Take for example in this particular case, in the Revenue Act
of 1932 they provided that automobile parts and accessories
should be exempt from taxes if the manufacturer sells them to a
manufacturer who is going to make a complete automobile or truck.
</p>

<p>In order to get that exemption the manufacturer who is going
to sell that part of an automobile or truck to the other
manufacturer, who is going to make a completed truck, cannot get
that exemption except under regulations to be prescribed by the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue. </p>

<p>The Commissioner merely requires him to obtain a certificate
from the other manufacturer that this part is to be used in the
manufacture of a completed truck. </p>

<p>In this particular we have exactly the same situation here,
and we are simply following the practice, I say, that Congress
has followed from time immemorial in revenue acts. The farmer
here will not even have to go to the Collector's office. All he
will have to do will be merely to mail in his five dollars, and
they will send him the stamp tax and the registration. At the end
of the year he will make an information return as to how much
land he has under cultivation and what disposition he has made of
it. </p>

<p>When he wants to sell his crop off seeds all he will have to
do under the regulations of the Treasury Department will be to
obtain some evidence from the person to whom he sells it, that
that person is entitled to the exemption. </p>

<p>That is the situation with respect to the seed, which is the
important item involved here so far as the domestic interests are
concerned. Of course, the fiber products are entirely out of the
bill. </p>

<p>That completes our case. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Mr. Hester, what are you going to do with
respect to the large number of farmers who are not going to know
about this law in its earlier stages of enforcement? It seems to
me that with the lack of dissemination of information, a great
many of them are going to engage perhaps in a legitimate
production of it, not knowing of this law. Are you rather harsh
toward those fellows, or can you be reasonable and generous
toward them? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: No, the bill will not become effective for 60
days, and there are not a great many of the hemp producers in the
United Sates. Of course the Treasury Department would do
everything it possibly could to notify these people. There would
be no hardship imposed upon them. This would be administered
exactly as any other revenue act is administered, and frequently
there are excise taxes imposed where the individual does not know
anything about it. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: What legitimate uses are now made of the hemp
plant in the United States. That is, what causes the farmer to
raise it? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: Some raise it for seeds. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Do you mean birdseeds? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: Yes. They raise the seeds for use in the
manufacture of birdseed. They make oil out of it. Most of the
seed, however, that is used in the manufacture of oil is imported
from Manchuria, but it may develop in this country. </p>

<p>Then after the seed is used for the making of oil, they take
that seed and crush it, and make meal and meal cake, and that is
sold to cattle raisers. </p>

<p>The oil is used in the manufacture of varnish and paint and
soap and linoleum, and then in the case of the mature stalk they
use that for making fiber and fiber products. Of course, they are
entirely outside the bill. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: While primarily you are placing a tax, it is
for the sole purpose of getting and enforcement of the law, and
getting a plan for enforcing it? </p>

<p>MR. HESTER: That is correct. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: If it should be one dollar, what difference
would that make? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: Well, the situation is simply this: ------- </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: I am only talking from the farmer's point of
view, of charging him one dollar instead of five dollars. </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: I am glad you raised that point, Senator Davis,.
When the Harrison Act was first before the Supreme Court the
occupational tax was only one dollar, and the vote was 5 to 4. In
other words the Supreme Court said, &quot;This is a revenue
measure&quot;, although the tax was only one dollar. But the vote
was five to four. After that Congress raised the occupational tax
and then when the case came before the Supreme Court, the vote
was six to three. and the Court said, &quot;We now have more
reason to sustain the constitutionality of this act that we had
before, because it is more of a revenue act than it was
then.&quot; </p>

<p>In the case of the producers, under the Harrison Narcotics
Act, although there are no poppies grown in this country, if they
could develop it so that they could raise poppies, so that they
could get opium from it, the farmer would have to pay $24, but in
this case the producer only pays five dollars. </p>

<p>We have left the practicioner at one dollar, because that was
the situation of the Harrison Narcotics Act, and that is the real
reason why the figures are set in this bill at $24, $5, $3, and
one dollar, so that we can have a real revenue raising measure. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: You charge five dollars an acre under this? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: Oh no, a year. </p>

<p>SENATOR DAVIS: I meant to say this: You charge five dollars
whether he produces on one acre of on one thousand acres? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: That is right. </p>

<p>Senator Brown: Have you worked out the Canal Zone matter with
the Department? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: We have. They wish to be exempted, and they have
agreed not to propose their amendment providing for direct
regulation of marihuana in the zone because as I pointed out to
you the other day it might indicate on the face of the bill that
it is a regulatory measure, but they wish to be exempted, and we
have no objection. We are preparing to change that. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Just one or two more matters. Why should they
be exempted? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: There is no legitimate business in the Canal Zone,
and they say they have sufficient control over the marihuana
problem in the zone at this time under existing legislation, and
they object to general legislation being applied. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: It would probably be considerable duplication
of effort down there. </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: There might be some. The Harrison Narcotics Act
applies to the Canal Zone, and that is the reason why it was
included in this bill. But the Treasury Department has no
objection if the Canal Zone goes out. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Will this entail any considerable increase in
personnel of the Department? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: No, I do not think so. </p>

<p>MR. ANSLINGER: No, sir. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: I understand this measure has the approval of
the Treasury Department. </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: Yes, oh, yes. it is strongly recommended by the
Treasury Department. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Is there anything further from the 'government?
Do you desire to have a chemist testify? </p>

<p>MR, HESTER: I think we have finished our case. </p>

<p>SENATOR BROWN: Very well, Thank you, Mr. Hester and
Commissioner Anslinger. </p>

<p>The next witness on my list is Mr. Rens of the Rens Hemp Coo.
of Brandon, Wis. We would be glad to hear from him. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>