
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-72</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B048-63</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/ACTIVIST/args3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115540 text/html 61464
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:55:30 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:26:17 GMT
Content-length: 61246
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>25 More pages of the Drug Legalization Debate </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>25 More pages of the Drug Legalization Debate </h2>

<p> by Clifford A. Schaffer </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>But there is a more pressing argument. I know human nature
to at least some degree. People do things for many reasons, but
primarily because they get more pleasure than pain from the
thing. Your argument is that if you remove a whole lot of the
pain from drug use, that people will not use drugs more. Are you
therefore saying that making heroin illegal causes people to want
to use it more? Why? Do people enjoy paying fines? Do they like
prison?</b> </p>

<p> <b>Please provide me with some sensible reasons why you
believe people would not use drugs more, or would use them less,
if drugs were legal.</b> </p>

<p> The basic reason is the same simple reason that most people
do not spend their days staggering around on booze. I tried it
and realized that I enjoyed being sober a whole lot more. The
vast majority of the people are the same way. As I said before,
there is nothing magical about these drugs which causes them to
be hypnotically attractive. As a matter of fact, I don't think I
would like them much myself because one of the most common
effects is to make users puke. Maybe it is hard for other people
to understand, but I don't think that puking is much fun. </p>

<p> As for inflicting pain, I must agree that is a noble goal.
Take a group of people who are not well off anyway and make it
our goal to inflict as much pain on them as we can. </p>

<p> Let's consider a certain little statistical fact. The number
of people in prison is currently only a small fraction of the
total number of users. Therefore, the current system cannot
inflict pain on more than a small number of the users and must be
seen as quite ineffective in your stated goal. Without
considering the fact that our prisons are currently overloaded,
just tell me how many more millions of people we should put in
prison to inflict the proper amount of pain. </p>

<p> <b>Please also confirm your quote to me on the percentage of
black men going to prison on drug charges. You said it was 50%.
Is that accurate? If so, what percentage of black men, in total,
abuse drugs? If 50% go to prison, total use must approach 100%.
If not, what is the figure? (I guess this has one point in your
favor. If 100% of black males now are drug abusers, legalizing
drugs would not cause the percentage to go up.) </b> </p>

<p> About half of all black men in America will be incarcerated
at least once by the time they are thirty. The source of this is
information extrapolated from the DOJ report The Prevalence of
Imprisonment, and studies by the Sentencing Project that show
that about one-fourth of the black men under 30 are _currently_
in prison, on probation, or parole. Drug offenses will be the
single biggest cause for this. The figures on drug use through
the population are about the same for whites as it is for blacks.
The disproportionately high percentage of blacks arrested can be
accounted for by a number of factors. The first is that these
laws originally were intended to target minorities and the
tactics used to enforce them tend to target minorities over
whites. For example, it is easier to pick up twenty street
dealers in a minority community than it is to get the same number
by busting middle class white houses. Also, the drug business
provides a unique opportunity for young black men. These and
other factors create a situation where, in certain inner city
neighborhoods, ninety percent of the black men have already been
to prison at least once. Also, black men are more likely to be
convicted because of poor legal representation, and more likely
to be sentenced to prison when they are convicted. </p>

<p> <b>Okay!! Finally. What other options do you have in mind?
This has the possibility of being a very productive thread. No
snide insults or sarcasm. What other options are there? </b> </p>

<p> There are quite a few. The first point that I would make is
that we should have a consistent philosophy and approach to all
recreational drugs. That is, if you would not think it good for
7-11 clerks to sell cocaine to children, then we should be
equally tough about tobacco. At the same time, if you recognize
that throwing tobacco smokers in prison would be
counterproductive, then it stands to reason that it would be
counterproductive for other drugs. Figure out what would be a
good policy for the two most dangerous drugs -- alcohol and
tobacco -- and it will be easy to figure out what should be done
about the others. </p>

<p> Judge Gray has called for &quot;regulated distribution&quot;.
His idea is that drugs would be available at government regulated
stores of some sort at prices that would be low enough to
discourage the black market. Advertising would be prohibited
under his idea and all drugs would be sold in plain wrappers with
warning information and, most importantly, a number to call to
get help. </p>

<p> The Netherlands has taken a different approach. They still
have drug laws but make it a point not to enforce them except in
cases where there are bad drugs, or people are making themselves
obnoxious. Their primary purpose is to reduce the harm done by
drugs and part of their plan is to get people to come in for
treatment. </p>

<p> In Liverpool, they are prescribing heroin and cocaine to
addicts as part of the public health service. Part of the price
of getting the prescription is that addicts must agree to stop
committing crimes and to get their lives together. </p>

<p> With some drugs, such as marijuana, it is doubtful whether
any sort of regulation is even desireable. The Dutch ignore it to
the point of allowing it to be sold openly in coffee shops and it
does not seem to cause any problems. </p>

<p> <b>Now there are burglars in my neighborhood. Some of them do
the same crime for years - and will keep on doing it for more.
Is, therefore, the threat of prison not relevant? Should we
remove that threat? Should we legalize buglary, because prison
only makes it worse? I don't think so. You have indicated that
legalizing hard drugs would lower the rate of drug abuse. Perhaps
you also believe legalizing burglary would lower that crime. I
disagree on both counts. The threat of prison is a deterrent to
potential burglars, robbers, murderers, etc. I believe it is also
a deterrent to potential drug abusers. Once addiction has been
reached, that threat is less powerful. But that does not mean we
remove it. </b> </p>

<p> I get this tired, irrelevant argument a lot. First, burglary
is not the same as drug use so comparisons of the legal methods
for controlling them are silly. Second, if we had thirty million
burglars (or criminals of any kind) we would have to find another
method of dealing with the problem just because the criminal
justice system could not handle the load. In this case it doesn't
matter what you want to do, it is a matter of what you can do. </p>

<p> <b>You also indicated that I should be imprisoned as a drug
addict. I assume you are being sarcastic again. (Which, BTW, is
rude.) Since I have now been sober for 13 years, and 15 days,
prison is not called for. However, remember that drugs took 12
years of my life. If I had been jailed in year two or three, and
that huge shock had persuaded me to stay sober, I would have
gained 9-10 years of a productive life back. I, in retrospect,
really wish that had happened. I miss those 12 years a lot. </b> </p>

<p> No, I was not being sarcastic, I was simply following the
logical conclusion of what you said. I would point out that,
under the current laws you might have done a lot more than a
couple of years in jail. And, when you got out, you would be
virtually unemployable (at anything decent, anyway) which would
have severely impacted your attempts at recovery. </p>

<p> <b>You again brought up several times that legalizing drugs
(which you oppose) in other countries lowered the rate of drug
abuse. Because of my knowledge of the way people act, I find that
either I do not understand what you mean, or your stats are
simply wrong. As I said above, if you made burglary legal, would
there be fewer of them? If you sold hamburgers for 10cents, would
we buy fewer? I just find the idea that making hard drugs
controlled, legal, and cheap would result in less use of them. </b>
</p>

<p> My point again that you are not acquainted with all of the
facts on this issue. It is happening in Europe. As one Dutch
official put it, junkies are their own worst advertisement and
they really don't need much in the way of education to persuade
people that drug addiction is something they want to avoid. </p>

<p> As I said before, I recommend that you read the CU Report,
and see the A&amp;E special which recently aired on this subject.
</p>

<p> <b>You asked about your mother being unable to get the drugs
she needs. I do not know the situation at all. I believe that any
drug that would help your mother should be available to her,
including marijuana and heroin. Of course, that is not the point
here.</b> </p>

<p> Then you do not understand a whole lot about the drug war.
The repression of medical use and research into these drugs was
an integral part of the whole campaign from the very beginning.
When the laws were first passed the drug police jailed more than
3,000 doctors, specifically aiming at those who were treating
addicts, and those who voiced disagreement with the policy. They
effectively shut down all research into the medical uses and even
research into the causes and cures for drug addiction for over
fifty years (and it is still difficult to do honest drug research
in this country). It was a deliberate, calculated reign of terror
against the medical profession which is still intact today. </p>

<p> If you will research this a little you will discover why this
reign of terror exists. That is, if these drugs are under the
province of the medical profession where they really belong, then
the whole drug prohbition will fall apart quite rapidly. </p>

<p> As I said before, your assumptions about why these laws are
here are totally wrong. The reasons you have stated never did
have anything to do with the laws. </p>

<p> <b>We have discussed this. You play with stats to advance
your point, regardless of the intellectual integrity. </b> </p>

<p> You have not presented any stats in contrast to mine, so I
wonder how you can say this. </p>

<p> <b>You also said that eight times the number that die from OD
on drugs, die from that drug use for other reasons - pneumonia,
for example. You ignored my point that many deaths would not be
attributed to drug use because there was something else handy,
such as exposure, or AIDS.</b> </p>

<p> No I didn't. I quoted the AMA figures on the subject. You
have cited nothing but your own opinion in response. </p>

<p> <b>You have again cooked your figures. Lets say a policeman
pulls over the car of a junkie tonight for erratic driving. A
search shows five rocks in his pocket. He is arrested. Knowing he
is busted, he pleads guilty. According to your figures, that cost
$150,000. Balderdash. </b> </p>

<p> Aren't we deliberately missing some points here? For every
one which does what you suggested (and there are fewer of them as
the penalties go up) there are others who fight it all the way.
The AVERAGE cost is what is being cited. </p>

<p> <b>They then build a cell - especially for him. They can't
use the one that some burglar is now leaving. </b> </p>

<p> Well, yes they could. That is what is happening now --
violent offenders are being released early so we can throw more
drug users in prison. That doesn't make a lot of sense, does it?
Therefore, in order for the law not to cause more harm than good
(by releasing another offender early) we have to build a new
prison cell. </p>

<p> <b>No - that would mean you had to prorate the cost of the
cell by everyone who uses it. Would be an honest way, but would
not boost your cause. Balderdash again. </b> </p>

<p> By what you are saying, the total number of people sent to
prison would not increase beyond what it is today -- therefore no
beneficial effect from tougher penalties. </p>

<p> <b>An official in Oakland who desperatly wanted to show how
much money was being saved by his drug program as opposed to
prison, put the cost of prison at $20,000 per year. You say
$30,000. Balderdash. </b> </p>

<p> No, the figures I used come from the Wall Street Journal and
the DOJ. The figures vary somewhat from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction, and according to the type of prison but they are
all in the same range. You can get the most current figures
yourself by calling the National Clearinghouse and Data Center
for Drugs and Crime. </p>

<p> <b>In Phoenix they put folks in tents!! Its warm, and they
have many cots like in the army, but it is cheap. And a good
deterrent. Folks don't like it. So my guess for my addict above
is about $2,000 to arrest and and convict, $1,500 for the
prorated cost of the cell, and $10,000 for the six months he
would actually serve. Comes to $13,500, as opposed to your
$450,000. </b> </p>

<p> But, of course, your guess is not any more informed than some
of your other statements. Personally, I will take the testimony
of people like Thomas Coughlin, the New York State Commissioner
of Corrections, before I would accept yours. </p>

<p> <b>I am developing a deep mistrust for your facts and
figures. Many of them _may_ be correct, but when I find some to
be in error, I know that you would deliberatly mislead if you
felt you could get away with it. So now I divide by two, an then
doubt. </b> </p>

<p> So go read the resources I have mentioned yourself. If you
had done that in the first place, we wouldn't be having this
discussion now. </p>

<p> <b>Drugs are not magical in a literal sense. They just have a
profound effect on the minds of some people, that some of those
people have compared to magic. </b> </p>

<p> I thought so. But, of course, either way it does not indicate
that prison is the correct approach. </p>

<p> <b>PatI ask you - how many more deaths, and destroyed lives,
would it take before you said legalizing drugs was a bad idea?
Will await your answer. Please make it public. Thanks. </b> </p>

<p> <b>You have dodged this question about four times now. I am
not asking your opinion on whether you think legalizing drugs
would have that effect. I am asking _If it did._ Please answer. I
think the lurkers here deserve an answer. </b> </p>

<p> As I said, I never said I supported legalization, so the
question is misdirected. If legalization is what you have stated
then I wouldn't support it whatever the figures are. </p>

<p> The answer here depends upon what you mean by
&quot;legalizing drugs&quot;. If you mean that cocaine, heroin,
etc., would be sold as freely as convenience store clerks sell
tobacco to children then it is possible that addiction and deaths
would increase, although the evidence clearly shows that they
would still not approach the death rates imposed by alcohol and
tobacco. So, even in that case, one has to wonder why the major
push should not be against alcohol and tobacco first. </p>

<p> But, of course, I am asking you if you have any evidence
(besides your own opinion) that it would increase the deaths. So
far, you have not responded to that. </p>

<p> <b>You said it is not okay with you if a junkie frys his
brain, or dies, from drug abuse. Why not, if he chooses to take
the drug? I thought that was the core of your argument - that we
had no right to interfere with him, because he could choose what
he wanted, and endure the results. Where am I missing this?</b> </p>

<p> This point is not, and never was, the core of my arguments. I
really don't care what you think about anyone's individual
&quot;right&quot; to use recreational drugs, as long as you
recognize that prison is not the proper approach in any case. </p>

<p> But, to get back to this point, let's consider a specific
example. My mother is desperately ill with severe chronic pain. I
won't bore you with the medical history, so let it suffice to say
that she has been all over the US and talked to the nation;s
leading medical experts on the subject. They have all said that
the best medications for here condition are the narcotics -
heroin and morphine. She cannot get either one because the
doctors are afraid they will be prosecuted over any questioned
prescription. In these cases, don't you think that the people who
should be making the decision on the medical use of drugs should
be the doctors, in consultation with their patients? </p>

<p> Both the Dept. of Health and Human Services and the
California Medical Association have issued reports stating that
the undertreatment of pain in this country is a &quot;national
tragedy&quot; and the only reasons for it are the fear and
ignorance created by the drug war. </p>

<p> Can we at least agree that any policy which denies medicine
to sick people has something seriously wrong with it -- both
morally and practically? </p>

<p> <b>You said it was &quot;tyranny&quot; to send a person to
prison for drug abuse, because we would be denying him his right
to make choices. Tyranny is a judgemental word. Is it tyranny to
prohibit sexual harassment? </b> </p>

<p> I never used the word &quot;tyranny&quot;. Who are your
quoting? </p>

<p> <b>((Who are we to cram our views down the throat of some
poor, middle aged, overweight, pathetic, animal of a business
manager? We are a society. We look out for each other. I won't
let that manager hurt people if I can stop it. Why? Because I
care about the people he is hurting, more than I care about his
pride. Would be willing to bankrupt him in a lawsuit, to stop
him, and the others like him, from hurting people. That same
concern is why I want drugs to remain illegal. I care about the
people who are having their lives messed up by drugs. I want it
to stop. Yes, prison is not a good way to do this, but it is the
best way I see available to us right now. </b> </p>

<p> I agree that you have a paternalistic attitude toward
interfering in other people's lives. I don't agree that prison is
the correct approach, even if your attitude was either moral or
justified. </p>

<p> It is also obvious that you are not acquainted with all the
ways we might do this. Try reading some of the studies I have
mentioned. </p>

<p> <b>If you can come up with a way that will assuredly reduce
the amount of human suffering because of drug abuse, please share
it. You know by now that I don't buy the &quot;make it legal, and
people will stop using it&quot; argument. Okay - you don't buy
prison is better than legalization. Do you have any other ideas??
What can we brainstorm? Imagine you and I were co-dictators of
this country. We could change any law, as long as we both agreed.
What would we do about drug abuse??</b> </p>

<p> A good point here, which is why I was one of the co-authors
of the Hoover Resolution. It is true that we can come to a better
solution if we will all sit down, read the facts, and discuss
them. The immediate problem here is that you are not yet
acquainted with all the facts, or the possible options. First, I
would recommend that you take a trip to the local library and
read The Consumers Union Report on Licit and Illicit Drugs. You
will find it fascinating, whatever your views may be. </p>

<p> Or, you may just want to check out what they are doing in
Europe. </p>

<p> <b>PatDo you think some adict who chokes to death on his own
vomit is not a victim?</b> </p>

<p> <b>PeterHe &quot;victimized&quot; himself.</b> </p>

<p> <b>PatYes, that is the core of the pro-legalization argument.
</b> </p>

<p> Absolutely false. There is a lot here that you don't
understand. </p>

<p> <b>I say so what? He is just as dead. Don't you care? That
_does_ make legalization seem much more attractive. If, say, an
additional 200,000 people die in the first year, the legalizers
would simply say they &quot;victimized&quot; themselves, and
therefore it is no big thing</b> </p>

<p> First, show me some evidence that this would happen. There is
no evidence anywhere that I can find. For openers, you might try
reading some of the studies I have mentioned. </p>

<p> Second, even if it did happen, there is even less evidence
that prison is the best approach to minimizing the problem. As I
have said many times before, all the major studies said that
prison was the worst approach. </p>

<p> Third, even if it did happen (which all major studies refute)
all major studies agreed that abandoning prison would still be a
better approach. </p>

<p> Fourth, as we have discussed before, legalization and prison
are not the only options. </p>

<p> . </p>

<p> <b>Please see this point. Responding that you don't think
more peole would die is not addressing this. I am asking you
&quot;What if they _do_ die?&quot; Is that even an issue to you? </b>
</p>

<p> Sure it is. That's why I want to see an approach which works
a whole lot better than what we are doing now. Every major study
agreed that the current system kills people from a whole lot of
causes. </p>

<p> <b>You referred back to Frank again, and said that Frank was
referring to &quot;responsible&quot; freedom. I had wondered
whether, if you were with Frank, drunk, and about to climb down a
cliff, whether he would smile and nod, or try to stop you by
whatever means necessary. Frank said &quot;a situation in which
any outside authority can proscribe the actions of an individual
agent, even if the motivation is to &quot;protect&quot; that
agent &quot;from himself&quot; is indefensible. It is a god-given
right to not only be wrong, but to also injury onself,
overtly/intentionally or covertly/unintentionally.&quot;</b> </p>

<p> We have already established that tough laws and big prisons
could not stop you from harming yourself with drugs. Should we
perhaps just attach a 24-hour bodyguard to you because you are a
known risk? How about isolation? </p>

<p> <b>Now, please, lets you and I get serious. Assume
legalization is _not_ an option. Can you think up options to
lower the amount of suffering caused by drug abuse? Visits to
LARC's by high school classes?</b> </p>

<p> <b>How about producing a very long lasting drug that makes
cocaine and heroin not function? Antabuse does a similiar thing
for alcoholics, but only stays in the system for about a week
after the last use. How about prison farms, where addicts are
seperated from the general population, and spend most of their
time in education and hard manual labor, for the duration of
their sentence? Any ideas at all????</b> </p>

<p> There are lots of ideas, some of which I have already shared
with you. In Europe they are trying even more than we have
discussed here and nearly all of those programs are having better
results than what we experience here. </p>

<p> As for the prison farms and hard manual labor, I suggest
again that (assuming you are right) we should start with the
addicts we know -- namely you. What's wrong with that? It would
improve your life greatly, wouldn't it? </p>

<p> <b>So, our government is wasteful and inept. That doesn't
preclude imprisonment as being a proper course of action.</b> </p>

<p> No, but the absolute futility of this approach, combined with
the fact that every major study of the issue says it does more
harm than good would preclude it as a proper course of action. </p>

<p> I would also like to ask you exactly when prison became a
&quot;proper course of action&quot; because no such fact was ever
established when these laws were first passed. </p>

<p> <b>I know of one who died from heroin. He was in my wedding
party. I know of another who died in an automobile wreck while
under the influence of cocaine. He was my best man. They're the
only two statistics I need to be familiar with. Unfortunately I
know more. Perhaps if they had been in jail, they would be
statistics.</b> </p>

<p> The obvious point here is that drugs are illegal as hell but
they did not stop either one of these tragedies. This makes it
all the more curious why you would support a policy that did
nothing for your friends. </p>

<p> <b>At the risk of sounding offensive, I dare say that until
you have lived and shared in the misery associated drug addiction
and abuse, you know absolutely nothing beyond the politically
slanted statistics that you've read or have access to. Perhaps
you do know something about this misery, in which case you've let
your mind lead your heart.</b> </p>

<p> I hear this a lot and it is BS from beginning to end. First,
let me assure you that I have a pretty fair amount of experience
with addicts, as do all of the doctors and others listed in
Signer.zip. I dare say that the experience of any one of them
would far outweigh the experience you have had. </p>

<p> I don't think that knowing someone who was an addict or even
being an addict yourself provides any great insights into a
proper national policy. That gives entirely too much credit to
drugs. </p>

<p> As for not knowing anything beyond the politically slanted
statistics, it is apparent that you have not been to the library
and read the studies I have mentioned many, many times. If you
had, you would find that the statistics -- and their
interpretation -- are quite clear to anyone who has bothered to
read the evidence. As President Nixon's own commission said, the
real problem is the ignorance of our public officials who have
never bothered to read the evidence. </p>

<p> <b>Increased &quot;incidence,&quot; not increased
&quot;reports.&quot; And yes, I expect that a 25% incidence of
narcotics would indicate harm to society.</b> </p>

<p> Perhaps you are wrong here, because the major studies of the
issue stated that, despite the widespread usage, it did not seem
to be a major problem. Furthermore, even if it was, there was no
evidence presented to Congress to show that the Harrison
Narcotics Act was an appropriate approach to the problem. In
fact, as stated earlier, the medical officials in this country
felt it was not the proper approach. Furthermore, if you will
read the Consumers Union Report (which you seemed to have missed
in your trips to the library) you will find that most members of
Congress did not realize that they were passing what would turn
out to be a Prohibition law. Similarly, when hemp was outlawed in
1937, most members of Congress did not realize that they were
outlawing a commercial crop which was grown in virtually every
state in the US. </p>

<p> <b>you equate the social, economic, and political milieu of
19th century China with that of modern day America</b> </p>

<p> <b>I am not doing anything of the kind.</b> </p>

<p> It seems to me you were. But, regardless, the information you
presented did not support the stated conclusions. </p>

<p> <b>I suggest you write to the Bureau of Justice Statistics
and tell them that their figures are in error.</b> </p>

<p> I suggest you research your facts a little better. You have
missed most of the major research on this issue. </p>

<p> <b>Drug abuse imposes its own costs on society.</b> </p>

<p> True enough. The point is that there is no evidence that
prison does anything to reduce those costs. In fact, every major
study of the issue (which you missed on your trip to the library)
said it only increases the costs. </p>

<p> <b>why we shouldn't help smokers and excessive drinkers kick
the habit</b> </p>

<p> <b>Sounds like a good idea. It's the Christian thing to do.</b>
</p>

<p> So let's get really Christian and throw them all in jail for
their own good. If you are a Christian, let me ask you a simple
question. If we gave this problem to Jesus, what would he do?
Would he build bigger prisons, or would he build hospitals and
schools? Would he punish people, or would he heal them? Before
you answer, please note that I have talked to a lot of members of
the clergy and they all come back with the same answer. As one
said, &quot;Put that way, the answer is obvious.&quot; </p>

<p> <b>When the smokers start robbing me at gun point, I'll start
to worry . . .</b> </p>

<p> Then you should start to worry the minute cigarettes come
under drug Prohibition. If you had read the major studies of the
issue you would know that tobacco users commit the same kinds of
anti-social behavior as other addicts when they are deprived of
their drug of choice. </p>

<p> <b>I don't think you understand that drug addiction is
physically harmful. _American Academic Encyclopedia_:
&quot;Tolerance develops to most of the effects of these drugs,
which means that the dose must be regularly increased to maintain
a constant effect.&quot; This leads to a gradual physical
deterioration which is generally obvious in long-time junkies.</b>
</p>

<p> The statement by the American Academic Encyclopedia does not
establish any harm to the body other than increased craving. Your
statement is easily proven wrong by the doctors I have talked to
(listed in Signer.zip) who are the world's leading experts on the
subject. </p>

<p> And, of course, I have been asking everyone on this board who
Dr. William Halsted is and how he is relevant to this issue. But,
of course, you don't know such basic facts as that, so there
ain't much point in asking you, is there? </p>

<p> <b>There are only 15,000 - 20,000 hard drug users in the
Netherlands. It's a small country. I have no figures on
mortality. However, I would expect they have a similar proportion
of OD cases to what we have here.</b> </p>

<p> In 1992 they had 28 deaths from heroin overdose in the entire
country. This is all the more remarkable when you consider that
heroin is usually injected and thus bypasses all the bodies
defenses against overdose. </p>

<p> <b>_Contemporary Drug Problems_ is not a &quot;book&quot; but
an academic journal. In this case, the author of the article
&quot;Drugs and crime in an accommodating social context: the
situation in Amsterdam&quot; was written by Martin Grapendaal, Ed
Leuw and Hans Nelen, who are introduced as follows:</b> </p>

<p> <b>. . .</b> </p>

<p> If you would like some more direct information, I can put you
in touch with Michael Hessing (former chief of police of
Rotterdam), Robert Van der Hoeven, the DA, etc., etc., etc. </p>

<p> <b>To accuse someone of lying would be rude, and so
naturally, I have not done so. I merely express a healthy degree
of skepticism as to Cliff's statements. As to his motives, I do
not care to speculate.</b> </p>

<p> Please read Signer.zip in library 13. I met with Friedman and
others on February 23, 1993 at the Hoover Institution and signed
what became known as the Hoover Resolution. I have become
reasonably well known for this, having persuaded such people as
William Von Raab, Dear Abby, and others to support the
Resolution. If you like, I will send you the transcript of the
radio show Hugh Downs did about me. I am fairly well known in
this field so, if you knew anything about it, you would run
across my name eventually. </p>

<p> As to my motives, I have stated them quite clearly on a
number of occasions. My mother cannot get the medicine she needs.
</p>

<p> <b>To begin with, there is no need to lock them all up, and
certainly not to imprison them all simultaneously. If you read
&quot;Narctics Reform,&quot; you understand that I never
advocated locking up *all* heroin users. First-time offenders
should be allowed treatment + probation, provided they have not
committed any other offense. Subsequent drug offenses would be
punished according to an accelerated schedule: Second-time
offenders would be obliged to do some jail time, third-time
offenders would get a longer sentence, and so on. Since the
recidivism rate for drug offenses is only 30%, this would reduce
the number of addicts requiring long-term confinement to a
relative handful.</b> </p>

<p> So, let's try the question again. How many people should be
locked up? Don't give me vague generalities, give me some
numbers. </p>

<p> <b>I have not expressed any opinion, pro or con, as to the
legalization or decriminalization of marijuana. However, eleven
states have already decriminalized simple possession of
marijuana, without any obvious harmful results.</b> </p>

<p> Of course, you are not familiar with how hemp or any of the
other drugs became illegal in the first place, are you? </p>

<p> <b>I believe that the difference between promoting the
legalization of narcotics and the use of narcotics is a very fine
distinction. One leads to the other.</b> </p>

<p> Correct me if I am wrong, but I think we have already
established that you have never read the major research on the
issue and therefore would not be quite qualified to make this
judgment. As it turns out, those who are now recommending
legalization are those who have spent decades trying to limit
drug abuse. </p>

<p> <b>You prefer being robbed at gunpoint? That is a false
economy.</b> </p>

<p> If someone commits a robbery, as my good friend Judge Gray
will tell you, that is an entirely different issue and they
should be brought before a court of law. Until then, however, it
is pointless to try to control private drug use with criminal
law. </p>

<p> <b>With stubborn cases who refuse to reform, that may be the
only alternative. These represent only a small minority, however.</b>
</p>

<p> So you still have not answered the simply question of how
many should go to jail. I bet you never thought about it, did
you? </p>

<p> <b>Child-molesting doesn't *necessarily* involve violence nor
threat of violence. In the case of teen prostitution, it's a
purely commercial arrangement.</b> </p>

<p> It may interest you to know that Joseph Califano, in a report
to the governor of New York in 1980, estimated that 70 percent of
all child molestation and abuse cases are related to alcohol. So
it again brings up the question of why you aren't campaigning for
alcohol prohibition. </p>

<p> <b>Well, er, no. Not quite. Cliff said exactly this --
&quot;Wait! You just convinced me that prison is the right
approach! We ought to start by throwing the known drug addicts
(that's you) into prison &quot;for their own good.&quot; A good
twenty year stretch in the pen will change your mind about how
appealing these drugs are.&quot; </b> </p>

<p> I told you that any time you thought it would be a good idea
for you to spend ten years locked in a small room as some thug's
sexual plaything I would be more than happy to do what you think
is the best thing for you. </p>

<p> <b>I thought he was being sarcastic, and replied &quot;You
also indicated that I should be imprisoned as a drug addict. I
assume you are being sarcastic again. (Which, BTW, is rude.)
Since I have now been sober for 13 years and 15 days, prison is
not called for.&quot;</b> </p>

<p> Oh, but you are still a known risk for addiction aren't you?
How else are we going to protect you from yourself? </p>

<p> Dr. Andrew, </p>

<p> Re the issue of comparative toxicity of drugs, the following
might interest you. Marijuana is not included, of course, because
there are no recorded deaths from marijuana in human history
(source: DEA). Therefore, there would be little point in
reporting the death rate from pot. Because the death rate is
ZERO, there seems to be even less point in jailing people for its
use. </p>

<p> Actually, I think these numbers might be understated with
respect to the number of users of heroin and cocaine. Other
figures I have seen are somewhat higher and, as I mentioned, I
believe the survey method itself promotes underreporting of users
for several reasons. Therefore, it seems quite possible that the
death rates per user for heroin and cocaine may be somewhat lower
than the figures stated below. </p>

<p> With respect to the number of deaths by heroin, you may
recall that the CU Report stated that they could not find any
heroin &quot;overdose&quot; death in which they believed the
medical evidence supported the label of &quot;overdose.&quot;
Oooooops! Sorry! I forgot you haven't read the CU Report! </p>

<p> By the reasoning that you have given before (what little
actual reasoning we have seen) we ought to throw people in jail
for (fill in the blank) because this drug can kill people. By
those standards, the heaviest penalties ought to be for alcohol
and tobacco. </p>

<p> You are, of course, free to present any valid citable
information which would conflict with these figures -- but you
haven't done it yet, so I don't expect you to start now. </p>

<p> from: Thinking About Drug Legalization </p>

<p> by James Ostrowski, Cato Institute Paper # 121, May 25, 1989
$2.00 </p>

<p> to order or for information, write Policy Analysis </p>

<p> Cato Institute </p>

<p> 224 Second St. SE </p>

<p> Washington DC 20003 </p>

<p> Estimated Per Capita Death Rates by Drugs </p>

<p> ---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Drug Users Deaths per Year Deaths per 100,000 </p>

<p> ---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> Tobacco 60 million 390,000 (a) 650 </p>

<p> alcohol 100 million 150,000 (b) 150 </p>

<p> Heroin 500,000 400 (c) 80 (400) </p>

<p> Cocaine 5 million 200 (c) 4 (20) </p>

<p> ---------------------------------------------------------- </p>

<p> (a) &quot;Reducing the Health Consequences of Smoking: </p>

<p> 25 Years of Progress&quot; Surgeon General's Report (1989). </p>

<p> (b) Estimates vary greatly, depending upon whether all health
</p>

<p> consequences, or only those traditionally associated with </p>

<p> alcoholism, are considered. The Fifth Special Report to the </p>

<p> U.S. Congress on Alcoholism and Health from the Secretary of </p>

<p> Health and Human Services contains two references indicating </p>

<p> a death toll of 200,000: The report states, first, that
alcohol </p>

<p> &quot;plays a role in 10% of all deaths in the United
States,&quot; </p>

<p> which comes to about 200,000 deaths each year. P. vi. It
further </p>

<p> states that present estimates of the death toll from alcohol </p>

<p> abuse are as high as 93.2 per 100,000. Ibid., p. x. This </p>

<p> ratio translates into a total of about 210,000. </p>

<p> (c) These figures were determined as follows: Drug Abuse
Warning </p>

<p> Network (DAWN) heroin and cocaine fatalities for 1984, 1985, </p>

<p> and 1986 were averaged. The number of suicides was
subtracted. </p>

<p> The figures were discounted to account for deaths in which </p>

<p> both heroin and cocaine played a role. Since DAWN covers </p>

<p> about one-third of the nation's population but almost all </p>

<p> major urban areas where drug use florishes, totals were
doubled </p>

<p> to arrive at yearly estimates of 2,000 for heroin deaths and </p>

<p> 1,000 for cocaine deaths. Finally, these figures were dis- </p>

<p> counted by 80 percent in accordance with the analysis
presented </p>

<p> in the text. </p>

<p> <b>Cliff, I've been practicing medicine for 20+ yrs.</b> </p>

<p> <b>I'm also active in medical politics (currently
president-elect of the medical staff of a major tertiary care
hospital).</b> </p>

<p> <b>We have a rich tradition of communicating and discussing
among ourselves all matters relevant to clinical practice,
economics and ESPECIALLY governmental control.</b> </p>

<p> <b>The communication is accomplished via formal (peer
reviewed) journals as well as by a welter of &quot;popular&quot;
medical periodicals.</b> </p>

<p> As I said before, I will be more than happy to compare your
credentials on this subject against the credentials of the
doctors who made the statements. But let's start with the simple
points first; </p>

<p> The total amount of heroin you have prescribed in your career
is _______? Please fill in the blank. </p>

<p> If you are an average US doctor you have never laid your
hands or eyes on medicinal heroin and certainly have never
prescribed it. Therefore, it would seem obvious that your
knowledge is inferior to the doctors I have talked to who have
actually worked with it. As I also said, I will be happy to put
you in touch with some of them. As I suggested to Forrest
Johnson, you can call them yourself if you like. Try, for
instance, just calling the publich health service in Liverpool
and ask to speak with the doctors in charge of their program. I
would be interested to hear the response you get. </p>

<p> If you were really knowledgeable about the subject (like some
of the doctors I have talked to) you would also be able to tell
me about the supplies of heroin in the US which are legal, how
they got here, and what they are used for. But, of course, you
can't even tell me who Dr. William Halsted is (even though you
CLAIMED to have read the book which describes him in some detail)
so we will not move on to the hard questions. </p>

<p> Why is it that you have such a difficult time answering
simple questions? What is the problem here anyway? </p>

<p> <b>NOWHERE AND AT NO TIME HAVE I RUN ACROSS ANY MENTION OF
DOCTORS JAILED FOR TREATING PATIENTS OR VOICING DISAGREEMENT WITH
ANYTHING.</b> </p>

<p> As I said before, it is becoming increasingly apparent that
you have not read the Consumers Union Report or any of the other
studies I mentioned. If credibility is an issue, yours is fading
fast. Were you telling us all a big story when you said you read
it? </p>

<p> <b>We have one journal (Medical Economics) that searches out,
investigates and reports on ANY &quot;sensational&quot; aspect of
non-clinical MD related activity.</b> </p>

<p> <b>They would go nuts if they thought they were missing a
story such as this.</b> </p>

<p> Again, I say that you have not read the materials you said
you read. It did not happen last week, it happened immediately
after the laws were passed and had the effect of stopping all
drug research and treatment for several decades. (Did you perhaps
miss the part about &quot;several decades&quot;). </p>

<p> But, to go on to more recent matters -- It is also apparent
that you have not read the reports issued by the Department of
Health and Human Services about the undertreatment of pain, and
you are not familiar with the California Medical Association's
recent statements on the issue. Your communication is lacking.
You can get a full copy of the HHS report by calling
1-800-4CANCER. </p>

<p> Also, as I stated previously, Dr. Harvey Rose of Sacramento
was prosecuted for giving Darvon to an 84-year old woman with
crippling arthritis. It almost destroyed his practice. I will put
you in touch with him if you like. As a result of his experience,
he wrote California's Intractable Pain Treatment Act which seeks
to give doctors some protection against this kind of arbitrary
prosecution. </p>

<p> Also, in 1992, the DEA sent two Chicago doctors to prison for
prescribing Tylenol 3. As you may know (assuming you really are a
doctor -- we have had some pretenders here before) Tylenol 3 is
not even a prescription drug except in the US and South Africa,
and the US is the only country in the world which has ever jailed
a doctor for prescribing it. </p>

<p> You may also be interested in the case of Florida vs.
Martinez which appeared on Court TV and has been repeated several
times because it was such an interesting trial. Mr. Martinez is
an AIDS counselor who was handing out morphine to anyone who
would come in and ask for it. Mr. Martinez does not have any kind
of medical training (other than OJT as a AIDS counselor) and
freely admitted that he was violating both state and Federal drug
laws. His only defense was that his actions were a medical
necessity because of the barbaric policies on drugs. The
testimony was quite interesting. When the jury heard all of the
evidence they voted unanimously for acquittal and stated that Mr.
Martinez was a &quot;hero&quot;. </p>

<p> Also, my mother's doctors have stated that the specific
reason that they will not give her morphine (or heroin) is
because they are afraid of prosecution if they do. These doctors
have included the doctors at the Mayo Clinic, the National Pain
Institute, the USC Pain Clinic, etc., etc., etc. As you recall, I
asked you if you would prescribe it for her and got the usual
cop-out. Your credibility is lacking in more than one respect. </p>

<p> <b>Your inflammatory statement demands proof.</b> </p>

<p> <b>As I have said before, your credibility is fatally
jeopardized by these sorts of wildly improbable statements.</b> </p>

<p> The proof demands that you actually read the things you said
you read. Your credibility also hinges on whether you can answer
any of the simple questions I have put to you. For example: Who
was Dr. William Halsted and why is his story relevant to the
things you have said? (He asked for the umpteenth time.) </p>

<p> Frankly, I would think that anyone who had been in medical
practice for more than 20 years would be able to answer these
questions a whole lot easier. Why is it that a practicing
physician cannot answer simple questions on this issue when he
claims to be an expert? </p>

<p> <b>There was an article in my morning newspaper. . . .It
first reported that the heroin hitting the streets today is more
pure, costs less, and is more lethal. Cliff and Mona please note
- lethal means that heroin is not harmless.</b> </p>

<p> A newspaper article with an unsupported statement about drugs
</p>

<p> <b>They also quoted Lee Brown, the country's drug policy
director, as saying that since some of the stigma has been
removed, heroin is now more socially acceptable. It use is
increasing. He also said its use is increasing because you can
now get purer doses for less money. (That is fundamental economic
theory coming out again. Please note, as it gets to be a more
quality product, and the price goes down, its use goes up -
despite the Netherlands.) </b> </p>

<p> Heroin is more socially acceptable? Who does he hang around
with? </p>

<p> If quality is going up and price is going down, then
obviously the drug war is not having its desired effect. This
much seems obvious. </p>

<p> <b>He stated there are now 2.7 million hard-core, chronic
drug users in this country. </b> </p>

<p> That much is correct. How many of them do you want to put in
prison? - Recognizing, of course, that jailing them would require
TRIPLING the size of every prison and jail which now exists in
America. </p>

<p> <b>Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., was quoted ast calling
heroin a vicious drug that tempts its users into a lifetime of a
living hell. (Hmmmmmmm.... they don't, apparently, just stop the
first time they vomit.)</b> </p>

<p> Charles Schumer -- Now there is an informed, intelligent,
reliable, impartial source that you can rely on. (Being sarcastic
here, in case you didn't catch it. This guy is famous for his
ignorance of the subject.) </p>

<p> <b>Thomas Constantine, administrator of the DEA, who came
there from the New York State police, gave a short history on how
the quality and purity of heroin is increasing. Street heroin
purity has gone from 7% a decade ago to an average of 36% now. In
New York and Boston, it reaches 95%.</b> </p>

<p> So he said interdiction was not working. I think we covered
that before. </p>

<p> <b>Opium production has quadrupled in the last decade. </b> </p>

<p> Ten years ago the DEA estimated that only one percent of the
entire world's opium supply would be required to supply the
entire demand in the US. Now I guess it is down to one-fourth of
one percent. </p>

<p> <b>End of article. It appears that heroin is not harmless,
and as its quality goes up and its price goes down, its use goes
up. Lets keep it illegal. </b> </p>

<p> It appears that you have a newspaper article with a bunch of
unsubstantiated statements. Of course, even assuming that heroin
is as dangerous as stated, that still does not establish that
throwing people in prison is the best approach to the problem.
The example of alcohol is instructive in this regard. </p>

<p> So, in conclusion, you have leaped from one unsubstantiated
statement to a conclusion which would be a non-sequitir in any
case. </p>

<p> <b>You frequently take sentences one at a time, and respond,
thereby answering points I am not making. </b> </p>

<p> Yes, because the points you made in those sentences cannot be
substantiated by an evidence I have found. You proceed from wrong
information to wrong conclusions. Let's get the information right
first, and then we might be able to move on to correct
conclusions. </p>

<p> <b>Also, frequently your response is not responsive. If you
say &quot;Heroin is harmless!&quot; and I respond &quot;But
according to your stats, 20,000 people a year die from it!&quot;
it is _not_ appropriate to then say &quot;But putting them in
prisons doesn't work.&quot; Please respond to the thought, or
skip it. It is very hard to maintain a dialog when you jump
around. </b> </p>

<p> Please get it straight what I have said. I did not say that
20,000 people die every year from heroin. (If you can't get this
straight then there is all the more reason to question the other
things you say). </p>

<p> What I said was that the AMA estimated that 20,000 people die
from ALL illegal drugs from ALL causes, including overdose,
accidents, etc. </p>

<p> Simply stating the number of people who die does not provide
any support for the notion that prison is a beneficial approach.
As I have stated previously, far more people die from alcohol and
tobacco which, by your reasoning, would show that prison ought to
be an even better idea for these drugs. In order to show that
prison is a beneficial approach, it must be shown that the number
of deaths would decrease with more people put in prison -- in
some proportion that would provide a real benefit in terms of the
cost. (You know, a simple cost-benefit analysis -- which you have
stated previously you have never even seriously considered.) </p>

<p> <b>Perhaps not. The post was addressed to Mona, not you.
Please pay attention. </b> </p>

<p> You stated that a junkie's right to fry his own brains was
the core of the arguments for (for lack of a better word)
&quot;legalization&quot;. I pointed out that you are wrong. You
can take those arguments away entirely and prison is still not a
good idea. </p>

<p> <b>Okay, you are being cute. Since your true position appears
to be in favor of legalizing drugs, I will attribute that to you,
and simply ignore any more comments like the above. If I am
wrong, state your position on legalization. </b> </p>

<p> We have been over this ground before. My position is that we
should have one consistent philosophy and approach to all
recreational drugs. That would require re-thinking our approach
to not only heroin, cocaine, and marijuana, but alcohol and
tobacco as well. </p>

<p> <b>You cannot have everything both ways, Cliff. If you are
not being sarcastic, then you really do believe that I should be
imprisoned. For twenty years. Because I am an addict. Of course,
that thought is contrary to your beliefs most of the time. So do
you _really_ want me in prison because I am an _uppity_ addict?
The only things your really know about me are that I am an addict
(whom, you believe, should not be imprisoned), and I disagree
with you on this policy (and I should be imprisoned.) </b> </p>

<p> <b>Or, of course, maybe there is some hypocrisy in your
belief system. </b> </p>

<p> You are the first addict I have run across who believes that
spending ten years in a small cell as someone's girlfriend (hope
he doesn't have AIDS) would improve his life. If you really
believe it, I am willing to grant it. I don't see any other way
that we could protect you against all the harmful things you
might do to yourself. </p>

<p> <b>It is a common failure of those who get frustrated in a
discussion to take their opponents view, and change it to
something else, and then oppose that. Please stop doing that. </b>
</p>

<p> That's called setting up a straw man. You might want to take
your own advice here. </p>

<p> <b>I am truly dismayed. If an additonal 200,000 people died
in the first year alone, you would still say that your &quot;no
prison&quot; policy is best. Good grief, Cliff, how many would it
take? I was trying to pick a number high enough so you would say
&quot;If that many more people died, of course I would change my
mind about legalization.&quot; You didn't. That many deaths
wouldn't be enough. Am not sure what I can say. Doesn't make much
sense to keep raising the ante until you do say Enough. </b> </p>

<p> As I said, since I don't agree with the policy you are asking
about in the first place, then it doesn't make much sense to
answer such a question. </p>

<p> And, you seem to have missed the question that I have been
asking of everyone. What evidence do you have to show that this
(or any number of increased deaths) would happen? As I said, all
the evidence I have run across says the opposite -- and I have
named that evidence. Do you have any evidence? (Apparently
nothing besides your own opinion, right?) </p>

<p> <b>Can we at least agree that any policy which denies
medicine to sick people has something seriously wrong with it --
both morally and practically? </b> </p>

<p> <b>I agree wholeheartedly. </b> </p>

<p> See, we do agree on some things. Now let's proceed to the
next point. Why is this happening when everyone I talk to seems
to agree that it is wrong? </p>

<p> <b>Ok, an example. You state it costs an average of $450,000
to imprison someone for drug abuse. Part of that cost, according
to you, is $150,000 for building the cell. This implies that
every drug offender has to have a new cell built for him. All
must be in one man cells, and none of them are reused upon the
release of the drug abuser. This is clearly absurd. You stick by
it. I don't have to provide a stat for what the prorated use of a
cell would cost to see that. It is obvious. When I see you cook
stats like that, I then doubt all of your stats because of a
perceived lack of intellectual integrity. </b> </p>

<p> Those are the costs stated by people such as Thomas Coughlin,
the New York State Commissioner of Corrections. I will believe
him before I believe you, particularly when you have not
presented any evidence to back up your statements. </p>

<p> The cells may indeed be reused on the release of the drug
abuser, but you seem to miss the major point here. It would seem
obvious that we have not put enough of them in prison to stop the
problem. Sending a drug abuser (or better yet, a violent
criminal) out the back door when another drug abuser comes in the
front door does not accomplish anything. Therefore, the prison
population will have to increase significantly before this policy
becomes effective. The question is, at what level of prison
population will this program have a real effect? As you have
stated, you don't have a clue what the answer to that one is, so
it really doesn't matter what numbers I cite. </p>

<p> <b>Cliff, you clearly don't understand what addiction is
like. You don't understand how people become addicts. You don't
seem to be very concerned over messed up lives, or deaths, that
could be caused by legalizing drugs. If messed up lives, and
deaths, are not the issue, than what is? If those are not the
issue, than is it only the money angle? Is it the pride of your
position? What is your motivation? </b> </p>

<p> Aside from the fact that you seem to have missed my position
on this issue: </p>

<p> As I have stated, I have relatives who are addicts, including
one that I grew up with like a brother. As I have stated, while I
deplore their behavior I have to recognize that prison would not
benefit them or society. My objective is to make them whole
again, not to destroy them by turning them into someone's
girlfriend in a small steel room for ten or twenty years. You may
like that and think that is beneficial for you, but I do not
accept that as an appropriate remedy for the people I know. </p>

<p> My motivation is that I would like to </p>

<p> a) change the laws so my mother can get the medicine she
needs. Even you have agreed that denial of medicine is wrong.
(Now you need to understand why it is happening.) </p>

<p> b) develop a policy which helps people instead of destroying
them. </p>

<p> c) Destroy the mythology which surrounds this issue, which
was the original basis for these laws in the first place. It is
increasingly apparent that you do not understand how the laws
came about, and therefore have an incorrect understanding of
where we are today. </p>

<p> <b>You have asked a number of people about imprisoning
30,000,000 drug abusers. I believe that all the serious folks I
know of say they are willing to imprison enough to lower the
suffering rate. I know of no one who believes that would take
30,000,000. Am not sure how many it would take. </b> </p>

<p> That is exactly my point. The people who support this policy
(including you) have never bothered to answer (or even ask) such
basic questions as this. THAT IS THE PROBLEM. Don't feel lonesome
here, because I have asked every government official that I have
run across and all I ever get in response is a rather stupid
expression on their face. How good can this policy be if no one
has ever thought about where we are going with it? </p>

<p> <b>If I ever see that the rate of human misery is, overall,
going up because of putting drug abusers in prison, I would look
into overturning at least some of the laws. </b> </p>

<p> Then look again, and do it more closely. </p>

<p> <b>I know you have rejected my descriptions of addiction, and
how addicts act. </b> </p>

<p> Not so. I believe you completely. As I said, that is the
reason that the CU Report and others have said that drug
prohbition will not work -- because the addicts do not respond
rationally and, therefore, the laws don't mean much to them in
terms of deterrence. Obviously, the laws did not deter you. </p>

<p> <b>But please consider what I told Cliff (when he told me he
thought I should be thrown in prison). I was a practicing addict
for 12 years, and those years are now lost forever. If you had
thrown me in prison, for the typical sentence for a first time
possessor, I _might_ have been so rattled that I would have
sought help, and stopped. If you had done that in year two of the
twelve, you would have given me ten years of life back. Mona, I
really would like those years back. Prison would have been very,
very worth it. </b> </p>

<p> I have no doubt that you would like those years back. We
tried everything we could with law enforcement to give them to
you and our efforts did not succeed. That's why I think we should
have thought about it a little better and developed a plan which
might have helped you more than this one did. As far as I can
see, the only thing this policy did for you was to make treatment
less available because all the money is being spent on prisons. </p>

<p> Yes, we might have given you ten years of life back (assuming
you would respond to jail when you admit that the thought of your
own death did not deter you). You would have spent that ten years
locked in a small steel and concrete room playing the role of
someone's girlfriend. I don't know your personal sexual tastes
but, for the addicts I have known, I would not consider that as
an acceptable remedy to their problem. Most of the ones I have
seen who went through something like that wound up considerably
more screwed up than when they went in. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>