
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-36</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B002-366</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc3a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133559 text/html 63532
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:35:31 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:27:59 GMT
Content-length: 63314
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marijuana Trafficking</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter III Part 2: Marijuana Trafficking </h2>

<p>Marijuana trafficking presents both unique opportunities and
significant disadvantages for the smugglers who provide the drug
to American consumers. The volume of demand for marijuana
precludes domination of the market by any group of traffickers
and allows a constant influx of small-scale and mid-size
operators as limited suppliers. These smaller groups are in large
part able to enter the market because of marijuana's
comparatively low wholesale cost. While an investment of tens of
thousands of dollars is required for entry into the U.S. heroin
or cocaine traffic, a capital investment of less than $10,000 is
generally sufficient in the marijuana trade. Finally, although
marijuana is supplied to U.S. consumers by growers in Colombia,
Mexico and Jamaica, nearly one-sixth of the U.S. supply is
domestically grown. Because significant amounts of the drug are
cultivated in all 50 States, American traffickers need not travel
to a foreign source country for a marijuana supply. </p>

<p>While the barriers to entry in the U.S. marijuana traffic are
relatively low, marijuana sales generate a small profit in
comparison to other illicit drugs. This is primarily because
marijuana, unlike heroin or cocaine, in not diluted or
&quot;cut&quot; in the intermediate phases of trafficking, but is
sold in much the same form at the wholesale and retail levels.
Marijuana is bulky and difficult to transport in high-profit
quantity: the profit generated from the retail sale of 700 pounds
of commercial Colombian marijuana could most probably be equalled
from the retail sale of one kilogram of diluted cocaine. Finally,
trafficking marijuana implies increased risks of interdiction
because the bulk of the drug makes it most visible to law
enforcement authorities. </p>

<p>Despite the relative ease with which small-scale traffickers
can enter the marijuana market, only large criminal organizations
have the resources and connections necessary to generate large
profits from marijuana trafficking. Many of these groups deal in
other drugs in addition to marijuana, and are organized to
facilitate the movement of any drug to the United States with
minimal interference from law enforcement authorities. Their size
allows group control of all aspects of a trafficking venture from
cultivation through the wholesale transaction, thus eliminating
middlemen, decreasing costs and maximizing profit. Unlike smaller
operations, the major trafficking groups have the capital
required to purchase the large vessels, trucks, or planes
necessary for smuggling high profit multi-ton quantities of
marijuana. A final advantage is their willingness to use violence
and corruption, the tools traditionally associated with organized
crime, to ensure the success of smuggling ventures. </p>

<p>Historical Context </p>

<p>From the 1930's through the mid-1970's, Mexican growers and
traffickers supplied nearly all of the marijuana consumed in the
United States. Most shipments of the drug were smuggled into this
country by car or truck; a small percentage was transported by
air. The Mexican monopoly ended in 1975, when in a joint venture,
U.S. and Mexican authorities increased marijuana interdiction and
eradication efforts in major Mexican cultivation regions and
along the U.S. borders. Paraquat, a potent herbicide toxic to
humans, was used widely in the eradication program, and
contaminated much of the Mexican crop. Despite the interdiction
efforts, a portion of the tainted marijuana was successfully
smuggled into the United States, and many Americans who smoked
the drug subsequently suffered adverse health consequences.
Eradication and interdiction of the Mexican crop, compounded by
the American marijuana smokers' reluctance to purchase a
potentially paraquat-tainted drug, resulted in a simultaneous
decrease in the availability of and the demand for Mexican
marijuana. By 1979 Mexico supplied only an estimated 11 percent
of the marijuana available in the United States and by 1981 that
figure dropped to 4 percent. </p>

<p>Concurrent with the commitment of more manpower and resources
to marijuana eradication and interdiction efforts in Mexico,
authorities in Jamaica, which was the source of the 10 percent of
the American supply not originating in Mexico, mounted a similar
campaign. The Jamaican initiatives significantly reduced
marijuana production and trafficking in that country, and
virtually eliminated Jamaica from the American marijuana trade
for a number of years. </p>

<p>During the mid-1970's America's two marijuana supply sources,
traffickers in Mexico and Jamaica, had only small amounts of the
drug available for export. The resulting vacuum was swiftly
filled by Colombian criminal groups, who for years had been
involved in smuggling all manner of contraband. Through the late
1960's these groups increased cultivation of marijuana in remote
regions of the Guajira Peninsula and began to develop systems to
facilitate the transport of multi-ton quantities of the drug to
the United States. At the same time, many Colombian groups were
establishing themselves as major operators in the cocaine trade:
the organizational structures, trafficking routes and corrupted
officials necessary for cocaine ventures often proved equally
useful for marijuana trafficking. </p>

<p>Once the Colombians established a position as marijuana
traffickers, their role in the traffic expanded rapidly. By 1975
airstrips capable of handling heavy 4-engine planes with the
capacity to hold one ton of marijuana were common along the
Guajira Peninsula. Loading facilities for
&quot;motherships,&quot; large vessels capable of transporting
tons of marijuana, dotted the coast. By the early 1980's a
Congressional committee estimated that between 15 and 60 thousand
tons of marijuana were exported from that country to the United
States each year. </p>

<p>In 1985 Colombia remains the major supplier of U.S. marijuana,
but the Colombian share of the market has declined significantly
since 1980. This decrease is attributed to increased eradication
in Colombia and to accelerated interdiction along major
trafficking routes. Colombia's reduced production has been offset
by increased cultivation and trafficking both in Mexico and
Jamaica. Mexico, now ranked second in world marijuana production,
could become the leading producer in 1986, given a Mexican bumper
harvest and continuing eradication in Colombia. </p>

<p>This short history of marijuana trafficking demonstrates that
law enforcement pressure in a particular cultivation area is
compensated by production and trafficking increases elsewhere.
Trafficking organizations are positioned in all major source
countries to handle increased volume when opportunities present. </p>

<p>Trafficking Today: Colombia </p>

<p>Colombia supplied 42 percent of the marijuana consumed in the
United States in 1984. The major percentage of this traffic was
controlled by large Colombian criminal organizations. </p>

<p>Although the Colombian marijuana crop is cultivated in several
regions of the country, the largest production occurs along the
Guijara Peninsula. Colombian traffickers purchase marijuana from
growers, and sometimes provide protection and additional
financing for cultivation. Crops are harvested twice each year,
with the largest harvest occurring in the fall. The harvest
pattern directly affects the level of marijuana trafficking
activity between Colombia and the United States; trafficking is
naturally heaviest after the fall harvest. </p>

<p>Nearly 90 percent of the marijuana exported from Colombia is
shipped to the United States by sea; almost all the remainder is
transported on general aviation aircraft. Both maritime and air
traffic are primarily concentrated along Colombia's north coast,
although some percentage of the traffic is centered along the
country's Pacific coast. </p>

<p>The major portion of Colombian marijuana is shipped to the
United States on large motherships. These ships are typically
fishing vessels or freighters and can hold tons of marijuana; a
100-foot mothership can transport SO tons and a 400 foot
mothership can ship over 100 tons of the drug. These ships,
generally owned or at least controlled by Colombian trafficking
organizations, remain at sea or in selected Colombian ports until
a shipment is prepared for export and transported to a beach site
along the Colombian coast. There are more than 100 such sites
along the north coast from Barranquilla to Portete, all which are
linked by a network of roads, trails and airstrips to the major
growing areas. When preparations are complete on shore, the
mothership moves into a prearranged loading point typically
one-half to 3 miles offshore. Small boats then ferry bales of
marijuana from shore to the mothership; loading of many tons may
be accomplished within an hour. Motherships are nearly always
loaded at night to decrease risks of detection. </p>

<p>The loaded motherships generally either sail from the Guajira
coast directly to the southeastern United States or to Caribbean
transshipment points, where cargo is off-loaded for future
pickup. Traffickers use the same maritime routes popular with
cocaine traffickers; the Windward Passage between Cuba and Haiti,
the Yucatan Channel between Mexico and Cuba, and the Mona
Passage, bordered by the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico, are
most frequently traveled. From these routes American ports along
the Gulf of Mexico and the east coast are accessible to
smugglers. In addition, a small percentage of Colombian ships now
sail directly to the U.S. west coast. </p>

<p>Those motherships that approach the U.S. coast typically hover
50-100 miles offshore in international waters. There, they are
met by small ships, typically purchased or rented shrimp boats,
which off-load and ferry the drug shipment to shore. While
traffickers traditionally made no attempt to conceal bales of
marijuana, either on motherships or on off-loading vessels,
increased law enforcement surveillance has recently prompted
smugglers to hide their drugs in secret compartments or in empty
or false fuel tanks. </p>

<p>The Colombian trafficking organization normally oversees the
cultivation and export of marijuana only through the off-loading
procedure. Off-loading is accomplished by &quot;service
providers&quot; who never actually own the marijuana, but who
merely collect a fee for its safe transfer. Once on the U.S.
shore, the drug shipment is delivered to a distributor, who in
turn supplies lower level dealers. The traffic below the
wholesale distributor level is vast and not well-understood. </p>

<p>Motherships that do not travel to the United States generally
transit the Bahamas and/or the Caribbean. In both regions
marijuana traffickers can either transfer shipments from
motherships to smaller crafts, which sail to the United States,
or they can unload and store shipments at island storage bases.
Use of island transshipment points has increased as law
enforcement efforts have intensified along the southeastern U.S.
coast. Rampant official corruption in a number of island nations
facilitates this traffic. </p>

<p>An estimated 3 percent of the marijuana shipped from Colombia
to the United States by sea is transported on commercial vessels.
Typically, marijuana is concealed in containerized cargo, but in
some instances crewmen or cruise ship passengers have been
directly implicated in trafficking the drug. In terms of
quantity, cargo shipment provides great opportunities for
traffickers and presents a decreased risk of interdiction. </p>

<p>Air Shipment </p>

<p>An estimated 10 percent of the marijuana smuggled from
Colombia to the United States reaches this country via general
aviation aircraft or commercial air shipment. Non-commercial air
shipment of marijuana parallels the Colombian air trafficking
patterns common in cocaine smuggling. Many of the same air routes
and transshipment points are used; the same airstrips are
accessible along the north coast of the country, and the same
methods used to avoid law enforcement interference are
applicable. Smugglers use both smaller twin engine aircraft and
larger four-engine planes for marijuana transport. When air
transport allows faster shipment, it limits export quantities and
increases the likelihood of interdiction. </p>

<p>A small portion of the marijuana exported from Colombia is
shipped by aircraft, then air-dropped over sea or land for pickup
and further shipment to the United States. Most airdrop activity
occurs in the Bahamas, but an increasing number of drops have
been intercepted in the Yucatan Peninsula, Jamaica, Haiti, the
Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico. Medium-size to large twin
engine aircraft are typically used for air-drop operations. </p>

<p>In addition to trafficking marijuana to the United States or
transshipment points, Colombian organizations sell marijuana
directly to non-Colombian traffickers, who assume responsibility
for the shipment in Colombia. The buyers then traffic the drug
into the United States using maritime and air shipment systems
similar to the Colombian methods. </p>

<p>Mexico </p>

<p>Mexican marijuana production nearly doubled from 1983 to 1984,
positioning Mexico as the second leading supplier of the drug to
the United States. An estimated 20 percent of the marijuana
available for consumption in the United States originates in or
transits Mexico, and that figure is expected to increase with a
bumper harvest in 1985. PEA analysts predict that this increased
production, with concomitant eradication and interdiction
successes in Colombia, could make Mexico the top American
marijuana source in 1985. </p>

<p>Although marijuana is grown in nearly every state in Mexico,
heaviest cultivation occurs in the northern and western states of
Sonora, Sinaloa, Chihuahua, Oaxaca and Cuerra. As in Colombia,
crops are harvested twice each year, with the largest harvest in
the fall. Cultivation occurs both in small open fields and in
well-maintained, hundred-acre sites. Growers are typically
overseen and financed by larger trafficking organizations. </p>

<p>Harvested marijuana is prepared for shipment near the
cultivation fields. Mexican marijuana is transported to the
United States by primarily overland methods, although aircraft
are also used to smuggle drugs across the border. Overland
shipments are typically concealed in automobile trucks, false
truck beds, camper tops and tanker trunks. The larger trucks
commonly haul multi-ton quantities: U.S. officials at El Paso,
Texas, seized nearly 6.5 tons of marijuana from a tanker truck in
February 1984, and nearly 30 tons from a cargo truck in March of
that year. In addition, suitcases of marijuana are often
forwarded on commercial bus lines to destinations beyond border
checkpoints for subsequent pick-up. </p>

<p>Air shipments generally run between private Mexican airstrips
and clandestine runways or drop spots in the southwestern United
States. Single engine aircraft are popular with Mexican smugglers
because they can land on open fields, roadways and rough landing
strips common on both sides of the border, and typically carry
about 1,500 pounds of marijuana. While few details are available
concerning marijuana air shipment, the great assortment of
airstrips on both sides of the border suggests a significant
volume of air traffic. A 1977 survey, for example, detected
nearly 3,000 airstrips in Mexico; one-half of them were
concentrated in ten major clusters. About 600 strips lie along
the United States border and are ideally positioned to serve
either as launching sites for flights into the United States or
as refueling stops for flights en route to this country from
southern Mexico. Strips in the other clusters most likely serve
as refueling and transshipment points for aircraft traveling
between South America and the United States. A large number of
airstrips in the southeastern United States serve as landing
sites for the Mexican flights. </p>

<p>Larger Mexican criminal organizations appear to control a
significant portion of the marijuana traffic between Mexico and
the United States. Many groups are active in both cocaine and
heroin smuggling as well as marijuana trafficking. The central
organizations are generally controlled by members of one extended
family, but often include non-family members in lower positions.
Like other trafficking groups, the Mexicans rely consistently on
an essential criminal support of attorneys, bankers and other
professionals, both in Mexico and in the United States. </p>

<p>Prominent among the larger Mexican organizations are the
groups headed by Jamie Herrera Navarres, Rafael Caro Quintero,
Ernesto Fonesca and Miguel Felix Gallardo. These groups
collaborate in smuggling ventures, much as the major Colombian
cocaine trafficking organizations work in concert to maximize
resources and profits. In one recent instance, for example, a
consortium of traffickers led by Caro Quintero cultivated
hundreds of hectares of marijuana at five separate large-scale
sites throughout the state of Chihuahua. All fields were
landscaped, fertilized and well-irrigated, demonstrating the
Mexican traffickers' knowledge of high-tech agricultural
techniques. The cultivation sites, along with eight associated
processing camps, were seized by Mexican authorities in November
1984. The seizures netted 10,000 metric tons of whole marijuana,
or an estimated 1,900 to 2,400 tons of net marketable marijuana.
In this single operation, officials confiscated 8 times more
marijuana than Mexican and American authorities at the time
believed was produced annually throughout Mexico. The seizure
raised serious questions both about the magnitude of drug traffic
between Mexico and the United States and about continuing
official corruption throughout Mexico. It seems highly unlikely
that an operation the size of the Chihuahua system could develop
or function without earlier detection by authorities. </p>

<p>Jamaica </p>

<p>Jamaica, from 1980 to 1984 this country's second leading
marijuana supplier, provided 14 percent of the United States
market share in 1984, trailing Colombia's 42 percent and Mexico's
20 percent contributions. Jamaican traffickers, much less highly
organized than their counterparts in Colombia and Mexico,
supplied about 1800 metric tons of marijuana, as well as smaller
amounts of sinsemilla and hashish oil to United States consumers
in 1984. </p>

<p>The greatest portion of Jamaican marijuana is transported to
the United States by general aviation aircraft, although some
maritime shipment also occurs. Over 70 island airstrips, one-half
of which are clandestine, facilitate the air traffic, which
commonly includes shipment by single engine and light to heavy
twin engine aircraft. Jamaican marijuana shipments are typically
either flown directly to United States landing sites or are
air-dropped to small pleasure craft in waters near the Bahamas. </p>

<p>Multi-ton marijuana shipments are occasionally transported to
the United States on small motherships, pleasure craft and cruise
ships. A small percentage of Jamaican marijuana exported to the
United States is concealed in containerized cargo on commercial
maritime vessels. </p>

<p>The United States Crop </p>

<p>The United States is currently a significant marijuana source
country: about 12 percent of the marijuana consumed in the United
States in 1984 was domestically cultivated. The largest crops are
grown in Hawaii, California, and Oklahoma, but there is now some
production in every State. Growers can be landowners, but are
typically squatters who operate independently or in small groups.
They cultivate their crops in Federal fields, forested land,
private clandestine plots or greenhouses, scattering plants next
to trees or amid legitimate crops to avoid detection. Planting on
Federal land offers growers the advantage of anonymity and
shields them from recently enacted laws which authorize seizure
of their property or other assets. Many plots, including those on
Federal parkland are wired with devices, such as punji sticks,
fish hooks hung at eye level, and trip wires attached to guns and
boulders, designed to ensure the security of the crop. Growers
are often armed and violent. </p>

<p>There is presently no evidence of a highly developed
distribution system for the domestic marijuana crop in the United
States. It appears that numerous smaller organizations traffic
the drug between states and that some individual growers supply
larger criminal organizations in major cities nationwide. These
organizations, which include both La Cosa Nostra groups and
trafficking specific groups, distribute domestic and imported
marijuana to brokers, retailers, and street-level dealers. The
extent of their control of the U.S. market is uncertain but
estimated to be significant. </p>

<p>The Role of the LCN </p>

<p>In 1967 Federal officials reported that the LCN was not
significantly involved In trafficking marijuana. Low profit was
thought to be the primary disincentive to La Cosa Nostra
involvement; in addition, the large and loosely structured market
was thought to be unattractive and uncontrollable. In the late
1960's the United States marijuana supply was exported almost
exclusively from Mexico. Entry into the trafficking business
required little capital and a simple border crossing, and thus
attracted many small and independent operators. When Colombia
became the major United States marijuana supplier in the early
1970's, however, the LCN was provided with a more controllable
source. Concurrent with this production shift, the United States
demand for marijuana and the retail price level for the drug
steadily escalated, prompting some LCN families to become
involved in trafficking marijuana. For a short period, this
activity proved to be a high profit/low risk enterprise for
traditional organized crime. Additionally, trafficking marijuana
carried little of the social stigma associated with trafficking
heroin or cocaine. </p>

<p>As the following case study demonstrates, marijuana
trafficking has increased the vulnerability of some organized
crime families and has led to a number of significant LCN
arrests. </p>

<p>Case Study: The Cleveland Connection </p>

<p>In the mid-1970's, Carmen Zagaria, a Cleveland drug dealer,
began to buy wholesale marijuana by the pound and sell it at
retail in one ounce bags. He rapidly expanded his business in the
course of a few years and developed a network of suppliers,
couriers and distributors. Although the business prospered
generally, Zagaria lost a substantial investment in one foiled
drug transaction in 1979 and borrowed money from Angelo Lonardo,
the reputed underboss of the Cleveland LCN Licavoli family. In
return for the loan, the Licavoli family assumed control of the
Zagaria operation. </p>

<p>Under Lonardo's oversight, the Zagaria enterprise expanded
rapidly. By 1980 the organization was buying 400-800 pounds of
marijuana per week and had incorporated over 20 couriers. PCP,
LSD, cocaine and hashish were added to the traffic. </p>

<p>The methods used by Zagaria were simple. His couriers flew to
the southeastern United States, usually to Florida via commercial
airline, and established contact there with a Zagaria supplier.
Suppliers included both LCN affiliates and non-LCN dealers.
Couriers picked up large marijuana shipments, paid for them in
cash, and drove the drugs back to Cleveland in rental cars. In
Cleveland the shipments were stored in stash houses, then
distributed to a network of wholesalers and retailers. The
Zagaria enterprise was a high-volume multimillion dollar
operation; in a single 10-day period in 1980 the group brought
3,000 pounds of marijuana to Cleveland from Atlanta. </p>

<p>In the course of his trafficking business Zagaria was involved
in numerous crimes, including murder. In 1982 he was convicted of
selling seven pounds of marijuana and 21 grams of cocaine and was
sentenced to 10-30 years in prison. Zagaria became a Federal
informant and though never a member of the Licavoli family
himself, provided sufficient testimony about family activities to
bring the leadership before a grand jury. In 1983 Angelo Lonardo
and five other Licavoli associates were convicted and
incarcerated without possibility of parole for numerous crimes,
including conspiracy to distribute marijuana. </p>

<p>Other Drugs </p>

<p>Millions of Americans abuse a number of licit and illicit
drugs other than heroin, cocaine and marijuana; these include
stimulants, synthetic narcotics, hallucinogens, and depressants.
Most popular among these dangerous drugs are diazepam (Valium),
methamphetamine and PCP. In addition, controlled substance
analogs known commonly as &quot;designer drugs,&quot; have gained
popularity with users since 1980. </p>

<p>Dangerous drugs are available to the consumer from three major
sources. Many of the drugs are approved for medical use in the
United States, and reach the illicit market through a variety of
diversion methods. A significant portion of the United States
supply of certain drugs, notably amphetamines and diazepam, is
diverted from licit channels in foreign countries and smuggled
into the United States. Finally, it is estimated that all the PCP
and chemical analogs, nearly all the methamphetamine and about 80
percent of the injectable amphetamine available on the illicit
market in 1984 were produced in clandestine United States
laboratories. </p>

<p>Only certain areas of the traffic in dangerous drugs clearly
reflect organized crime involvement. Most notably, the traffic
appears to be dominated nationwide by outlaw motorcycle gangs.
According to the Commission's survey of local law enforcement
officials, these gangs control nearly 40 percent of the
&quot;dangerous drug&quot; traffic in the United States. While
these gangs have traditionally been active in trafficking a wide
variety of illicit drugs, they have developed the technology to
manufacture methamphetamine and PCP, and have been a major force
in the wholesale and resale distribution of these two drugs
nationwide. </p>

<p>The major outlaw motorcycle gangs traffic dangerous drugs
within separate territorial boundaries: the Hell's Angels control
the West Coast trade, the Outlaws dominate the Midwest and parts
of the east coast, the Bandidos control the Southwest, and
Eastern Seaboard States are dominated by the Pagans. Officials
are uncertain of the total membership of the four groups, but
estimate that nearly all the U.S. traffic in PCP, and up to
three-fourths of the illicit methamphetamine traffic falls under
their control. </p>

<p>The Hell's Angels, the oldest of the four groups, first became
involved in drug distribution in the late 1960's. Initially, the
group trafficked marijuana, heroin, cocaine, seconal, PCP,
amphetamines and methamphetamines. In the early 1970's the
organization recruited a chemist to manufacture methamphetamine
and to instruct other organization members in the procedure.
Hell's Angels' activity shifted as their production of
methamphetamine increased and within a short period of time, the
organization dominated west coast methamphetamine manufacture and
distribution. </p>

<p>In the eastern United States, the Pagan's gang leadership also
recruited chemists and gained control of the methamphetamine and
PCP markets from Florida to New England. Pagan drug activity is
centered in the Philadelphia/ South New Jersey area; several
Pagan-controlled processing centers and small laboratories are
located in the region. It is known by law enforcement officials
that Pagan gang members have frequently cooperated in joint
ventures with the Philadelphia Bruno organized crime family,
especially in methamphetamine and PCP manufacture and
distribution. Officials believe that the Bruno leadership
regularly finances a portion of Pagan drug activities in return
for a percentage of the drug profits and enforcement and
protection services. In addition, it appears that the Pagans and
the Bruno family have arranged to divide control of the
methamphetamine and PCP markets in certain territories and that
the two groups coexist and cooperate in these regions. </p>

<p>Case Study: The Pagan/Bruno Relationship. </p>

<p>Between 1977 and 1981 both the Pagan motorcycle gang and the
Bruno organized crime family were active and competitive
distributors of methamphetamine throughout the mid-Atlantic
states. Both groups obtained P2P, an essential chemical in
methamphetamine production, from Ronald Raiton, the major
supplier of the chemical in the eastern United States. Raiton
supplied P2P directly to Ronald Kownacki, a businessman closely
aligned with the Pagan leadership, and to Ronald Martorano, a
Bruno family associate. Though Kownacki and Martorano both
operated in the Philadelphia area, their laboratories and
clientele were distinct. </p>

<p>Kownacki paid the Bruno family a $10,000 fee for every gallon
of P2P he purchased from Raiton. He sold the methamphetamine he
produced to Pagan Walter &quot;Buckets&quot; Jozwiak, who cut the
drug and distributed it to Pagan mother club members in New
Jersey, Delaware and Philadelphia. Martorano distributed his
methamphetamine through Bruno family channels. </p>

<p>In 1980 Kownacki was assaulted and robbed by two Bruno
associates, who claimed they were collecting a debt owed to the
Bruno family. They stole a significant amount of gold from
Kownacki, which he maintained belonged to the Pagans. In February
1981 a number of Pagans confronted members of the Bruno family
and demanded that the gold be returned. The Bruno associates
refused, but agreed to meet with the Pagans to negotiated
possible joint ventures in trafficking methamphetamine and PCP.
Finally in 1982 the Pagans and the Bruno family agreed that each
group would control methamphetamine and PCP markets in separate
territories and that competition between them in these areas
would cease. In 1983 after the agreement, the estimated street
value of the Pagan PCP and methamphetamine operations was $15.5
million. </p>

<p>Organized crime involvement in trafficking dangerous drugs
other than methamphetamine and PCP in the United States is not
well-documented. La Cosa Nostra appears to be active in
trafficking methaqualone from Colombia through Florida to major
United States cities, but the scope of their interest in this
market is not known. Mexican traffickers have smuggled
significant quantities of diazepam, methaqualone and amphetamine
into this country for at least ten years. A major portion of the
illicit methaqualone traditionally available in this country was
trafficked to the United States by Colombian organized crime
groups; however, international controls adopted by virtually all
major producing and exporting countries have led to worldwide
shortage of the drug. </p>

<p>The DEA currently reports that organized crime is not now
involved in the production or distribution of controlled
substance analogs, &quot;designer drugs.&quot; Given the enormous
profit potential of these substances, however, and the relatively
simple manufacturing processes required in their production, the
formulation and distribution of controlled substance analogs
would seem to be an endeavor perfectly suited to organized crime.
</p>

<p>Drug Trafficking, Terrorism, and Insurgency </p>

<p>Drug trafficking organizations in many areas of the world
coexist and cooperate with political insurgent groups and
terrorists. Their typical relationship is mutually beneficial:
traffickers supply terrorists with American currency and weapons
in return for protection and assistance in smuggling activities.
While terrorists and insurgents do not currently control
significant portions of the drug trade, the profit potentially
realized from even isolated drug transactions could provide
sizable revenues for a militant cause. Terrorists and insurgents
funded through drug trafficking could very conceivably become
powerful enough to disrupt governments in a number of countries
presently allied with the United States, and thus pose a serious
threat to this country's national security. </p>

<p>The role of terrorists and insurgents in drug trafficking has
expanded greatly since the early 1970's as drug trafficking has
spread across the world. At that time, heroin traffic was
controlled by North American organized crime groups working with
Sicilian suppliers in the French Connection, marijuana was
supplied to the United States almost exclusively by Mexican
trafficking organizations, and cocaine traffic in this country
was insignificant. Heroin now reaches North America from Europe,
the Middle East, Mexico and Southeast Asia. Marijuana is
trafficked to the United States by Colombian and Caribbean based
groups as well as by Mexicans, and cocaine from nearly every
country in South America satisfies a still-increasing demand for
the drug throughout this country. </p>

<p>At the same time, the expanded United States market for
illicit drugs has swelled the profit from trafficking to enormous
proportions, and attracted terrorist and insurgent groups to this
activity. In addition, this source of funding serves the
ideological purposes of many groups. As explained by terrorism
expert Michael Ledeen: </p>

<p>Running drugs is one sure way to make big money in a hurry.
Moreover, the directions of the flow are ideologically
attractive. Drugs go to the bourgeois countries, where they
corrupt and where they kill, while the arms go to pro-Communist
terrorist groups in the Third World. </p>

<p>The links between terrorist and insurgent groups and
traffickers are most substantial in drug source countries,
including Colombia, Peru, Burma and Thailand. In Colombia, four
major insurgent organizations work in collaboration with cocaine
traffickers. The oldest, largest, and best-equipped of these
groups is the Revolutionary Armed Force of Colombia (FARC), which
is the armed wing of the Colombian Communist Party (PCC) and
claims over 5,000 active members and supporters. The FARC forces
consist of between 23 and 28 &quot;fronts,&quot; essentially
independent company-level forces, nearly all of which are located
in Colombia's rural areas. Over one-half of the fronts operate in
coca and marijuana growing regions. FARC forces cultivate some
coca, but derive more profit by collecting protection payments
from coca growers in their operating territory, often demanding a
10 percent share of the drug profits. One FARC front reportedly
obtained over $3.8 million per month by assessing this protection
tax. Collected monies are used to buy weapons and supplies which
are often shipped into Colombia on return drug flights. Two FARC
fronts have had documented direct dealings with cocaine
traffickers to obtain arms and ammunition. </p>

<p>In exchange for the levied fee, the FARC forces protect
growing and trafficking areas, including air fields, and warn
traffickers of nearby anti-narcotics police or military patrols.
In certain areas of Colombia FARC fronts control enough strategic
points to make police travel difficult or impossible. </p>

<p>FARC encampments have recently been discovered in close
proximity to several major cocaine processing centers. For
example, on April 6, 1984, during a raid of a fully operational
processing center in Southeast Colombia known as &quot;La
Loma,&quot; officials discovered and subsequently destroyed a
FARC guerrilla base camp. The FARC camp, complete with airstrips
and large stockpiles of food and medical supplies, that group's
direct involvement in providing protection for the cocaine
traffickers. A month prior to the La Loma raid, when authorities
raided another processing center nearby known as Tranquilandia,
they were met by approximately 30 armed resistors in fatigue
uniforms believed to be FARC members. </p>

<p>A number of other militant organizations in Colombia have also
been associated with the drug trade. The leftist 19th of April
movement (M-19) has been most notable for its October 1985
takeover of the Colombian Palace of Justice in which 11 of that
country's Supreme Court Justices were murdered. Although M-19 was
once hostile to traffickers, and on several occasions kidnapped
relatives of prominent drug smugglers, some officials maintain
that the October incident was related to drug trafficking. It is
alleged that the attack was motivated by the M-19's desire to
destroy records that might lead to the extradition a number of
major Colombian cocaine traffickers, and to intimidate
authorities in Colombia to force them to rescind the extradition
treaty in effect between that country and the United States. M-19
also at least once traded drugs for arms from Cuba through
Colombian trafficker Jaime Guillot-Lara. In the early 1970's to
1982 Guillot supplied M-19 with weapons in return for their
assistance in his drug smuggling activities through high-ranking
Cuban officials. The Cubans provided a safe haven for Guillot's
drug smuggling vessels en route to the United States from
Colombia in return for payments. M-19 received periodic weapons
shipments for facilitating the arrangement on Guillot Lara's
return trips to Colombia from the United States. </p>

<p>In Peru, where an estimated 40 percent of the world coca crop
is grown, insurgents and traffickers share much the same
relationship evidenced by the Colombians. Insurgents and growers
work in the same remote areas, primarily in the upper Huallaga
Valley, but operate separately. Smugglers supply arms and money
are supplied in return for militant protection. The two groups do
not maintain a structured relationship or pursue common goals;
their collaboration is one of convenience. </p>

<p>The most prominent insurgent group currently operating in Peru
is the Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso), which seeks a
rural-based revolution to rid the predominantly peasant
population of the &quot;imperialistic&quot; influences of the
United States and other foreign governments. While existing
evidence is insufficient to link the Shining Path to the drug
trade, the group has incited peasants, many of whom make their
living from coca cultivation, to rebel against anti-coca projects
in major growing areas. During 1984 several anti-coca projects,
including a United States-supported crop substitution program,
were attacked by armed mobs, resulting in many injuries and
deaths. </p>

<p>In Southeast Asia a number of political insurgent groups rely
principally on heroin smuggling to finance their activities. They
control or influence the main areas of opium production in
northeastern Burma, where the Burmese government does not exert
authority. The insurgents range from ideological revolutionaries
like the Burmese Communist Party (BCP), to ethnic separatists,
such as the Kachin Independence Organization (KIO), and opium
warlords, like the Shan United Army (SUA). All of these groups,
whatever their professed objectives, are heavily involved in the
production, transport or sale of heroin. </p>

<p>In Burma, where 90 percent of the southeast Asian opium crop
is grown, the BCP controls an estimated two-thirds of the major
opium production areas and levies a protection tax on
cultivators. While the BCP has traditionally controlled opium
cultivation and the SUA has exclusively dominated associated
refining and trafficking activities, the BCP has recently begun
to engage in processing and sales, and the groups have come into
conflict. The BCP remains an active political insurgency while
the SUA now concentrates its resources almost entirely on the
drug trade. </p>

<p>In Thailand the link between insurgency and drug trafficking
is much weaker. Although Burmese groups operated with relative
impunity on both sides of the Burma/Thailand border in the early
1980's, government initiatives in Thailand have severely
disrupted their activities. The only indigenous Thai insurgent
group of any consequence, the Communist Party of Thailand (CPT),
is reportedly ready to engage in drug trafficking, but has been
kept under control by Thai security forces. </p>

<p>In the Middle East, nearly all the militant groups engage in
struggle in Lebanon - Palestinians, Phalangists, Druze and
Shiites - reportedly are financed in some part by the drug trade.
Lebanon's Bekaa Valley is the site of significant hashish
production; heroin laboratories are also believed to exist in the
area. Terrorists throughout that area can and do enter the drug
trade, either directly or by protecting drugs transshipped
through regions they control. </p>

<p>Armenian terrorists are also active in Lebanon, especially in
Beirut, where Armenian nationals are heavily involved in drug
trafficking. In 1980 Noubar Sofoyan, an Armenian heroin and
hashish trafficker connected with the right-wing Justice
Commandos of the Armenian Genocide, was indicted in the U.S. for
heroin smuggling. Sofoyan allegedly helped fund the 1976 bombing
of a Turkish installation in Zurich. He was arrested in Greece on
drug charges in 1981 and was subsequently extradited to Lebanon
and released; he remains a fugitive today. </p>

<p>Traffickers as Terrorists </p>

<p>While drug traffickers are not by definition terrorists or
insurgents, they rely heavily on terrorist tactics to obtain
limited political objectives. The use of threats, violence,
assassination and kidnapping by trafficking organizations to
prevent vigorous enforcement of drug laws can only be categorized
as terroristic in nature. </p>

<p>The use of terrorist tactics is most evident among traffickers
in Colombia, Peru and Mexico. In Colombia much of the violence
centers on the issue of the extradition of reputed Colombian drug
traffickers to the United States for trial. The extradition issue
has become prominent in the past two years under Colombian
President Belisario Betancur, and has prompted unprecedented
levels of terrorism by traffickers. Two key members of the
Colombian government, Minister of Justice Rodrigo Lara-Bonilla
and Justice Ministry Assistant Eduardo Gonzalez, both outspoken
supporters of the implementation of the United States/Colombia
extradition treaty, were murdered reportedly by traffickers in
1984. The Colombian judiciary, the body responsible both for the
investigation of drug cases and the disposition of extradition
requests, has been targeted by traffickers. Twenty-four judges,
among them the judge investigating the Lara assassination, have
been murdered in the past two years. Americans have also been
singled out: Colombian traffickers have reportedly offered a
$350,000 bounty for the murder of any top DEA official in the
United States or in Colombia, and have threatened to kill five
Americans for every reputed Colombian drug trafficker extradited
to the United States. </p>

<p>In Peru drug-related violence has been increasing since 1983,
and has specifically targeted anti-drug efforts in the Upper
Huallaga Valley. A series of violent attacks by traffickers on
police units and eradication workers in that area led to the
November 1984 torture and murder of 19 members of a United
States-financed coca-eradication team, and subsequently to the
brutal murder of 17 United States financed eradicators by about
50 traffickers armed with submachine guns less than one year
later. Dozens of people in Peru, including policemen, mayors and
farmers have been reported killed in the past year in attacks
attributed to cocaine traffickers. </p>

<p>In Mexico trafficking violence culminated in the February
kidnapping, torture and murder of DEA Agent Enrique Camerena and
a Mexican pilot. Camerena's abduction occurred shortly after
Mexican police, alerted by DEA, raided the largest marijuana
plantation ever discovered in that country and seized an
estimated 8,500 tons of marijuana. In the course of the search
for Camerena, five persons, including a police officer, were
killed. Mexican trafficker Rafael Caro Quintero is being held by
Mexican authorities in connection with the Camerena murder. The
trafficking-related violence in Mexico escalated further in
November 1985, when 17 police officers and other members of an
anti-drug team working in southern Mexico were lured into an
ambush, tortured, and killed by a large group of drug traffickers
armed with automatic weapons. </p>

<p>Government Complicity </p>

<p>A number of hostile foreign governments, motivated either by a
need for hard American currency, or by a more ideological desire
to undermine governments in Europe and the United States,
actively facilitate drug trafficking activities. Cuban and
Nicaragua blatantly aid traffickers smuggling drugs from Colombia
to the United States; the Bulgarian government assists
traffickers transporting drug shipments from Southwest Asia to
Western Europe. All three countries are geographically
well-positioned to serve as transshipment points for drugs en
route to Europe or the United States, and all allow trafficking
routes to cross through their sovereign territory, thus providing
a way for traffickers to circumvent drug-interdiction
authorities. </p>

<p>Cuba </p>

<p>Reports of Cuban government involvement in drug trafficking
first surfaced in the early 1960's, but were in large measure
unsubstantiated. A series of reports in the 1970's subsequently
suggested Cuban Government involvement, but did not provide solid
evidence of such activity. In the early 1980's, however, the link
between the Cuban government and Colombian drug traffickers was
documented. In November 1982, the United States District Court
indicted four major Cuban officials on charges of conspiracy to
smuggle drugs; those indicted included the former Cuban
Ambassador to Colombia, two officials of the Cuban Communist
Party, and the Vice Admiral of the Cuban Navy. All four officials
were involved in facilitating the trafficking activities of
Colombian Jaime Guillot-Lara, reputedly a major marijuana,
cocaine and methaqualone trafficker. The Cuban officials,
according to the indictment, agreed to allow Cuba to be used as a
supply and loading center for Lara's ships transporting drugs to
the United States, and permitted him to navigate drug vessels
through Cuban waters to evade United States interdiction
authorities. The Cuban Government reportedly expected large
payments for their role in this traffic; on one occasion, the
government was to receive approximately $800,000 from the sale of
10 million methaqualone pills and approximately 23,000 pounds of
marijuana. </p>

<p>In addition to facilitating maritime trafficking, recent
reports indicate that drug traffickers regularly fly through
otherwise tightly controlled Cuban airspace. Traffickers
apparently have an assigned corridor which they can transit
without challenge from Cuban air defenders. Cuba also reportedly
allows Colombian traffickers to off-load drugs to other carriers
for the final journey to the United States. </p>

<p>It is often difficult in drug trafficking cases to make a
distinction between corrupt high-ranking government officials and
government-sanctioned involvement in the drug trade. Given,
however, the tight controls exerted by the Castro government's
security apparatus over foreign travel and communications, the
drug-related activities which have occurred in Cuba in recent
years almost certainly were known and approved by that country's
highest ranking officials. According to the Department of State: </p>

<p>. . . the evidence clearly indicates more than a case of
corruption by local or mid-level security officials in Cuba . . .
Narcotics trafficking has apparently been sanctioned by Cuba as a
means to finance subversion in Latin America. </p>

<p>Nicaragua </p>

<p>Since 1981, the United States has received a steady stream of
intelligence indicating that Nicaragua is used by drug
traffickers as a transshipment point between Colombia and the
United States, and that officials of the revolutionary government
there, the Sandinista Directorate, are involved in the drug
trade. Evidence further suggests that enforcement measures
implemented by Colombian President Betancur have prompted
Colombian traffickers, notably Jorge Ochoa and Pablo Escobar, to
relocate their cocaine processing facilities to Nicaragua. </p>

<p>The best evidence to date of the link between the Nicaraguan
government and Colombian drug traffickers came to light in 1984.
In that year, pilot Adler Barriman Seal, a former Ochoa cocaine
trafficking pilot working then with the DEA in an undercover
capacity, reported that Escobar and Ochoa had agreed in April
1984 to use Nicaragua as a cocaine smuggling base. At Ochoa's
request, Seal flew 750 kilos of cocaine in June, 1984 from
Colombia to an airfield just northwest of Managua. The airfield
was used generally as a joint facility by the Nicaraguan armed
forces and the Ministry of the Interior. Seal's aircraft was
damaged in the landing, and according to Seal, Frederico Vaughn,
a personal assistant to Interior Minister Thomas Borge, arranged
for him to return to the United States in another plane. Later
that June, Seal returned to the airfield in a C-123 aircraft,
equipped with a hidden camera, to retrieve the drugs. Both Vaughn
and Escobar, escorted by Nicaraguans in uniform and recorded on
videotape, personally helped Seal load the cocaine into the
aircraft. Vaughn was paid $1.5 million for providing the
Colombian traffickers &quot;secure facilities.&quot; </p>

<p>In July 1984, Seal made another trip to Nicaragua from the
United States to bring supplies for a new cocaine processing
complex under construction there. In a subsequent taped
conversation with Seal, Frederico Vaughn stated that the
processing center was ready for use. </p>

<p>Eleven persons, including Vaughn, were indicted by a Federal
grand jury on charges stemming from this trafficking arrangement.
All remain at large. It is highly unlikely that these trafficking
activities occurred without the knowledge and consent of the
Sandinista government. </p>

<p>Bulgaria </p>

<p>Since the late 1970's, reports that many drug dealers,
especially Turkish nationals, operate out of semi-permanent bases
in Bulgaria have been in circulation. The allegations against
Bulgaria include charges that the Bulgarians, primarily through
an official government trading firm, Kintex, officially sanction
the sale of illicit drugs to Western Europe and use the proceeds
from those sales to finance illegal arms transactions and to
bankroll terrorist groups. There are consistent reports that
top-ranking members of the Bulgarian Security Service or
ex-Bulgarian ministers comprise the directorate of Kintex. </p>

<p>Certain smugglers are reportedly permitted to conduct
activities within Bulgaria. In effect, Bulgarian officials,
though Kintex, assign representatives to establish fee
arrangements with smugglers for bartered contraband. Smugglers
trafficking through Bulgaria are primarily Turkish nationals of
Kurdish background, but include Syrian, Jordanian, Lebanese and
European nationals. </p>

<p>Corruption </p>

<p>The Role of the Corrupt Official </p>

<p>The corrupt official is the sine qua non of drug trafficking.
By the corruption of his office, he protects the interest of
traffickers in all phases of growing, processing and smuggling
illicit drugs. Officials &quot;from the lowly constable on
up&quot; are bribed and subverted by traffickers. </p>

<p>Mexico </p>

<p>While United States officials and investigators commonly
acknowledge that corruption among the ranks of both the Mexican
Federal Judicial Police and the Directorate of Security
facilitates drug trafficking in and through that country, they
are hesitant to make open accusations concerning the relationship
between corrupt officials and traffickers. Their reasoning is
persuasive: Mexico is a neighbor and an ally, a politically and
economically unstable one at that. The government of President
Miguel de la Madrid appears sincere in its efforts to improve the
quality of drug law enforcement throughout the country.
Nonetheless, mounting evidence prompted the Department of State
to assert in its 1985 mid-year report to Congress that: </p>

<p>There are strong indications that the Mexican [drug] program
has been less effective over the past two years, and that
corruption is playing a major role in this decline. </p>

<p>Drug-related corruption among members of Mexico's Federal
police force, which was widespread and well-publicized in the
1970's, continues to undermine anti-drug efforts in that country.
Allegations of corruption surfaced in March 1985, after DEA agent
Enrique Camarena Salazar and his pilot, Alfredo Zavala Avelar
were kidnapped and murdered in Guadalajara. Six Mexican police
officers were indicted on charges related to the Camarena murder;
they were charged with assisting drug traffickers through
&quot;protection of personnel and goods, custody of drugs in
transit, as well as continuing services of information.&quot; The
arrested officers have reportedly confessed that drug traffickers
offered them between $200 to $6,250 a month for official
protection. </p>

<p>In connection with the Camarena case, DEA officials maintain
that Jorge Armando Pavon Reyes, the First Commandante of the
Mexican Federal Judicial Police, who directed the investigation
into the Camarena murder, accepted a bribe from the trafficker
suspect in the killing, Rafael Caro Quintero, and in return
allowed Caro to leave Guadalajara. Later apprehended in Costa
Rica, Caro claimed in a confession that he paid Pavon Reyes
$265,000 to avoid arrest at the Guadalajara airport. Despite his
denials of the charges, Pavon Reyes was indicted for the crime in
Mexico in April 1985. </p>

<p>United States pressure after the Camerena murder and
subsequent revelations of corruption prompted a number of quick
responses from the Mexican Government. President de la Madrid
announced a major reorganization and consolidation of the police
forces under stronger Federal control; the governor of one
Mexican state dismissed that state's entire judicial system,
including the state attorney general, police and administrative
personnel; and a reported 100 agents of the Federal Security
Directorate, a political police force and counterintelligence
unit run by the Interior Ministry, resigned in the face of
corruption allegations. Corruption in at least some Mexican
institutions, however, appears to be deeply embedded and not
likely to be eliminated quickly or easily. At the end of
September, 1985, six months after the Camerena murder, evidence
of Mexican corruption continued to surface as the members of the
United States Fraternal Order of Border Patrol Agents charged
that: </p>

<p>Mexican federal agents, using the latest in radio and
scanner-equipped cars and armed with automatic weapons, have been
providing transit security for huge loads of domestically
produced marijuana and heroin and in-transit cocaine. </p>

<p>Bahamas and Caribbean </p>

<p>The Bahamas and a number of Caribbean countries serve as a
major refueling transshipment points for traffickers transporting
illicit drugs from Mexico and South America to the United States.
Corruption among officials at all levels throughout these
countries appears to be widespread. </p>

<p>Drug-related corruption has reached the highest offices of
government in the British-held Turks and Caicos Islands, where in
March 1985, that country's Chief Minister, Norman Saunders, was
convicted of conspiracy to travel in furtherance of a drug plot
and on five counts of traveling in furtherance of in illicit drug
transaction. Saunders, the first foreign head of state to be
convicted on drug charges, was found not guilty of more serious
charges of conspiracy to smuggle marijuana and cocaine. Trial
witnesses testified that Saunders accepted a total of $50,000 to
allow drugs to move freely through his island chain. He planned
to use the islands as a &quot;safe-haven&quot; for traffickers
smuggling illicit drugs from Colombia to the United States.
Stafford Missick, Minister of Commerce and Development in the
Saunders government, was convicted of conspiracy to import
cocaine and marijuana in the case; a third indicted Turks and
Caicos official, Aulden Smith, has not yet been tried. </p>

<p>In the Bahamas, a 1984 Commission of Inquiry investigating
drug trafficking through the Islands reported that Bahamian
officials &quot;from policemen to cabinet minister&quot; allowed
the Islands to be used as a transshipment point for illicit drugs
in return for sizeable bribes. A majority of the three-man
Commission concluded that no credible evidence directly tied
Bahamian Prime Minister Lynden Pindling to the drug-related
corruption, but noted that Pindling's bank accounts reflected
deposits of $3.5 million in excess of his salary between 1977 and
1983. </p>

<p>The Commission of Inquiry noted that a number of the Family
Island Commissioners, the representatives of the central
government on nearly all the Bahamian Islands: </p>

<p>claimed they either had no direct knowledge of drug
trafficking or had never received any complaints regarding such
activity . . . We find that to be quite remarkable and we do not
believe that they were being candid with us . . . they could not
help but know what was going on in relation to drug trafficking.
We have concluded that there must have been a degree of
acquiescence on their part . . . </p>

<p>The Commission report also charged that Colombian cocaine
trafficker Carlos Enrique Lehder Rivas operated an extensive
cocaine enterprise in the Bahamian Island of Norman's Cay from
1978 until 1982, and the Lehder paid &quot;substantial
bribes&quot; to various ranks of policemen and customs officials
to facilitate his illicit drug activities. </p>

<p>Former trafficker Luis Carcia, who transshipped marijuana and
cocaine through the Bahamas on a regular basis in the late 1970's
and early 1980's testified before the President's Commission on
Organized Crime that he had: </p>

<p>. . . never seen corruption such as there is in the Bahamas.
The policemen used to plead with me to use airstrips in their
territory so they could received the pay-off . . . sometimes
off-duty police unloaded the stuff from the plane and into the
boats for me . . . we always operated out of the Bahamas because
of the total corruption there. </p>

<p>South America </p>

<p>Official corruption has seriously hindered anti-drug efforts
throughout South America, especially in Bolivia and Peru.
Throughout Bolivia during the 1980's regime of General Garcia
Meza, corruption among high-level officials charged with drug
enforcement was so rampant that &quot;the government itself
became an international drug trafficker.&quot; Despite the
subsequent efforts the current Bolivian government to more
effectively enforce drug control laws, corruption at all levels
of the Bolivian government remains a major problem. In 1983, for
example, Bolivian authorities arrested two suspected traffickers
with a small amount of cocaine and confiscated a 14,000 acre
ranch and two airplanes belonging to them. Two weeks later, the
men were transferred to the authority of a local prosecutor who
subsequently released them and returned their possessions.
According the reports, at least $250,000 in bribes were paid to
Bolivian police and government officials for the release of the
two traffickers. </p>

<p>In August 1985, officials in Peru began a drug corruption
investigation that country's entire Interior Ministry after
authorities discovered direct telephone lines linking reputed
cocaine trafficker Reynaldo Rodriguez Lopes to officials at the
Mexican Consulate in Peru. Officials also found a government car
belonging to a top aid of former Interior Minister and Prime
Minister Luis Percovich parked in front of Lopes' home. </p>

<p>These are a few among many examples. Corruption linked to drug
trafficking is a widespread phenomenon among political and
military leaders, police and other authorities in virtually every
country touched by the drug trade. The easily available and
enormous amounts of money generated through drug transaction
present a temptation too great for many in positions of authority
to resist. </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>