
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B32-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B047-161</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch6.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132142 text/html 127567
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:21:32 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:50:25 GMT
Content-length: 127348
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE
ABUSE AND ADDICTION </b> </p>

<p> <b>US Government Office of Technology Assessment</b> </p>

<p> October 18, 1994 </p>

<p> <b>CHAPTER 6 INDIVIDUAL RISK AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS </b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> No single or generic set of variables explains the misuse of
substances for every individual. Depending on an individual's
biological makeup, developmental stage, and interaction with
various environmental forces, individual risk, vulnerability, and
resilience to substance abuse and addiction will vary for
different factors at different times (3). </p>

<p> Much of the research on substance abuse has focused on
identifying factors for drug and alcohol use (see table 6- 1),
specifically among adolescents and young adults. Risk factors for
substance abuse have been identified as those cognitive,
psychological, attitudinal, social, pharmacological,
physiological, and developmental characteristics that foster
initiation of drug and alcohol use and abuse by an individual.
There is some consensus in the field of risk factor research that
probably two fairly distinct sets of risk factors affect
individuals differently. Social, situational, and environmental
factors are likely to be more influential in initial or low-level
substance use, while individuals who progress from use to abuse
or addiction are influenced to a greater extent by biological,
psychological, and psychiatric factors (27). This distinction
between risk factors is more thoroughly discussed in chapter 5.
Protective factors are those characteristics that reduce the risk
of substance abuse and addiction and promote positive development
such as, appropriate role models, involvement in positive peer
groups, and a positive self-image and outlook for the future. </p>

<p> This chapter focuses on a select group of individual factors
that has been combined under the three headings: Demographics, </p>

<p> Economics, and Psychosocial/Behavioral. Factors not directly
discussed in this chapter are reviewed in either Part I or III of
the report. These factors may not appear in every individual with
substance abuse and addiction problems, nor will all individuals
exposed to these factors use or abuse drugs. In addition,
unanimous agreement is lacking within the field of substance
abuse and addiction on the importance, number, order of
appearance, or interactive effects of many of these factors. </p>

<p> Where applicable, each of the factors has been reviewed in
the following manner: historical perspectives; current
prevalence; psychosocial and cultural antecedents; biological and
genetic antecedents; relevant prevention programs; and areas for
future research. </p>

<p> DEMOGRAPHICS </p>

<p> Age </p>

<p> The preponderance of substance abuse research points to the
fact that children who use drugs and alcohol before the age of 15
have a greater likelihood of becoming problem alcohol and other
drug users, versus those youth who begin use at a later age (28).
</p>

<p> Highlights from the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse
(NHSDA) provide a somber picture of substance use among the
Nation's children (77). Lifetime and past month substance use,
rates for continued substance use, as well as differences in
racial and ethnic substance use (see box 6-1) are reviewed in
this section. </p>

<p> As part of NHSDA, data on lifetime use of alcohol and
cigarettes (whose use is illicit for minors) has been collected
for youth aged 12 to 17 since 1974; data collection on other
illicit drug use began in 1979 (see figure 6-1). The lifetime use
findings include: </p>

<p> o Rates in 1991 for lifetime use of alcohol, cigarettes, or
other illicit drugs were the lowest recorded since the survey
series began 17 years ago. The highest rates for any substance
use appeared in the late 1970s. </p>

<p> o In 1979, 70 percent of youth aged 12 to 17 reported some
lifetime use of alcohol compared to 46 percent in 1991. Since
1979, lifetime cigarette use has dropped from 54 percent to 38
percent. </p>

<p> o Since 1979, the use of other illicit substances
(methaqualone, inhalants, heroin, cocaine, phencyclidine (PCP),
crack, tranquilizers, stimulants, other opiates, barbiturates,
nitrites, lysergic acid diethylamide, hallucinogens, and
marijuana) has followed a similar trend with rates decreasing
from a high of 34 percent to the 1991 rate of 20 percent. </p>

<p> A complementary study of adolescents shows 1991 data for
substance use within the past 30 days among a sample of
approximately 17,500 eighth graders, 14,800 tenth graders, and
15,000 twelfth graders (75). </p>

<p> o Any alcohol use within the past 30 days was reported by 25
percent of the eighth graders, 43 percent of the tenth graders,
and 54 percent of the twelfth graders. Having had more than five
drinks in the last two weeks was reported by 13 percent of the
eighth graders, 23 percent of the tenth graders, and 30 percent
of the twelfth graders. </p>

<p> o Fourteen percent of the eighth graders, 21 percent of the
tenth graders, and 28 percent of the twelfth graders reported
smoking cigarettes within the past month. Those who smoked more
than one-half pack per day included 3 percent of the eighth
graders, 7 percent of the tenth graders, and 11 percent of the
twelfth graders. </p>

<p> o The other most commonly used substance for eighth and tenth
graders was smokeless tobacco with 7 and 10 percent reported,
respectively. Eighth graders had the highest percentage of past
month inhalant use (4 percent), and of those individuals,
approximately 1 percent reported using inhalants on 3 to 5
occasions within the past month. </p>

<p> o For tenth and twelfth graders, the other most commonly used
substance was marijuana and/or hashish with 9 percent of the
tenth graders and 14 percent of the twelfth graders reporting
past 30-day use. Of those individuals, approximately 2 and 3
percent, respectively, had used marijuana and/or hashish on three
to five occasions. </p>

<p> Another important indicator of potential substance abuse
problems among adolescents is the noncontinuation rate for the
use of certain substances. This is an indication of the extent to
which people who try a drug do not continue to use it, and is
based on the number of individuals who reported ever using a drug
divided by the those who have not used the drug in the past 12
months (75). </p>

<p> Among a sample of twelfth graders in 1991, the data show that
noncontinuation rates vary widely among the different drugs, with
the highest rates observed for methaqualone and inhalants (62
percent). As mentioned previously, inhalant use is higher among
younger individuals. The noncontinuation of methaqualone may be
due, in part, to the decrease in its availability. A high
noncontinuation rate is also seen for heroin (56 percent),
cocaine (55 percent), PCP (52 percent), and crack (52 percent).
Marijuana has one of the lowest noncontinuation rates (35
percent) in the senior year of any of the illicit drugs;
primarily because a relatively high proportion of seniors
continue to use it at some level over an extended period of time.
</p>

<p> Additionally, the noncontinuation rates for alcohol and
cigarettes are extremely low. In other words, 88 percent of the
seniors reported some lifetime use of alcohol, and of those
individuals, 78 percent have continued to use it within the past
year, thus only 12 percent of the seniors reported no alcohol use
in the preceding 12 months. Cigarette noncontinuation was defined
somewhat differently, as the percentage of those who said they
had ever smoked &quot;regularly&quot; and who also reported not
smoking at all during the past month. Of the regular smokers,
only 17 percent stopped smoking within the past month. </p>

<p> An obvious drawback to these data is the fact that only those
individuals who have not dropped out of school are included in
the survey. It is not unrealistic to assume that those students
with serious drug problems may well have left school before the
twelfth grade. More specific discussion of the factors that
influence the risk of adolescent substance abuse, as well as
prevention programs targeting youth, are thoroughly reviewed in
chapter 8. </p>

<p> While the majority of attention is focused on adolescent
substance use and abuse, young adults and older adults also show
significant levels of substance use and abuse. The 1991
statistics from the NHSDA reveal that heavy drinking (defined as
drinking five or more drinks per occasion on 5 or more days in
the past month) was reported by 2 percent of 12 to 17 year olds,
11 percent of 18 to 25 year olds, 7 percent of 26 to 34 year
olds, and 4 percent of those 35 and older (77). For those same
age categories, smoking a pack or more of cigarettes per day was
reported by 1, 13, 17, and 17 percent, respectively. The illicit
substances reported being used most often in the past month among
all age groups were marijuana and hashish. Individuals 18 to 25
had the highest percentage (13 percent) and those 26 to 34 the
next highest percentage (7 percent). The second most commonly
reported illicit substance was the nonmedical use of
psychotherapeutics, which was again highest among 18 to 25 year
olds (3 percent) followed by those 26 to 34 (2 percent); all
other age groups reported less than 2 percent. </p>

<p> Clearly then, the heavy use of some substances is not
exclusive to adolescents. Young- to middle-aged and older adults
can also be exposed to stressful risk factors, such as loss of a
job, divorce, or death of a child, which could contribute to
alcohol or drug problems. The adult population presents unique
and often overlooked challenges for the planning and
implementation of substance abuse prevention programs. </p>

<p> Gender </p>

<p> Historically, the vast majority of biological and behavioral
substance abuse studies were conducted on male participants,
although that has begun to change. A distorted picture emerged,
in which women were assumed to misuse the same substances, and
for the same reasons, as their male counterparts. It has only
been within the past 10 to 20 years that separate research has
been conducted on the causes and consequences of alcohol and drug
problems among women. </p>

<p> Women have not been immune to the harmful effects of alcohol
and other drugs. In the late 1800s twice as many women were
addicted to narcotics as men. The majority of these women were
white, middle-aged, and of upper-middle class status. Some had
become addicted through the prescription of narcotics for a host
of so-called female problems, while others knowingly misused
opium, heroin, morphine, and cocaine (53). </p>

<p> The number of women drinking alcohol and experiencing
alcohol-related problems has risen steadily since World War II.
At least one-third of the estimated 18 million alcoholics and
problem drinkers in the United States are thought to be women.
These figures, which many consider to be conservative, would
suggest that close to 6 million women are currently dealing with
the medical, legal, and social problems of alcohol misuse (53). </p>

<p> Overall, men report more frequent use of alcohol, cigarettes,
and all illicit substances (except nonmedical use of
psychotherapeutics) than women (79,77). However, this does not
mean that there is not substantial alcohol and drug use among
women (see table 6-2). Additionally, some gender and ethnic
differences may be attributable to failure to survey hidden
populations. The risk status of women who are not in the
workforce, do not receive prenatal care, and are not visible
through arrest, is less reliably known. </p>

<p> Neither men, nor women, should be considered homogeneous. For
example, alcohol use and its misuse can vary widely between
different racial and ethnic groups. Among men, Hispanics (60
percent) were slightly more likely to have used alcohol within
the past month than whites (59 percent) or blacks (52 percent)
(77). In general, white women drink more frequently than other
women. Large numbers of Native American, Hispanic, black, and
Asian women do not drink at all (70). Additionally, poor and
minority women appear to come under closer scrutiny for alcohol
and drug abuse than do financially secure or white women (see box
6-2). These racial and ethnic differences are more fully
discussed in the following section. </p>

<p> Do men and women cite different reasons for the misuse of
alcohol and other drugs? Over the last several decades within the
United States, the socially defined roles for men and women have
undergone substantial changes. When given a choice, many women
have opted for the traditional role of a stay-at-home mother and
homemaker, while other women have pursued career paths that may
or may not include marriage and children, and still others have
attempted to combine the two. These fairly recent changes have
brought pressures and risks many women had not been subjected to
previously. </p>

<p> Women in the workplace are more likely to encounter drinking
opportunities such as business lunches and office celebrations,
where they may feel encouraged or even pressured to drink (53).
Women have also been recently targeted by the beer, tobacco, and
liquor industries, as well as by small-scale marketing by
nightclubs and bars in the form of ladies' nights. </p>

<p> In the early 1970s, researcher Sharon Wilsnack postulated
that some women may abuse alcohol to submerge those aspects of
themselves that did not conform to the traditional female sex
role, thereby allowing them to feel more acceptably feminine
(53). More recently, several studies on female alcoholics have
shown that women, more frequently than men, can pinpoint a
specific traumatic life event that they believe precipitated
their problem drinking. The crises identified most often by women
included a partner's infidelity, the death of a family member, a
child leaving home, postpartum depression, divorce or separation,
infertility, gynecological problems, and menopause (39,53). </p>

<p> A similar study focused on the impact of various life events
on alcoholic men and women. Alcoholic men placed significant
importance on work-related events, marriage issues, sexual
difficulties, and arguments with spouses. In addition to those
events cited by the men, alcoholic women focused on social
activities, family troubles, stillbirth and adoption, and death
of a close relative (40). </p>

<p> While much of the substance abuse research has focused on
alcohol issues, various researchers have examined the differences
between men and women in their use of illicit substances with or
without the presence of alcohol. For men and women cocaine
addicts in treatment, the following significant differences were
noted (40,41,35): </p>

<p> o Women had started to use cocaine at a younger age than men,
conversely to what is generally found among opiate users and
alcoholics. </p>

<p> o Women had a significantly lower level of social adjustment
than male patients. </p>

<p> o Women patients were less likely to be employed, to hold
high status jobs, to be self-supporting, and to be financing
their own drug use. </p>

<p> o Women were more likely than men to cite specific reasons
for their drug use: depression, feeling unsociable, family and
job pressures, and health problems; whereas men more often cited
the intoxicating effects of cocaine as a reason for their drug
use. </p>

<p> o Men reported experiencing more guilt (47 vs. 23 percent),
whereas women noted that one of the desirable effects of cocaine
use was a reduction in their feelings of guilt. </p>

<p> o Women were more often diagnosed with depression than men,
and their depression took longer to treat, while men were more
often diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder. </p>

<p> o Most men and women reported that they used cocaine to be
more sociable. </p>

<p> o Women demonstrated a slower recovery than men, and had more
residual problems. </p>

<p> Gender differences among opiate addicts have also been
explored. Researchers have shown that female addicts are more
likely than male addicts to have first been introduced to heroin
by family members or others close to them, and to have
experienced severe family disruption (36). The development of the
women's opiate dependence is also more likely to be linked to the
family's approval of use or the absence of clear disapproval of
use, in combination with easy access to the drug (35). </p>

<p> Differences in marijuana smoking may also be partially
attributable to gender. In a recent review, it was shown that
men's marijuana smoking was tied more to the availability of the
drug, while women's smoking was affected to a greater degree by
social influences, such as weekday versus weekend smoking, and
the smoking of their male partners. Women have also been shown to
increase their marijuana smoking during periods of anger and
other unpleasant dispositions (41). </p>

<p> In addition to discovering some sociocultural
dissimilarities, gender differences in biological and genetic
susceptibility to substance abuse have been examined. The role of
heritability and genetics in influencing individual
susceptibility is more thoroughly discussed in chapter 3, thus
the discussion in this section will concentrate on biological
differences. Again, a large portion of these studies has
concentrated on alcohol and its effects. </p>

<p> In the late 1970s it was reported that when men and women of
comparable body weight were given equivalent doses of alcohol,
women achieved higher blood alcohol levels. However, these
findings have been challenged, as more recent studies have shown
that if the blood alcohol level is based on total body water
rather than weight, the difference in levels between men and
women is insignificant (65). </p>

<p> Another avenue that has been explored in explaining the
gender difference in blood alcohol levels has to do with the
metabolism of alcohol. Based on findings from animal research,
Mario Frezza et al. (25) investigated differences in the
&quot;first-pass metabolism&quot; between men and women. Data
from animal studies reveal that a significant amount of ingested
ethanol does not enter the circulatory system, but rather is
neutralized in the stomach by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase.
Using a small study sample (6 alcoholic and 14 nonalcoholic men,
6 alcoholic and 17 nonalcoholic women) Frezza et al. investigated
whether the first-pass metabolism and enzyme activity level
varied between men and women, and alcoholic and nonalcoholic
individuals. They discovered that both gender and chronic alcohol
abuse had statistically significant effects on the first-pass
metabolism of alcohol, specifically, the first-pass metabolism
was considerably lower among alcoholic women compared to
alcoholic men, which in turn was lower than nonalcoholic men.
Similar findings were reported for the alcohol dehydrogenase
activity level; with the highest activity levels (70 to 80
percent) found in the nonalcoholic men and women, less activity
among the alcoholic men (37 to 46 percent), and the smallest
activity level among alcoholic women (11 to 20 percent). To
summarize, the women in general had lower rates of first- pass
metabolism and lower levels of alcohol dehydrogenase activity,
which both lead to an increase in the amount of ethanol in the
circulatory system. The levels of enzyme activity further
decreased among the alcoholic women and the first-pass metabolism
was essentially nonexistent, indicating little neutralization by
the stomach. </p>

<p> Researchers have also been studying the effect of hormonal
changes during the menstrual cycle on alcohol absorption rates.
Alcohol absorption has been reported to vary during a woman's
cycle--specifically, the rate of alcohol absorption increases
premenstrually. However, data from other clinicaland animal
trials have disputed these findings (65). </p>

<p> What is clear from this type of biological research is that
few firm conclusions can be made about gender differences in
response to alcohol ingestion, and even fewer still about
biological responses to drugs other than alcohol. </p>

<p> Nevertheless, the psychosocial differences that have been
identified between the sexes could assist practitioners in the
development of more gender specific substance abuse prevention
programs. For example, because many women can pinpoint specific
events in their lives that they believe contributed to their
heavy alcohol or drug use, it would behoove professionals working
with women to be cognizant of these factors. General inquires
could be made at yearly physical or gynecological exams, which
could also serve as informational sessions on the dangers of
alcohol and drug use (39). In addition, special attention should
be paid toward adolescent girls whose first experience with
alcohol and drugs is often through a male family member or
boyfriend. </p>

<p> Broadly speaking, there are basic gaps in knowledge
concerning gender differences and substance use within virtually
all the parts identified in this report: Part I- necessary
preconditions; Part II-individual factors; and Part III-activity
settings. Until these gaps are addressed, the practice of
transferring data garnered from studies specific for one gender,
to the other gender, is inaccurate and misleading. </p>

<p> Race and Ethnicity </p>

<p> Historically, racial and ethnic minorities have been linked
with, and often blamed for, many of the drug problems within the
United States. Throughout the late 1800s and early 1900s, the
general public associated the growth in opium addicts with the
arrival of Chinese immigrants; although numerous physicians had
been freely prescribing narcotic preparations to their patients,
many of whom were middle- to upper-class whites. The drug cocaine
has long been associated with blacks. A popular image during this
time was one of cocaine-crazed blacks, although use of cocaine
was widespread among whites as well (86). Throughout this same
period, marijuana was thought to have been brought into the
country and promoted by Mexican immigrants and later picked up by
the subculture of black jazz musicians. Due in part to public
paranoia, the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, which was a direct
attempt to control marijuana use, was born (45). </p>

<p> In the minds of many individuals, this derogatory link
between minority populations and rampant drug abuse has
continued. Certainly, many urban areas have high concentrations
of minorities, and within these areas the prevalence of alcohol
and drug abuse may be high. Often over-looked, however, is the
existence of alcohol and drug problems in suburban and rural
areas throughout the United States, which have varying
percentages of minorities. </p>

<p> Prevalence rates for past month use of an illicit substance
in 1992 (see figure 6-2) are not drastically different between
whites, blacks, and Hispanics, although it should be kept in mind
that this statistic does not accurately reflect abuse or
addiction. Even though the prevalence of illicit substance use
was highest among blacks, over three-fourths (76 percent) of the
past month illicit substance users were white. In other words,
there were approximately 8.7 million whites, 1.5 million blacks,
885,000 Hispanics, and 315,000 individuals of other racial and
ethnic groups who reported past month use of an illicit substance
in 1992 (79). </p>

<p> Also for 1992 among individuals aged 12 and older, whites
reported the highest percentage of alcohol use within the past
week (21 percent), followed by blacks (19 percent), and Hispanics
(18 percent) (79). The rates for heavy drinking were not
statistically different by race or ethnicity (5 percent for
whites and blacks, and 6 percent for Hispanics) (78). </p>

<p> Until fairly recently, much of the analysis of substance use
data has concentrated on the correlations between the use of a
substance and one or two variables such as race and ethnicity
and/or educational level. Often a positive association was found
between minority populations and the use of certain substances.
While statistically correct, these analyses can be simplistic and
misleading (see box 6- 3). Clearly many risk and protective
factors interact to produce substance use and abuse. If the
majority of these variables are excluded from the analysis, a
skewed picture may arise as to the importance of certain
variables as risk factors for substance use and abuse.
Additionally, to simplify the data collection, racial and ethnic
categories are often broad. The most popular groupings are
blacks, white non-Hispanic, Hispanic, and other. Though each of
these categories contains many distinct cultures, gross
generalizations are commonly made within each category. </p>

<p> In recent years, there has been a shift toward analyzing more
carefully the complex relationship between cigarette, alcohol and
illicit drug use, and socioeconomic and demographic variables.
The previous research had drawn on relatively small databases.
However, in 1992, the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
critically analyzed the national drug use data collected in its
1988 and 1990 NHSDA. Predictors of drug and alcohol use included
an extensive array of both individual variables (e.g., age,
educational level, marital status) and aggregate variables based
on the attributes of the census block, community, or region in
which the respondent lived (see table 6-3 for a complete list). </p>

<p> The effect of select variables such as race and ethnicity
were measured, while simultaneously controlling for all other
variables (e.g., age, educational level, employment status).
Individuals of racial and ethnic minorities were found to be no
more likely than whites to use alcohol heavily (defined as having
five or more drinks on five or more days in the past month) or to
use marijuana, cocaine, or psychotherapeutic drugs (inclusion of
crack or heroin in the analysis was impossible due to the small
number of respondents reporting use). In fact, when socioeconomic
status was controlled for, both blacks and Hispanics had a
substantially lower likelihood of heavy alcohol use than whites
(76). </p>

<p> A reanalysis of the 1988 NHSDA data was accomplished by an
independent group of researchers who clustered the respondent
data into neighborhood risk sets. The original analysis on the
1988 data revealed that for all ages, blacks and Hispanics were
twice as likely to have ever used crack cocaine than were whites.
Once neighborhood clusters were established, the data revealed
that given similar social and environmental conditions, crack use
did not differ significantly for blacks or Hispanics compared
with whites (9). However, the number of reported crack users in
the study was relatively small (138), and neighborhoods were
identified as crack neighborhoods with as few as one reported
crack user, thus the research findings should not be generalized.
</p>

<p> The new research hypothesized that the previous racial
differences found in the prevalence of crack cocaine smoking may
have been due to macrosocial environmental risk factors
including: differences in the availability of crack; employment
rates; premature death rates; community contact with the criminal
justice system; socially acceptable mechanisms for coping with
life stressors; distribution of wealth; and access to social
resources. </p>

<p> While both studies had specific limitations, the importance
of these types of analyses cannot be understated. Focus should be
placed on the interaction between communities and individuals and
the relative influence on subsequent drug and alcohol use, rather
than a person's race or ethnicity. </p>

<p> Race or ethnicity has not been shown to be either a
biological or genetic risk factor for substance use or abuse. To
date, the preponderance of investigative studies has focused on
racial and ethnic differences in response specifically to
alcohol. Virtually no study has been completed on differences in
racial and ethnic biological responses to other licit or illicit
drugs. </p>

<p> Individual metabolism of alcohol is essentially controlled by
two enzymes, aldehyde dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase. If
the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase is inactive for any reason,
ingestion of even a small amount of alcohol can cause rapid and
prominent facial flushing. Continued drinking leads to nausea,
dizziness, palpitations, and faintness. This reaction is seen
among many Asians (84,16). </p>

<p> A mutant form of alcohol dehydrogenase will effect the
efficiency of alcohol metabolism as well. Altered forms of the
alcohol dehydrogenase enzyme have also been reported in several
Asian populations. </p>

<p> The two enzymes, aldehyde and alcohol dehydrogenase, probably
interact in some individuals to amplify the adverse reaction to
alcohol consumption (57). Since this reaction discourages heavy
drinking, the observation that it commonly occurs in some
populations where alcoholism is relatively rare suggests that
alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase mutations might be a major
determinant of alcohol consumption, abuse, and dependence. This
would seem to hold true for Taiwan and Japan where the reaction
occurs in 30 to 50 percent of individuals. Research on these two
enzymes among other racial and ethnic groups is scanty and
inconclusive. </p>

<p> The role genetics plays in the heritability of alcohol and
other drug problems has been studied for the past 30 years. While
this topic is more thoroughly addressed in chapter 3, one point
is worth mentioning here. Of the more than 30 family, twin, and
adoption studies that have been completed, the vast majority have
used white males as study subjects. Clearly, among different
racial and ethnic groups the relationship between genetic
heritability and increased susceptibility to alcohol and other
drug problems is an area that deserves further study. </p>

<p> While race and ethnicity in and of themselves are not
predictive risk factors for future substance abuse, by reviewing
when, how, and why certain substances became problematic within
different racial and ethnic groups, insight can be gained into
the generational impact drugs have had on these populations. Four
broad racial and ethnic groups (and one multiracial and ethnic
group, see box 6-4) are discussed below in the following manner:
historical perspectives; prevalence statistics; psychosocial and
cultural antecedents; and selected prevention programs. A
separate section on areas for future research is also included. </p>

<p> Native American Indians/Alaska Natives </p>

<p> There are more than 1.5 million Americans Indians and Alaskan
Natives throughout the United States, with vastly different
languages and cultural beliefs. Even within the same tribe there
may be a good deal of cultural diversity, since differences exist
between reservation and rural tribal members, and those residing
in urban settings. While urban dwelling American Indians may
constitute more than 50 percent of the total Indian population,
little is known concerning their health status (59). </p>

<p> The American Indians' introduction to alcohol dates back to
the early 1600s and their initial interactions with European
trappers and settlers. Much of the early trading between the
Europeans and American Indians involved an exchange of alcohol.
It was not long before alcohol became a considerable problem for
many American Indian tribes. Some researchers speculate that
because American Indians lacked a prior drinking history, or role
model for moderate drinking practices, many tribes adopted a
quick and copious style of drinking, consistently drinking to the
point of intoxication. However, in other tribes, it is appears
that being intoxicated was deemed unacceptable, and over time
these tribes developed a &quot;social&quot; drinking style (35). </p>

<p> Prevalence statistics </p>

<p> Studies among American Indian adolescents have shown that
prevalence rates for licit and illicit drug use vary
insignificantly between tribes (5,4). However, compared to
non-Indian youth, Indian adolescents consistently begin using
alcohol, illicit substances, cigarettes, and inhalants at a
younger age, at higher rates, and in combination with each other
(10,60,69). With regard to alcohol, there is often a great deal
of peer pressure to drink as the Indian thing to do (42). Studies
have shown that Indian youth are three times more likely to be
involved in alcohol-related offenses than their white or Hispanic
counterparts. A 1982 study indicated that alcohol was involved in
as many as 58 percent of Indian juvenile arrests (63 percent for
males, 37 percent for females)(60). </p>

<p> In some tribes, up to 30 percent of American Indian
adolescents have used inhalants, most notably, gasoline and glue.
The age group with the highest rate of inhalant use was 11- to
13-year-olds. Contrary to the popular belief that inhalant abuse
occurs primarily among boys, research among American Indians
revealed that eighth grade girls and boys were equally likely to
have inhaled volatile substances. While the rate for Indian
inhalant use decreases substantially among high school age youth
(down to 4 percent), it is still 2.5 times greater than the rate
for non-Indian youth of that age. Interestingly, while the rate
of inhalant use has remained relatively stable among Indian youth
since 1984, there has been a steady rise of reported use among
non-Indian adolescents (66). </p>

<p> While there is no substantial difference in alcohol use among
various tribal adolescents, rates do differ between the drinking
patterns of tribal adults. Contrary to the still pervasive
drunken Indian stereotype, many tribes have levels of adult
alcohol use below the national average (42). Consistent with the
U.S. population as a whole, American Indian males are more likely
to drink than females (42,35). In some tribes it is permissible
for adolescent females to experiment with alcohol, with the
understanding that when adulthood is reached they are expected to
abstain or drink only rarely. </p>

<p> As is true for adolescents, adult Indians encounter an
increased rate of legal complications due to alcohol and drug
use. Data on urban American Indians has shown that while under
the influence of alcohol and/or other drugs, they are arrested at
four times the rate for blacks and 10 times the rate for whites
(44). </p>

<p> Few statistics exist to quantify illicit substance use among
the adult American Indian population. While alcohol is clearly a
major problem for some tribes, future research efforts should
include data on the use of illicit substances. </p>

<p> Psychosocial/cultural antecedents </p>

<p> The relationship between the majority of American Indians and
the early settlers was suffused with violence, distrust, deceit,
and perhaps more than anything, forcible and abrupt change. The
food American Indians ate, how they dressed, where and how they
lived, what language they spoke, tribal governing structures, and
how they worshiped were, for the most part, forcibly altered to
conform with the newly dominant society's cultural and moral
views. While these involuntary changes occurred several
generations ago, their impact on the American Indian culture
should not be underestimated. </p>

<p> In some instances, tribal traditions, languages, and methods
of worship were lost. Thousands of American Indian children, some
as young as 3 years old, were removed from their families and
placed in federally funded and run boarding schools, where
physical, verbal, and sexual abuse were common. Nuclear and
extended families were dispersed, and with them, a vital social
support system. Acculturation issues abounded. Children returned
home from boarding schools unable to speak their native language,
or understand the importance of their cultural traditions. These
cultural problems are multigenerational, and current studies
reveal that American Indian children report more emotional
problems, mental health problems, and low self-esteem than
non-Indian children (60). While the relationship between many of
these psychosocial/cultural antecedents and increased substance
abuse levels has yet to be formally evaluated, clearly the
American Indian people have been, and in some may continue to be,
subjected to cultural disruption. </p>

<p> Prevention programs </p>

<p> For substance abuse prevention programs to be effective
within the American Indian population it is important to realize
the diversity that exists between tribes and villages. For
example, a specific program tailored to New Mexico Navajos living
on the Navajo reservation may be culturally unacceptable to
Winnebago Indians living in urban Minneapolis, MN. However,
several fairly universal themes permeate American Indian culture:
the importance of tribal identity, which is an individual's
membership or affiliation with specific tribe(s); a belief that
each human is a multidimensional being made up of a body, mind,
and spirit, and that the spirit world coexists and intermingles
with the physical world; the importance of sharing and
generosity, allegiance to one's family and community, respect for
elders, noninterference, orientation to present time, and harmony
with nature; the importance of an oral tradition as a primary
method of teaching values, attitudes, legends, and stories; an
emphasis on observant, reflective, and integrative skills which
lead to communication patterns that give virtue to silence,
listening, nonverbal cues, and learning by example; and the
presence of rituals and symbols that are acknowledged for their
underlying significance, which is expected to emerge as time and
experience go on (72). </p>

<p> One example that assists communities in the development of
culturally sensitive programs is an instructional publication
compiled by The Four Worlds Development Project in Alberta,
Canada. Information has been collected on health promotion and
prevention efforts by various indigenous people from around the
world. The text assists American Indian communities in tailoring
program planning, training, and implementation techniques with
their culture beliefs and specific needs (24). </p>

<p> Blacks </p>

<p> A great deal of diversity exists within the black community.
One reflection of that diversity is the use of the terms African
American and black. Some researchers use African American to
define black persons who are direct descendants of men and women
brought to the United States as slaves, whereas blacks is used to
define all people and cultures of African descent, including
black people from the West Indies, Africa, and the Americas. At
times, the two terms are used interchangeably (72). For this
section, both terms will be utilized where appropriate. </p>

<p> Historically </p>

<p> Many of the first blacks to arrive in the United States did
so as slaves. Plantation owners were responsible for regulating
much of their slaves' alcohol consumption. During holidays,
alcohol was routinely distributed to the slaves in reward for
their loyalty and hard work, and the subsequent drunken revelries
were tolerated. This controlled permissiveness began to change in
the early 1800s, as clandestine groups of black slaves began
their quest for freedom. It was at this point that blacks were
prohibited from owning stills, or even being in possession of
alcoholic beverages. These laws persisted after the Civil War,
when technically, blacks had been granted citizenship (14). </p>

<p> Spanning the late 1800s through the late 1960s, hundreds of
thousands of blacks left the South and, looking for work, headed
for northern cities. This period was later described as the
&quot;Great Migration,&quot; with a total outmigration estimated
at 4.3 million individuals (72,14). This outmigration contributed
substantially to defining the large number of blacks currently
found in many of the northern urban areas. Unfortunately, many of
those seeking work did not find it, nor did they find that they
were free from racism, discrimination, and oppression. Slowly,
the numbersleaving the South decreased, and by the 1970s there
was actually some migration back into the southern states by both
northern-born blacks and individuals returning home after
unsuccessful moves to the North. </p>

<p> Prevalence statistics </p>

<p> Differences in adolescent drug use among high school seniors
by race and ethnicity were discussed earlier in this chapter (see
box 6-A). Among this group, alcohol, cigarette, and illicit drug
use was lowest among black and Asian youth, even after inclusion
of background and lifestyle factors. Obviously, a drawback to
this type of survey is that high school dropouts are not included
in the analyses. The 1991 event dropout rate (which measures the
proportion of individuals who dropped out of school over a
specified time period) for grades 10 to 12, ages 15 to 24, reveal
dropout percentages of 3.2 for whites, 6.0 for blacks, and 7.3
for Hispanics (63). While the event dropout rate for blacks is
double that of white students, low alcohol and drug usage rates
have also been found among black eighth and tenth graders, so the
low rate of substance use among black twelfth graders cannot be
due entirely to dropout rates (75). </p>

<p> While use of alcohol, cigarettes, and illicit drugs is
relatively low among blacks, data on heavy or frequent use of
such substances differs. The 1991 NHSDA data for individuals aged
12 to 20 found that 7.3 percent of whites reported heavy alcohol
use (defined as having 5 or more drinks on one occasion on 5 or
more days in the past 30 days), Hispanics reported 3.9 percent,
and blacks reported 2.7 percent. However, for those individuals
aged 21 or older, heavy alcohol use did not differ significantly
between whites and blacks (5.0 vs. 6.0 percent), but was
significantly higher among Hispanics (6.6 percent) (77). Other
studies on heavy alcohol use, by gender, have shown that white
men aged 18 to 29 report the highest prevalence of heavy
drinking, which then declined in subsequent age groups.
Conversely, the abstention rate for black males was highest among
those aged 18 to 29, while subsequent age groups showed
significantly increased levels of heavy drinking--among whom half
report either frequent heavy or frequent high maximum drinking
(70). Similarly, white women in the 18 to 29 age group were
significantly more likely to drink, and to drink heavily, than
were young black women (67). </p>

<p> Past-month use (which does not necessarily constitute abuse)
of an illicit substance by race and ethnicity was discussed at
the beginning of this section (see figure 6-2). However, the 1992
NHSDA also contains more specific data for some of the most
commonly used substances such as marijuana and cocaine. Of the
blacks age 12 and older surveyed, 3.2 reported using marijuana
once a week or more compared to 2.5 percent for whites and
Hispanics. Blacks also had the highest reported weekly use of
cocaine (0.5 percent) compared to Hispanic and white percentages
(0.4 and 0.3, respectively) (78). </p>

<p> Persistence of drug use has also been used as another
indicator of substance use severity and is measured by percent of
monthly users divided by percent of lifetime users. It has been
shown that blacks and Hispanics have a different pattern of drug
persistence from that of whites. Data on cocaine use analyzed
from the 1990 NHSDA showed that the persistence rate for blacks
age 18 to 25 was almost three times that of whites (.29 vs.. 09),
and among those aged 26 to 34, the rate for blacks was four times
higher than that for whites (.21 vs.. 05). In both age groups,
the persistence rates for Hispanics were between those of blacks
and whites. It is important to note that the differences in
persistence did not appear to extend to alcohol and marijuana
(32). </p>

<p> Psychosocial/cultural antecedents </p>

<p> At least initially, many blacks did not arrive in the United
States voluntarily. The legacy of slavery has shaped much of
black culture. Black slaves struggled with many of the same
issues as American Indians: loss of languages, traditions, and
religious beliefs; assimilation and acculturation issues; and the
breakup of nuclear and extended families. Not allowed to express
their original languages, cultures, and beliefs, blacks attempted
to establish new cultural identities amidst oppression,
segregation, and racism. </p>

<p> Hypotheses concerning alcoholism among black males have been
proposed by several studies. Some researchers believe that the
increase in the number of heavy drinkers among black males in
their thirties may be due to feelings of frustration and failure
concerning career expectations. A complementary view points to
the combination of high unemployment rates among black males
coupled with the large numbers of liquor stores found in many
urban black neighborhoods, as having contributed to the alcohol
problems faced by black men (14,82). </p>

<p> Prevention programs </p>

<p> With respect to the use of alcohol and other drugs, common
themes link blacks. In general, social stratification, church and
community involvement, and racial identity are thought to be
important variables in attitudes toward alcohol and drug use
(72,14). The level of importance will vary between individuals
and groups depending on environmental factors. One program cited
as exemplary by the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP)
is called Super II, and targets primarily at risk, black
inner-city youths 11 to 17 and their parents. The design and
implementation of the program emphasizes holism and cultural
competence, viewing them as crucial in reducing the strength of
risk factors and increasing the strength of resiliency factors.
The program takes place through already established agencies in
the communities (Boys Clubs and Girls Clubs) and incorporates the
childrens' caregivers, youth and recreational workers, police
officials, local corporations, and a variety of social service
agencies. The first-year evaluation report found reductions in
four of five major categories of alcohol- and drug- related
behavior. These included frequency of use and amount of use,
number of modalities of use, alcohol- and drug-related behavior
problems, and media influenceability (71). </p>

<p> Another antidrug abuse campaign is being waged by the
Congress of National Black Churches, Inc. (CNBC), a national
nonprofit religious organization comprised of a variety of
denominations. Through a variety of programs, the CNBC clergy are
mobilizing, creating, and coordinating groups of individuals
interested in bringing about positive change in their
communities. Program strategies are implemented in partnership
with the police, criminal justice agencies, school systems,
social service agencies, private organization and businesses, and
informal community networks to reduce the supply of and demand
for drugs. </p>

<p> Hispanics </p>

<p> Historically </p>

<p> The term Hispanic was first used by the U.S. Census Bureau in
1980 to designate those individuals who resided in the United
States and whose cultural origins were in Mexico, Puerto Rico,
Cuba, Central America, and other Latin American countries. Not
all members of this group accept the term and prefer to use
phrases such as Latino or la raza (literally, &quot;the
race&quot;). Data from the 1990 census reveal an Hispanic
population of more than 20 million, and projections indicate that
Hispanics will be the largest minority group in the United States
sometime between the years 2000 and 2010. Hispanics of Mexican
origin, by far the largest Hispanic group (63 percent), are
clustered in the southwest, particularly California and Texas.
Puerto Ricans, excluding those living on the island of Puerto
Rico, are the second largest subgroup (12 percent) and live
primarily in the Northeast, especially in and around New York
City, New York. Cubans (5 percent) live primarily around their
port of entry, Miami, Florida, though large numbers are found in
New Jersey and New York. Dominicans, who reside primarily in the
Northeastern Atlantic States, are also beginning to grow in
number. In the past 10 years, there has been a large immigration
of Central Americans to the United States. These individuals have
come primarily from civil war-plagued countries including
Guatemala, El Salvador, and Nicaragua. It is highly possible that
many of the problems faced by newly arrived Hispanic immigrants
may be exacerbated among this population who have left their
countries involuntarily. Refugees escaping political turmoil or
open warfare often show signs of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
(72). </p>

<p> Prevalence statistics </p>

<p> NIDA data collected from 1975 to 1991 on drug use among
twelfth graders, as well as data from 1991 for eighth and tenth
graders, reveal the following for Hispanic students: as a group,
Hispanic youth had the highest lifetime and annual prevalence
rates in the senior year for PCP, cocaine, crack, heroin, ice,
and steroids, compared to whites and blacks, and the rates for
crack and steroid use were particularly high; among eighth
graders, Hispanics had higher rates of past month use for
virtually all the drugs surveyed including, cocaine, heroin,
inhalants, alcohol, marijuana, hallucinogens, and cigarettes. In
other words, in eighth grade, before a considerable number of
students has dropped out, Hispanic youth have the highest
prevalence of nearly all drug use, but by twelfth grade, whites
have the highest usage rates. The researchers suggest two
possible explanations, which are not necessarily exclusive. The
first being that the high dropout rate for Hispanics in later
grades (in some areas as high as 40 percent) is causing a shift
in the rates, and the second is that while Hispanic youth begin
experimenting earlier, white youth catch up by the later grades
(75). </p>

<p> National statistics for 1992 of past-month use of any illicit
substance indicated that rates for Hispanics and whites were not
significantly different, and were slightly lower than those for
blacks (see figure 6-2). The same database also revealed that for
the illicit substances measured, Hispanic rates either fell
between black and white rates, or were the lowest rates reported
by an ethnic group. The only exception would be the heavy alcohol
use data (defined as having 5 or more drinks on one occasion on 5
or more days within the past 30 days) for 1991 (1992 data not yet
available) which showed that Hispanics aged 21 or older reported
significantly more heavy alcohol use within the past month as
compared to whites and blacks (77). </p>

<p> Psychosocial/cultural antecedents </p>

<p> Dignidad, respeto, confianza--dignity, respect, and trust--
are important elements in the Hispanic culture. Like many
immigrants to the United States, Hispanics deal with language,
cultural, racial, and economic barriers. These barriers and how
they are handled within the Hispanic culture have a great deal to
do with subsequent alcohol and drug problems. To a large extent,
drinking (at times heavily) among Hispanic males is not only
expected, but encouraged. Much of the research literature has
therefore centered around alcohol and its misuse. To be able to
drink heavily and maintain &quot;control&quot; is a valued
characteristic among most Hispanic men (38). Personal identities
for a vast majority of Hispanic men are intricately entwined with
the notion of machismo, which generally connotes strength,
masculinity, independence, and responsibility (1). The man of the
family is expected to provide for and take care of his wife and
children. For those who may be unable to fulfill this role, due
to difficulties learning English and/or procuring employment, the
social drinking pattern can change from one of low frequency and
high quantity, to high frequency and high quantity (38,1). This
drinking pattern varies between Hispanic groups, however. A study
completed in 1981 found that drinking levels among newly arrived
Dominicans, Guatemalans, and Puerto Ricans, when compared to
preimmigration levels, decreased, increased, and remained the
same, respectively (1). </p>

<p> As is relatively true for other cultures, heavy drinking is
not condoned for Hispanic women. This is not to say that it does
not exist. While the majority of first generation Hispanic women
generally abstain or drink very little, changes in drinking
patterns among the following generations have been observed. To
the distress of many first generational Hispanic families, as
their daughters and granddaughters become increasingly
acculturated, the drinking patterns and alcohol problems more
closely mirror those found in the general population (26).
Another change observed among more acculturated Hispanic women is
the diminishment of marianismo, which is the female complement to
machismo, and encompasses such behaviors as submissiveness,
humility, tolerance, virtuosity, and devotion to the male
(whether father, husband, or first son). </p>

<p> Prevention programs </p>

<p> Important intergroup differences need to be understood for
the planning, implementation, and evaluation of substance abuse
prevention programs. For example, while two immigrants, one
Mexican and the other El Salvadorian, may both speak Spanish and
may both be experiencing many of the same difficulties in
adjusting to life in the United States, they are very likely to
have had vastly different lifetime and cultural experiences (72).
</p>

<p> Funds from CSAP as well as the National Institute on Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) have been distributed to several
demonstration projects throughout the United States and Puerto
Rico that target high-risk Hispanic youth and their families.
Many of these programs are similar to others previously outlined
in this report in their attempt to be as comprehensive as
possible through the coordination of families, schools, law
enforcement, and local social services and businesses. Several of
the programs are creating their own audiovisual and written
materials in Spanish, others are utilizing activities such as
English courses, puppet shows, and live theater performances,
while others employ peer group counseling and mentoring programs
(69). </p>

<p> Asian and Pacific Island Americans </p>

<p> Historically </p>

<p> According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Asian and Pacific Island
Americans are the fastest growing population in the United
States. Between 1980 and 1988, the number of Asian and Pacific
Island Americans increased by 76 percent compared with an
increase of 36 percent within the Hispanic population. Similar to
the other racial and ethnic categories, the term Asian and
Pacific Island American gives one the impression of homogeneity,
while in reality, over 60 different racial and ethnic groups are
lumped in this bracket. Some of the diverse populations included
in this group are Hawaiians, Guamanians, Filipinos, Thais,
Bengalis, and Sri Lankans. Beside the obvious differences in
language, and cultural norms and beliefs, is the degree to which
different subpopulations have acculturated and/or assimilated to
the dominant culture. Many Chinese and Japanese families have
been in the United States for three generations or more, which is
in sharp contrast to the majority of first-generation Vietnamese,
Koreans, Asian Indians, and Filipinos (72,85). </p>

<p> Prevalence statistics </p>

<p> Research on substance use and abuse within the Asian and
Pacific Island American population appears to be sporadic, and
often limited to alcohol. While the three national surveys NHSDA,
the National Adolescent School Health Survey, and the High School
Senior Survey, all collect separate data for Asian and Pacific
Island Americans, only the High School Senior Survey routinely
analyzes the data separately. Due to small sample sizes, the
remaining two surveys included Asian and Pacific Islanders under
the racial and ethnic category of &quot;other.&quot; </p>

<p> Research on alcohol consumption patterns among adult Asian
and Pacific Island Americans consistently shows that this
population drinks substantially less than whites and Hispanics,
and slightly less than blacks. Though subgroup variation does
exist, as data reveal, native Hawaiians drink at levels
comparable to those of whites, among mainland Asian Americans,
Japanese Americans drink the most, followed by Koreans and
Chinese Americans. However, Japanese, Korean, and Filipino men
all have roughly the same percentage of heavy drinkers at 28
percent. This style of heavy drinking is typically associated
with business entertainment and after work socializing (68).
Among Asian and Pacific Island American women, four-fifths of
Korean and Filipino women were reported to be abstainers, as were
two-thirds of Chinese women, and one-third of Japanese women.
Among women who drank, the percentage who did so heavily varied:
12 percent for Japanese women; less than 4 percent for Filipino
women; and virtually none for Chinese and Korean women (68). A
similar statistic for white women showed 14.5 percent reported
drinking heavily (73). Evidence suggests, however, that the
prevalence of drinking may be on the rise among both men and
women Asian and Pacific Island Americans, although the exact
reasons for this remain unclear. Some researchers have suggested
that paralleling other immigrant populations, the more
acculturated and assimilated generations will tend to adopt the
drinking patterns of the dominant culture. Yet other researchers
point to the fact that a significant number of second and third
generation Asian and Pacific Island Americans have not adopted a
more copious style of drinking. </p>

<p> For adolescent Asian Americans, the majority of the studies
mirrors the findings for the adults--this group consistently has
the lowest prevalence of alcohol and other drug use for all
racial and ethnic groups with the possible exception of black
youth. Although, a prospective study conducted in North Carolina
found an alarming increase in reported alcohol and other drug use
among Asian Americans over a three-year period in the late 1980s.
The reason for this increase at a time when prevalence rates for
other races and ethnicities was decreasing remains unknown (72).
Another study on youth in California reported that Chinese
American youth used quaaludes twice as often as white and
Hispanic youth, and five times as often as black youth (68).
Drinking statistics for Asian American youth are again similar to
those reported by the adult population, that is, their overall
prevalence rate is one of the lowest, but statistics for heavy
drinking are similar to those found among white youth (72). </p>

<p> Psychosocial/cultural antecedents </p>

<p> Why does this population have such low overall rates of
alcohol and other drug use? The diversity present within the
Asian and Pacific Island American group makes it impossible to
list all the different cultural factors that could influence
alcohol and drug use patterns. However, among many of the
subpopulations, anthropologists and substance abuse experts have
found the existence of the following philosophies: moderation,
family reputation, humility, keeping a low profile, negative
community sanctions on excessive drinking and behavior, and the
impact of parental drinking practices (83). Among Chinese
specifically, alcohol is in an important part of many religious
and celebratory ceremonies, yet excessive use is strongly
discouraged. </p>

<p> One study in California uncovered additional behavioral
factors that influenced drinking patterns among some Asian
American men. Japanese respondents were heavily influenced by
their friends' drinking; among Chinese men, those with more
education were more likely to drink; and Korean men were strongly
influenced by their parents' drinking habits (68). </p>

<p> Few researchers have examined psychosocial influences on
Asian and Pacific Island American adolescent drinking or other
drug use. One factor which has been mentioned, though, is the
pressure Asian American youth, in particular, are under to
succeed, especially academically. Thirty-four percent of Asian
Americans are college educated, more than twice that of the
United States population as a whole. Those with the least amount
of college education were American Indians (7.7 percent) and
Pacific Islanders (9.3 percent). Asian parents are similar to
parents, in general, in their hopes for their children's success.
However, among some subpopulations (notably Japanese, Korean, and
Chinese) the feelings for their children are often tied to the
child's academic achievement. When their children perform poorly
in school, some parents respond with strong
criticism,disapproval, and shame. This can understandably add a
substantial amount of stress to an adolescent who may already be
coping with language and cultural differences (72). </p>

<p> Prevention programs </p>

<p> Mainstream culture in the United States, to a great degree,
emphasizes individuality, competitiveness, and monetary success.
Conversely, for many Asian and Pacific Island Americans the
qualities most stressed are the needs of the family, sharing and
generosity, and a belief in who you are rather than what you own.
Because the extended family is so important in many of the
cultures, it is often the first group that an individual with
problems will turn to versus an &quot;outsider&quot; or social
service agency. Substance abuse prevention practitioners need to
be aware of the strong resistance within many Asian and Pacific
Island Americans to seek outside assistance. </p>

<p> One innovative substance abuse program entitled Na Keiki O
Ka`Aina (Children of the Land) is being implemented in Oahu,
Hawaii. Children attending the local Makaha elementary school
work several hours a week on a farm where they learn to care for
the land, their environment, and themselves as alternatives to
lifestyles that rely on alcohol and other drugs. The program uses
the cultural values of native Hawaiians, which emphasize
&quot;warm, open friendship and love,&quot; love of the earth,
and other spiritual values. Since the program's inception, class
behavior has noticeably improved, English scores have increased,
and a survey measuring drug use in the district schools showed
that Makaha school was the only school that reported a decrease
(74). </p>

<p> Areas for Future Research Among Different Racial and Ethnic
Groups </p>

<p> While this section of the report has reiterated the need to
view racial and ethnic groups as heterogeneous, the majority of
substance abuse data is not collected or examined in this way. To
date, a variety of distinct cultures are usually grouped under
one classification, and generalizations are made concerning this
group's drug use. While substance abuse prevention programs are
often better tailored to specific subpopulations and cultures, it
is virtually impossible to adequately evaluate these programs
when little baseline substance abuse data exists for specific
subpopulations. There is therefore room for improvement in the
collection of prevalence data on alcohol and other drug use and
abuse among distinct racial and ethnic groups. Furthermore, long-
term prospective studies, which are essential for understanding
risk and protective factors specific to different groups, are
extremely scarce. </p>

<p> Biomedical research on different racial and ethnic groups has
also been inconclusive and scanty (with the possible exception of
alcohol research and Asians). </p>

<p> ECONOMICS </p>

<p> Economics can be viewed as a factor in individual substance
abuse in two ways. In areas where substance abuse is already well
established and viable employment opportunities are scarce,
selling illicit substances can seem very appealing. Several
questions arise from this scenario. Are individuals lured into
the world of illegal drug sales by income potential? And, are
drug dealers more likely to become drug abusers because they are
dealers? Both of these questions have been addressed under the
first section. </p>

<p> A parallel issue is that of poverty and the daily stresses
encountered by individuals living in chronically poor areas. Do
individuals living in these poor areas abuse substances in
greater numbers or are fewer social services available in these
areas, and thus the consequences from substance abuse are more
acutely felt and visible? </p>

<p> Generated Income </p>

<p> While few studies have attempted to ascertain the individual
incomes of drug dealers, two studies have concentrated on the
street sale of illicit drugs by urban youth (21,52). The research
revealed that individual dealers reported mean gross monthly
incomes of $3,558 to $5,934. Even if these self-reported earnings
were exaggerated, this sum of money is clearly more than many
urban youth could hope to obtain in legitimate jobs at a median
of $7 per hour. </p>

<p> This earning potential may be a serious obstacle to
prevention, intervention, and treatment programs targeted toward
urban adolescents. The staff at an innovative treatment program
for drug dealers in Baltimore, Maryland, has discovered the
difficulties former dealers have in giving up the fast lifestyles
they once led. </p>

<p> Most dealers say they do it because of the money,&quot; says
a staff counselor. &quot;They can't see working at McDonald's for
minimum wage when they're making $500 to $1,000 per day,&quot; he
adds. Counselors try to help clients think beyond the idea of
making fast money to the moral, social and legal issues
associated with drug dealing. They find, however, that the moral
issue is not always clear-cut. In many cases, clients are
supporting their families and it is hard for them to see they are
doing something wrong when they are paying the bills. </p>

<p> Overall, counselors say their clients are addicted to the
money. &quot;What we do is help them see what is all around them,
what they're doing to themselves and their community by selling
drugs (48). </p>

<p> The potential for monetary gain may be especially true within
the crack trade. A young black male from San Francisco,
California, explained his preference for the immediate rewards of
selling crack over the seemingly meaningless rituals of school: </p>

<p> Forget about school. I'd rather have a life of selling drugs.
?.?. When you go to school, you do nothing. You sit around, have
books in your backpack, take`em home, do your homework, come back
to school, get some grade. When you sell drugs, see, I had
satisfaction of seeing my work, getting some money for it (22). </p>

<p> It would appear then that for many urban youth, selling
illicit drugs supplies purpose, companionship, and income without
compromising dignity. More money can be gained from the sale of
illicit drugs than through petty crimes, and certainly more than
through minimum wage jobs. </p>

<p> Another issue to be addressed is the dealer-turned-client.
From the two previously cited studies, dealers were estimated to
spend between 59 and 71 percent of their income each month on the
purchase of illicit drugs. For example, out of $3,558 gross per
month, $1,226 was spent purchasing additional drugs for business,
$883 was spent on drugs for personal consumption, and an
additional $533 on expenses associated with drug dealing. </p>

<p> The Urban Institute has also reviewed the relationship
between using and selling drugs. Its study population was
composed of 387 inner-city adolescent males of ninth- and tenth-
grade age. Of this sample, 79.6 percent reported that they
neither used nor sold drugs within the past year. Of the
remainder, 19.0 percent reported both using and selling drugs,
44.3 percent reported selling only, and 36.7 percent reported
using only. They also discovered that the greater the level of
involvement in either using or selling, the higher the likelihood
of doing both (13). </p>

<p> In summary, the research completed thus far neither confirms
nor negates the possible influence income potential has on luring
individuals into drug dealing. Nor can one conclude that drug
dealers are more likely to become substance abusers than
nondealers. </p>

<p> Poverty </p>

<p> Alcohol and drug problems are present not only among the
poor, but are poor individuals at greater risk for developing
these problems? While a relatively straight forward question, not
only is poverty difficult to define, but drawing conclusions
concerning an individual's potential for future substance abuse
based on one or two variables, such as family income or
educational level, is overly simplistic and deceptive. To
adequately review this question, a milieu of both individual and
aggregate measures should be present in any analysis done. </p>

<p> In recent years, great attention has been paid to the plight
of the urban poor, many of whom are minorities. These inner- city
communities are often riddled with high rates of crime, violence,
unemployment, and inadequate social and medical services. For
individuals living in these localities, the consequences of these
problems are serious and far reaching. Yet according to the 1980
census only 9 percent of all the poor, and 21 percent of all the
poor blacks, lived in these types of areas. </p>

<p> To define the problems of the urban poor as predominantly
&quot;black problems&quot; does a disservice to the two-thirds of
African Americans who are not poor, as well as to the two- thirds
of the poor in our central cities who are not black (8). </p>

<p> Poverty within rural communities, while lacking much of the
violence and crime of urban areas, is no less oppressive. In
1987, compared with the general population, rural residents were
less likely to be employed and to have completed high school.
They had lower average incomes and higher poverty rates than did
urban residents, and one out of every six rural families lived in
poverty (compared with one in eight urban families). This ratio
approached one out of two for black rural families. Areas of
chronic poverty were concentrated in the South, where 25 million
of the Nation's 57 million rural residents live (48 percent), and
where four out of every ten rural residents were poor, elderly,
or both (61). </p>

<p> To assess poverty and its relationship to alcohol and drug
abuse problems, one must find appropriate measures. Some
researchers have utilized the Federal guidelines for poverty,
while others employ measures of Socioeconomic Status (SES), such
as educational level and household income. To date, the largest
and most comprehensive analysis of SES variables and substance
use has been accomplished by NIDA (76). Both bivariate and
multivariate analyses were completed on data collected in 1988
and 1990 from NHSDA (see box 6-C). </p>

<p> The NIDA report has two major limitations. First, the
analysis focused on indicators of drug and alcohol use, rather
than indicators of problem use or hard-core use. While the report
has categories for frequent/heavy use and recent use, it cannot
be assumed that individuals who reported such use had alcohol or
drug problems. Secondly, the report lacks data for transient,
homeless, or institutionalized individuals, many of whom have
serious alcohol and/or drug problems. </p>

<p> Table 6-3 presents the findings from the multivariate
analysis of the NHSDA data. The SES variables pertinent to a
possible link between poverty and substance use are educational
level, occupation of chief wage earner, employment status, number
of jobs held in past 5 years, median housing value, and percent
of housing that is owned. Neither personal income nor household
income were included in the analysis, as personal income was most
meaningful only for persons who worked and household income data
were not available in the 1988 survey. </p>

<p> Alcohol consumption within the past month was measured on
three levels: abstinence; nonheavy use; and heavy use. Marijuana
use was measured by any past-month use and cocaine use was
measured by any past-year use (both categories could include
frequent as well as casual users). Major findings from the
analysis include: </p>

<p> o SES variables associated with poverty and predictive of
past month abstinence from alcohol were: not having worked in the
past 5 years and having lived in a census block with a high
percentage of owner occupancy. For users, versus abstainers, SES
attributes predictive of nonheavy alcohol use included having
attended college (regardless of completion) and living in census
areas with high housing values. Significant for heavy alcohol use
was not having completed high school, holding three or more jobs
in the past 5 years, and living in a census area with low housing
values. No employment status or occupational categories were
found to be independently predictive of heavy alcohol use. </p>

<p> o For any past-month marijuana use the independent SES
predictors associated with poverty were being unemployed and
having held three or more jobs in the past 5 years. Individuals
who reported no marijuana use in the past month were more likely
to have had some degree of college participation. </p>

<p> o Many of the SES predictors for cocaine use in the past year
were similar to those identified for marijuana use: being
unemployed and having worked three or more jobs in the past 5
years. SES characteristics predictive of no reported cocaine use
in the past year were being a college graduate and having a
part-time job. </p>

<p> This type of analysis is an exercise in inclusion and
exclusion. A myriad of individual and aggregate characteristics
are initially considered in the equation and, depending on the
outcome of interest, whether it be heavy alcohol use or marijuana
use in the past month, different variables will show themselves
to be either predictive or not predictive of the outcome. Because
personal income and household income were not included in the
multivariate analysis, but are often used as SES measures for
poverty, tables 6-4 and 6-5 depict the bivariate analysis done by
NIDA (76). Again, this analysis reveals associations, not
causality. </p>

<p> Personal income (which is highly correlated with an
individual's age and sex) was examined only for respondents who
reported working full time during the year prior to the survey.
Associations between personal income and drug use were
significant for most drugs. For every drug use measure (except
past-month use of alcohol), plus heavy use of alcohol, the
percentage of users declined as the income level rose.
Differences between income levels for frequent use of marijuana
and cocaine, concurrent heavy use of alcohol with marijuana, and
use of psychotherapeutics, hallucinogens, inhalants, and crack
were all statistically significant and more than twice as common
in the lowest income group as in the highest. Low income was also
associated with higher rates of abstinence from alcohol as well
as higher rates of heavy drinking. </p>

<p> The associations between household income (which is less
affected by age and sex) and drug and alcohol use were
considerably weaker than those observed for personal income. The
only statistically significant associations were for alcohol use,
concurrent heavy alcohol use with marijuana, and use of
hallucinogens. Those with household incomes of $40,000 or higher
were about twice as likely as those with incomes of less than
$12,000 to have used any amount of alcohol in the past month.
However, the rates of heavy drinking differed little across the
income levels. Other categories of drug use appear to be slightly
less common among the wealthiest households, but, in general,
drug use was not strongly related to household income. </p>

<p> From these types of analyses, a straightforward &quot;yes or
no&quot; response to the initial question, which linked poverty
to increased individual risk for drug abuse, is clearly
impossible. The NIDA analyses demonstrated that the type and
quantity of an individual's substance use is correlated with a
variety of both individual as well as geographic characteristics.
Furthermore, while the NIDA report was the largest and most
comprehensive to date, some segments of the population, many of
whom were possible alcohol and drug abusers, were excluded from
the survey. </p>

<p> As one economist noted, &quot;There is much we still need to
learn about poverty. Much of the past research has focused
primarily on economic questions, reflecting the extensive
involvement by economists in this work. Research is much more
limited on topics such as the causes of changing family
structures, the impacts of neighborhoods and family structure on
children's opportunities in life, personal and family coping
strategies among the poor, how expectations about future
opportunities are formed, and how these expectations influence
behavior&quot; (8). </p>

<p> PSYCHOSOCIAL/BEHAVIORAL </p>

<p> Aggressiveness </p>

<p> In much of the research literature the term aggression is
used almost exclusively when referring to young children and
adolescents between the ages of 13 and 15. Shortly after this age
a divergence appears within this identified aggressive group. The
vast majority of children &quot;outgrow&quot; their aggressive
behavior, while a smaller percentage progress into or also
exhibit, among other things, conduct disorders, antisocial
behavior, delinquency, and violence. Discussing each of these
areas is beyond the scope of this report. However, it should be
noted that as is true for many individual risk factors, a number
of these behaviors are intricately meshed. </p>

<p> Definitions for the term aggression vary considerably and may
include tardiness, breaking rules, fighting, vandalism, cruelty
to animals, and verbal abuse of other children. Many studies
simply fail to define it. Wherever possible, study definitions of
aggression will be outlined. </p>

<p> The children in the various studies on aggressiveness and
subsequent drug abuse ranged in age from 5 to 20 years old.
Aggressive behavior in the majority of the studies was exhibited
almost exclusively by boys. While girls were included in the
study populations, the number exhibiting aggressive behavior was
very small. However, the presence of aggressive behavior among
some young girls has not been shown to be predictive of later
adolescent delinquency or substance use (49). This disparity
between the sexes has not been addressed at any length. </p>

<p> Of the preadolescent boys who exhibited aggressive behavior,
30 to 40 percent maintained this behavior into adolescence. This
continued aggression has been shown to be a strong predictor of
subsequent alcohol and drug problems (28,33, 51). Interestingly,
the combination of shy and aggressive behavior has also been
correlated with later substance use problems. It has been
postulated that aggressive boys may be more likely to be shunned
by conventional peer groups, but accepted by other aggressive
children who could encourage drug and alcohol use. Another
theory, while not confirmed, suggests that young children
rejected by conventional peer groups gravitate toward each other
and that these groups of former so-called loners may foster
delinquent behavior in later adolescence (28). Conversely, boys
(but not girls) exhibiting shy behavior have been shown as less
likely to partake in alcohol and drug using activities as they
grew older (28,33,51). </p>

<p> Where does this aggressive behavior originate? Some studies
have shown that young children exhibiting sociable, spontaneous,
and fearless behavior are at greater risk for future aggressive
and violent conduct. Factors that seem to be protective include a
shy temperament, being first born, having a small and stable
family characterized by low discord (i.e., effective family
management), and having parents who regularly attend religious
services (51). </p>

<p> Current psychological perspectives emphasize that aggressive
and violent behaviors are &quot;learned&quot; responses to
frustration, that they can also be learned as instruments for
achieving goals, and that the learning occurs by observing models
of such behavior. Such models may be observed in the family,
among peers, elsewhere in the neighborhood, and through the mass
media (51). </p>

<p> This observation could, in part, explain why so few young
girls are identified as aggressive. While socially defined roles
for adults have changed considerably in the last several decades,
the socialization of children's behavior to a large extent has
not. Certain behaviors by boys are still classified by many
adults under the &quot;boys-will-be-boys&quot; axiom, while the
same behaviors by girls are oftenconsidered inappropriate. </p>

<p> Biological and genetic precursors to aggressiveness have also
been explored. Events associated with brain dysfunction that
appear to increase an individual's potential for aggression
include: brain injuries; in vitro exposure to opiates, cocaine,
alcohol, and tobacco; and early environmental exposure to lead
(e.g., air contaminated by leaded fuels, lead-based paint, water
from older plumbing systems) (51). </p>

<p> No genetic studies specific to aggressive behavior have been
conducted. Several Scandinavian countries have researched the
association between genetics and violence, obtaining mixed
results. No such studies have been attempted in the United States
(51). </p>

<p> By understanding the antecedents of aggressive behavior,
prevention programs targeted at reducing such behavior are much
more likely to succeed. It has been asserted that
multidimensional programs are more effective than those that
focus on one or two components of aggressiveness. Researcher
Karen Dodge submits: </p>

<p> Most intervention approaches are implemented without regard
for the type of aggressive behavior under scrutiny, and that
different types of aggression are likely to respond differently
to different types of intervention. Reactive aggressive children
who overly attribute hostility to others in provocative
situations may respond best to treatment aimed at training them
to understand better others' thoughts and feelings. Proactively
aggressive children may respond more favorably to consistent
punishment of aggressive behavior and reinforcement of
nonaggressive responses; this latter group many also have a
better prognosis than the former group. Three intervention
programs cited as being particularly suitable for differential
implementation with these two types of aggressive children
include social problem-solving skills training, anger-control
training, and parent training (17). </p>

<p> Several unanswered questions point to areas for future
research. Why do boys disproportionately exhibit aggressive
behavior? Are specific aggressive behaviors unique to certain
subpopulations? What are the differences between those
individuals who &quot;grow out of&quot; their aggressive behavior
and those who do not? </p>

<p> Answers to these questions and others will allow for more
detailed understanding of aggressive behavior and its connection
to alcohol and drug abuse, which could in turn provide for an
improved structure for the planning of appropriate prevention
programs. </p>

<p> Delinquency and Crime </p>

<p> Similar to aggression research, studies define and collect
data on delinquency and crime differently. Some studies use the
two terms interchangeably, while others define delinquent acts as
those less serious versus acts such as rape, armed robbery, and
manslaughter, which are clearly illegal. Self-reported data are
relied on by some studies, while others utilize only arrest
records. These differences must be considered when attempting to
generalize delinquent behavior to subsequent misuse of alcohol
and drugs. </p>

<p> As is true for aggressiveness, males are at greater risk for
developing delinquent and criminal behavior. Delinquent behavior
for most youths appears to peak between the ages of 15 to 17,
while alcohol and drug use are on the rise. However, only a small
percentage (2 to 6 percent) of these adolescents become young
adults who continue to engage in serious criminal activity
coupled with frequent drug use. Statistics reveal that many
arrests for property and violent crimes can be attributed to this
small group of individuals (29). </p>

<p> Several researchers have linked delinquent and criminal
behavior to alcohol and drug abuse and have concluded these
activities precede the use and abuse of certain substances
(28,29,13,56). </p>

<p> One such study conducted on adolescents examined the
relationship between later drug use and earlier individual
delinquent behavior and delinquent peer group bonding (DPGB).
Females were found less likely to engage in individual delinquent
behavior before but not after participating in a delinquent peer
group. Additionally, minority students doing well in school had
lower rates of delinquent problems than did nonminority youth who
were also doing well in school. Strong positive belief systems
(beliefs that committing illegal or rule-violating acts are
morally wrong) also decreased the potential for future use of
alcohol, marijuana, and other drugs. Conversely, those
adolescents who had high DPGB levels had increased rates of
alcohol, marijuana, and polydrug use (20). </p>

<p> A separate study of male and female cocaine addicts analyzed
the psychosocial factors present among individuals who
substantially increased their cocaine use from adolescence to
young adulthood. Those who progressed to heavier use displayed a
significant lack of law abidance or social conformity (46). </p>

<p> Several points have come to light from studies on heroin
addicts. Studies conducted in the late 1970s found that while
delinquency preceded illicit drug use, use of alcohol and first
alcohol intoxication took place before delinquency. In fact, an
average of two years lapsed between first alcohol intoxication
and first criminal activity for both males and females who later
became heroin addicts (64). A further study on male heroin
addicts that grouped participants into low-crime versus
high-crime categories found that men who had been placed in the
high-crime group admitted significantly more contact with the
criminal justice system before becoming addicted than did those
in the low-crime group. Also, the high-crime group showed earlier
and more frequent use of substances, as well as use of a wider
variety of narcotic and nonnarcotic substances (47). </p>

<p> While a relatively small number of individuals who exhibit
delinquent behavior progress to serious alcohol and drug
problems, understanding the cause(s) of the delinquent behavior
may help to decrease this number further. Psychosocial elements
that have been associated with later delinquent behavior include:
</p>

<p> o low parent-child attachment </p>

<p> o family conflict </p>

<p> o family social deprivation </p>

<p> o school failure </p>

<p> o parental and sibling drug use and criminal behavior </p>

<p> o poor and inconsistent family management practices (e.g.,
harsh or lax discipline, lack of supervision) </p>

<p> o attitudes and beliefs </p>

<p> o lack of neighborhood attachment and community
disorganization </p>

<p> o family mobility. </p>

<p> Neurophysiological and cognitive dimensions have also been
examined for serious delinquents, adult criminals, and children
with conduct disorders. However, the findings were scanty and
inconclusive (29,37). </p>

<p> When discussing prevention programs for these children, there
is the hazard of labeling them predelinquent. This concern could
be applied equally to most risk factors linked to future alcohol
and drug problems. Labeling children as aggressive, high risk,
delinquent, or developmentally slow may be a self-fulfilling
prophecy. Some researchers have suggested that broad,
encompassing programs should be implemented in targeted areas
where groups exhibit a number of the risk factors previously
described. This type of approach would not single out individuals
but rather would assist communities, schools, and families (29). </p>

<p> Physical and Sexual Abuse </p>

<p> Researchers and clinicians have increasingly addressed the
possibility that physical and sexual abuse, especially in
childhood, may be associated with an increased likelihood of
later substance abuse and addiction. Although there are many gaps
in this literature, and substantive and methodological issues
that remain to be addressed, findings from several studies that
have measured the prevalence of substance abuse strongly suggest
that additional research and the evaluation of targeted clinical
interventions are warranted. This section highlights selected
research findings on the relationship of physical and sexual
abuse to later substance abuse. </p>

<p> One review article on physical abuse found that children
subjected to physical abuse had higher levels of later substance
abuse compared to children not physically victimized. The review
also cited another study which found that 84 percent of the
females in treatment for alcohol or drug addiction reported a
history of childhood abuse (18). </p>

<p> Childhood sexual abuse appears to be rising. The National
Incidence Study reported in 1988 that approximately 156,000
children had been recognized by public agencies (such as child
protective service agencies, mental health agencies, and the
schools) as being sexually abused each year, for an annual rate
of about 0.3 percent (58). This is an increase in recognized
cases of child sexual abuse of more than 300 percent between 1980
and 1988, and due to the sensitive nature of the topic, is
probably a gross underestimation of the actual numbers of cases. </p>

<p> Prevalence statistics on childhood sexual assault specific to
women range from 6 to 62 percent, depending on the definitions,
methodology, and study populations used (54). One study that
relied on a random sampling method discovered that of the 391
women who agreed to participate in the study, almost 34 percent
reported being sexually assaulted by age 18, which provides a
lifetime prevalence rate of one out of every three women. Of the
respondents, over 24 percent reported an experience such as rape,
15 percent had been victims of molestation, and 10 percent
reported some type of noncontact sexual assault (e.g., voyeurism,
verbal threats of sexual assault, being forced to watch
pornography) (54). Other researchers, measuring childhood
molestation histories among women psychiatric outpatients, have
cited figures of 50 to 70 percent, versus 20 to 30 percent
reported by women in nonclinical populations (12). </p>

<p> While causality has not been established between childhood
sexual abuse and later substance abuse problems, an association
between the two variables has been shown. Several review articles
have summarized the findings from researchers who consistently
report that children exposed to sexual abuse present with a
greater number of symptoms and problems compared to children who
are not victimized (12,34,55). While substance abuse problems are
not measured in all the studies, where it is measured,
individuals who have been sexually abused show a much higher
incidence of later substance abuse than their study counterparts
(55). For example, 60 to 80 percent of individuals in substance
abuse treatment programs report having been sexual abused (12).
Other researchers have classified common symptoms by age group,
discovering that among adolescents who had been sexually abused
at some time in their lives, 53 percent reported abusing some
substance (34). </p>

<p> Studies on sexually abused women have demonstrated similarly
high rates. One study of women requesting appointments at a
crisis counseling unit of a community health center found that 44
percent of the women walk-in clients reported a history of sexual
abuse as children. The sexually abused women differed from the
nonabused women in many ways, but they differed most in their
substance abuse. The abused women were about 10 times more likely
than the nonabused women in this population to report a history
of drug abuse (21.1 percent vs. 2.3 percent) and more than twice
as likely to report a history of alcoholism (26.9 percent vs.
10.5 percent) (11). </p>

<p> A review of four separate studies on women seeking treatment
for alcoholism shows 34 to 85 percent of the women report a
history of sexual abuse (30); and among recovering chemically
dependent women, the topics discussed most often are sexual child
abuse, incest, and rape. Uncovering the memories of these early
childhood experiences is thought to be a contributing factor in
drug relapse for some women (31). Thus, early experiences of
abuse, especially sexual abuse, may require attention in
treatment programs, since they may have been important precursors
and contributors to the substance abuse and addiction, and may be
major obstacles to successful treatment and the prevention of
relapse. </p>

<p> Clearly, physical and sexual abuse are not uncommon
phenomena. While this section has focused on the association
between abusive experiences and subsequent substance abuse, there
are many other psychopathologies that also arise from sexual and
physical abuse. The research question need not be whether
physical and sexual abuse &quot;cause&quot; the later substance
abuse and addiction. Clearly, many factors interact, especially
in the home, school, and peer settings of children as they grow
up. However, the consistent finding of higher levels of physical
and sexual abuse among substance abusers warrants further
research to disentangle the many factors that are at work. Unlike
race, ethnicity, and poverty (which are not by themselves
strongly and independently associated with substance abuse and
addiction, but must be understood in the context of subcultures
and the availability and marketing of drugs in neighborhoods and
communities), physical and sexual abuse may more directly
contribute to later behavioral problems, including substance
abuse. </p>

<p> Mental Disorders </p>

<p> The sheer number of Americans with mental disorders
transforms personal tragedy into a widespread public health
problem. Nearly one in three American adults will experience a
mental disorder during his or her lifetime. Moreover,
approximately 1.7 to 2.4 million Americans currently suffer from
a persistent and severely disabling mental disorder, such as
schizophrenia or bipolar disorder (commonly known as manic
depression) (62). </p>

<p> There exists a wide array of behaviors classified as
symptomatic of mental disorders, ranging from premenstrual
syndrome, hostility toward others, and other maladaptive
personality traits, to full-blown psychosis (2). It can at times
be difficult to delineate where mental health ends and mental
illness begins. </p>

<p> While many alcohol and drug problems may not be attributable
primarily to mental disorders, they can certainly be exacerbated
by these disorders. One comprehensive study found a high
prevalence of comorbid (i.e., occurring at the same time) mental
disorders and alcohol or other drug disorders--including both
abuse and dependence syndromes as defined in the DSM-III-R. Using
data from NIMH's Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) survey of
20,291 adults (aged 18 and older) in communities and in various
institutional settings (prisons, mental hospitals, nursing homes,
and specialized treatment centers), they assessed the prevalence
of comorbid alcohol, other drug, and mental disorders.
Schizophrenia, mood disorders, and anxiety disorders were among
those studied. Specific drugs studied, in addition to alcohol,
included marijuana, cocaine, opiates, barbiturates, amphetamines,
and hallucinogens (50). </p>

<p> Alcohol Disorder as the Primary Diagnosis </p>

<p> An estimated 13.5 percent of all adults in the United States
will have a lifetime diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence
(see figure 6-3). For these individuals, the rate of mental
disorder was almost double that of persons with no history of an
alcohol disorder, and the rate of another drug disorder was
almost six times greater. Specific comorbid mental disorders
found in people with alcohol abuse- dependence disorder include
anxiety disorders (19.4 percent), mood disorders (13.4 percent),
and schizophrenia (3.8 percent). </p>

<p> Drug Disorder (Other than Alcohol) as the Primary Diagnosis </p>

<p> Some 6.1 percent of the total adult population will have had
a primary diagnosis of drug abuse or dependency at some time in
their lives. Over half of these individuals have also been
diagnosed with a comorbid mental disorder such as anxiety
disorder (28.3 percent), mood disorder (26.4 percent), or
schizophrenia (6.8 percent). Compared to those persons without a
drug disorder, these individuals are at more than four times the
risk of having some type of mental disorder. Additionally, these
individuals are also seven times more likely to be addicted to
alcohol. </p>

<p> Mental Disorder as the Primary Diagnosis </p>

<p> In contrast, at some time in their lives nearly one-quarter
of all adults in the United States will have had a primary
diagnosis of mental disorder. Compared with individuals having no
history of mental disorder, people with a mental disorder face
twice the odds of having alcohol abuse- dependence and over four
times the odds of drug abuse dependence. </p>

<p> Comorbid alcohol and other drug abuse or dependence disorders
occur frequently in people with the specific subtypes of mental
disorders included in the study: </p>

<p> o Of those who develop schizophrenia and related disorders
during their lifetimes (approximately 1.5 percent of the U.S.
population), nearly half will abuse or be dependent on alcohol or
other drugs, or both. </p>

<p> o Thirty-two percent of people with mood disorders (8.3
percent of the total adult population) will abuse or become
dependent on alcohol, other drugs, or both. </p>

<p> o The anxiety disorders, as a group, occur at sometime in the
lives of 14.6 percent of the population and are highly likely to
be associated with an alcohol or other drug abuse or dependence
disorder. For example, 35.8 percent of people with panic
disorder, and 32.8 percent of people with obsessive-compulsive
disorder will have some form of alcohol or other drug abuse or
dependence disorder. </p>

<p> People with both mental disorders and alcohol or other drug
disorders are likely to suffer more severe psychiatric symptoms,
disruptive behaviors, aggression, and criminal behaviors. The
importance of early detection for mental disorders is clear if
subsequent alcohol and drug abuse problems are to be avoided. In
other cases, an individual's drug and/or alcohol problems may
precede his or her mental disorder. In whatever order these
complications are distinguished, it is essential to remember that
millions of men and women suffer through not one, but two
illnesses (62). </p>

<p> Resiliency </p>

<p> The majority of funding and research has been devoted to
understanding and identifying those elements that appear to place
individuals at a greater risk for substance abuse. However, many
of these same factors can, to some degree, be protective. For
example, the vast majority of adolescents who have used alcohol,
cigarettes, and other drugs do not grow up to become substance
abusing adults. The process of aging and successfully passing
through various developmental stages is in itself protective. In
other cases, the lack of a particular factor is protective. This
is true for many of the psychosocial factors such as
aggressivity, delinquency, mental disorders, and physical and
sexual abuse. </p>

<p> But what about those individuals who live in stressful and
chaotic conditions--who are constantly exposed to many of these
risk factors--yet who do not develop substance abuse problems.
How do these individuals emerge relatively unscathed, while many
of their immediate family succumb to substance abuse? This
section addresses a complimentary set of protective attributes,
characteristics identified inindividuals who display resiliency
to the effects of various risk factors. </p>

<p> The term resiliency can be described as the ability to
recover from or adjust easily to misfortune or change. A 1991
conference sponsored by the Children of Alcoholics Foundation
released a report in which resiliency was conceptualized in the
following manner (15): </p>

<p> o Resiliency is a dynamic process, not a static condition. </p>

<p> o Resiliency is contextual; adaptive behavior in one context
may be maladaptive in another. </p>

<p> o Resiliency is the result of inherent personality
characteristics interacting with environmental factors. </p>

<p> o Resiliency is more complex in multiple-risk situations. </p>

<p> o Resiliency can be learned. </p>

<p> For the most part, social science research on resiliency in
children has not specifically addressed environmental substance
abuse, and where it has, the research has focused to a large
extent on alcoholism within the family. However, in general,
resiliency studies have examined high-risk children from a
variety of families and communities, of which many had substance
abuse problems. </p>

<p> One of the largest longitudinal studies spanned a period of
30 years and was completed by Emmy Werner on the Hawaiian island
of Kauai (80,81). An entire multiracial cohort of children was
followed from the prenatal period to young adulthood, revealing
invaluable information on resiliency in the presence of certain
risk factors. Of the 700 children originally included in the
study, 200 were identified as at- risk for later problems based
on perinatal stress, poverty, family instability, and parents
with mental health problems. Through the children's first decade
of life, approximately 25 percent had at least one parent with a
serious alcohol problem. Of these children, 41 percent later
developed serious learning and behavioral problems by age 18,
while the rest did not. All the children of alcoholic mothers
developed problems, with the exception of one. Conversely,
children of alcoholic fathers &quot;were represented in roughly
equal proportions among those who did and those who did not
develop serious coping problems by age 18&quot; (80). </p>

<p> More general findings from the study highlighted the
difference between the prevalence of serious physical, learning,
and behavior problems among girls and boys. Up to age 10, when
confronted with a variety of risk factors, boys were
significantly more likely to display a greater number of
childhood problems requiring some type of social service and/or
medical intervention. However, this ratio changed markedly by the
second decade (ages 10 to 18). While high- risk boys were still
three times more likely than girls to have records of serious
delinquency (77 vs. 26 percent), by age 18 more than twice as
many high-risk girls reported serious mental health problems.
Additionally, of those children in the first decade identified
with serious learning and/or behavioral problems, a greater
number of boys than girls had improved by age 18. </p>

<p> Interestingly, the researchers also showed that some of the
resilience factors identified differed between the sexes. For
example among young girls, experiences that tended to foster
greater maturity and independence, such as absence of a father,
responsibility for younger siblings, and maternal employment
outside the home, also appeared to bolster resiliency and
competence. On the other hand, resiliency among young boys was
correlated with the presence of the father, little family discord
or crowding, and the existence of adequate structure and
supervision. However, overall, a greater number of high-risk
girls than high-risk boys grew into resilient young adults. </p>

<p> Several other studies have also identified factors associated
with resiliency in children (6,19,23). One such factor is
described as adaptive distancing whereby the child accomplishes
two things: the child emotionally and psychologically detaches
from the chaos of the family and resumes more &quot;customary
pursuits&quot; in the outside world of school and friends, and
the child does not allow the caregiver's drug or alcohol problem
to be the central focus of his or her world. These behaviors have
been observed in children as young as 3 years old. </p>

<p> A sense of purpose and future have also been identified with
resiliency. Clinicians have observed very young children
attempting to make sense of their situation upon experiencing an
array of hardships such as chronic poverty or familial substance
abuse. Resilient children display such attributes as hopefulness,
hardiness, motivation, and a belief in a bright future even when
faced with challenges and adversity. </p>

<p> Researchers have also found that the ability to develop
competency skills was associated with resiliency. Competence
includes &quot;the qualities of responsiveness, flexibility,
empathy and caring, communication skills, a sense of humor, and
any other prosocial behavior&quot; (6). Researchers have
consistently documented the presence of these characteristics
among resilient individuals, and equally important, have noted
the lack of these characteristics among individuals with severe
behavioral, criminal, and mental health problems. </p>

<p> Another element that has been associated with resiliency is
the ability to use support systems effectively. Those children
who tapped into school activities, spoke with counselors,
actively sought an alternative parent figure or role model, and
confided in others were much more likely to be resilient than
those children not involved in these supportive networks. </p>

<p> Much of a person's resiliency depends on a variety of
elements including the individual's developmental stage, cultural
perceptions, and &quot;the acuteness or chronicity of the adverse
circumstances&quot; (19). Nonetheless, many men and women who
have gone on to lead productive and fulfilling lives, often did
so in spite of their circumstances. By understanding how this was
achieved, prevention programs can incorporate activities to
bolster the protective factors in the lives of all children. </p>

<p> Spirituality/Religiosity </p>

<p> The terms religiosity and spirituality are neither mutually
exclusive nor inclusive. Both terms encompass an enormous array
of fellowships and individual values, including institutionalized
religion, new age religion or quasi- religious groups,
traditional beliefs, and nonreligious persons. </p>

<p> Within the drug and alcohol abuse research field, studies
have focused almost exclusively on the relationship between
institutionalized Christian religions (with the exception of a
handful of studies on Judaism) and its effect on substance use
among adolescents and young adults. Virtually no data are
available on other methods of worship, or discussion of the
effect spiritualism/religiosity may have on the progression from
adolescent alcohol and drug use to problem use and addiction. </p>

<p> A succinct and thorough review of recent literature on
religion and substance use was completed by social psychologist
Peter Benson (7). With rare exceptions, religiousness, in varying
degrees, has been associated with decreased levels of substance
use. The substances studied included alcohol, cigarettes, and
numerous illicit drugs. This protective factor held true for men
and women across the four U.S. census regions, and to some extent
among blacks and Hispanics (although only a few studies analyzed
race and ethnicity). The most widely used measures of religiosity
were church attendance, church affiliation versus nonaffiliation,
and religious importance; yet it also appeared that such indirect
associations as parents' religiousness and belief in life after
death were correlated with decreased substance use. Multivariate
analysis was employed to examine the relative importance of
religiousness by controlling for other demographic and social
variables. In most instances the protective effect of
religiousness was relatively small, but it did appear to be more
predictive than several personal factors (e.g., self-esteem,
purpose in life, locus of control) and less predictive when
compared to social variables such as parental standards, peer
pressure, and social tolerance. Benson puts forth several
explanations for this apparent protective element, most of which
center around the idea that organized religion fosters and
maintains a certain set of morals and values. Depending on the
religion, deviating from these norms can be somewhat tolerated
or, at the other extreme, considered a profound sin. </p>

<p> For countless individuals, spirituality, while a more
nebulous concept than religion, is intricately tied to emotional,
psychological, and physical well-being. A practitioner of Zen
(Buddhist) meditation and various New Age spiritualities stated: </p>

<p> I think of health at every level: a healthy mind, a healthy
spirit, as well as a healthy body. So that a person would have to
have energy, alertness, enthusiasm, a love of life, a love of
people, a love of themselves (43). </p>

<p> Many traditional cultures think of illness and disease as
indicators of personal spiritual discord. For example, the
American Indian Navajos strive for a state of personal wholeness,
beauty, and well-being. The Blessingway rite, composed of sacred
songs and prayers, is often used to restore an individual's
harmony with those around him or her, the environment, and, in a
larger sense, the universe. </p>

<p> By ignoring different racial and ethnic religious and
spiritual beliefs, their importance is minimized and/or
trivialized (perhaps inadvertently) by more dominant religions.
From a drug and alcohol prevention point of view, it would seem
both cost-effective and relatively simple to encourage and
celebrate religious and spiritual differences among individuals
and communities; and acknowledge the protective benefits these
factors provide for many people. </p>

<p> SUMMARY </p>

<p> No single or generic set of variables explains the harmful
use of alcohol and drugs for every individual. While this chapter
reviewed a number of selected individual and protective factors,
this information should be viewed in a broader context. To gain a
complete understanding of the complexity of the substance abuse
issue, the information presented before and after this chapter
must be incorporated in any argument concerning factors that in
some way effect an individuals potential for substance use and
abuse. </p>

<p> By reviewing the individual risk factors under the three
broad headings of Demographics, Economics, and
Psychosocial/Behavioral, certain gaps in the literature appeared.
Within the demographics section, the vast majority of the
research to date has focused on identifying psychological as well
as social characteristics that place preadolescent and adolescent
children at greater risk for the initiation and continuation of
drug use. While the benefits of this type of research are
obvious, the majority of data point to the fact that alcohol,
tobacco, and illicit drug use are highest among those aged 18 to
25 and 26 to 34. However, few research studies have been devoted
to these age groups. Also, under the demographic section there
was a general paucity of data on risk factors that may be unique
to racial and ethnic minority populations and to some extent
women (although this continues to change). </p>

<p> Within the economics section, while there may be quotes in
the general media of tremendous financial earnings by drug
dealers, research substantiating these figures is scanty. There
is also little known about whether those individuals dealing
drugs are at an increased risk for becoming drug abusers. </p>

<p> Many of the psychosocial/behavioral factors reviewed in the
chapter have been extensively studied, and their associations to
alcohol and drug use documented. However, one of the sections
that has fairly recently been scientifically studied is that of
physical and/or sexual abuse. Those studies that have been
rigorously conducted are beginning to yield data that positively
links childhood abuse to later alcohol and drug problems. Future
research in this area is probably warranted. Also included in the
section were select studies on resiliency and/or protective
factors. While research has been conducted in this area for quite
some time, much of the literature is not specific to alcohol and
drug use situations, but rather, encompasses a wide array of
variables that place individuals at a greater risk for
behavioral, developmental, and learning problems.<br>
</p>

<p> BOX 6-1: Racial and Ethnic Differences in Adolescent Drug Use
Among High School Seniors Research on adolescent substance use
has documentedsubstantial racial and ethnic differences in use
among highschool seniors. On average, alcohol, cigarette, and
otherillicit drug use is highest among American Indian
youth,somewhat lower among white and Hispanic youth,
substantiallylower among black youth, and lowest among Asian
youth.Additional research explored the hypothesis that
thesedissimilarities could be partially attributed to
differencesin background (e.g., urban versus rural, family
structure,parental education) and lifestyle factors (e.g.,
grades,truancy, evenings out, religious commitment).The findings
indicated that controlling for backgroundfactors alone did not
account for most racial and ethnicdifferences in drug use, but it
did reduce American Indians'relatively high levels of use, which
suggests that their usemay in part be related to disadvantaged
socioeconomicstatus. When both background and lifestyle factors
wereincluded in the analysis, the racial and ethnic
differenceswere substantially reduced. Educational values
andbehaviors, religious commitment, and amount of time spent
inpeer-oriented activities were particularly importantexplanatory
variables.Racial and ethnic differences were also found in a
study ondrug-related attitudes and perceptions. Perceived risk
ofusing drugs, disapproval of drug use, and perceptions
ofdisapproval of drug use by friends were typically highestamong
black seniors, at intermediate levels among Hispanicseniors, and
lowest among white and American Indian seniors.Conversely,
perceived peer use of drugs and exposure topersons using various
drugs for &quot;kicks&quot; were generallylowest among black and
Asian seniors, at intermediate levelsamong Hispanic seniors, and
highest among white and AmericanIndian seniors.While these
findings are not applicable for thoseadolescents who drop out of
school, researchers areconfident that the results are valid for
the majority ofadolescents who remain enrolled through the senior
year ofhigh school.SOURCE: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, PublicHealth Service, National Institutes of Health,
Smoking,Drinking, and Illicit Drug Use Among American
SecondarySchool Students, College Students, and Young Adults,
1975-1991, NIH Pub. No. 93-3480 (Rockville, MD: 1992). </p>

<p> BOX 6-2: Racial, Ethnic, and Socioeconomic Discrepancies in
Mandatory Alcohol and Drug Use Reporting Practices for Pregnant
Women In one county of Florida, anonymous alcohol and drug
testswere conducted on urine samples obtained from all
pregnantwomen seeking prenatal care from both public health
clinicsas well as private obstetrical offices. White and
blackwomen were discovered to have insignificantly
differentprevalence rates for alcohol or illicit drug use
duringpregnancy. While black women used cocaine more
frequentlythan white women (7.5 percent versus 1.8 percent),
whitewomen had higher rates of marijuana usage (14.4
percentversus 6 percent). The relative similarities between
alcoholand drug use also held true for poor versus
middle-classwomen. However, the study also documented that
afterdelivery, black women were 10 times more likely to have
beenreported to the health authorities for substance use
duringpregnancy than were white women. Poor women also had
agreater chance of being reported than middle-class women.This
study reflects a discrepancy in reporting practicesamong staff at
some public clinics and private obstetricaloffices, which appears
to be influenced by an individual'ssocial status as well as
race.SOURCE: I.J. Chasnoff, H.J. Landress, and M.E. Barrett,
&quot;ThePrevalence of Illicit-Drug or Alcohol Use During
Pregnancyand Discrepancies in Mandatory Reporting in Pinellas
County,Florida,&quot; The New England Journal of Medicine
322(17): 1202-1206, 1990. BOX 6-3: Bivariate Versus Multivariate
Analysis Bivariate analysis is the process of taking one
variablesuch as employment status and testing its correlation
andstatistical significance to reported alcohol or drug use.
Amajor drawback to this type of analysis is its
relativesimplicity; it does not control for the potential effects
ofother variables. For example, if a relationship betweenbeing
unemployed and heavy alcohol use was shown to bestatistically
significant, one could not be certain of thenature of the
relationship. Perhaps the individual wasunemployed due to his or
her heavy drinking. Alternatively,a person's unemployment could
have caused his or her heavydrinking. Furthermore, if more
sophisticated analyses usingadditional variables were completed,
the originalassociation between being unemployed and heavy
drinkingcould disappear altogether.Multivariate analysis, while
having its own limitations, isa much more comprehensive way in
which to study therelationships between several variables and
alcohol and drugconsumption. The multivariate analysis used by
the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse systematically incorporated
avariety of individual variables such as educational
level,employment status, race and ethnicity, and sex, in
additionto certain aggregate variables including region
(South,Northeast, North Central, West), metropolitan status,
andracial and ethnic composition of census blocks. Each one
ofthese variables was then separately analyzed for itspotential
predictive value for alcohol and drug use, whilethe other
contributing variables were also taken intoaccount. While
multivariate analyses fall short ofdemonstrating causality,
because additional variables areused to control for plausible
alternative explanations, moreconfidence can be placed in the
significant correlationsfound.SOURCE: Office of Technology
Assessment, 1994. </p>

<p> BOX 6-4: A Population at Risk--Migrant and Seasonal
Farmworkers Migrant and seasonal farmworkers (M/SFWs) are
individuals&quot;whose principal employment is in agriculture on
a seasonalbasis [and who have] been so employed within the last
24months&quot; (Public Law 100-386). Migratory workers are
those&quot;who establish ... for the purposes of such employment
atemporary abode,&quot; while seasonal workers are those who
meetthe seasonal definition but are not migrant workers
(PublicLaw 100-386). While seasonal is not explicitly defined
inthe public law, the Department of Agriculture defines aseasonal
farmworker as one who performs 25 to 149 days offarm wage work in
one year, and does not migrate.Due to the transitory nature of
the job and the employees,obtaining a precise estimate on the
number of farmworkers isdifficult. State data suggest that
upwards of 4 millionfarmworkers are in the United States and
Puerto Rico, and ifratios from the late 1970s hold true,
approximately 30percent (or 1.2 million) of these are
migrants.The racial and ethnic background of the farmworkers
varieswith the so-called &quot;stream.&quot; The East Coast
stream isprobably the most diverse with American blacks,
Haitians,Jamaicans, Dominicans, Mexicans, Puerto Ricans,
anincreasing number of Central American Indians, and a
smallpercentage of whites. In the Midwest and West, the
greatmajority of migrant farmworkers are of Mexican
descent,although increasingly, Asian immigrants are making their
wayinto the stream. American Indians make up a
substantialproportion of the farmworker population in the West
andSouthwest.Farmworkers are most often hired through a
middle-person or&quot;crewleader&quot; who is usually in charge
of negotiating lengthof employment, transportation, wages,
housing, and meals. Itis not uncommon for migrant farmworkers to
move anywherefrom two to eleven times in a year. Besides the
physicallytaxing nature of the work, numerous environmental
stressors(some unique to this population) increase the likelihood
foralcohol and drug abuse. Some of these stressors
includephysically and socially isolated camp locations;
unsanitary,overcrowded, and unsafe camp conditions; towns which
oftendo not welcome the presence of farmworkers; long periods
ofseparation from family members; feelings of boredom,isolation,
and powerlessness; and language and culturaldifferences.The job's
high mobility requirements hamper the collectionof health data on
this population. Anecdotal informationfrom health care providers
located at Migrant/CommunityHealth Centers (M/CHCs) and local
health departments citealcohol and drug abuse problems as some of
the mostsignificant health issues faced by M/SFWs, followed
byanxiety and depression (McCaw 1991). However, fewquantitative
or qualitative studies have documentedsubstance abuse within this
population. One study of blackand Haitian farmworkers in upstate
New York found that themajority of the heavy drinking on the
migrant camps was doneby older, single, black males, and that the
drinkingpatterns of the study participants who traveled with
theirfamilies differed little from individuals in the
generalpopulation. To a large extent, this was attributed to
thesocial controls family members exerted on one another(Mattera
et al. 1983). This is an important point, as thegreater
mechanization of farmwork has reduced the need formanual labor,
and many of the farmworkers who previouslytraveled with their
families can no longer afford to do so.Anecdotal evidence
suggests that the composition of themigrant workforce has been
shifting toward one of singlemales, rather than families. With
this shift, a generaldecrease in social control among the migrant
camps is likelyto occur, and a greater number of alcohol and drug
problemsmay begin to appear.Providing substance abuse prevention
programs to M/SFWs is achallenge. Few M/CHCs have the financial
or personnelcapabilities to implement substance abuse
preventionprograms. Many farmworkers simply do not stay in
onelocation long enough. Language and cultural differences
arevast, not to mention the geographical distances
sometimesrequired to reach the camps, which often are located 20
to30 miles away from the nearest social service and/or eachother.
Two organizations (BOCES Geneseo Migrant Center inNew York, NY,
and Tri-County Community Health Center inNewton Grove, NC) have
successfully implemented similartypes of programs based on the
premise of providing weekendactivities as an alternative to
drinking and drug use. Full-day programs are normally held away
from the camps, andinclude educational, creative, athletic, and
culturalactivities. The activities are free and transportation
isoften provided. However, farmworkers can attend only if
theyhave not been drinking or using drugs.Clearly, greater
research is necessary to adequatelydocument the prevalence of
alcohol and drug use within themigrant streams, as well as the
changing composition of thestreams, and how this may affect
substance use. Little isknown about the differences in substance
use between thevarying racial and ethnic groups within the
streams, and howthe growing number of immigrants from war-torn
countrieswill affect the health problems seen within the
streams.SOURCES: U.S. Congress, Office of Technology
Assessment,Health Care in Rural America, OTA-H-434 (Washington,
DC:U.S. Government Printing Office, September 1990). K.
McCaw,&quot;Migrant Workers,&quot; Clinical Manual of Substance
Abuse, J.Kinney (ed.)(St. Louis, MO: Mosby-Year Book, Inc.,
1991). G.Mattera, J. Watson, S. Kunitz, et al., &quot;Alcohol Use
AmongMigrant Laborers,&quot; unpublished report for the New York
StateHealth Research Council, Albany, NY, 1983. _ <br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>