
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-93</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000618-B046-105</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/JLCROWD.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122030141 text/html 26418
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:01:23 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:13:21 GMT
Content-length: 26200
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Systemwide Strategies To Alleviate Jail Crowding </title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>Systemwide Strategies To Alleviate Jail Crowding </h2>

<p> <img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <b>Andy Hall</b> </p>

<p> <b>U.S. Department of Justice</b> </p>

<p> <b>National Institute of Justice</b> </p>

<p> <b>January 1987</b> </p>

<p> The words &quot;jail&quot; and &quot;crowding&quot; seem
inseparable these days. A 1983 National Institute of Justice
survey of more than 1,400 criminal justice officials from all
parts of the country identified jail and prison crowding as the
most serious problem facing criminal justice systems.(1) </p>

<p> The reality of more prisoners than available beds creates a
dilemma for local justice officials. Crowded jails may compromise
public safety through a lack of space to confine those who pose
serious threats to the community. Lawsuits challenging crowded
conditions may constrain a community's ability to incarcerate, </p>

<p> A recent Bureau of Justice Statistics <i>Bulletin </i>notes
that 22 percent (134) of the Nation's 621 largest jails (those
with a capacity of more than 100) were under court order in 1984
to expand capacity or reduce the number of inmates housed, and 24
percent (150)<i> </i>were under court order to improve one or
more conditions of confinement. (2) </p>

<p> Building or expanding facilities is often necessary to house
those who must be incarcerated. The time and costs of
construction and operation of new institutions, however, argue
that other options should not be overlooked. (3) </p>

<p> For the local sheriff or jail administrator, jail crowding
creates increased prisoner and staff tensions, increased wear and
tear of facility and equipment, budgetary problems from overtime
staffing, and an inability to meet program and service standards.
Less frequently recognized are the problems crowding creates for
other justice system officials: </p>

<ul>
    <li>Judges, prosecutors, probation and parole, and other
        officials often find crowding a severe constraint in
        cases where jailing offenders appears necessary but space
        is unavailable. </li>
    <li>Prosecutors, public defenders, and pretrial services
        officers find their functions impaired by delayed access
        to inmates caused by difficulty in processing large
        numbers of offenders. </li>
    <li>Court functions overall may suffer when crowding affects
        the movement of inmates to and from scheduled
        appearances. </li>
</ul>

<p> Too often, however, agencies outside jail management are not
fully involved in efforts to cope with the problem. </p>

<p> Many jurisdictions address the symptoms of jail crowding but
leave the underlying causes unaddressed. Other jurisdictions,
however, view jail crowding as a problem that demands the
cooperative involvement of all key figures in the local justice
system. </p>

<p> Given the success of this <i>systemwide </i>approach in a
number of locations, the National Institute of Justice sponsored
development of <i>Alleviating Jail Crowding: A Systems
Perspective </i>(NCJ 99462, 1985), based on a survey of justice
system officials and programs throughout the United States. The
report stresses that while construction of new facilities may be
part of a community's solution to crowding, emphasis must also be
placed on ensuring that existing bed space is used effectively.
Accordingly, the report highlights the role of each local
criminal justice agency in ensuring the effective use of jail bed
space to prevent crime and maintain public safety. This <i>Research
in Brief </i>summarizes the full report. </p>

<p> <b>Looking at the local justice system</b> </p>

<p> Virtually every decisionmaker in the local justice system
exercises discretion that can affect the jail population.
Jurisdictions using a systemwide approach to jail crowding see
the local justice system as a screening mechanism that can be
modified to enhance the use of scarce jail space. </p>

<p> These jurisdictions develop case-processing flowcharts to
understand the details of their case-handling process from the
initial contact to final disposition. Flowchart, illustrate the
stages of the legal process, specify the points at which
decisionmaker actions affect the jail population, and identify
opportunities to alleviate crowding. </p>

<p> Understanding the local flow of cases can help policymakers
identify program and process changes to reduce crowding. Program
changes frequently involve eliminating the jailing of persons
whom a community deems inappropriate for criminal justice
processing, such as the mentally ill. </p>

<p> Process changes improve system efficiency, eliminating
case-handling &quot;catch points&quot; that unnecessarily prolong
the confinement of persons who might eventually be released
through bail, probation, or transfer to the State prison. </p>

<p> Reducing length of confinement often becomes the first focus
of population reduction, because efficiency measures are
generally less costly and more readily implemented than new
programs. Local analysis often reveals that the primary
underlying cause of crowding is excessive length of confinement
due to inefficient case processing. </p>

<p> <b>How system decisionmakers can affect jail crowding</b> </p>

<p> System studies in a number of jurisdictions have suggested,
as one judge said, &quot;a lot of little ways&quot; to halt or
reverse jail population increases without releasing serious
offenders. The following discussion highlights just a few of the
&quot;little ways&quot; available at different parts of the
system. </p>

<p> Law enforcement - Decision, surrounding local arrest
practices whether to arrest, transport to jail or </p>

<p> stationhouse, book or detain for bail setting - are critical
determinants of jail population size. Law enforcement practices
both before and after arrest can be modified to reduce jail
admissions. Jurisdictions such as San Diego County, California,
and Frederick County (Winchester), Virginia, use perhaps the most
common form of prearrest diversion through short-term
&quot;sobering up&quot; facilities for public inebriates. </p>

<p> San Diego has been successful in reducing crowding through
the use of a privately operated detoxification reception program
where inebriates must remain for a minimum 4-hour period. Though
in a largely rural area, the Winchester, Virginia, detoxification
program, operated by the Division of Court Services, has also
diverted a large number of persons from jail. </p>

<p> Similar prearrest diversion programs are in effect for
persons involved in family disputes(4) and for homeless persons
in a number of jurisdictions throughout the United States. </p>

<p> Law enforcement officials in Galveston County, Texas, have
instituted practices to divert the mentally ill-a population that
frequently makes up 10 to 20 percent of a jail's population. A
team of deputies receives special training to assist in meeting
the emergency needs of the mentally ill, thereby allowing the
agency to take them directly to a mental health facility. </p>

<p> Many agencies also use a number of postarrest practices such
as station-house release before booking, field citations, and
court-delegated authority to release suspects according to a bail
schedule to eliminate unnecessary confinement. </p>

<p> Jail administrators - Elected sheriffs or appointed jail
executives are often viewed as the managers most affected but
least powerful in dealing with jail crowding. While having little
direct control over admissions and length of confinement, jail
administrators nevertheless can help reduce crowding by assuring
ready access for pretrial release screening and bail review. </p>

<p> Quick access to detainees tends to be a common characteristic
of successful programs to reduce jail crowding. For example, the
sheriff in Mecklenburg County (Charlotte), North Carolina, allows
pretrial services staff to be present during the jail admissions
process, which gives them access to defendants and speeds
decisionmaking. </p>

<p> Individual judges often lack feedback regarding prisoners in
jail awaiting or following adjudication. Yet such information is
of interest to the court and critical to jail population
reduction. The Bexar County (San Antonio), Texas, administrator
provides data to help judges monitor the court status of
prisoners and prevent length of confinement from being extended
through oversight or inattention. </p>

<p> In some other jurisdictions, jail administrators are
delegated authority to release defendants pretrial or divert
drunk drivers to treatment centers. Other administrators help
develop nonjail pretrial-release and sentencing options or
cooperate with other jurisdictions to alleviate crowding on a
multicounty basis. </p>

<p> <b>Prosecutors </b>- Prosecutors act at more case-handling
decision points than any other officials. This gives them an
especially important role in containing jail population growth. </p>

<p> Early case screening by prosecutors reduces unnecessary
length of confinement by eliminating or downgrading weak cases as
soon as possible. Assistant prosecutors in Milwaukee County,
Wisconsin, review arrests around the clock by examining police
records and conducting meetings between complainants and
suspects. This practice enables Milwaukee prosecutors to decide
on the appropriate charge within 24 to 36 hours after arrest. </p>

<p> Prosecutors in Milwaukee also use &quot;vertical case
processing&quot; - assigning the same attorney or team of
attorneys to prosecute a case from start to finish. Though not
necessarily the case in all jurisdictions, reassigning cases from
one assistant prosecutor to another while the matter is before
the court &quot;horizontal case processing&quot; - may cause
stagnation in caseflow, increased requests for continuances, and
lengthened time to trial. </p>

<p> Prosecutor cooperation is essential for alternatives in
arrest, pretrial confinement, and sentencing. Prosecutor
participation and leadership are essential to the effectiveness
of task forces dealing with jail crowding. Since the prosecutor
&quot;owns&quot; cases on behalf of the State, others are rarely
willing to propose case-handling changes without the prosecutor's
support. </p>

<p> Recognizing that a lack of space to confine dangerous persons
is a threat to public safety, prosecutors in a number of
jurisdictions have taken an active role in reducing jail crowding
by serving on &quot;key court officials&quot; groups or chairing
jail population reduction boards. </p>

<p> <b>Pretrial services </b>- Providing background information
on defendants, release recommendations, and other pretrial
assistance can be an important component of solutions to
crowding. Pretrial services can often help merely by adjusting
staff schedules to ensure timely screening and interviews for a
maximum number of defendants. </p>

<p> In Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, for example, pretrial
services and magistrate bail setting are available 24 hours, 7
days a week. In Kentucky, pretrial staff are on call 24 hours a
day to interview persons at rested, notify judges by phone of the
prisoner's qualifications for release, and supervise the release
process if nonfinancial bail is authorized. </p>

<p> Limited release authority is delegated to pretrial services
staff in an increasing number of jurisdictions. In San Mateo
County (Redwood City), California, pretrial staff are authorized
to release misdemeanor suspects prior to their first court
appearance. Seattle, Washington, is experimenting with delegated
release on certain felony charges. </p>

<p> Many pretrial programs respond to jail population pressures
by expanding the range of release options (conditional and
supervised release, third-party custody, unsecured bail, deposit
bail) and by conducting regular bail reviews for those detained
for trial. </p>

<p> A National Institute of Justice study found that supervised
release programs in Miami, Florida; Portland, Oregon; and
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, significantly reduced the bail-held
population without significantly increasing the risk to public
safety. </p>

<p> <b>Judiciary</b> - Judges make more decisions affecting jail
population than anyone else; this often makes them leaders in
seeking jail-crowding solutions. Judges can issue summonses
instead of arrest warrants; provide guidelines authorizing direct
release by police, jail, and pretrial staff; and provide bail
setting outside normal court hours. Evaluators of the 4-year Jail
Overcrowding Reduction Project of the former Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration found that the project's most
successful sites were those with strong judicial leadership. </p>

<p> Many courts provide 24-hour bail-setting magistrates. The
King County (Seattle), Washington, District Court has a
&quot;three-tier&quot; release policy that reduces court time,
jail admissions, and length of confinement. The court established
guidelines specify the charges for which pretrial services staff
may (1) release without consulting the court, (2) release after
phoning a duty judge, or (3) make recommendations to the court in
the most serious felony cases. </p>

<p> Reducing court delay is crucial to effective use of jail
space. Bexar County, Texas, seeks to eliminate &quot;dead
time&quot; by having the court administrator work with a jail
case coordinator to identify cases in need of special attention
and processing steps that can be shortened. Each judge receives
weekly a list of prisoners awaiting indictment, trial,
sentencing, or revocation in his or her court. </p>

<p> One result is a 50-percent time saving in disposing of
misdemeanor charges and thus a significant cut in overall length
of confinement. </p>

<p> Many judges have worked to extend the range of nonjail
sentencing options, using probation supervision, </p>

<p> suspended sentences, fines, community service and
restitution, halfway house placements, and specialized treatment
facilities as true alternatives to incarceration. </p>

<p> A growing number of courts now defer service of jail
sentences, when the jail is at capacity, in cases in which jail
is believed an appropriate sentence but immediate jailing is not
essential for the community's safety. </p>

<p> <b>Defense - </b>The National Institute's field test on Early
Representation by Defense Counsel found that early screening for
indigency, defender appointment, and defendant contact can
decrease length of confinement and thus yield substantial savings
of jail space.(6) Vertical case processing in defense offices
also helps cut length of confinement. </p>

<p> In Mecklenburg County, pretrial conferences between defense
and prosecution help identify, eliminate, or downgrade marginal
cases and facilitate plea negotiation. Both offices can thus
budget staff time efficiently and lessen pretrial confinement. </p>

<p> In St. Louis, Missouri, efforts to reduce staggering defender
caseloads by appointing private attorneys in felony cases have
also reduced case disposition time, stimulated bail review, and
resulted in shorter pretrial confinement. </p>

<p> <b>Probation and parole - </b>Not only do probation and
parole agencies provide nonjail alternatives for sentencing, they
can enhance case- processing efficiency by streamlining
presentence investigation (PSI) procedures and expediting
revocation decisions. All this helps cut length of confinement. </p>

<p> In Brevard County, Florida, the jail population oversight
committee spotlighted PSI delays and worked with probation and
parole officers to cut PSI preparation time from 90 days to 30 or
35 days for jail cases. The county also cut to 24 hours the time
required for decisions on probation revocation, thus decreasing
the use of jail beds for persons on probation &quot;hold&quot;
orders. </p>

<p> <b>Outside the local level </b>- State legislation, court
rules, executive orders, and other &quot;external factors&quot;
can affect jail populations - Guidelines on diversion, bail
policy, appointment of legal counsel, sentencing practices, and
jail operation all can affect the range of solutions available. </p>

<p> Other outside factors that need to be considered in local
planning for jail use include local -demographics, availability
of State and Federal resources, public opinion and media coverage
of criminal justice issues, activities of local civic<b> </b>groups
and community organizations, and political campaigns and
referendums. </p>

<p> <b>Outside the system</b>-Organizations outside the justice
system can be instrumental in alleviating shortages </p>

<p> of jail space by providing emergency shelter, detoxification,
and treatment facilities for the mentally disturbed, public
inebriates, and drunk drivers. Many jurisdictions use local
mental health centers to provide prompt mental health
assessments, diversion, and outpatient treatment. Private
agencies in several jurisdictions provide temporary shelter for
juveniles, pretrial supervision, and community service
placements. </p>

<p> <b>Formulating solutions</b> </p>

<p> While individual parts of the system can help through such
practices as those highlighted above, one or two agencies in the
local justice system are not enough to bring about comprehensive
solutions to crowding. Jail crowding results from the actions of
many, with their decisions interacting to determine jail
admissions and length of confinement. Effectively combating
crowding requires taking into account the interactive nature of
the problem. </p>

<p> Jurisdictions that successfully implemented a systemwide
approach to jail crowding have identified as critical needs (1)
the participation of key decisionmakers in formulating solutions
and (2) detailed information on case processing and on the actual
characteristics of the jail population. </p>

<p> <b>Key decisionmaker participation - </b>Whether it is a
&quot;jail population management board&quot; or some other body,
experience in many jurisdictions argues for a forum that
encourages communication and participation by judges,
prosecutors, sheriffs, police, probation officials, and other
policymakers in developing solutions to crowding. </p>

<p> Collective involvement provides increased awareness of the
impact of one agency's actions on another and of the other
agency's procedures. Also, recommendations of a broadly
constituted planning group are more likely to gain systemwide
support. Finally, the political pragmatism that may accompany
committee action may permit some participants to support more
imaginative policies. </p>

<p> <b>Information - </b>A<b> </b>systemwide approach to jail
crowding requires improved information about jail use. In
addition to the detailed flowcharts that help assess the
timeliness of case-processing decisions and the availability of
nonjail options, planners need information on precisely who or
what type of person is in jail and why and how long they stay.
This permits administrators to learn the frequency of admissions
and the size and variation of distinct segments of the jail
population, as well as indicating sluggish case processing. </p>

<p> Statistical analysis of the population identifies symptoms of
jail crowding, greatly enhancing the ability to identify and
treat the causes. But while jail population data are valuable,
they should not overshadow case-processing information. </p>

<p> Analysis of data on the jail population might show, for
example, that persons detained before trial are released only
after 7 to 10<b> </b>days. Alone, this finding could indicate the
need for a special pretrial services program to expedite
screening and bail review. Information on caseflow, however,
might reveal the actual cause to be inefficient case processing. </p>

<p> Evaluation information is also critical to developing
effective strategies. Evaluation data should be collected and
analyzed to determine if planned modifications in decisionmaking
are being made and the resulting positive or negative
implications for crowding and public safety. </p>

<p> <b>Implementing strategies and conclusions</b> </p>

<p> Localities that take a systemwide approach to jail crowding
generally follow some important steps: </p>

<p> <b>Involve </b>all key system decisionmakers; </p>

<p> <b>Collect</b> all necessary data on jail population and case
processing; </p>

<p> <b>Identify</b>, implement, and evaluate appropriate changes
in programs or processes; and </p>

<p> <b>Inform</b> the public of system changes when initiated and
successful strategies when confirmed. </p>

<p> While many communities have taken great steps, experience has
also confirmed the complexity of the jail crowding problem and
the futility of seeking a panacea through one or two changes.
Long-term success requires a variety of solutions and, most
important, the time, patience, and attention of the entire
criminal justice community. </p>

<p> <b>Notes</b> </p>

<p> 1. Stephen Gettinger, &quot;Assessing Criminal Justice
Needs,&quot; National Institute of Justice <i>Research in</i> <i>Brief</i>,
June 1984, NCJ 94072. </p>

<p> 2. <i>Jail Inmates 1984.</i> </p>

<p> 3. Those jurisdictions that must build or expand jails can
learn from the experiences of others through the National
Institute of Justice Corrections Construction Initiative. For
information, call 800-851-3420 or 301-251-5500 and ask to speak
with a corrections specialist. </p>

<p> 4. In violent family disputes, however, research now
indicates that arrest is the preferred police response. This
research, now being replicated under NIJ sponsorship, was
reported in Lawrence W. Sherman and Richard A. Berk,<i>
Minneapolis Domestic Violence Experiment</i>, Washington, D.C.,
Police Foundation, 1984, NCJ 98905. </p>

<p> 5. James Austin, Barry Krisberg, and Paul Litsky,<i>
Evaluation of the Field Test of Supervised Release - Final Report</i>,
1984 NCJ 95220. </p>

<p> 6. An executive summary of the <i>Early Reprensentation by
Defense Counsel</i> evaluation, by E.J. Fazio, Jr., et al., is
available in microfiche as NCJ 97595. </p>

<p> <i>Andy Hall is an associate of the Pre-Trial Services
Resource Center, Washington, D.C., and principal author of the
NIJ publications</i> Alleviating Jail Crowding: A Systems
Perspective <i>and</i> Pretrial Release Program Options <i>(NCJ
94612).</i> </p>

<h3><img src="../graphics/golddot1.gif" align="BOTTOM">From the
Director </h3>

<p> Communities throughout the Nation face the problem of jail
crowding: Having more prisoners than space to house them. Despite
construction innovations that may help cities or counties expand
their confinement capacity both more quickly and at less expense,
a host of problems, including fiscal pressures sometimes, may
indicate solutions other than construction. </p>

<p> Some consequences of jail crowding are well known: Increased
victimization and fear, decreased public confidence that
dangerous persons can be locked up, lawsuits, court-imposed
limits on the number of prisoners, damage to facilities and
equipment. Crowding increases both tension in the institution and
the strain on correctional budgets. </p>

<p> Less obvious but equally worrisome are delays in case
processing due to cumbersome access to prisoners and the limits
put on such necessary judicial options as pretrial release and
sentencing. </p>

<p> National Institute of Justice surveys have shown that
officials in law enforcement, courts, corrections, and other
parts of the justice system were virtually unanimous in naming
prison and jail crowding their number one concern. </p>

<p> Recognition of the gravity of jail crowding, however, offers
a glimmer of hope. Officials in a growing number of jurisdictions
have concluded that if each part of the local justice system does
what it can to ease crowding, the sum of all<b> </b>these small
solutions has a notable cumulative effect. </p>

<p> The separate decisions of law enforcement, judicial
prosecution, defense, pretrial services, probation, corrections,
and other officials can interact to influence the number of jail
admissions and length of confinement. Jurisdictions taking this
systemwide approach find that seemingly minor modifications in
case processing can both reduce crowding and, more important,
improve the overall administration of justice. </p>

<p> Jail crowding is a local problem that must be dealt with
locally. The National Institute of Justice hopes to contribute to
such endeavors, however, by assessing and synthesizing
information on the program and process changes that local
jurisdictions may want to consider. Without information on the
experience of other jurisdictions, informed policy decisions are
hard to come by. </p>

<p> At<b> </b>the Institute, our role is one articulated by
President Reagan and Attorney General Meese: To support, not to
direct, local responsibilities. Experience demonstrates that we
have many useful tools to deal with jail crowding. <i>This
Research in Brief </i>offers local jurisdictions their choice
among such options. </p>

<p> James K. Stewart </p>

<p> Director </p>

<p> National Institute of Justice <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>