
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B29-89</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B002-267</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/gao/gao4.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032235 text/html 76562
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:22:28 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:18:39 GMT
Content-length: 76344
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Interdiction Efforts in Central America Have Had Little
Impact o </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z">
</head>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2>Interdiction Efforts in Central America Have Had Little
Impact on the Flow of Drugs </h2>

<p> <u><b>United States General Accounting Office</b></u> </p>

<p> <b>GAO Report to the Chairman, Subcommittee on Information,
Justice, Transportation, and Agriculture, Committee on Government
Operations, House of Representatives</b> </p>

<p> <b>August 1994 DRUG CONTROL</b> </p>

<p> <b>GAONSLAD-94-233</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> <center><b>United States</b> </center> </p>

<p> GAO <b>General Accounting Office</b> </p>

<p> <center><b>Washington, D.C. 20548</b></center> </p>

<p> <center><b>National Security and</b></center> </p>

<p> <center><b>International Affairs Division</b></center> </p>

<p> <center>B-257824</center> </p>

<p> <center>August 2, 1994</center> </p>

<p> <center>The Honorable Gary A. Condit</center> </p>

<p> <center>Chairman, Subcommittee on Information, </center> </p>

<p> Justice, Transportation, and Agriculture Committee on
Government Operations House of Representatives </p>

<p> Dear Mr. Chairman: </p>

<p> In response to your request, we reviewed U.S.-assisted
narcotics control efforts in Central America.' This report
describes (1) the drug trafficking situation in that region, (2)
the efforts being made by various U.S. departments and agencies
to curb the flow of cocaine and the obstacles they face in
carrying out these efforts, (3) the capabilities of Central
American countries to interdict cocaine shipments and their
dependence on U.S. assistance, and (4) new U.S. counterdrug
initiatives. </p>

<p> Results in <b>Brief: </b>Despite various U.S. government
interdiction efforts, Central America continues to be a primary
transshipment point for cocaine shipments to the United States.
Available evidence suggests that the supply of drugs entering the
United States via Central America remains virtually
uninterrupted. Law enforcement officials stated that drug
traffickers have adjusted their modes of operations to evade U.S.
air interdiction efforts and are increasingly using sea and land
transportation to move drugs through Central America to the
United States. Drugs moved by these new trafficking modes are
very difficult to detect and interdict. The Central American
nations have neither the resources nor the institutional
capability to address the new drug trafficking modes and are
heavily dependent on U.S. assistance. Various U.S. government
agencies are working with some Central American countries on a
number of small-scale projects to address new trafficking modes.
However, the outcome of these efforts is uncertain due to limited
host country capabilities and shifts in U.S. program emphasis
from drug interdiction in the transit countries of Central
America toward intercepting drugs and disrupting drug
organizations in the source countries of South America. </p>

<p> 'Central American countries are Belize, Costa Rica, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama. </p>

<p> <u>'Drug Control: Expanded Military Surveillance Not </u>Justified<b>
</b><u>by</u> Measured Goals <u>or Results </u>(GAO/T-NSIAD-94-14,
Oct. 5,1993); <u>Drug Control: Heavy Investment in Military
Surveillance Is Not </u>Paying Off (GAO/NSIAD-93-220, Sept. 1,
1993); and Drug Control: <u>Impact of DOD's</u> Detection and <u>Monitoring
on</u> Cocaine Flow (GAO/NSIAD-91-297, Sept. 19,1991). </p>

<p> <b>Background:</b> By the late 1980s, most cocaine entering
the United States was flown directly from the producing countries
of South America into northern Mexico, where the cargo was then
transported by truck across the border. However, in response to
joint U.S. -Meexican drug interdiction efforts in northern
Mexico, traffickers began to adjust their routes and moved their
operations and staging areas to southern Mexico and neighboring
Central American countries.' </p>

<p> Strategically located between the United States and the
cocaine producing countries of South America, Central America and
its coastline are used as a bridge by drug traffickers to
facilitate cocaine transshipment to the United States. The two
primary air routes used to move cocaine from Colombia to Central
America and Mexico are the western Caribbean corridor and the
more frequently used eastern Pacific corridor.' (See fig. 1.)
From various points along these corridors, traffickers either
land and offload their drugs or airdrop their drug cargoes. Drugs
are then stockpiled for shipment to Mexico and then the United
States. </p>

<p> <u>3Drug Control: Revised Drug Inter-diction Approach Is
Needed in Mexico</u> (GAO/NSIAD-93-152, May 10, 1993). </p>

<p> 'In a limited number of cases, traffickers in producing
countries have been known to fly their drug cargoes directly to
the United States or Canada. </p>

<p> <u>Figure 1: Primary Cocaine Trafficking Routes</u> From
Colombia to Central America and the United States </p>

<p> Drugs Continue to <b>Transit </b>Central America </p>

<p> In recent years, the major thrust of the U.S. drug strategy
in Central America has been to intercept drug trafficking
aircraft as they move drug cargoes along established trafficking
routes. This strategy appears to have been successful in
Guatemala, the primary transhipment country of the region, but
has had little impact on the flow of drugs to the United States. </p>

<p> According to law enforcement officials, the strategy has not
been effective because traffickers have adjusted their methods of
operation and destinations to evade U.S. detection and
interdiction efforts. In addition, the U.S. government and
Central American countries face numerous obstacles to developing
effective counterdrug programs. Although the amount of cocaine
that transits Central America is not known, the Department of
State estimates that as much as 70 tons of cocaine transits
Guatemala annually, the country at the focus of U.S. interdiction
efforts in the region. </p>

<p> As the United States has increased its ability to detect,
monitor, and interdict drug trafficking aircraft moving from
South America to Central America and the United States,
traffickers have turned to more complex and evasive means of air
delivery and to less detectable highway and sea transportation.
Some U.S. officials believe that, in a limited number of
instances, drug traffickers have changed their air shipment
methods to avoid detection by Department of Defense (DOD) radar.
For example, one drug enforcement official told us that
traffickers are flying small aircraft into the jungle area that
spans the border between Colombia and Panama, trucking drug
cargoes across Panama, and reloading the drugs on small aircraft
that mix with legitimate air traffic in the region. Ms technique
avoids the radar assets that DOD has focused on the northern
coast of South America. </p>

<p> According to the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA),
maritime vessels and air cargo conveyances are now responsible
for the bulk of the cocaine being moved into Central America and
much of the cocaine being smuggled into the United States. The
use of ships and boats allows cocaine to be transported in
greater bulk so that it can be more easily concealed and
increases the difficulty of detecting drugs that are commingled
with legitimate cargo. The National Narcotics Intelligence
Consumers Committee reports that cocaine has been hidden in the
walls of cargo containers, in bulk cargo such as coffee, and
attached to the vessels themselves. The U.S. Customs Service
faces an enormous challenge as it attempts to examine all
containers entering U.S. ports. For example, over 44,000 sea
containers arrived at U.S. seaports from cocaine source and
transit countries during fiscal year 1992. Of this total, Customs
examined 13 percent of the full containers and 25 percent of the
empty ones. </p>

<p> The large volume of vehicular traffic crossing into Mexico
from Central America also provides traffickers with ample
smuggling opportunities. Once into Mexico, whether by air, boat,
or land, the drugs are usually destined for the United States.
Almost 6,600 tractor trailer trucks and 21 1,000 passenger
vehicles cross the U. S.-Mexico border each day. Customs
estimates that two-thirds of all cocaine entering the United
States crosses the U. S.-Mexico land border concealed in cargo.
Appendix I contains detailed information on drug trafficking in
Central America. </p>

<p> Numerous Agencies U.S. narcotics control efforts in Central
America have centered on intercepting drug trafficking aircraft
transiting the region and seizing drugs Involved in U.S. destined
for the United States. The primary focus has been Operation
Interdiction <b>and</b> Cadence, a program combining the efforts
of various U.S. government Control Efforts agencies with
interdiction operations conducted by DEA and Central American
police personnel. Initiated in 1991, Operation Cadence involves
the deployment of specially trained U.S. law enforcement agents
to Guatemala who work with information and intelligence developed
by DEA, DOD, and Customs to seize trafficking aircraft and their
cargoes. </p>

<p> Available data indicates that State, DEA, DOD, and Customs
programmed over $48 million to support Operation Cadence and
other interdiction activities in Central America during fiscal
year 1993. These expenditures primarily represented the cost of
U.S. personnel and services and the operation of U.S.-owned radar
and aviation assets. With the use of various land-, sea-, and
air-based radar assets, DOD spent an estimated $24.7 minion on
detecting and monitoring drug trafficking aircraft as they left
South America and approached the Central American isthmus.
Customs spent at least $9 million to monitor suspect trafficking
aircraft and track them once they entered a particular country's
airspace. The Department of State spent $6.1 million to operate
and maintain aircraft used to transport Cadence personnel to
aircraft landing sites and $1 million to train and support
Guatemalan police personnel involved in interdiction operations. </p>

<p> DEA spent $828,000 to support the deployment of Cadence teams
to the region. DEA also spent about $6.5 million to conduct
routine investigative activities not related to Operation Cadence
and operate offices in six Central American countries. </p>

<p> 1The National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers Committee is a
multiagency U.S. government panel that <b>was </b>established <b>in
</b>1978 to coordinate foreign and domestic collection, analysis,
dissemination, and evaluation of drug-related intelligence. </p>

<p> According to DEA, Operation Cadence has been responsible for
seizing almost 29 metric tons of cocaine since its inception in
May 1991.6 However, annual Cadence cocaine seizures have
declined. The number of detected flights to the seven Central
American countries fell from 84 in 1992 to 25 in 1993. The number
of suspected trafficking flights into Guatemala fell from 57 in
1992 to 13 in 1993. As a result of Operation Cadence's ability to
successfully seize a growing percent of those aircraft landing in
Guatemala and six consecutive successful interdiction operations
from June to September 1993, traffickers have avoided Guatemala.
No suspected trafficking flights were detected entering Guatemala
from October 1993 to March 1994, the last month for which data is
available. Operation Cadence has also provided some interdiction
and training assistance to Belize, El Salvador, and Honduras
through the short-term deployment Of DEA personnel. </p>

<p> In addition to supporting Operation Cadence, the Department
of State spent almost $4 million to improve the drug interdiction
capabilities of six Central American nations; support drug
eradication efforts; and inform Central American citizens about
the adverse impacts of drug production, trafficking, and abuse.
It also spent $4 million to operate and maintain State-owned
eradication aircraft in Guatemala and Belize. The U.S. Coast
Guard spent $400,000 to train regional maritime forces in vessel
boarding and inspection procedures. Appendix 11 further discusses
U.S. anti-narcotics activities in Central America. </p>

<p> In addition to problems inherent in identifying and
interdicting drug traffickers, U.S. efforts in the Central
American transit zone have been limited by national sovereignty
and jurisdiction issues. For example, Cadence activities in
Belize were suspended for about 1 year because the government of
Belize prohibited the entrance of Cadence personnel armed with
M-16 rifles. The government of Belize currently prohibits
Department of State helicopters armed with M-60 machine guns from
flying over that country. Similarly, the government of Honduras
does not allow Guatemalan aircraft or personnel to fly over its
territory. In Honduras, flight plans for U.S. interdiction
aircraft must be filed 48 hours in advance. One State Department
official said that regional suspicions have also inhibited joint
training and adversely affected joint drug interdiction
operations. </p>

<p> 'One metric ton equals 1,000 kilograms or 2,205 pounds. </p>

<p> Central American presidents discussed greater anti-drug
cooperation at a conference in February 1993 and issued a
declaration stating their commitment to develop specific regional
counterdrug programs within 6 months. As part of their agreement,
the presidents also committed to establishing a new Central
American counterdrug commission. To date, none of the actions
approved at the conference have been initiated. </p>

<p> Central American Although all of the Central American
countries have drug control efforts underway, no country
possesses the technical, financial, or human Drug Interdiction
resources necessary to run an efficient drug interdiction
program. In Capabilities Axe addition, none of the countries has
an organization in place to effectively Limited and counter the
overland or maritime drug movement. The limited interdiction
efforts that they do undertake are highly dependent on U.S.
assistance. </p>

<p> Dependent on Assistance </p>

<p> A U.S. <b>senior </b>Guatemalan narcotics control official
told us that air and land interdiction rates in Guatemala would
fall by at least 80 percent without U.S. assistance. In Honduras,
a Department of State representative said that the drug
interdiction effort would quickly wither away without the
continued insistence and assistance from the United States. </p>

<p> Limited Capabilities and Obstacles </p>

<p> None of the Central American countries has the resources
necessary to purchase sophisticated equipment and develop
well-trained personnel to combat the well-financed, creative, and
highly adaptable drug traffickers. </p>

<p> No Central American nation has a navy or coast guard capable
of completely controlling its territorial waters. For example,
four Honduran Navy ships are responsible for patrolling that
country's extensive Caribbean coast. Three of these ships have
been in dry dock, and Honduras could not afford fuel for the
fourth ship for a long period of time. In addition, Honduras is
the only Central American country with the radar capability to
monitor its airspace. </p>

<p> 'Department of State helicopters used in Cadence operations
are operated and maintained by a U.S. contractor, which employs
Guatemalan civilian pilots. Also, Cadence interdiction teams
include a number <b>of </b>host nation law enforcement personnel
who are restricted to operations within their specific country. </p>

<p> Corruption also limits the effectiveness of Central American
governments' narcotics control efforts. In its 1994 International
Narcotics Control <u>Strategy</u> Report to Congress, State
reported concerns of narcotics-related corruption in all seven
Central American countries. Instances cited by State ranged from
the premature release of people arrested and convicted on drug
charges to the alleged involvement of prominent individuals in
drug trafficking. In another country, DEA has reported that the
host nation organization responsible for conducting its
surveillance and undercover operations is the least professional
law enforcement agency in the country and the one most
susceptible to corruption. </p>

<p> Funding for U.S. Narcotics Budgetary constraints and concern
over the effectiveness of State's Control Activities narcotics
control program resulted in Congress reducing the funds available
for this worldwide program from $147.8 million in fiscal year
1993 to $100 million in fiscal year 1994. Both host country
assistance and U.S. direct interdiction efforts are being reduced
to accommodate the lower level of funding. </p>

<p> The United States, through the Department of State, provided
about $5 million in narcotics control assistance to six of the
seven Central American countries during fiscal year 1993 and
plans to provide about $3 million in similar aid during fiscal
year 1994. This assistance provides training and logistics and
maintenance support to counternarcotics police in Belize, Costa
Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Panama. Narcotics
control training provided by the Department of State focused or,
strengthening the capabilities of drug law enforcement units.
Some of this training is provided by the U.S. Customs Service,
which instructs Central American personnel on interdiction
techniques and detector dog operations; the U.S. Coast Guard,
which provides training on vessel boarding techniques; and DEA,
which provides training in investigatory techniques. </p>

<p> Within Central America, the Department of State has focused
its efforts in Guatemala and Panama, where it established
narcotics affairs sections to manage in-country programs and
oversee much smaller projects in neighboring countries. State
helped the government of Guatemala to organize an interdiction
unit, develop a narcotics-related intelligence and information
clearinghouse, and establish a unit to coordinate interdiction
operations. State also supports Guatemalan efforts to eradicate
opium poppy and marijuana cultivations by providing equipment,
commodities, and aviation support. </p>

<p> To accommodate reduced funding for counterdrug programs in
Central America, State terminated the deployment of an
interdictionleradication helicopter to Belize, reduced the number
of helicopters it had deployed to Guatemala, and greatly reduced
the number of flying hours available for support of Operation
Cadence interdiction activities. Ms reduced level of aviation
support has adversely affected interdiction efforts and DEA has
reduced the number of Operation Cadence teams deployed in
Guatemala. </p>

<p> U.S. Plans to Combat Overland Drug<b> Trafficking</b> </p>

<p> In recognition of the limited usefulness of existing
programs, U.S. anti-drug agencies, along with some Central
American governments, are Maritime and developing new small-scale
approaches to address the growing threat of maritime and overland
trafficking through the region. However, it is not clear whether
these initiatives will develop into viable programs because of
limited host country capabilities and changing emphasis and
program priorities in the U.S. drug control strategy. </p>

<p> DEA has developed a proposal for a maritime force to patrol
the coast of Honduras. Funding constraints, however, have caused
State to reject DEA'S proposal. In Guatemala, the Department of
State has approached Guatemalan shipping interests and proposed a
port inspection project that would tighten controls and safeguard
the integrity of goods shipped via Guatemalan ports. Start-up
costs for this project would be provided by State, and subsequent
costs would be the responsibility of the port authority, which
would impose a fee on those who use the port and its facilities. </p>

<p> In the meantime, in February 1994, the White House released
the new National Drug Control Strategy, which shifted the focus
from interdicting drug shipments in the transit countries of
Central America to intercepting drugs and disrupting drug
organizations in the source countries of South America. The
strategy clearly envisions a reduced role for DOD and its
detecting and monitoring assets in Central America and makes less
money available for U.S. assistance to Central American
countries. The full impact of this strategy shift on transit zone
efforts is not yet clear. </p>

<p> Scope and In conducting this review, we interviewed program
officers and reviewed planning documents, field reports, studies,
and cables at the Department </p>

<p> Methodology Of State, DEA, DOD, the Defense Intelligence
Agency, and the Office of National Drug Control Policy,
Washington, D.C. We also met with program and operational
officers at DEA's El Paso Intelligence Center in Texas <b>and </b>with
officials in Guatemala, Honduras, and Panama. We conducted our
work between June 1993 and April 1994 in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Additional
information on our scope and methodology is discussed in appendix
111. </p>

<p> We did not obtain written agency comments on this report.
However, we discussed the information in a draft of this report
with officials from the Departments of State and Defense and the
Drug Enforcement Administration and incorporated their comments
where appropriate. </p>

<p> As agreed with your office, unless you publicly announce its
contents earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report
until 7 days from the issue date. At that time, we will send
copies to appropriate congressional committees, the Secretaries
of State and Defense, the Attorney General, the Administrator of
the Drug Enforcement Administration, and the Directors of the
Office of National Drug Control Policy and the Office of
Management and Budget. We will also provide copies to others on
request. </p>

<p> Please contact me on (202) 5124128 if you or your staff have
any questions on this report. Major contributors to this report
are listed in appendix IV. </p>

<p> Sincerely yours, </p>

<p> Joseph E. Kelley </p>

<p> Director-in-Charge </p>

<p> International Affairs Issues </p>

<p> Contents </p>

<p> Letter </p>

<p> Appendix 1 14 </p>

<p> Efforts to Control Drug Trafficking in Guatemala 14 </p>

<p> Drug Trafficking in Honduras 17 </p>

<p> Drug Trafficking Narcotics Trafficking in Other Central
American Countries 21 </p>

<p> Through Central </p>

<p> America </p>

<p> Appendix 11 26 </p>

<p> DEA 27 </p>

<p> U.S. Narcotics Control The Department of State 29 </p>

<p> Activities in Central DOD 31 </p>

<p> America The U.S. Customs Service 32 </p>

<p> The <b>U.S. </b>Coast Guard 32 </p>

<p> Appendix III 33 </p>

<p> Scope and </p>

<p> Methodology </p>

<p> Appendix IV 34 </p>

<p> Major Contributors to </p>

<p> This Report </p>

<p> Related GAO Products 36 </p>

<p> Tables Table 1. 1: Cocaine Seizures in Guatemala 17 </p>

<p> Table 1.2: Cocaine Seizures in Honduras 20 </p>

<p> Table 11. 1: Roles of U.S. Organizations Involved in
Supporting 26 </p>

<p> Operation Cadence </p>

<p> Table 11.2: U.S. Assistance to Narcotics Control Activities
in 27 </p>

<p> Central America </p>

<p> Figure Figure 1: Primary Cocaine Trafficking Routes From
Colombia to 3 </p>

<p> Central America and the United States </p>

<p> <b>Page </b>12 <b>GAO/NSIAD-94-233 Drug Control</b> </p>

<p> Contents </p>

<p> Letter </p>

<p> Appendix 1 14 </p>

<p> Efforts to Control Drug <b>Trafficking </b>in Guatemala 14 </p>

<p> Drug Trafficking in Honduras 17 </p>

<p> Drug Trafficking Narcotics Trafficking in Other Central
American Countries 21 </p>

<p> Through Central </p>

<p> America </p>

<p> Appendix II 26 </p>

<p> DEA 27 </p>

<p> U.S. Narcotics Control The Department <b>of </b>State 29 </p>

<p> Activities in Central DOD 31 </p>

<p> America The U.S. Customs Service 32 </p>

<p> The U.S. Coast Guard 32 </p>

<p> Appendix III 33 </p>

<p> Scope and </p>

<p> Methodology </p>

<p> Appendix IV 34 </p>

<p> Major Contributors to </p>

<p> This Report </p>

<p> Related GAO Products 36 </p>

<p> Tables Table 1. 1: Cocaine Seizures in Guatemala 17 </p>

<p> Table I.2: Cocaine Seizures in Honduras 20 </p>

<p> Table 11. 1: Roles of U.S. Organizations Involved in
Supporting 26 </p>

<p> Operation Cadence </p>

<p> Table 11.2: U.S. Assistance to Narcotics Control Activities
in 27 </p>

<p> Central America </p>

<p> Figure Figure 1: Primary Cocaine Traffickidng Routes From
Colombia to 3 </p>

<p> Central America and the United States </p>

<p> Page 12 GAO/NSIAD-94-233 Drug Control </p>

<p> <u>Appendix I</u> </p>

<p> Efforts to Control Drug Trafficking Through Central America </p>

<p> To reduce the use of Central America as a staging area for U.
S.-bound drug shipments, the United States has created and funded
a number of programs that assist countries as they combat
narcotics trafficking. All seven Central American countries have
received U.S. narcotics control assistance and have narcotics
control efforts in place. Although U.S. Narcotics control
initiatives vary among the Central American countries, the
overall U.S. strategy aims to increase their ability to curb drug
trafficking and eventually take responsibility for drug control
operations within their respective countries. </p>

<p> Drug <b>Trafficking </b>in Guatemala </p>

<p> In 1990, drug traffickers began to alter their established
air transit routes through Mexico and expand their operations
into Guatemala. The Department of State estimates that as much as
70 tons of cocaine annually transit Guatemala. The number of
confirmed drug trafficking flights entering the country increased
from 4 in 1989 to 36 in 1990. Guatemala is an attractive transit
location for drug trafficking because it is situated halfway
between the United States and Colombia, has hundreds of
unmonitored landing strips, and has no radar capability. Drug
trafficking aircraft have concentrated their activities in three
regions of the country: the coastal Pacific plains of
southwestern Guatemala, the river valleys and isolated jungle
flatlands of the northern Peten region, and the area around Lake
Izabal in eastern Guatemala. Air delivery techniques involve the
traditional landing and offloading drug cargoes and the
increasing practice of airdropping drug cargoes over land and sea
to waiting confederates. </p>

<p> Seaborne drug transshipment is centered in-the eastern
Guatemualan port of Puerto Santo Tomas. Once in Guatemala,
traffickers use a variety of smuggling methods to forward drug
cargoes to the United States. These range from traditional air
transportation to the use of cargo containers, tractor trailers,
automobiles, boats, and air cargo. According to the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA), the transportation of cocaine
aboard air cargo shipments departing Guatemala and the overland
shipment of cocaine by tractor trailer through Mexico are the two
most serious problems being encountered in Guatemala. </p>

<p> Appendix I </p>

<p> Efforts to Control Drug Trafficking Through Central America </p>

<p> Narcotics Control Three organizations in the Guatemalan
government have anti-narcotics Organizations responsibilities:
the Treasury Police, the National Police, and the military's
intelligence unit. </p>

<p> The Guatemalan Treasury The Guatemalan Treasury Police has
primary responsibility for drug Police enforcement and
eradication and is the principal beneficiary in Guatemala of U.S.
narcotics control assistance. About 350 Treasury Police agents
are involved in different aspects of the drug war. A
20-manTreasury Police unit known as the &quot;Tiburones&quot;
patrols Guatemala's coast and inland waterways and is responsible
for monitoring the entry and exit of contraband at Guatemala's
largest seaport. Another unit known as the &quot;Halcones&quot;
focuses on road blocks and is involved in overland interdiction
operations. A 15-man rapid reaction airmobile platoon accompanies
DEA agents during drug seizure operations. A unit of helicopter
door gunners protects U.S. helicopters involved in eradication
and interdiction operations. In addition, manual eradication <b>units
</b>address the problem of opium poppy and marijuana cultivation.
The Treasury Police also has a drug detector dog unit. </p>

<p> The Guatemalan National Police </p>

<p> At the request Of DEA, a Narcotics Task Force consisting of
15 National Police investigators was formed in 1989 to conduct
undercover and surveillance operations. DEA, however, reported in
1992 that the National Police was the law enforcement agency
believed to be most susceptible to corruption and least
professional in Guatemala. </p>

<p> Guatemalan Military Intelligence </p>

<p> All drug enforcement activities must be coordinated with the
Guatemalan military intelligence unit, currently the sole source
of narcotics-related intelligence. U.S. officials prefer that the
Guatemalan military not be involved in the drug war because of
its poor human rights record. AU forms of U.S. military
assistance, except for military education and training, have been
suspended. </p>

<p> Narcotics Control Efforts </p>

<p> In addition to participating in Operation Cadence, the
government of Guatemala is undertaking several other narcotics
control activities that are supported by the Department of State.
The government of Guatemala has established a clearinghouse for
narcotics-related information and intelligence, a drug detector
dog program, a port inspection and policing unit, and a
counternarcotics intelligence unit and has participated with the
United States in counternarcotics exercises. </p>

<p> The Guatemala City Joint Information Coordination Center is a
counternarcotics information clearinghouse staffed with
Guatemalan personnel and supported by the Department of State.
The center has several computer terminals that are used to track
private aircraft, vessels, and people suspected of drug
trafficking. </p>

<p> A drug detector dog program at the Guatemala City
international airport was established in 1990. The program
consists of Treasury Police dog handlers and eight dogs that have
been trained to detect illegal drugs. Under this program, all
baggage, both private and commercial, and air cargo is to be
inspected. Although the program has not resulted in any major
seizures, DEA believes the level of security awareness at the
airport has been raised and the presence of the dogs and handlers
poses a deterrent to drug smugglers. The program is funded by
airline, cargo, and export association organizations that use the
airport. </p>

<p> The U.S. Embassy in Guatemala City is working with Guatemalan
shippers and port authorities to establish a
self-inspection/policing unit. This unit will inspect ships and
cargo for drugs prior to their departure from the port. According
to U.S. officials in Guatemala, State win provide the funds
necessary to initiate the unit, and subsequent costs are expected
to be met by a tax levied on shippers and vessels using
Guatemalan ports. </p>

<p> During 1993, the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps conducted a small
joint exercise with Guatemalan Naval Forces that focused on
coastal and river counternarcotics operations on Guatemala's
Pacific and Caribbean coasts. </p>

<p> Cocaine Seizures As shown in table 1. 1, the amount of
cocaine seized in Guatemala has declined since joint
U.S.-Guatemalan interdiction operations began in 1991. U.S.
officials view this decline as an indicator of the success of the
program, since fewer trafficking aircraft are now choosing to
land in Guatemala. These officials also note that a higher
percentage of those aircraft that choose to land are being seized
than before Operation Cadence began. For example, from May 1993,
when interdiction helicopters and personnel began using night
vision equipment, to the end of 1993, Operation Cadence teams
interdicted all six trafficking aircraft detected by the U.S.
Southern Command. Although some U.S. officials noted that
aircraft have apparently evaded U.S. radar assets and continue to
land in Guatemala, Operation Cadence is viewed as the most
successful interdiction program anywhere. 'Me Department of State
believes the operation's success can be corroborated by the
number of landings reported by ground intelligence sources.
According to State, these reports have historically paralleled
the number of flights detected by the U.S. Southern Command and
have revealed no undetected landings. </p>

<p> <b>Table 1.11: Cocaine Seizures in</b> </p>

<p> <b>Guatemala (1989-93)</b> Figures in metric tons </p>

<p> <b>Year</b> <b>Cocaine seizures</b> </p>

<p> 1989 3.2 </p>

<p> 1990 15.5 </p>

<p> 1991 15.4 </p>

<p> 1992 9.5 </p>

<p> 1993 7.6 </p>

<p> Source: Department of State. </p>

<p> Drug Trafficking in According to the Department of State and
DEA, Honduras is a transit route for cocaine destined for the
United States and, to a lesser extent, Europe. </p>

<p> Honduras The government of Honduras maintains a radar system
that covers a majority of the country. Furthermore, the Honduran
Air Force has shot down suspected traffickers three times since
1986. Although Honduras possesses the capability to effectively
deter air trafficking, its capability to deter other methods of
trafficking are limited. Drug trafficking via land and sea routes
remains essentially unhindered, according to State. </p>

<p> Honduras is attractive for maritime drug trafficking because
of its poorly guarded coastline, Bay Islands region with a long
history of smuggling, active fishing industry, and containerized
export of seafood products to the United States. U.S. officials
view maritime transportation as the primary shipping method used
by organizations operating in Honduras. </p>

<p> According to DEA and Department of Defense (DOD) officials,
several Honduran families residing in the Bay Islands have
extensive family and business ties throughout Central America and
are believed to be transporting cocaine throughout the region and
into the southeastern United States. The close-knit island
society, their mistrust of outsiders, and the islanders distinct
appearance have prevented DEA from developing informants with
knowledge of island drug trafficking or cur-rent information on
the activities of the island families. 'Me government of Honduras
has a minimal presence on the Bay Islands, and, according to U.S.
officials, law enforcement personnel assigned to the islands have
been quickly corrupted and all drug interdiction efforts to date
have been compromised. </p>

<p> Although few roads are paved in Honduras, the country is a
transit country for the overland shipment of drugs. The
Inter-American Highway passes through a small portion of
southwestern Honduras and is viewed as the major route for
drug-laden trucks bound for the United States. According to
officials in Honduras, traffic on the highway is heavy and
vehicle monitoring and inspection is minimal. </p>

<p> Narcotics Control As of March 1994, four organizations in the
Honduran government had </p>

<p> Organizations anti-narcotics responsibilities: the National
Police, the Air Force, the Navy, and the military's intelligence
unit. </p>

<p> The Honduran National Police Narcotics control efforts in
Honduras are to be carried out by three strike units of the
National Police, which is an arm of the Ministry of Defense.
These units receive equipment and support from the Department of
State and are located in the capital of Tegucigalpa, the
northwestern city of San Pedro Sula, and the Caribbean port of La
Ceiba. </p>

<p> The Honduran Air Force The Honduran Air Force plays a major
role in deterring the air movement of drugs through Honduras. 'Me
Honduran Air Force has three radar facilities that provide almost
complete radar coverage of the country. State reports that
airborne traffickers generally avoid Honduras because on three
occasions most recently in 1992-the Honduran Air Force shot down
drug smuggling aircraft. </p>

<p> The Honduran Navy The Honduran Navy is responsible for
deterring maritime trafficking. However, the Honduran Navy is
small and has four ships available to patrol its extensive
Caribbean coast. One U.S. official found that three of the ships
were in dry dock awaiting funds to finance repair and the fourth
had been tied to a pier for a long period of time because
Honduras cannot afford fuel. In 1994, DEA proposed establishing a
maritime anti-narcotics strike force in Honduras. The lack of
available funds to purchase the necessary boats and equipment
caused State to reject this proposal. </p>

<p> Honduran Military Intelligence During the mid-1980s, the
Honduran military's intelligence unit assumed border inspection
duties that had previously been the responsibility of the
Honduran customs and border patrol agencies because of the threat
posed by Contra rebels. According to U.S. officials, the Honduran
military intelligence unit has also assumed increased
responsibility for investigating drug trafficking activities. </p>

<p> Narcotics Control Efforts </p>

<p> The government of Honduras has attempted to strengthen its
counternarcotics capabilities. However, it lacks the technical
and financial resources necessary to combat drug trafficking and
faces a number of serious organizational problems. </p>

<p> In April 1994, the Department of State reported that large
cocaine shipments were continuing to transit Honduras, in part
because of several institutional weaknesses. In addition to the
difficulties involved in detecting maritime drug shipments, State
reported that Honduran enforcement efforts were hindered by an
underpaid and insufficiently trained police force, an inadequate <b>judi</b>cial
-system, and Widespread corruption. Law enforcement personnel in
Honduras are paid as little as $60 per month. </p>

<p> Officials at the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa were equally as
skeptical about Honduras' capabilities and willingness to
interdict drugs. For example, one U.S. Embassy official believes
the Honduran military, which is in charge of the police, has
little or no knowledge of day-to-day police investigative
activities. Another U.S. Embassy official believes that the
Honduran drug interdiction effort would wither away without U.S.
prodding. </p>

<p> Until recently, law enforcement activities in Honduras had
come under the purview of the military, and, as a result, the
Honduran National Police was an arm of the Ministry of Defense.
Ms action blurred the line between civilian law enforcement
activities and military operations, which had a negative impact
on drug enforcement. According to U.S. officials in Tegucigalpa,
military officials with little or no police training or
experience were traditionally placed in senior positions within
the National Police. U.S. officials are optimistic that this
situation will eventually change as graduates of a 4-year
National Police academy gain seniority and assume positions of
greater responsibility. According to these officials, the
narcotics control units of the National Police are now being
staffed with academy graduates. </p>

<p> In March 1994, Honduras created an independent Public
Ministry, which is to have authority over criminal investigations
and prosecutions. According to State, the ministry will recruit
and train new personnel who win be independent of the military. </p>

<p> A major State Department program in Honduras has been the
establishment of a Joint Information Coordination Center. The
center became operational in 1993 and is staffed by 14 Hondurans
who can query a number of databases (e.g., telephone company
records and vehicle registrations) to investigate
narcotics-related crimes. A State official in Honduras views the
center as a success and said the government of Honduras has made
a commitment to the center's operation. This commitment has been
demonstrated through a fourfold increase in the Honduran
contribution to this State-sponsored project and the government's
decision to staff the center with qualified personnel who are
paid professional salaries. </p>

<p> Conversely, despite U.S. support and training, Honduras'
detector drug dog program has not met expectations and is viewed
by one Embassy official as the weakest link in the U.S. program
in Honduras. According to <b>DEA officials </b>in Honduras,
trained dog handlers have been transferred, and dogs have not
been cared for properly. One U.S. official in Honduras said that
the dogs were <b>confined </b>to small cages for long periods of
time and were generally malnourished and mistreated. This
official uses Ws personal funds to purchase dog food for the
animals. <b>DEA </b>officials believe any future narcotics dog
program in Honduras depends entirely on U.S. willingness to fund
the program on a continuing basis. </p>

<p> Cocaine Seizures Table 1.2 summarizes cocaine seizures in
Honduras since 1989. </p>

<p> <b>Table 1.2: Cocaine Seizures in</b> </p>

<p> <b>Honduras (I 989-93)</b> <u>Figures</u> <u>in metric</u>
tons </p>

<p> <b>Year</b> <b>Cocaine </b><u>seizures</u> </p>

<p> 1989 0.041 </p>

<p> 1990 0.254 </p>

<p> 1991 0.491 </p>

<p> 1992 1.460 </p>

<p> 1993 2.610 </p>

<p> Source: Department of State. </p>

<p> <b>Page 20</b> <b>GAOINSLAD-94-233 Drug Control</b> </p>

<p> Appendix I </p>

<p> Efforts to Control Drug Trafficking Through </p>

<p> Central America </p>

<p> Narcotics Trafficking in Other Central American Countries </p>

<p> All Central American countries have organizations and
programs in place to address illegal narcotics trafficking. These
control mechanisms are modest in scope and have achieved only
limited results. The following provides a brief description of
the drug trafficking problems confronting Belize, Costa Rica, El
Salvador, Nicaragua, and Panama; efforts by these countries to
address these problems; and U.S. narcotics control assistance to
these countries. </p>

<p> Belize </p>

<p> Belize is a transshipment staging area for cocaine and
marijuana, which is grown in the northern Guatemala province that
borders Belize. The Department of State reports that Belize's
proximity to Guatemala and Mexico, its dense unpopulated jungle,
extensive seacoast, and unsophisticated infrastructure for
combating drug problems make it a potentially significant
transshipment point for illicit drugs. </p>

<p> U.S. financial support for training, transportation, and
equipment have been instrumental in increasing drug seizures and
drug-related arrests in Belize during recent years. The Belize
Police Force, with U.S. assistance, has formed an investigative
unit that targets drug traffickers who have amassed significant
assets. State reported in April 1994 that Belize customs, working
with the Belize police force, had begun a maritime and land
container search and review program. The Department of State
provided $298,000 in narcotics control assistance to Belize in
fiscal year 1993 and plans to provide $1 1 0,000 in assistance in
fiscal year 1994. During 1993, Belize officials participated in a
State-sponsored training program to strengthen basic law
enforcement skills. The Belize police also conducted a marijuana
eradication program and arrested suspected drug traffickers. A
drug detector dog program was also in place at the Belize
International Airport. </p>

<p> Costa Rica Costa Rica has long been a transit point for
cocaine, and recent seizures indicated that heroin is also being
moved through the country. DEA attributes Costa Rica's extensive
coastline, large number of uncontrolled airstrips, and limited
government resources as factors contributing to the country's
growing use as a drug transshipment Site. DEA estimates that
significant quantities of cocaine transits Costa Rica annually.
In addition to the air movement of cocaine, increased quantities
of the drug are believed to be entering Costa Rica from the
island of San Andres (a possession of Colombia, located off the
eastern coast of Nicaragua) and from the Nicaraguan coast.
According to DEA, both coasts of Costa Rica are used by smuggling
aircraft and vessels, and overland shipments of cocaine are
entering from Panama. In its April 1994 report to Congress, State
reported that 611 kilograms of cocaine had been seized during the
first 1 1 months of 1993 and concluded that Costa Rican law
enforcement agencies could not effectively safeguard the country
against traffickers. According to DEA officials, drugs are
smuggled out of Costa Rica by land along the Inter-American
Highway and by sea in containerized cargoes. These drugs are
destined for the United States. </p>

<p> State's April 1994 report further noted that the Costa Rican
government had modernized its counternarcotics laws, streamlined
narcotics control enforcement, and encouraged demand reduction
activities. The State report stated that effective drug control
efforts in Costa Rica were hampered by a scarcity of resources,
the lack of a fully professional police force, and bottlenecks in
the judicial system. 'Mere is also corruption within the Costa
Rican government. Since Costa Rica has no military force, the
underequipped air and maritime sections of the Ministry of Public
Security conduct limited counternarcotics patrols, but they are
hindered by a lack of ships, aircraft, fuel, and trained
personnel. </p>

<p> In fiscal year 1993, the Department of State provided
$272,000 in narcotics control assistance that focused on training
and supporting Costa Rican drug interdiction forces and
continuing support for a counternarcotics intelligence center,
which has been operational since 1988. An estimated $86,000 in
narcotics control assistance is planned for Costa Rica in fiscal
year l994. </p>

<p> El Salvador </p>

<p> The Department of State reported that traffickers are using
the Inter-American Highway, which passes through El Salvador, to
move significant quantities of cocaine and smaller quantities of
heroin. Salvadoran government officials are concerned that
trafficking aircraft increasingly use their territory to evade
U.S.-supported counternarcotics forces in Guatemala and Mexico.
DOD officials believe the large number of landing strips along El
Salvador's Pacific coast and the lack of radar to monitor air
traffic will attract drug traffickers if interdiction efforts in
Guatemala continue to be successful. In June 1993, nearly 6
metric tons of cocaine were seized in San Salvador-the largest
seizure in El Salvador's history. </p>

<p> In 1990, the government of El Salvador created the Executive
Anti-Narcotics Unit, which, according to the Department of State,
has proven to be effective despite its small size. The
anti-narcotics unit relies on the military for air and maritime
capability. The Executive Anti-Narcotics Unit was incorporated
into the civilian national police in September 1993 and granted
wider investigative authority than was previously authorized. </p>

<p> The United States has provided telecommunications equipment
and vehicles to the anti-narcotics unit, without which it would
have been incapable of operating effectively, according to one
Salvadoran official. In addition, a U.S.-supported canine team
allows Salvadorans to monitor airports, ports, and
border-crossing points for illegal drugs. State's narcotics
assistance program provided El Salvador with $205,000 in
assistance in fiscal year 1993 and plans to provide an estimated
$129,000 in assistance during fiscal year 1994. </p>

<p> Nicaragua </p>

<p> Nicaragua plays a relatively minor role in the transshipment
of cocaine to the United States and Europe. However, as
enforcement efforts intensify elsewhere in the region, drug
smuggling organizations have increased their activities in
Nicaragua. Nicaragua's remote and sparsely populated Caribbean
coastline, access to the Inter-American Highway, and limited
government resources also contribute to the nation's potential
use as a drug transshipment site. According to DEA, cocaine
transiting Nicaragua moves by fishing vessel, cargo vessel,
private and commercial aircraft, and land vehicles. A frequent
method of transshipment along the Caribbean coastline has been
airdrops from low-flying aircraft to waiting speed boats. An
additional trafficking method has been coast hopping, a practice
in which cocaine-laden vessels and aircraft mix with legitimate
traffic and slowly move up the Caribbean coast, stopping to
refuel or buy supplies. </p>

<p> The government has created a part-time civilian coordinator
for narcotics affairs, who may also head a government wide
narcotics commission. In March 1993, the government of Nicaragua
implemented a national police reformation project, which created
three anti-narcotics units designed to combat all forms of drug
trafficking. The anti-narcotics units are divided into airport
activity, national trafficking matters, and international
trafficking matters. According to State, the anti-narcotics units
are severely lacking in resources and have captured small and
medium-size shipments of cocaine transiting the country. </p>

<p> In recent years, State has offered to provide $100,000 in
narcotics control assistance if Nicaragua would establish an
anti-drug force that was not under the control of the
Sandinista-influenced military or police. The government agreed
to create such a force; however, personnel assigned to the new
unit were believed to be tied to the Nicaraguan military, and the
U.S. assistance was withheld. 'Me United States and Nicaragua
agreed in 1994 to reprogram these funds to support a demand
reduction project. </p>

<p> At present, there is neither a DEA office nor a Department of
State narcotics control program in Nicaragua. During the early
months of 1994, the government of Nicaragua made a number of drug
seizures, both on its own and with information provided by DEA.
These seizures and the government of Nicaragua's assumption of a
leadership role in regional drug enforcement conferences has
caused U.S. officials to reconsider their opinion of narcotics
control efforts in Nicaragua. During informal discussions in May
1994, Nicaraguan officials informed U.S. representatives that
they planned to request that the United States establish a DEA
office at the U. S. Embassy in Managua. Due to a lack of funds
and absence of an official request, action on establishing a DEA
office in Managua has been postponed. </p>

<p> Panama </p>

<p> Panama plays a role in international drug trafficking by
being a financial center for laundering drug profits and a major
transshipment point for cocaine, according to DEA. Although
Operation Just Cause disrupted money laundering activities in
December 1989, DEA reports that the disruption was only temporary
and money laundering has resumed. DEA officials in Washington
told us that the continued use of Panama as a money laundering
center and the government of Panama's inability or unwillingness
to curb these operations was the biggest problem currently
confronting international law enforcement officials dealing with
this country. Panamanian agencies responsible for money
laundering control are viewed by State as weak. They do not
coordinate with one another, and their resources are small. </p>

<p> One of Panama's greatest attractions for drug traffickers is
the Colon Free Trade Zone. According to a U.S. official in
Panama, legitimate commercial goods entering the Free Zone are
often disassembled, repackaged, and/or transferred to other
shipping containers. These activities, along with the traffickers
ability to forge shipping documents, makes it all but impossible
for law enforcement officials to monitor the movement of drugs
once they enter the area. According to one U.S. official in
Panama, drug traffickers are sophisticated, and many legitimate
businessmen do not know their operations are being used to move
drugs. Most of the large drug seizures have occurred in the Free
Zone or in port facilities serviced by the Free Zone. </p>

<p> During 1993, drug seizures by the Panamanian Judicial
Technical Police and Customs increased, several combined
U.S./Panamanian maritime interdiction campaigns were staged, and
a new drug detector dog -program was established in the Free
Zone. Overall, seizures of cocaine (5.7 metric tons) decreased
from the record 10 metric tons seized in 1992. </p>

<p> According to DEA, although the government of Panama has
provided limited funding for law enforcement efforts against drug
activities, the national police organizations lack the necessary
training, appropriate salaries and equipment to conduct effective
anti-drug operations.' During fiscal year 1993, the Department of
State provided $1.5 million in narcotics control assistance to
Panama and had budgeted $500,000 for fiscal year 1994. In April
1994, the President was unable to certify that. Panama was
cooperating fully with the United States, or was taking adequate
steps on its own, to achieve full compliance with the goals and
objectives of the 1988 United Nations Convention Against Illicit
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.' In an
explanation that accompanied the discussion, the President
indicated that even though the government of Panama had
cooperated with many U.S. drug control efforts, it had not made
significant progress on its own to deter money laundering. This
lack of action made Panama a haven for drug launders and hindered
efforts to bring narcotics traffickers to justice. Although
Panama's law enforcement performance showed improvement, it
remained weak. Citing the need to preserve a cooperative
relationship necessary to operate the Panama Canal and permit the
orderly withdrawal of U.S. military forces from Panama, the
President determined that it was in the &quot;vital national
interest' of the United States to continue assistance to Panama. </p>

<p> 'The needs of Panama's law enforcement agencies for resources
and training to combat drug trafficking and money laundering are
also discussed in an earlier report, The War <u>on Drugs:
Narcotics Control</u> Efforts in Panama (GAO/NSLAD-91-233, July
16, 199 1). </p>

<p> 'Section 490 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 196 1, as
amended, sets out requirements for withholding of bilateral
foreign assistance and opposition to multilateral development
assistance to major illicit drug-producing countries and major
drug transit countries. These provisions will not <b>apply </b>in
cases in which, under section 490(b), the President determines
and certifies to Congress that either (1) the country has
cooperated fully during the previous year with the United States
or has taken adequate steps on its own to achieve compliance with
the goals and objectives established by the United Nations
Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances or (2) vital national interests of the
United States require support for such assistance. </p>

<p> To curb the increased use of Central America as a staging
area for South American cocaine shipments, the United States
initiated Operation Cadence, a DEA-led interdiction effort, in
May 199 1. Mve U.S. government agencies participate in Operation
Cadence: DEA, DOD, the Department of State, the U.S. Customs
Service, and the U.S. Border Patrol. Operation Cadence involves
(1) developing human intelligence on possible trafficking
flights, (2) using U.S. radar assets to detect and monitor
suspect aircraft leaving South American countries, (3) tracking
those suspect aircraft using specially equipped Customs aircraft
from the time they enter Central American airspace until they
land, (4) arresting traffickers and seizing their cargoes, and
(5) conducting follow-up investigations. The specific roles of
these agencies are listed in table H. 1. </p>

<p> <b>Table IIA: Roles of U.S. </b><u>Organizations </u><b>Involved
in </b><u>Supporting Operation Cadence</u> </p>

<p> <u><b>Organization</b></u> <b>Role</b> </p>

<p> DEA Provides interdiction personnel, program leadership, and
oversight for U.S. participants. Assists and trains host nation
interdiction <u>and investigative personnel</u>. </p>

<p> <u>Department</u> of State Provides <u>diplomatic, logistics,
financial, and aircraft support and training assistance</u>. </p>

<p> DOD Detects and monitors suspect aircraft leaving South
America until they enter Central American airspace. Provides
communication assistance, intelligence resources, <u>equipment,
and personnel</u> to <u>coordinate operations</u>. </p>

<p> U.S. Customs Service Tracks suspect aircraft entering Central
American airspace until they land. Provides four U.S. <u>tracking
aircraft and crews deployed in Honduras</u> and Panama. </p>

<p> U.S. Border Patrol Instructs host country personnel in road
interdiction techniques and methods for controlling the overland
movement of narcotics. </p>

<p> In addition to its support of Operation Cadence, the
Department of State funds bilateral narcotics control programs
with all of the Central American countries, except Nicaragua, and
maintains an interregional aviation service. Although it is not a
participant in Operation Cadence, the U.S. Coast Guard helps by
deploying training teams to improve the law enforcement skills of
Central American maritime police forces. Table 11.2 summarizes
the Central American narcotics control assistance provided by the
United States during fiscal year 1993. </p>

<p> <b>Appendix 11</b> </p>

<p> <b>U.S. Narcotics Control Activities in Central America</b> </p>

<p> <b>Table 11.2: U.S. Assistance to Narcotics Control
Activities in Central America</b> </p>

<p> Fiscal year 1993 dollars in thousands </p>

<p> <b>Department of</b> <b>U.S. Customs</b> <b>U.S. Coast</b> </p>

<p> <b>Country</b> <b>State</b> <b>DEA</b> 000 <b>Service</b> <b>Guard</b>
<b>Total</b> </p>

<p> Belize -$298 $500 0 0 0 $798 </p>

<p> Costa Rica <i>272</i> 908 0 0 0 <b>$1,180</b> </p>

<p> El Salvador 205 796 0 0 0 $1,001 </p>

<p> Guatemala 2,500 2,420 0 0 0 <b>$4,920</b> </p>

<p> Honduras 198 637 0 0 0 <b>$835</b> </p>

<p> Nicaragua 0 0 0 0 0 0 </p>

<p> Panama 1,500 1,288 0 0 $399 <b>$3,187</b> </p>

<p> Noncountry specific </p>

<p> assistance 10,100a 828b $24,700 $8,981 c 0 <b>$44,609</b> </p>

<p> <b>Total</b> <b>$15,073</b> <b>$7,376</b> <b>$24,700</b> <b>$8,981</b>
<b>$399</b> <b>$56,530</b> </p>

<p> Regional aviation support was provided to Operation Cadence
interdiction efforts and Department of State eradication
operations. </p>

<p> b This amount was for Operation Cadence. </p>

<p> cThis figure includes operation and maintenance of P-3 Orion
detection aircraft and Citation tracking aircraft and does not
include U.S. Customs Service personnel costs. </p>

<p> DEA DEA supports drug interdiction efforts in the region by
having DEA offices in the Central American countries, except
Nicaragua, and deploying specially trained Operation Cadence
teams. Within the six countries, DEA activities are designed to
help host nations to reduce the supply and flow of drugs and
develop intelligence that will lead to the arrest of traffickers
within the host country and the United States. </p>

<p> To supplement the traditional drug enforcement activities of
DEA agents permanently assigned to the U.S. embassies in Central
America, teams of specially trained interdiction personnel are
deployed to Guatemala for 90-day periods. The multiagency Cadence
teams are composed of approximately 10 DEA special agents as well
as communications specialists, medics, and U.S. Border Patrol
personnel who have received U.S. Army training in such
specialties as air mobile techniques, land navigation, field
medicine, and communications. According to DEA, Operation Cadence
has resulted in the seizure of 28.8 metric tons of cocaine and 16
aircraft since its inception. </p>

<p> Under the Operation Cadence concept, DEA agents and
Guatemalan Treasury Police personnel are dispersed to forward
operation bases located in four geographic regions used by drug
trafficking aircraft and await notification by the U.S. Southern
Command in Panama that an aircraft believed to be carrying
narcotics is en route. Using intelligence data and trafficking
profiles developed through hundreds of such tracks, the U.S.
Southern Command identifies potential trafficking aircraft and
monitors their movement along the Central American isthmus. As
the trafficking aircraft enters Central American airspace,
responsibility for tracking the suspect is passed to specially
equipped tracking aircraft of the U.S. Customs Service, which
directs the Cadence team to the anticipated landing site. The
interdiction teams are transported to the landing sites by
helicopters funded by the Department of State. Operation Cadence
is primarily based in Guatemala, but Cadence teams have assisted
in interdiction operations in Belize, El Salvador, and Honduras. </p>

<p> When Operation Cadence began in 1991, the majority of
trafficking flights transited the Pacific and landed along
Guatemala's Southwestern Pacific coast region. Operation Cadence
initially focused on this area, established its first forward
operating base in the Southwestern town of Retalhuleu, and
deployed two Department of State helicopters and interdiction
personnel to the base. After some initial seizures, U.S.
officials observed that the traffickers began to use different
routes into Guatemala that evaded the sole forward operating
location. One State official in Guatemala told us that it took 6
months to establish a forward operating base but that -it -took
the traffickers only 6 days to get around it. Three additional
forward operating bases have been established, and the response
teams are now able to cover most of Guatemala. </p>

<p> Another change in tactics occurred shortly after the program
was initiated when traffickers changed from delivering drugs
during the daytime to delivering at dusk or night. This change
proved to be effective because (1) the interdiction helicopters
lacked night vision equipment and could not be flown at night and
(2) the interdiction teams would land only if the operation could
be completed and the helicopters returned to the secure forward
operating bases during daylight hours. Night vision equipment was
installed in the Department of State helicopters, and by May
1993, the flight crews and interdiction teams had completed
training in the use of the equipment and night assault
techniques. The first night interdiction operation occurred on
June 2, 1993, and resulted in the seizure of </p>

<p> 1.7 metric tons of cocaine. According to DEA officials,
Operation Cadence has successfully interdicted all six
trafficking aircraft that landed in Guatemala from June 2, 1993,
through March 30, 1994. </p>

<p> Some law enforcement officials believe drug traffickers have
again changed their tactics and are bypassing DOD detection and
monitoring assets that surround the traditional
trafficking-routes out of Colombia and northern South America
According to one U.S. official, a few aircraft that were
undetected by DOD have crashed and, when the crash site was
investigated, the planes were found to be loaded with cocaine.
This official believes that traffickers are now flying smaller
aircraft into the Darian jungle that spans Panama and Colombia.
The drug cargoes are then moved across Panama and either loaded
on tractor trailer trucks, transferred to ocean-going vessels, or
reloaded onto small aircraft and flown northward. These aircraft
fly at low altitudes to avoid radar and are designed to mix with
legitimate air traffic. This technique allows the trafficker to
avoid the air- and sea-based radars that are positioned along the
northern tier of South America. </p>

<p> The Department of The Department of State, through its Bureau
of International Narcotics Matters, has primary responsibility
for developing, implementing, and </p>

<p> State monitoring the U.S. international narcotics control
policy. As part of its drug control effort, State funds programs
in six of the seven Central American countries and maintains an
inter-regional aviation program. At the U.S. embassies in
Guatemala and Panama, State has established Narcotics Affairs
Sections to administer the in-country programs and provide
general oversight for the much smaller programs in Belize, Costa
Rica, El Salvador, and Honduras. </p>

<p> Assistance to Guatemala U.S. narcotics control objectives in
Guatemala are to (1) reduce narcotics trafficking from and
through Guatemala to the United States, (2) reduce opium
production, (3) develop an effective civilian narcotics law
enforcement agency, and (4) improve Guatemalan public awareness
of the dangers of drug production and use. To achieve these
objectives, State funds four narcotics control projects and
provides aviation support for eradication and drug interdiction
operations. </p>

<p> State's efforts to develop an effective civilian narcotics
law enforcement agency in Guatemala involve the organization,
training, and equipping of several drug interdiction and
eradication control units within the Guatemalan Treasury Police.
The Department has supported the establishment of an
anti-narcotics directorate, a narcotics investigative unit,
manual eradication units, a rapid reaction unit that supports
Operation Cadence, an interdiction force that patrols Guatemala's
inland waterways, two drug canine units, and a Joint Intelligence
Coordinating Center. </p>

<p> In addition to being a major transit country for cocaine,
Guatemala is a producing country for opium and marijuana. To
address this problem, the Department of State supports an aerial
and manual eradication project that eliminated almost 95 percent
of the opium poppy crop and about 500 acres of marijuana in 1993.
The State Department provides herbicides for Department of State
eradication aircraft, ground support equipment, communications
and photographic equipment, and field rations. Similar assistance
is also provided for manual eradication operations. </p>

<p> Another Department of State project in Guatemala is designed
to increase public awareness of the harm caused by drug
production, trafficking, and abuse. The Department of State
program in Guatemala also included $295,000 in fiscal year 1993
to support U.S. and foreign national personnel involved in
program planning, development, monitoring, and evaluation at the
Narcotics Affairs Section in Guatemala City. </p>

<p> State also maintains an aviation unit in Guatemala,
consisting of five aircraft to conduct aerial eradication and
assist in law enforcement efforts; one aircraft to transport
interdiction personnel between field locations; and three
helicopters to conduct aerial eradication, surveillance, and
transport interdiction personnel. Five helicopters had been
assigned to Guatemala before November 1993. </p>

<p> Assistance to Honduras U.S. drug control efforts in Honduras
are aimed at (1) increasing Honduran drug enforcement activities,
(2) promoting government efforts to combat narcotics-related
corruption, (3) urging the government of Honduras to strengthen
laws on asset seizure and money laundering, and (4) pursuing
demand reduction programs. In recent years, State efforts in
Honduras have focused on establishing and outfitting three </p>

<p> counternarcotics task forces, establishing a Joint
Intelligence Coordinating Center, and improving the effectiveness
of the drug dog program. </p>

<p> Drug program oversight and reporting is the responsibility of
a U.S. Embassy officer. General program oversight for State's
programs in Honduras is provided by the Narcotics Affairs Section
in Guatemala City. </p>

<p> DOD DOD supports Operation Cadence and narcotics control
efforts in Central America by detecting and monitoring suspect
aircraft and maritime shipments as they approach and transit the
region, providing equipment and expertise to Operation Cadence
operations, developing targeting packages for interdiction
operations, and assisting the countries of the region in drug
awareness and drug abuse prevention programs. DOD's surveillance
mission supports the U.S. and foreign law enforcement agencies
that apprehend suspects and seize their cargo, both in the source
countries where cocaine is produced and in the transit countries
between South America and the United States. </p>

<p> DOD operates a network of airborne, ground-, and sea-based
radar systems to detect and monitor potential drug trafficking
aircraft as they move from South America through the transit
zones of Central America and the Caribbean. Information from
these radars is passed to U.S. law enforcement officials and used
to support the interdiction operations of U.S. and foreign
agencies. </p>

<p> DOD supports in-country interdiction efforts by deploying
various specialists and equipment to the countries of Central
America to assist U.S. law enforcement officials and train host
country counternarcotics personnel. To support U.S. embassy
intelligence needs, DOD has deployed tactical analysis teams to
several embassies in the major drug-producing and transit
countries of Guatemala and Honduras. These teams analyze and
produce intelligence on narcotics traffickers using reports from
agencies such as the Defense Intelligence Agency, DOD, DEA, and
other sources and provide this information to in-country
counternarcotics personnel. They use a sophisticated
communications system that can securely transmit and receive
classified documents, photographs, text, or radar images on a
real-time basis to and from U.S. counternarcotics personnel in
the Western Hemisphere. DOD has also deployed military teams to
Guatemala, Panama, and five South American countries to work with
U.S. Embassy personnel and coordinate and assist in the
development and counternarcotics plans. </p>

<p> Finally, the Defense Intelligence Agency develops targeting
packages for potential interdiction operations and provides
intelligence studies and information on trafficking
organizations. For example, it has developed targeting packages
on many of the numerous landing strips along Guatemala's
southwest coast and written reports on the organization and
interrelationships of trafficking families operating in the Bay
Islands of Honduras. </p>

<p> The U.S. Customs The U.S. Customs Service supports Operation
Cadence and narcotics interdiction efforts in Central America by
deploying detection, monitoring, Service and tracking aircraft
and personnel to the region. Customs also provides some training
to Central American interdiction and inspection personnel. </p>

<p> Customs deploys three Cessna Citation aircraft to track
suspect aircraft once they enter Central American airspace. The
planes, crews, and mechanics are assigned on a temporary
rotational duty basis and are deployed to Panama and Soto Cano
Air Base in Honduras. To supplement the detection and monitoring
activities of the U.S. Southern Command -in Panama, Customs
stations up to three surveillance aircraft on a 90-day basis in
Panama to track suspect aircraft as they leave Colombia. </p>

<p> Surveillance aircraft from Corpus Christi, Texas, also fly
routine sorties over the Gulf of Mexico as they perform their
normal Customs functions. During 1993, Customs conducted several
State-funded training programs for Central American narcotics
control personnel. Examples of this training include detector dog
training and a forthcoming regional interdiction course in El
Salvador, a contraband enforcement course being provided to
Guatemalan personnel, and a course in narcotics security
techniques provided to managers and employees of private carrier
companies in Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Honduras, and Nicaragua. </p>

<p> The U.S. Coast Guard The U.S. Coast Guard supports narcotics
control efforts in Central America by providing training to
improve the law enforcement skills of indigenous maritime police
forces and by establishing a liaison office to coordinate
maritime and river narcotics control activities. </p>

<p> <u>Appendix III</u> </p>

<p> Scope and Methodology </p>

<p> At the U.S. Embassy in Guatemala City, Guatemala, we
interviewed the Ambassador and Deputy Chief of Mission and
responsible officials from the Narcotics Affairs, Political and
Economic Sections, Military Assistance Group, Defense Attache
Office, Tactical Analysis Team, DEA, and DEA'S Operation Cadence
interdiction team. We attended meetings of the Embassy's Country
Team and the Narcotics Affairs Committee. To examine and evaluate
narcotics trafficking and interdiction efforts, we reviewed
documents prepared by U.S. Embassy personnel and supplemented the
information in interviews with U.S. officials. We also visited
the Department of State's aviation facility in Guatemala City and
Operation Cadence's forward operating base in Flores, Guatemala.
To obtain the views of the Guatemalan government, we met with the
Director of Guatemala's Anti-Narcotics Operations Department. </p>

<p> At the U.S. Embassy in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, we interviewed
the Ambassador and Deputy Chief of Mission and responsible
officials from the Political Section, Military Assistance Group,
Defense Attache Office, Tactical Analysis Team, DEA, and members
Of DEA'S Operation Cadence interdiction team who were deployed to
Honduras at the time of our visit. To examine and evaluate
narcotics trafficking and interdiction efforts, we reviewed
documents prepared by U.S. Embassy personnel. We also visited
Soto Cano Air Base and met with representatives of the U.S.
Southern Command. We were not permitted to meet with the pilots
and crews of the U.S. Customs Service interdiction aircraft
stationed at Soto Cano. To obtain the views of the Honduran
government, we met with the Director of the Honduran National
Police's Joint Information Collection Center. </p>

<p> In Panama, we were briefed by officials of the U.S. Southern
Command. We also met with civilian liaison officers attached to
the Southern Command from the Central Intelligence Agency,
Defense Intelligence Agency, National Security Agency, U.S. Coast
Guard, U.S. Customs Service, and DEA. At the U.S. Embassy in
Panama City, Panama, we interviewed the Deputy Chief of Mission
and responsible officials from the Narcotics Affairs Section,
U.S. Customs Service, and DEA. </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Return
to Cliff Schaffer's Main Page</a> </p>

<hr>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>