
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-38</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B021-150</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1a.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123254 text/html 41557
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:32:45 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:52 GMT
Content-length: 41339
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<h1>History of Marihuana Use: Medical and Intoxicant </h1>

<p>From: <u>Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</u>, the
Report of the US National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse,
1972</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>The term &quot;marihuana&quot; is a word with indistinct
origins. Some believe it is derived from the Mexican words for
&quot;Mary Jane&quot;; others hold that &quot;marihuana&quot;
comes from. the Portuguese word marigu-ano which means
&quot;intoxicant&quot; (Geller and Boas, 1969: 14). This chapter
outlines the many and varied uses of marihuana through history,
and deals with its use in medicine and its use as an intoxicant. </p>

<p>The experience of the 1960's might lead one to surmise that
marihuana use spreads explosively. The chronicle of its 3,000
year history, however, shows that this &quot;explosion&quot; has
been characteristic only of the contemporary scene. The plant has
been grown for fiber and as a source of medicine for several
thousand years, but until 500 A.D. its use as a mind-altering
drug was almost solely confined in India. The drug and its uses
reached the Middle and Near East during the next several
centuries, and then moved across North Africa, appeared in Latin
America and the Caribbean, and finally entered the United States
in the early decades of this century (Snyder, 1970: 129). </p>

<p>Meanwhile it had been introduced into European medicine
shortly after the invasion of Egypt by Napoleon and had a minor
vogue as an intoxicant for a time in France.<br>
<br>
Regardless of which parts of the world are discussed, many of the
same problems and concerns about cannabis are common to all,
including the United States. Understanding its various uses
during many centuries in diverse countries and continents can
perhaps lead to a better understanding of marihuana in general.<br>
</p>

<h2>History of the Medical Use </h2>

<p>The history of cannabis products and their use has been long,
colorful and varied. &quot;To the agriculturist, cannabis is a
fiber crop; to the physician, it is an enigma; to the user, a
euphoriant; to the police, a menace; to the trafficker, a source
of profitable danger; to the convict or parolee and his family, a
source of sorrow&quot; (Mikuriya, 1969: 34). The fact is that
cannabis has been held simultaneously in high and low esteem at
various times throughout recorded history, particularly in our
own times. </p>

<p>The volume of information available on the medical application
of cannabis is considerable. Occasionally certain references have
been condensed or deleted, but this should not detract from the
completeness of the report. </p>

<p>This historical survey of the medical uses of marihuana is
introduced by abroad overview of its use, including brief notes
on current and projected research, and then considers specific
historical settings and circumstances in ancient China, moving on
to Egypt, India, Greece, Africa, and the Western World. </p>

<p>Cannabis sativa has been used therapeutically from the
earliest records, nearly 5,000 years ago, to the present day
(Mikuriya, 1969: 34) and its products have been widely noted for
their effects, both physiological and psychological, throughout
the world. Although the Chinese and Indian cultures knew about
the properties of this drug from very early times, this
information did not become general in the Near and Middle East
until after the fifth century A.D., when travelers, traders and
adventurers began to carry knowledge of the drug westward to
Persia and Arabia. </p>

<p>Historians claim that cannabis was first employed in these
countries as an antiseptic and analgesic. Other medical uses were
later developed and spread throughout the Middle East, Africa,
and Eastern Europe. </p>

<p>Several years after the return of Napoleon's army from Egypt,
cannabis became widely accepted by Western medical practitioners.
Previously, it had had limited use for such purposes as the
treatment of burns. The scientific members of Napoleon's forces
were interested in the drug's pain relieving and sedative
effects. It was used during, and to a greater extent, following
his rule in France, especially after 1840 when the work of such
physicians as O'Shaughnessy, Aubert-Roche, and Moreau de Tours
drew wide attention to this drug.<br>
</p>

<p>With the rise of the literary movement of the 1840-1860 period
in France (Gautier, Baudelaire, Dumas, etc.), cannabis became
somewhat popular as an intoxicant of the intellectual classes. <br>
</p>

<p>In the United States, medical interest in cannabis use was
evidenced in 1860 by the convening of a Committee on Cannabis
Indica of the Ohio State Medical Society, which reported on its
therapeutic applications (McMeens, 1860: 1). Between the period
1840-1890, Walton states that more than 100 articles were
published recommending cannabis for one disorder or another. </p>

<p>Concern about cannabis as an intoxicant led the government of
India to establish the India Hemp Commission of 1893-94 to
examine the entire question of cannabis use in India. </p>

<p>Paralleling the question over cannabis use in the latter half
of the 19th century was the growing medical use of other
medications superior to cannabis in their effects and more easily
controlled as to dose. Consequently, medical use of cannabis
declined and cannabis began to lose support of the medical
profession. </p>

<p>During the years between 1856-1937, cannabis lost its image as
a medicine and was left with a disreputable image as an
intoxicant. Strong public reaction coupled with a campaign in the
public press led to a federal anti-marihuana law in 1937. (The
drug was illegal in many states before 1937.) The issue of
medical use remained active, however, and Dr. William C.
Woodward, Legislative Counsel to the AMA, an opponent of cannabis
use and the only physician to be a witness at the Taxation of
Marihuana hearings, stated: <br>
</p>

<p>There are exceptions in treatment in which cannabis cannot
apparently be successfully subsituted for. The work of Pascal
seems to show that Indian Hemp has remarkable properties in
revealing the subconscious; hence, it can be used for
psychological, psychoanalytic and psychotherapeutic research
(Hearings, House of Representatives, 1937: 91).<br>
</p>

<p>Although cannabis drugs are generally regarded as obsolete and
rarely used in &quot;western&quot; medicine today, cannabis is
&quot;still used extensively in the Ayruvedic, Unani and Tibbi
systems of medicine of the Indian-Pakastani subcontinent&quot;
(&quot;The Cannabis Problem, 1962: 27). The Pharmacopoeias of
India mention cannabis use in the recent past. Two preparations
of cannabis, a liquid extract and a tincture, are listed in the
1954 and 1966 Pharmacopoeias of India which contain descriptions
of cannabis and its extract and how it is made (Chopra &amp;
Chopra, 1957: 9).<br>
</p>

<p>A more recent source makes reference to the fact that &quot;in
contemporary India and Pakistan, there continues to be widespread
indigenous medical, 'quasi-medical,' and illicit use of both
opium and cannabis&quot; (Chopra &amp; Chopra, 1957: 12-13).
Bouquet notes that hemp resin is occasionally used in the native
medicines of the countries where it is collected. He points
especially to India where, &quot;the medical systems . . . make
much use of cannabis as a sedative, hypnotic, analgesic,
anti-spasmodic and anti-hemorrhoidal&quot; (Bulletin on
Narcotics, 1962:27). </p>

<p>According to the Canadian Commission of Inquiry into the
Non-Medical Use of Drugs:<br>
</p>

<p>There is no currently accepted medical use of cannabis in
North America outside of an experimental context. Although
cannabis has been reported to produce an array of possibly useful
medical effects, these have either not been adequately
investigated, or can be replaced by using other more readily
available and convenient drugs. The natural product's variability
in potency and instability over time are among the factors which
have led to its disfavor in Western 20th century medicine....
cannabis has often been employed in the past, and is currently
used illicitly in North America, to reduce the secondary symptoms
and suffering caused by the flue and the common cold. These . . .
alleged therapeutic properties of cannabis have not been
adequately studied in a scientific context, and their general
medical potential remains a matter of conjecture (1970: 74).<br>
</p>

<p>Similar statements regarding cannabis are to be found in
Marijuana, edited by Erich Goode, and in the textbook
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics by Goodman and Gilman
(1970: 300). Concerning therapeutic uses, the latter states:<br>
</p>

<p>Although cannabis was once used for a wide variety of clinical
disorders and has even been demonstrated to have antibacterial
activity, there are at present no well substantiated indications
for its use. It is no longer an official drug. Preparations are
rarely available (cannabis preparation and synthetic THC are
obtainable only for research purposes), and prescriptions are
regulated by special tax laws.<br>
</p>

<p>Hollister (1971: 27) lists a few difficulties of the
therapeutic use of cannabis: <br>
</p>

<ol>
    <li>The onset of the action of oral doses of THC is often
        rather slow, contrary to that of conventional
        sedative-hypnotics. </li>
    <li>Doses high enough to produce a marked hypnotic effect are
        almost always accompanied by some degree of
        psychotomimetic-like perceptual disorders, which many
        patients might find disagreeable. </li>
    <li>The fine titration of dose required to provide sedative
        effects is likely to be difficult. </li>
    <li>The drug does not have novel effects compared with other
        sedative-hypnotics. <br>
    </li>
</ol>

<p>The Department of Health, Education, and We] fare report to
Congress in 1971, Marihuana and Health, repeats the statement of
the Canadian Interim Report of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use
of Drugs, and states: &quot;There is no currently accepted
medical use of cannabis in the United States outside of an
experimental context&quot; (DHEW: 1971: 27). Allen Geller and
Maxwell Boas (1969: 4) think that cannabis' &quot;unsavory
reputation has largely stymied further research.&quot; </p>

<p>Despite the many statements discounting cannabis' therapeutic
usefulness, some authorities maintain that its medical value
might be reborn through further research and/or use. David
Solomon, in his foreword to The Marihuana Papers (1968: xxi)
argues that: <br>
</p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Marihuana should be accorded the medical status it once
    had in this country as a legitimate prescription item. After
    1937, with the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act and
    subsequent federal and state legislation, it became virtually
    impossible for physicians to obtain or prescribe marihuana
    preparations for their patients. Thus, the medical profession
    was denied access to a versatile pharmaceutical tool with a
    history of therapeutic utility going back thousands of years.<br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>In a 1970 article, &quot;Pot Facing Stringent Scientific
Examination ,&quot; reference is made to Dr. Par who states that
there are three areas in which &quot;chemical and animal
experiments are under way:&quot; </p>

<p>(1) Analgesia-mood elevation plus analgesic power may make
useful drug. </p>

<p>(2) Blood pressure reduction-hypertension may be helped by new
drugs which lower the blood pressure by what seems to be action
on the central nervous system. </p>

<p>(3) Psychotherapeutic-new compounds are antidepressants and
antianxiety drugs (Culliton: 1970).<br>
</p>

<p>Mikuriya cites it studies concerning cannabis funded by the
National Institute of Mental Health in 1961. The studies were
&quot;either specialized animal experiments, part of an
observational sociologic study of a number of drugs, or
explorations of chemical detection methods&quot; (Mikuriya, 1969:
38). </p>

<p>Feinglass has pointed to four general categories into which
the clinical studies of marihuana could be divided (1968:
206-208). They are: </p>

<ol>
    <li>Anticonvulsant effects-treatment of tetanus, convulsions
        of rabies, epilepsy, and infant convulsions. </li>
    <li>Psychotherapeutic actions - appetite-stimulation,
        treatment of depression, and as a sedative and hypnotic
        in reducing anxiety; treatment of addiction. </li>
    <li>Antibiotic properties. </li>
    <li>Pain-affecting power.<br>
    </li>
</ol>

<p>Grinspoon suggests:<br>
</p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Very little research attention has been given to the
    possibility that marihuana might protect some people from
    psychosis. Among users of the drug, the proportion of people
    with neuroses or personality disorders is usually higher than
    in the general population; one might therefore expect the
    incidence of psychoses also to be higher in this group. The
    fact that it is not suggests that for some mentally disturbed
    people, the escape provided by the drug may serve to prevent
    a psychotic breakdown (1969: 24).<br>
    </p>
</blockquote>

<p>Mikuriya lists many possible therapeutic uses of THC and
similar products in his paper &quot;Marihuana in Medicine: Past,
Present and Future.&quot; He includes:<br>
</p>

<p>Analgesic-hypnotic, appetite stimulant, antiepileptic,
antispasmodic, prophylactic and treatment of the neuralgias,
including migraine and tic douloureaux,
antidepressant-tranquillizer, anti-asthmatic, oxytocic,
anti-tussive, topical anesthetic, withdrawal agent for opiate and
alcohol addiction, child birth analgesic, and antibiotic (1968:
39).<br>
</p>

<p><b>China</b> </p>

<p>The oldest known therapeutic description Of cannabis was by
the Emperor Shen-Nung in the 28th century B.C. in China, where
the plant had long been grown for fiber. He prescribed cannabis
for beri-beri, constipation, &quot;female weakness,&quot; gout,
malaria, rheumatism and absentmindedness (Bloomquist, 1968: 19). </p>

<p><b>Egypt</b> </p>

<p>In Egypt, in the 20th century B.C., cannabis was used to treat
sore eyes. Additional medical usage was not reported until much
later. </p>

<p><b>India</b> </p>

<p>Prior to the 10th century B.C., bhang, a cannabis preparation,
was used as an anesthetic and antiphlegmatic in India. In the
second century A.D., a Chinese physician, Hoa-Tho, prescribed it
as an analgesic in surgical procedures (Mikuriya, 1969: 34). </p>

<p>From the 10th century B.C. up to 1945 (and even to the present
time), cannabis has been used in India to treat a wide variety of
human maladies. The drug is highly regarded by some medical
practitioners in that country. </p>

<p>The religious use of cannabis in India is thought to have
preceded its medical use (Blum and Associates, II, 1969: 73;
Snyder, 1970: 125). The religious use of cannabis is to help
&quot;the user to free his mind from worldly distractions and to
concentrate on the Supreme Being&quot; (Barber, 1970: 80). </p>

<p>Cannabis is used in Hindu and Sikh temples and at Mohammedan
shrines. Besides using the drug as an aid to meditation, it is
also used to overcome hunger and thirst by the religious
mendicants. In Nepal, it is distributed on certain feast days at
the temples of all Shiva followers (Blum &amp; Associates, 1969,
11: 63). </p>

<p>The Hindus spoke of the drug as the &quot;heavenly
guide,&quot; &quot;the soother of grief.&quot; Considered holy,
it was described as a sacred grass during the Vedic period (Fort,
1969: 15). A reference to cannabis in Hindu scriptures is the
following: </p>

<p>To the Hindu the hemp plant is holy. A guardian lives in bhang
... Bhang is the joy giver, the sky filer, the heavenly guide,
the poor man's heaven, the soother of grief ... No god or man is
as good as the religious drinker of Mang. The students of the
scriptures of Benares are given bhang before they sit to study.
At Benares, Ujjain and other holy places, yogis take deep
draughts of Mang that they may center their thoughts on the
Eternal . . . By the help of Mang ascetics pass days without food
or drink. The supporting power of Mang has brought many a Hindu
family safe through the miseries of famine (Snyder, 1970: 125).<br>
</p>

<p><b>Greece</b> </p>

<p>In ancient Greece, cannabis was used as a remedy for earache,
edema, and inflammation (Robinson, 1946: 382-383).<br>
</p>

<p><b>Africa</b> </p>

<p>Cannabis was used in Africa to restore appetite and to relieve
pain of hemorrhoids, its antiseptic uses were also known to
certain African native tribes (O'Shaughnessy, 1842: 431). Various
other uses, in a number of countries, included the treatment of
tetanus, hydrophobia, delirium tremens, infantile convulsions,
neuralgia and other nervous disorders, cholera, menorrhagia,
rheumatism, hay fever, asthma, skin diseases, and protracted
labor during childbirth.<br>
</p>

<h3>The 19th Century </h3>

<p>Documents of the 19th century report on the use of cannabis to
control diarrhea in cholera and to stimulate appetite. In his
reports of the late 1830's and early 1840's, O'Shaughnessy (1842:
431) stated that tetanus could be arrested and cured when treated
with extra large doses of cannabis. </p>

<p>John Bell, M.D., Boston, reported enthusiastically in 1857,
about the effects of cannabis in the control of mental and
emotional disorders as opposed to the use of &quot;moral
discipline&quot; to restrain the mentally ill. Similarly, in
1858, Moureau. de Tours reported several case histories of manic
and depressive disorders treated with hashish (Walton, 1938: 3). </p>

<p>The Ohio State Medical Society's Committee on Cannabis Indica,
convened in 1860, reported that their respondents claimed
cannabis successfully treated neuralgic pain, dysmenorhea,
uterine hemorrhage, hysteria, delirium tremens, mania, palsy,
whooping cough, infantile convulsions, asthma, gonorrhea, nervous
rheumatism, chronic bronchitis, muscular spasms, tetanus,
epilepsy and appetite stimulation (McMeens, 1860: 1). </p>

<p>The India Hemp Commission (1894: 174) likewise was informed of
similar medicinal uses for cannabis. Specific reports included
the use of cannabis as an analgesic, a restorer of energy, a
hemostat, an ecbolic, and an antidiaretic. Cannabis was also
mentioned as an aid in treating hay fever, cholera, dysentery,
gonorrhea, diabetes, impotence, urinary incontinence, swelling of
the testicles, granulation of open sores, and chronic ulcers.
Other beneficial effects attributed to cannabis were prevention
of insomnia, relief of anxiety, protection against cholera,
alleviation of hunger and as an aid to concentration of
attention.<br>
</p>

<h3>MEDICAL USES IN THE 20TH CENTURY </h3>

<p>Despite the fact that marihuana was made illegal in the United
States in 1937, research has continued on the medical uses of
marihuana. The findings include various possible medical
applications of cannabis and its chemical derivatives. </p>

<p>One of the most recent and interesting findings (Frank, 1972)
concerns the effect of cannabis in reducing intraocular pressure.
It was found that as the dose of marihuana increased, the
pressure within the eye decreased by up to 30%. This occurred in
normal persons as well as in those with glaucoma, a disease of
the eye in which increased intraocular pressure may cause
blindness. Much more research is necessary in connection with
this experimental clinical finding before final judgment can be
passed on such a possible therapeutic value. </p>

<p>During the past 20 years in western medicine, marihuana has
been assigned antibiotic activity; as a result, several studies
relating to this possibility have been undertaken. H. B. M.
Murphy (1963: 20) reported investigations in Eastern Europe. He
stated that &quot;it is alleged to be active against gram
positive organisms at 1/100,000 dilution, but to be largely
inactivated by plasma, so that prospects for its use appear to
be, confined to E. N. T. (ear, nose and throat) and skin
infections.&quot; </p>

<p>Dr. J. Kabelikovi (1952: 500-503) and his coworkers carried
out tests on rats, which were similar to tests carried out with
penicillin in vitro. The alcohol extract of cannabis was
bacterially effective against many gram-positive and one
gram-negative microorganisms. It was also found that a paste form
of external application was successful. According to Kabelikovi,
&quot;from a study of 2,000 herbs by Czechoslovakian scientists
it was found that cannabis indica (the Indian Hemp) was the most
promising in the realm of antibiotics.&quot; </p>

<p>In a 1959 publication of Pharmacie, Krejci stated: &quot;From
the flowering tips and leaves of hemp, cannabis sativa var indica
bred in Middle Europe, were extracted a phenol and an acid
fraction. From the acid fraction, two acids were obtained, of
which one preserved its antibiotic properties&quot; (p. 349). In
another Czechoslovakian publication, Krejci (1961: 1351-1353)
referred to two additional samples with antibiotic activity. </p>

<p>Sample I in Fig. 1 has been sufficiently identified as
cannabidiolic acid and sample 9 as cannabidiol. Both fractions
show antibiotic activity. The results of tests lead us to
conclude that the antibacterial action of cannabis sativa is not
identical to the hashish effect found, for example, in
tetrahydrocannabinol. However, it was established that cannabis
sativa is effective as an antibiotic for local infections. </p>

<p>Kabelik, Krejci, and Santavy (1960: 13) include in
&quot;Cannabis as a Medicant&quot; the various microorganisms
against which cannabis is effective. </p>

<p>Proof could be furnished that the cannabis extracts produce a
very satisfactory antibacterial effect upon the following
microbes: staphylococcus pyogenes aureus, steptococcus alpha
haemolyticus, streptococcus beta haemolyticus, enterococcus,
diplococcus pneumonia, B. anthracis, and corynebacterium
diptheriae i.e., all of them gram-positive microorganisms.
Noteworthy is the effect upon staphylococcus aureaus strains,
which are resistant to penicillin and to other antibiotics. </p>

<p>These authors also mentioned that E. coli (gramnegative
bacteria) were tested and found to be resistant to the cannabis
extract. One of the conclusions was &quot;the possibility of
utilizing the antibiotics locally without any danger of producing
resistant strains to other antibiotics administered at the same
time throughout treatment&quot; (Kabelik, et al., 1960: 13). </p>

<p>Veliky and Genest in &quot;Suspension Culture of Cannabis
Sativa,&quot; (1970) reported that &quot;the ethanol extract of
cultured cells exhibited antibiotic activity against Bacillus
megatherium, staphlococcus aureaus and escherichia coli&quot; (p.
493). </p>

<p>Other reports said that &quot;a pronounced antibiotic effect
has been observed in South America, where fresh leaves, after
being ground, are used as a poultice for furuncles, and in folk
medicine in Europe for treatment of erysipelas&quot; (Kabelik, et
al., 1960: 8). </p>

<p>This section on the -antibiotic uses of cannabis concludes
with a summary of several reports from various countries. In
Pharmacopee Arabe: &quot;The ground-up seeds are mixed with bread
for people with tuberculosis&quot; (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967:
145). In Czechoslovakia: &quot;A preparation from seed pulp was .
. . introduced by Sirek to act as a roborant diet in treatment of
tuberculosis&quot; (Kabelik, 1960: 8). &quot;In Southern Rhodesia
the plant is used as an African remedy for malaria, anthrax,
sepsis, black water fever, dysentery, blood-poisoning, tropical
quinine-malarial haemoglobinuria, and a wart medicine&quot;
(Watt, 1961: 13). In Argentina: </p>

<p>Cannabis is considered a real panacea for tetanus, colic,
gastralgia, swelling of the liver, gonorrhoea, sterility,
impotency, abortion, tuberculosis of the lungs and asthma ...
even the root-bark has been collected in spring, and employed as
a febrifuge, tonic, for treatment of dysentery and gastralgia,
either pulverized or in form of decoctions. The root when ground
and applied to burns is said to relieve pain. Oil from the seeds
has been frequently used even in treatment of cancer . . .
(Kabelik, 1960: 8).<br>
</p>

<p>In 1949, Davis and Ramsey reported a study of the effect of
THC on epileptic children. &quot;The demonstration of
anticonvulsant activity of the tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
congeners by laboratory tests (Loewe and Goodman, Federation
Proc., 6: 3521 1947) prompted clinical trial in five
institutionalized epileptic children&quot; (David and Ramsey,
1949: 284-285). Of these five children, all had severe
symptomatic grand mal epilepsy with mental retardation; three
also had cerebral palsy; and three had focal seizure activity.
The EEG tracings were reported to be grossly abnormal in all five
children. The results after treatment with homologues of THC,
were reported as follows: </p>

<p>Three children-responded at least as well as to previous
therapy. </p>

<p>Fourth child-almost completely seizure free. Fifth
child-entirely seizure free. </p>

<p>As a result of their study, David and Ramsey (1949: 284-285)
felt that &quot;the cannabinols herein reported deserve further
trial in non-institutionalized epileptics.&quot;<br>
</p>

<p>Dr. Vansim of Edgewood Arsenal has written in a recently
published book &quot;Psychotomimetic Drugs,&quot; that the
synthetic preparations of cannabis are of interest. There are
three areas where they may be of definite use in medicine (Efron,
1969: 333-334). One concerns the use of a cannabis analogue which
Dr. Walter S. Loewe reported very effective in preventing grand
mal seizures if given in small doses. </p>

<p>The second use refers to cannabis as an antidepressant. Straub
(Walton, 1938: 3), Adams (1942: 726-727), and Stockings (1947,
920-922) point to the possible use of cannabis and cannabis
analogues in relieving dysphoria in depressed patients. Other
authors (Parker and Wrigley, 1950: 278-279) had lesser success
but recommended further research in this field. </p>

<p>A report from London in 1968 suggests that cannabis treats the
symptoms and not the cause by focusing the user's attention on
his anxieties and pains without helping him to resolve them
(Report by the Advisory Committee, 1968: 11). </p>

<p>The third use is described by Douthwaite, who used hashish in
1947 &quot;for reducing of anxiety and tension in patients with
duodenal ulcer&quot; (Pond, 1948: 279). </p>

<p>A report in a 1965 issue of Medical News (&quot;Cardiac
Glycocides,&quot; p. 6) suggests cannabis as treatment for a
specific form of malignancy. </p>

<p>Cannabis is recognized as an appetite stimulant, which
suggests that the drug might be useful in the treatment of
pathological loss of appetite known as anorexia nervosa
(Grinspoon, 1969: 21). Similar symptoms exist in terminal cancer
patients who, when treated with cannabis over a short period of
time, demonstrated stimulation of appetite, euphoria, increased
sense of well-being, mild analgesia and an indifference to pain
which reduced the need for opiates (DHEW, 1971: 11). </p>

<p>Cannabis has been recently proposed as an adjunct in the
treatment of alcoholics and drug addicts. Roger Adams (1942:
726-727) and Todd Mikuriya (1970a: 187-191) noted that the
substitution of smoked cannabis for alcohol may have
rehabilitative value for certain alcoholics. </p>

<p>Regarding the use of cannabis analogue in the treatment of
drug, alcohol and depressive state withdrawal, Thompson and
Proctor (1953: 520523) report the following: </p>

<p>Depressive States: </p>

<p>20 cases of neurotic depression-4 improved (20%) </p>

<p>6 cases of psychotic depression-none improved (00%) </p>

<p>Post-Alcoholic Cases: </p>

<p>70 cases--59 reported clinical alleviation of symptoms (84%) </p>

<p>Drug Cases: </p>

<p>6 cases of barbiturate addiction-4 reported amelioration of
symptoms (66%) </p>

<p>4 cases of dilaudid addiction-3 reported alleviation (75%) </p>

<p>2 cases of pantopan and one paregoric addiction-all reported
smooth withdrawal (100%) </p>

<p>12 cases of Demerol addiction-10 withdrawals in one week (83%)
</p>

<p>6 cases of morphine addiction-2 withdrawals without unpleasant
symptoms (33%)<br>
</p>

<p>The doctors concluded that &quot;Pyrahexyl (a synthetic
cannabis-like drug) and related compounds are beneficial in the
treatment of withdrawal symptoms from the use of alcohol to a
marked degree, and in the treatment of withdrawal symptoms from
the use of opiates to a less marked, but still significant
degree&quot; (Thompson &amp; Proctor, 1953:520-523). </p>

<p>Drs. Allentuck and Bowman (1942) undertook a study of the use
of marihuana in the morphine abstinence syndrome. They stated: </p>

<p>A series of cases were selected from among drug addicts
undergoing treatment. . . . Comparative results were chartered
for the gradual withdrawal, total withdrawal, and marihuana
derivative substitution, as methods of treatment. . . . 49
subjects were studied. The results in general, although still
inconclusive, suggest that the marihuana substitution method
ameliorated or eliminated (the symptoms) sooner, the patient was
in a better frame of mind, his spirits elevated, his physical
condition was more rapidly rehabilitated, and he expressed a wish
to resume his occupation sooner (p. 250). <br>
</p>

<p>In his study of the medical application of cannabis for Mayor
LaGuardia's committee, Dr. Samuel Allentuck reported
&quot;favorable results in treating withdrawal of opiate addicts
with tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a powerful purified product of
the hemp plants&quot; (Mikuriya, 1969: 38). </p>

<p>Roger Adams' detailed studies, as reported by Dr. C. K.
Himmelsbach in his 1944 article &quot;Treatment of the Morphine
Abstinence Syndrome with a Synthetic Cannabis-Like Compound&quot;
(1944:26), indicated that &quot;withdrawal manifestations were
considered to be mild. The reported therapeutic value of
marihuana was attributed to improved appetite, greater sleep,
euphoria, and a reduction of the intensity or elimination of
abstinence phenomena.&quot; Himmelsbach, however, had lesser
success when he studied the effect of a &quot;pyrahexyl&quot;
compound on the morphine abstinence syndrome, as noted by his
conclusions that: </p>

<p>(1) Pyrahexyl compound appears to possess considerable
cannabis-like effect when administered orally, but little or none
when given intramuscularly. </p>

<p>(2) When given by mouth In definitely effective amounts
pyrahexyl compound had no appreciable ameliorative effect on the
opiate abstinence syndrome (P. 29).<br>
</p>

<p>The New York City Mayor LaGuardia's Committee on Marihuana
(1944: 147-148) reported two possible therapeutic applications of
marihuana: </p>

<p>The first is the typical euphoria-producing action which might
be applicable in the treatment of various types of mental
depression; the second is the rather unique property which
results in the stimulation of appetite. In the light of this
evidence and in view of the fact that there is a lack of any
substantial Indication of dependence on the drug, It was reasoned
that marihuana might be useful in alleviating the withdrawal
symptoms in drug addicts. However, the studies here described
were not sufficiently complete to establish the value of such
treatment . . . . </p>

<p>A study was then undertaken at Riker's Island (N.Y.)
Penitentiary involving 56 morphine or heroin addicted inmates.
Two groups were equally matched according to age, physical
condition, length and intensity of habit, etc. One group received
no treatment or Magendie's solution, and the other received 15
mg. of THC and/or placebo. </p>

<p>&quot;The impression was gained that those who received
tetrahydrocannabinol had less severe withdrawal symptoms than
those who received no treatment or who were treated with
Magendie's solution&quot; the report stated. However, the report
further said that this alleged therapeutic use of marihuana
should be &quot;investigated under completely controlled
conditions&quot; before meaningful conclusions can be developed
(New York City Mayor, AU: 147-148). </p>

<p>Some reports indicate that cannabis helps relieve labor pains.
Such uses are reported among native tribes in South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia: &quot;The Suto tribe fumigates the parturient
woman to relieve pain;&quot;the Sotho women of Basutoland
&quot;are reported as smoking cannabis to stupefy themselves
during childbirth,&quot; and have also been known to
&quot;administer the ground-up achene with bread or mealiepap to
a child during weaning&quot; (Watt, 1962:13). </p>

<p>The use of cannabis in the treatment of leprosy has been
described in a 1939 dictionary of Malayan medicine: &quot;Seeds
of Hydnocarpus anthelmintim ... form the basis of the Tai Foon
Chee treatment of leprosy. After crushing and sieving, they are
mixed with cannabis indica in the proportion of two parts of the
seeds to one of Indian hemp&quot; (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967:
146). Likewise, Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk quote Pappe that
&quot;the early colonist employed a decoction in the treatment of
chronic cutaneous eruptions, possibly in leprosy (Andrews and
Vinkenoog, 1967: 146). </p>

<p>Kabelik, Krejci, and Santavy have reported favorable results
&quot;in stornatitis aphtosa, gingivitis, and in paradentoses
with a mouthwash of the following composition: Tinct. Cannabis
20.0, Tinct. Chamomillae, Tinct. jernmarum populi (or another tan
for example, Tinct. Gallarum) aa 10.0 to be applied in the form
of sprays or linaments to the inside of the mouth&quot; (Kabelik
et al., 1960: 13). </p>

<p>In reference to the use of cannabis, Chopra and Chopra (1957:
12-13) listed some preparations used in the practice of
indigenous medicine in India in 1957. They summarize their
article &quot;The Use of the Cannabis Drugs in India&quot; (1957:
12-13) by saying: </p>

<p>. . . with regard to the use of cannabis in Indian indigenous
medicine at the present time, it may be said that It was and
still is fairly extensively used in both the Ayurvedle (Hindu)
and Tibbi (Mohammedan) systems of medicine as an anodyne,
hypnotic, analgesic and antispasmodic, and as a remedy for
external application to piles. It is also used in the treatment
of dysmennorhoea, rheumatism, chronic diarrhoea of the sprue
type, gonorrhoea, malaria and mental diseases on the advice of
itinerant practitioners of Indigenous medicine as well as quacks
who roam about the country. For medicinal purposes the drug is
administered by mouth and hardly ever by smoking. </p>

<p>The use of cannabis drugs in indigenous medicine has greatly
declined during recent years for two reasons-firstly, because of
the rapid deterioration of the potency of cannabis drugs in
storage, the specimens available on the market being often Inert
and quite useless; secondly, because a number of potent and
effective drugs of the type used In western medicine are now
available on the market and are used quite extensively by the
practitioners of indigenous medicine in place of cannabis, for
the anodyne, sedative and hypnotic effects. In the rural areas of
India, however, the practitioners of indigenous medicine still
use cannabis quite extensively In their practice.<br>
</p>

<p>The same article lists a variety of uses in which cannabis is
employed therapeutically in veterinary medicine. </p>

<p>Dr. R. N. Chopra (1940: 361) reports the following medicinal
household uses of Indian Hemp:<br>
</p>

<p>The hemp drugs are popularly used as household remedies in the
amelioration of many minor ailments. A mild beverage made from
bhang leaves is believed to sharpen appetite and to help
digestion. Indian hemp Is commonly used as a smoke and as a drink
for its supposed prophylactic value against marihuana in
malarious tracts. Bhang beverages form one of the popular
household remedies for gonorrhoea and dysuria. On account of
their mild diuretic and sedative properties these drinks probably
give a certain amount of symptomatic relief. Likewise, the use of
bhang for dysmenorrhea, asthma, and other spasmodic conditions is
not uncommon. A poultice made from fresh leaves is a common
household remedy for painful affections of the eyes,
conjunctivitis, swollen joints, orchitis, and other acute
inflammatory conditions. <br>
Tuberculosis, anthrax, tetanus, and menstrual cramps are among
the miscellaneous medical uses of cannabis reported. Reports from
Mexico indicate the use of marihuana smoking &quot;to relax and
to endure heat and fatigue&quot; (Mikuriya, 1969: 37). </p>

<p>Kabelik et al. (1960: 13) also discuss other varied uses of
cannabis. <br>
</p>

<p>In human therapy the best results have been obtained with the
following medicaments combined with substances derived from
cannabis: dusting powder together with boric acid (otitis),
ointment (staphylococcus infected wounds, staphylodermia and so
on), ear drops (otitis chron.), alcohol solutions with glycerine
(treatment of rhagades on the nipples of nursing women-prevention
of staphylococcic mastitis,) aqueous emulsions (sinusitis),
dentin powder with the IRC (Isolated Resin from Cannabis)
(caries). The preparations mentioned above have been already
tested clinically, and will eventually be made available for
production. . . . the experiments made in clinical practice,
particularly in stomatology, otorhinolaryngology, gynecology,
dermatology, phisiology, with some pharmaceutical preparations
containing antibacterial substances from cannabis have been
reported. Attention has been drawn to the advantageous
utilization of the active substances from cannabis in veterinary
medicine, and particularly in preventive medicine for
anthropozoonoses.<br>
</p>

<p>Murphy (1963: 20) refers to an article by Lang,
&quot;Treatment of Acute Appendicitis with a Mixture of Ma
Jen,&quot; which says &quot;the drug has apparently been used in
China for the treatment of appendicitis.&quot; The Xosa tribe in
South Africa &quot;employs it for treatment of inflammation of
the feet&quot; (Kabelik et al., 1960: 7), while the Mfengu and
Hottentot use the plant as a snake-bite remedy (Watt, 1962: 13). </p>

<p>Other therapeutic uses attributed to marihuana are for the
treatment of migraine headaches, as an analgesic, and as a
hypnotic. Hollister (1971: 28) stated that &quot;other uses which
have been proposed for marihuana include the treatment of
epilepsy, as prophylaxis for attacks of migraine or facial
neuralgia, or as a sexual stimulant.&quot; <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>