
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-50</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B034-204</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/asap/painmed1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122070233 text/html 354922
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:01:56 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:34:00 GMT
Content-length: 354703
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1">
<title>Pain Medication References - Part 1</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.03z">
</head>

<body>

<p> UI - 000149 </p>

<p> AU - Abram SE </p>

<p> TI - 1992 Bonica Lecture. Advances in chronic pain management
since gate control. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - OBJECTIVE. Two pain treatment systems that developed
soon after the publication of the gate theory are probably a
direct result of its publication: neuraxial opiate administration
and electrical stimulation of the spinal cord and peripheral
nerves and receptors. Although the use of these modalities has
become widespread in managing chronic pain, there is disagreement
about their long-term efficacy. This presentation will attempt to
review the data regarding the mechanisms of action of these
modalities and their efficacy in treating chronic pain of
malignant and nonmalignant origin. DATA SOURCES. Data were
derived almost entirely from original articles reporting
experimental data from both animal and human studies and from
series of patients undergoing treatment with the modalities
reviewed. STUDY SELECTION. Where possible, controlled studies
were selected. However, much of the available data regarding
treatment results are uncontrolled. DATA EXTRACTION AND
SYNTHESIS. Selected data from studies that were felt to be
reasonably well conducted are presented or summarized. Because of
the lack of control groups in many of the clinical trials,
meta-analyses were not carried out. CONCLUSIONS. Long-term spinal
opiate administration has been shown to be more effective than
systemic opiates in some patients with cancer pain, but often
must be combined with local anesthetics to provide satisfactory
pain relief. Loss of effect over time is a significant problem.
Since the identification of spinal opiate receptors and the
introduction of spinally administered narcotics, a number of
other receptors that are important in both sensitization and
suppression of pain projection systems have been characterized.
Agonists and antagonists to many of these receptors are being
developed, and a few are available for clinical trials. Long-term
electrical stimulation of the spinal cord produces substantial
analgesia below the stimulated spinal segments in some patients
with chronic pain. Although initial results are usually
encouraging, long-term efficacy may be disappointing. It is
postulated that analgesia associated with spinal stimulation is
associated with both stimulation of large fiber ascending tracts
and blockade of spinothalamic pathways. Transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation (TENS) has come into widespread use in managing
chronic pain and has had limited trials in cancer pain patients.
It is well accepted by patients and physicians, but clinical
studies of long-term efficacy have yielded variable results. The
analgesic action is probably the result of both large afferent
fiber activation and blockade of peripheral nociceptors.
[References: 99] </p>

<p> SO - Regional Anesthesia 1993;18:66-8<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> UI - 000146 </p>

<p> AU - Bushnell TG </p>

<p> AU - Justins DM </p>

<p> TI - Choosing the right analgesic. A guide to selection.
[Review] </p>

<p> AB - Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience,
unique to each individual patient. In the dynamic processes of
nociceptive stimulation, signal transmission, central decoding
and interpretation there are many potential sites for
pharmacological intervention, and there are many drugs which will
produce analgesia. An analgesic 'ladder' has been proposed for
rational pain relief in cancer and a similar concept should be
used in all forms of acute and chronic pain. Continuing research
and drug development undoubtedly extends our understanding, but
consistent improvement in our clinical ability to relieve pain
depends more on our willingness to consider the need of each
patient individually, to tailor the drug, route and mode of
administration to that patient's requirements, and then to
monitor on the basis of the response of the patient to the
treatment. [References: 27] </p>

<p> SO - Drugs 1993;46:394-40<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> TI - Decision-making in the opioid therapy of cancer pain:
interim analysis of a prospective survey </p>

<p> (Meeting abstract) </p>

<p> AB - Sequential trials of opioid drugs or routes of
administration are frequently required to optimize the balance
between analgesia and adverse effects. Neither the clinical
factors that determine the choice of drug or route nor the
variability in patient (pt) response have been studied
previously. To assess these phenomena, we are evaluating pts
referred to the Pain Service using a new instrument completed by
the treating physician that records reason(s) for referral,
pain-related data, and reason(s) for change(s) in analgesic
regimen. To date, 25 consecutive pts with advanced cancer (11
males and 14 females; median age 51 yr, range 31-82) have been
followed until discharge (n=23) or death (n=2). The reason(s) for
referral included uncontrolled pain despite analgesic therapy
(68%), difficulties in pain assessment (33%), and analgesic
toxicity with inadequate (33%) or adequate (11%) analgesia. All
pts had received previous opioid trials (median 3, range 1-6).
Following referral, a total of 45 changes in either drug, route,
or both were evaluable. Two pts died and 13 were discharged
during the initial therapeutic trial. Ten required additional
trials to achieve an acceptable balance between pain relief and
adverse effects: 5 required 2 trials, 2 required 3 trials, and 3
required 4 or more sequential trials. The major factors that
influenced opioid selection were previously well tolerated (48%),
no known prior dose-limiting toxicity (51%), and easy to titrate
(56%). </p>

<p> Convenience of formulations (24%) was associated only with
the selection of morphine, whereas concerns regarding renal
function (8%) and drug metabolites (14%) were associated with the
selection of hydromorphone. The major reasons for the choice of a
parenteral rather than oral route were the need for very rapid
analgesic effect (66%), inability to swallow (31%), impaired
intestinal function (25%) and intolerance of po administered
drugs (18%). In the 2 cases in which spinal route was selected,
dose- limiting toxicity with systemic administration was the
compelling consideration. In 6 cases, an initial parenteral route
was changed to the oral route prior to discharge; the need for
rapid analgesic effect was a reason for the first selection, and
resolution of that need and improved convenience were the reasons
for the change. This interim analysis illustrates (1) the large
variability in response to different opioids and routes of
administration; (2) the potential utility of sequential
therapeutic trials; and (3) the likely existence of trends in the
rationale for the selection of opioid therapies, enhanced
understanding of which may improve therapeutic decision making AD
- Pain Service AD - Dept. of Neurology AD - Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center AD - New York AD - NY 10021 UI -
93695900 </p>

<p> SO - Proc Annu Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1993;12:A1502-A150<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000147 </p>

<p> AU - Dixon BA </p>

<p> TI - Institutional survey of nurse anesthesia practice in
patients receiving opioids via patient- </p>

<p> controlled analgesia </p>

<p> AB - This preliminary study determined certified registered
nurse anesthetist (CRNA) practice experience and educational
needs in the preoperative evaluation of patients using
patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) for chronic and cancer pain
management. A convenience sample (N = 29) of CRNAs practicing in
a university teaching hospital completed the surveys developed by
the investigator. Survey items related to CRNA experience with
management of patients using PCA preoperatively, PCA modes of
opioid delivery, and use of adjuvant medication for chronic and
cancer pain patients. Results of the study indicated that 79% of
CRNAs reported experience in administration of anesthesia to one
or more patients who used PCA preoperatively. However, only 32%
of CRNAs surveyed reported knowledge of the modes of opioid
delivery available. Results also indicated that 48% of CRNAs were
not familiar with adjuvant medications (ie, tricyclic
antidepressants, benzodiazepines, steroids, and anticonvulsants),
which are often prescribed in combination with opioids in chronic
pain management. The respondents reported use of a variety of
methods in handling opioid and infusion devices for patients
using PCA preoperatively. Fifty-two percent of CRNAs disconnected
the infusion and discarded the opioid preoperatively. Fourteen
percent reported leaving the PCA device connected to the patient
for use perioperatively or for continued pain management
postoperatively. Based upon the findings of this preliminary
study, CRNA education in management techniques for the use of PCA
infusions in chronic and cancer pain is recommended </p>

<p> SO - Nurse Anesthesia 1993;4:112-11<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> TI - Flupirtine. A review of its pharmacological properties,
and therapeutic efficacy in pain states. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Flupirtine is a novel non-opiate centrally acting
analgesic agent with muscle relaxant properties, advocated for
use in a number of pain states. Preliminary evidence suggests
that flupirtine 100 to 200mg orally or 150mg rectally 3 to 4
times daily (maximum daily dose 600mg) is more effective than
placebo in relieving moderate acute pain of various types. For
the relief of pain due to surgery, traumatic injury, dental
procedures, headache/migraine and abdominal spasms, flupirtine
has proved at least as effective as the opiate analgesics
codeine, dihydrocodeine and pentazocine, the nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agents suprofen, diclofenac and ketoprofen, as
well as dipyrone and paracetamol (acetaminophen). Although
evidence to support a role in the treatment of chronic pain is
limited, flupirtine has been found as effective as pentazocine in
short term trials of patients with muscular or neuralgiform pain,
dysmenorrhoea, soft tissue rheumatism or cancer pain. The safety
profile of flupirtine has not yet been fully established,
although initial evidence suggests that adverse reactions, while
frequent, are usually minor in nature. The most common reactions
are drowsiness, dizziness, dry mouth and various gastrointestinal
complaints. In comparison with opiate drugs, flupirtine appears
to produce fewer central nervous system effects, no respiratory
or cardiovascular depression, and no overt tolerance or physical
dependence on prolonged administration. If these initially
favourable results are confirmed in larger long term trials, then
flupirtine would appear to represent an effective analgesic for
the relief of moderate pain, particularly that of musculoskeletal
origin. </p>

<p> [References: 75] </p>

<p> SO - Drugs 1993;45:548-56<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> AU - Goldman B </p>

<p> TI - Use and abuse of opioid analgesics in chronic pain.
[Review] </p>

<p> AB - Primary care physicians are frequently required to treat
patients with chronic debilitating pain. Opioid analgesics can
successfully manage chronic pain. To prescribe opioid analgesics
effectively, physicians must identify appropriate patients.
Several methods can be used to identify and distinguish
appropriate patients, addicted patients, and for-profit drug
seekers. [References: 15] </p>

<p> SO - Canadian Family Physician 1993;39:571-57<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> AU - Helme RD </p>

<p> AU - Katz B </p>

<p> TI - Management of chronic pain. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - The principles of chronic pain management in the elderly
are the same as in younger people; whenever possible, the cause
of the pain should be identified and eradicated. However, older
people are more likely to suffer pain from incurable conditions,
and the emotional component of the suffering may be considerable.
Treatment options include analgesics, opiates, antidepressants
and anticonvulsants as well as psychological strategies, physical
strategies such as exercise and transcutaneous electrical nerve
stimulation (TENS), and surgery. Improvement of function may be a
more important treatment goal than relief of pain. </p>

<p> [References: 15] </p>

<p> SO - Medical Journal of Australia 1993;158:478-48<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> AU - Kerrick JM </p>

<p> AU - Fine PG </p>

<p> AU - Lipman AG </p>

<p> AU - Love G </p>

<p> TI - Low-dose amitriptyline as an adjunct to opioids for
postoperative orthopedic pain: A placebo-controlled trial </p>

<p> AB - IN: U Minnesota Coll of Pharmacy, Minneapolis, US LA:
English AB: Investigated the usefulness of a tricyclic
antidepressant in the management of chronic pain. 28 patients
(aged 38-79 yrs) undergoing surgery completed a randomized,
placebo-controlled, double-blinded trial of 50 mg of
amitriptyline (AMT) po HS on postoperative days 1, 2, and 3 while
using patient-controlled morphine or meperidine analgesia. Visual
analog and numerical verbal pain ratings, sedation scores, sleep
quantity/quality scores, and sense of well-being scores were
assessed twice daily on each of the days succeeding AMT/placebo
use. AMT was no different than placebo in altering the majority
of postoperative symptom variables studied in the sample study
population but caused no significant adverse effects. There does
not appear to be an opioid-sparing effect nor an improvement in
general well-being. Results of this study do not support general
use of AMT as a coanalgesic. (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1993
American Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: adjunctive
low dose amitriptyline with patient controlled morphine or
meperidine analgesia; 38-79 yr olds with postoperative orthopedic
chronic pain AN: 80-34733 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1993;52:325-33<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> AU - Kong H </p>

<p> AU - Raynor K </p>

<p> AU - Yasuda K </p>

<p> AU - Moe ST </p>

<p> AU - Portoghese PS </p>

<p> AU - Bell GI </p>

<p> AU - Reisine T </p>

<p> TI - A single residue, aspartic acid 95, in the delta opioid
receptor specifies selective high affinity agonist binding </p>

<p> AB - The enkephalins, dynorphins, and endorphins are
endogenous opioids which function as neurotransmitters,
neuromodulators, and hormones and are involved in the perception
of pain, modulation of behavior, and regulation of autonomic and
neuroendocrine function. Pharmacological studies have defined
three classes of opioid receptors, designated as delta, kappa,
and mu. To investigate mechanisms by which agonists and
antagonists interact with the delta opioid receptor, we have
substituted aspartic acid 95 in the transmembrane segment 2 of
the cloned mouse delta opioid receptor with an asparagine (D95N).
The D95N mutant receptor had reduced affinity for delta
receptor-selective agonists such as enkephalin,
[D-Pen2,D-Pen5]enkephalin and [D-Ser2,Leu5]enkephalin-Thr6 such
that it did not bind these peptides even at micromolar
concentrations. The binding of delta-selective non-peptide
agonists was also reduced. In contrast, the delta
receptor-selective antagonists, such as naltrindole, the
benzofuran analog of naltrindole, and 7-benyllidenenaltrexone,
bound equally well to the wild-type and mutant receptor.
Similarly, non- </p>

<p> selective opioid agonists such as bremazocine and
buprenorphine, which interact with delta, kappa, and mu </p>

<p> opioid receptors, showed no difference in binding to the
wild-type and mutant delta receptor. The D95N </p>

<p> mutant remained coupled to G proteins, and the receptor was
functionally active since it mediated agonist </p>

<p> inhibition of cAMP accumulation. These results indicate that
selective agonists and antagonists bind </p>

<p> differently to the delta receptor and show that Asp-95
contributes to high affinity delta-selective agonist </p>

<p> binding. The identification of a key residue involved in
selective agonist binding to the delta opioid receptor </p>

<p> will facilitate the development of novel therapeutic reagents
that can be used for the treatment of chronic </p>

<p> pain and other conditions. </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Biological Chemistry 1993;268:23055-2305<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000150 </p>

<p> AU - Krames ES </p>

<p> TI - Intrathecal infusional therapies for intractable pain:
patient management guidelines </p>

<p> AB - This article focuses on appropriate patient selection
for and management of patients selected for </p>

<p> continuous spinal infusional opioid therapy. Patients with
cancer-related pain who have undergone sequential </p>

<p> strong opioid drug trials, who have intractable, unmanageable
side effects, and who have undergone a </p>

<p> successful spinal opioid efficacy trial are candidates for
implantable spinal infusional therapy. Patients with </p>

<p> noncancer-related chronic pain, who have failed all
conventional syndrome-specific therapies before </p>

<p> neuroablative surgical procedures, including sequential
strong opioid drug trials, who have </p>

<p> intractable, unmanageable side effects, and who have
undergone successful spinal opioid efficacy trial </p>

<p> are deemed candidates for implantable spinal infusional
therapy. Patients with chronic noncancer- </p>

<p> related pain and patient with cancer-related pain who have
life expectancies greater than 3 mo all have </p>

<p> implanted programmable infusion pumps. Patients with
cancer-related pain who have life expectancies less </p>

<p> than 3 mo have implanted permanent epidural catheters
connected to external pump systems. Management </p>

<p> guidelines for complications of therapy broadly categorized
as surgical, mechanical, and pharmacologic are </p>

<p> presented. </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pain &amp; Symptom Management 1993;8:36-4<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000151 </p>

<p> AU - Lipchik GL </p>

<p> AU - Milles K </p>

<p> AU - Covington EC </p>

<p> TI - The effects of multidisciplinary pain management
treatment on locus of control and pain beliefs </p>

<p> in chronic non-terminal pain </p>

<p> AB - OBJECTIVE: To determine whether chronic pain patients'
beliefs and attributions about pain control </p>

<p> are amenable to change in a short-term inpatient
multidisciplinary pain management program. DESIGN: </p>

<p> Non-randomized consecutive sample with prospective,
before-after treatment. SETTING: Pain- </p>

<p> management, tertiary care center in a major U.S. city.
PATIENTS: All adult patients (n = 50) who were </p>

<p> treated in an inpatient multidisciplinary pain management
center were contrasted with those of a control </p>

<p> group of 46 adult patients who were treated in an outpatient
pain center. OUTCOME MEASURES: Pain </p>

<p> Locus of Control Scale, the Pain Beliefs and Perceptions
Inventory, subjective pain intensity, and medication </p>

<p> usage were measured before and after treatment. RESULTS:
Statistically significant posttreatment changes </p>

<p> were found for the treatment group, but not the control
group. Patients who completed the inpatient pain </p>

<p> management program reported significant decreases in
subjective pain intensity despite discontinuation of </p>

<p> narcotic analgesics. Patients in the treatment group showed
an increased sense of personal control over their </p>

<p> pain and substantial decreases in attributions of pain
control to powerful others and chance. Patients in the </p>

<p> treatment group also showed a significant reduction in their
endorsement of the belief that their pain was a </p>

<p> mysterious phenomenon. CONCLUSIONS: Chronic non-terminal pain
patients' beliefs about pain and </p>

<p> attributions of pain control are amenable to change in a
short-term inpatient multidisciplinary pain </p>

<p> management program. These results suggest that an intensive
multidisciplinary program involving </p>

<p> psychotherapy might be more effective in treating chronic
pain patients similar to those in this study than </p>

<p> outpatient treatment without psychotherapy. </p>

<p> SO - Clinical Journal of Pain 1993;9:49-5<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000206 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Therapeutic use of opioids: prescribing and control
issues </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] AD - Department of
Neurology AD -Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer </p>

<p> Center AD - New York 10021 UI -94019720 </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Res Monogr 1993;131:35-5<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000254 </p>

<p> AU - Weissman DE </p>

<p> TI - Doctors, opioids, and the law: the effect of controlled
substances regulations on cancer pain </p>

<p> management </p>

<p> AB - AB - Opioids are underused by physicians for the
treatment of cancer pain. Reasons for this include </p>

<p> excessive concern about opioid-induced respiratory
depression, tolerance, and addiction, as well as the </p>

<p> impact of controlled substances regulations. The negative
impact of controlled substances regulations on </p>

<p> patient care is not well understood. This paper reviews the
historical basis and current structure of the </p>

<p> regulatory system. Four potential ways in which controlled
substances regulations and policies can affect </p>

<p> medical care are discussed: (1) by placing restrictions on
physician practice, (2) by affecting patient access to </p>

<p> opioids, (3) by stigmatizing patients, and (4) indirectly
through physicians' perceptions of regulations, </p>

<p> resulting in modified medical practices. Physicians are urged
to work with state regulatory agencies to </p>

<p> identify regulatory impediments to appropriate patient care.
AD - Division of Cancer and Blood Diseases </p>

<p> AD - Medical College of Wisconsin AD -Milwaukee UI - 93235094
</p>

<p> SO - Semin Oncol 1993;20:53-5<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000154 </p>

<p> AU - Wilder-Smith CH </p>

<p> TI - [Non-opioids in pain therapy: current perspectives].
[German] </p>

<p> AB - Increasing knowledge of the mechanisms underlying
nociceptive processing are making a more </p>

<p> rationale approach to pain treatment possible. Recent
research has confirmed relevant differences between </p>

<p> NSAIDs and the direct analgesic action of several
psychotropic drugs. Alpha 2-adrenergic agonists are being </p>

<p> clinically tested and have shown considerable analgesic
activity in various pain states. Simultaneous </p>

<p> treatment of pain with complementary analgesics, i.e.
&quot;balanced analgesia&quot;, seems to be a logical approach in
</p>

<p> the light of the close interactions between the different
nociceptive pathways. The indications for the use of </p>

<p> known analgesics in chronic pain therapy are insufficiently
researched. </p>

<p> SO - Schweizerische Rundschau fur Medizin Praxis
1993;82:271-27 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000172 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> AU - Willweber-Strumpf A </p>

<p> TI - Opiophobia and cancer pain in Europe [see comments] </p>

<p> SO - Lancet 1993;341:1075-107<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000155 </p>

<p> AU - Beltrutti DP </p>

<p> AU - Ardizzone A </p>

<p> AU - Parola P </p>

<p> TI - Continuous spinal analgesia by means of
micropumps[correction of micropumpus]: a report of </p>

<p> 163 chronic pain patients </p>

<p> AB - Chronic pain in patients suffering from advanced cancer
as well as unbearable chronic pain states </p>

<p> depending on non-malignant pathology have always represented
a test bench to verify results of advanced </p>

<p> therapeutical programs as to more traditional approaches. The
Authors present their experience resulting </p>

<p> from longterm spinal infusion with peridural catheters
connected to portable micropumps for the continuous </p>

<p> administration of analgesic solutions. The availability of
portable micropumps, a better understanding of </p>

<p> spinal opioid receptors and advances in pharmacokinetics of
opiate analgesics led in these years to a </p>

<p> tremendous improvement of pain control possibilities and of
the quality of life of patients. </p>

<p> SO - Panminerva Medica 1992;34:128-13<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000194 </p>

<p> AU - Brescia FJ </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> AU - Ryan M </p>

<p> AU - Krasnoff L </p>

<p> AU - Gray G </p>

<p> TI - Pain, opioid use, and survival in hospitalized patients
with advanced cancer </p>

<p> AB - AB - PURPOSE: Pain is a common and feared symptom for
patients with incurable cancer. </p>

<p> Comprehensive assessment provides the foundation for
effective pain management, and data that clarify the </p>

<p> relationship between pain and other relevant factors also
facilitate this process. The main objective of the </p>

<p> study was to develop a clinical data base for advanced cancer
patients and to survey data to determine (1) </p>

<p> pain severity at admission, (2) opioid use at admission, (3)
change in opioid use during the hospital stay, and </p>

<p> (4) survival in the hospital. PATIENTS AND METHODS:
Information was collected prospectively on </p>

<p> 1,103 patients admitted and on 1,017 patients who died within
6 months of the study's end. Demographic </p>

<p> and clinical data were recorded 72 hours after admission and
soon after death or discharge. RESULTS: </p>

<p> Seventy-three percent of patients had pain at admission.
Cancer of the cervix was frequently (68%) </p>

<p> associated with severe pain, as were prostate (52%) and
rectal/sigmoid tumors (49%). Severe pain was more </p>

<p> probable in those with bone metastasis, those admitted from
home, and in those younger than 55 years of </p>

<p> age. The majority (71.7%) of patients had a stable dosing
pattern, and only 4.2% of the patients required </p>

<p> dose increases of at least 10% per day. CONCLUSION: This
study demonstrated the wide variability in </p>

<p> opioid doses required. No reliable predictor of opioid
requirement was identified, and this lack of </p>

<p> predictability of cancer pain severity underscores the need
for ongoing assessment. AD - Calvary Hospital </p>

<p> AD - Bronx AD - NY 10461 UI - 92092056 </p>

<p> SO - J Clin Oncol 1992;10:149-15<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000211 </p>

<p> AU - Cherny NI </p>

<p> AU - Thaler HT </p>

<p> AU - Friedlander-Klar H </p>

<p> AU - Lapin J </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - OPIOID RESPONSIVENESS OF NEUROPATHIC CANCER PAIN:
COMBINED ANALYSIS </p>

<p> OF SINGLE-DOSE ANALGESIC TRIALS (MEETING ABSTRACT) </p>

<p> AB - AB - Neuropathic pain resulting from damage to the
central or peripheral nervous system is common </p>

<p> in cancer patients (pts). Controversy exists about the opioid
responsiveness of this type of pain. Some </p>

<p> clinicians have suggested that these pains may be inherently
resistant to opioid analgesia; others have </p>

<p> postulated that the neuropathic mechanism may relatively
diminish the analgesic response. To assess these </p>

<p> hypotheses, we performed a combined analysis of the results
from 4 controlled single-dose analgesic trials </p>

<p> performed from 1978 to 1982, with morphine or heroin at high
and low doses. Analgesic response was </p>

<p> assessed serially over a 6-hr interval using a visual analog
scale and was summarized as a total pain relief </p>

<p> (TOTPAR) score. A total of 194 pts with chronic cancer pain
were included; there were 482 administrations </p>

<p> of study drug. Median age was 52 yr (20-79). Information
about characteristics of pts' pain recorded at the </p>

<p> time of study was reviewed independently by 2 experienced
pain clinicians who grouped each case according </p>

<p> to inferred pain mechanism (neuropathic, nociceptive or
mixed) and the degree of confidence in the inferred </p>

<p> mechanism (definite vs probable/possible). When initial
groupings differed, they were rereviewed with a </p>

<p> third investigator and disagreement was resolved by
consensus. Cases were grouped as follows: nociceptive </p>

<p> pain only (n=210), neuropathic pain only (n=51) and mixed
(n=221). Analgesic responsiveness was </p>

<p> evaluated comparing TOTPAR scores using the Student's t-test.
TOTPAR for the entire group was not </p>

<p> predicted by the specific drug (morphine vs heroin), but the
dose (high vs low) was a significant predictor of </p>

<p> TOTPAR. Placebo TOTPAR response was estimated at 5.1,
significantly less than the mean observed with </p>

<p> any group. The primary analysis for the study compared
analgesic response of pts having any neuropathic </p>

<p> component with those with only nociceptive pain. Results are
presented in a table. In a covariate analysis </p>

<p> that adjusted for prior opioid exposure and other prognostic
factors, the opioid responsiveness of </p>

<p> neuropathic pain was significant and was less than that of
purely nociceptive pain. These data support the </p>

<p> postulate that opioid responsiveness is a continuum and that
it is diminished by the neuropathic mechanism </p>

<p> AD - Pain Service AD - Dept. of Neurology AD - Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center AD - New </p>

<p> York AD - NY 10021 UI - 92682059 </p>

<p> SO - Proc Annu Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1992;11:A1330-A133<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000188 </p>

<p> AU - Culpepper-Morgan JA </p>

<p> AU - Inturrisi CE </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> AU - Foley K </p>

<p> AU - Houde RW </p>

<p> AU - Marsh F </p>

<p> AU - Kreek MJ </p>

<p> TI - Treatment of opioid-induced constipation with oral
naloxone: a pilot study </p>

<p> AB - Opioids cause constipation by binding to specific opioid
receptors in the enteric and central nervous </p>

<p> systems. First-pass glucuronidation limits systemic
bioavailability of oral naloxone. This study was designed </p>

<p> to determine if oral naloxone could reverse opioid-induced
constipation without precipitating abstinence or </p>

<p> recrudescence of pain in opioid-dependent individuals.
Concentrations of unmetabolized and total naloxone, </p>

<p> including naloxone glucuronide, were measured by
radioimmunoassay. A dose-related increase in symptoms </p>

<p> of laxation resulted in all three opioid-dependent patients
studied that paralleled the increase in active and </p>

<p> total naloxone plasma levels. Withdrawal symptoms occurred
with plasma naloxone area under the plasma </p>

<p> concentration-time curves above 550 ng.min/ml and with dosing
intervals less than 3 hours. Peak plasma </p>

<p> levels did not predict withdrawal. Oral naloxone ameliorates
opioid-induced constipation in opioid- </p>

<p> dependent persons. Titration of dose to a maximum of 12 mg at
least 6 hours apart may be needed to avoid </p>

<p> adverse reactions. </p>

<p> SO - Clin Pharmacol Ther 1992;52:90-9<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000164 </p>

<p> AU - Dimski DS </p>

<p> AU - Hebert LA </p>

<p> AU - Sedmak D </p>

<p> AU - Ogrodowski JL </p>

<p> AU - Elkhammas EA </p>

<p> AU - Tesi RJ </p>

<p> AU - Gold M </p>

<p> AU - Courville CS </p>

<p> TI - Renal autotransplantation in the loin pain-hematuria
syndrome: a cautionary note </p>

<p> AB - The current literature suggests that renal
autotransplantation is nearly uniformly effective in </p>

<p> controlling the severe and debilitating pain of the loin
pain-hematuria syndrome (LPHS). However, we </p>

<p> report two patients thought to have this syndrome in whom
renal autotransplantation did not result in long- </p>

<p> term control of pain. In case 1, autotransplantation resulted
in immediate cessation of pain; however, the </p>

<p> flank pain recurred 7 1/2 months later. The recurrent pain
was also severe and debilitating, requiring narcotic </p>

<p> medications for control. In case 2, autotransplantation of
the left kidney resulted in chronic pain in the left </p>

<p> pelvic area, the site of the autotransplanted kidney. In
addition, the patient continued to experience chronic </p>

<p> discomfort in the left flank and along the flank incision.
One year after autotransplantation, the patient still </p>

<p> requires multiple daily doses of narcotic medications for
pain control. Our two patients represent the 13th </p>

<p> and 14th reported patients subjected to renal
autotransplantation for management of LPHS. They represent </p>

<p> only the third and fourth reported patients with recurrence
of pain after renal autotransplantation. Because </p>

<p> studies with negative results are less likely to be reported
in the literature than studies with positive results, it </p>

<p> is possible that the literature overestimates the
effectiveness of renal autotransplantation in the LPHS. To </p>

<p> assess the true effectiveness of renal autotransplantation in
LPHS, a survey of patients with LPHS who have </p>

<p> undergone renal autotransplantation needs to be performed. </p>

<p> SO - American Journal of Kidney Diseases 1992;20:180-18<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000016 </p>

<p> AU - Eisele JH </p>

<p> AU - Grigsby EJ </p>

<p> AU - Dea G </p>

<p> TI - Clonazepam treatment of myoclonic contractions
associated with high-dose opioids: Case report </p>

<p> AB - IN: U California-Davis, Sacramento, US LA: English AB:
Presents the case of a 30-yr-old man with </p>

<p> chronic abdominal pain who was treated with high doses of iv
hydromorphone and developed severe and </p>

<p> frequent myoclonic contractions. Several medications
including lorazepam failed to control the contractions; </p>

<p> however, clonazepam in normal doses reduced the myoclonus
dramatically. (PsycLIT Database Copyright </p>

<p> 1992 American Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP:
clonazepam; hydromorphone induced myoclonic </p>

<p> contractions; 30 yr old male with chronic abdominal pain;
case report AN: 79-44237 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1992;49:231-23<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000161 </p>

<p> AU - Fishbain DA </p>

<p> AU - Rosomoff HL </p>

<p> AU - Rosomoff RS </p>

<p> TI - Detoxification of nonopiate drugs in the chronic pain
setting and clonidine opiate detoxification. </p>

<p> [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Although the pain physician is most familiar with the
treatment of the opiate withdrawal syndrome, </p>

<p> other drugs are abused by the chronic pain patient. The pain
physician should then be familiar with the </p>

<p> withdrawal syndromes associated with other drug groups. The
withdrawal syndromes associated with </p>

<p> hypnosedatives, psychotomimetics, nicotine, stimulants, ergot
alkaloids, beta adrenergic blocking agents, </p>

<p> antidepressants, muscle relaxants, and alpha-adrenergic
agonists are described. Drug detoxification protocols </p>

<p> for these drugs are reviewed. Additionally, the rationale for
clonidine opiate detoxification is discussed, and </p>

<p> current clonidine detoxification protocols are reviewed.
[References: 89] </p>

<p> SO - Clinical Journal of Pain 1992;8:191-20<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000207 </p>

<p> AU - Galer BS </p>

<p> AU - Coyle N </p>

<p> AU - Pasternak GW </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Individual variability in the response to different
opioids: report of five cases </p>

<p> AB - AB - Although it is widely appreciated that patients can
demonstrate highly variable responses to </p>

<p> different opioid drugs, there have been few detailed
descriptions of this phenomenon. To illustrate this </p>

<p> variability, we present 5 patients, 4 with cancer pain and 1
with non- malignant pain, who underwent dose </p>

<p> titration with more than 1 opioid and developed markedly
different responses to each. In every case, dose </p>

<p> escalation led to successful treatment with 1 opioid and to
intolerable side effects without adequate relief </p>

<p> with others. The existence of this individual variability in
the response to different opioids has important </p>

<p> implications for both clinical practice and current
understanding of opioid pharmacology in man. It </p>

<p> contradicts the view that any opioid is inherently more
efficacious than any other, suggests that patients who </p>

<p> fail to obtain adequate pain relief at maximally tolerated
doses of 1 opioid may benefit from an alternative </p>

<p> drug, and underscores the potential importance of genetic
factors as a determinant of opioid response. AD - </p>

<p> Department of Neurology AD - Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center AD - New York AD - NY 10021 </p>

<p> UI - 92278827 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1992;49:87-9<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000019 </p>

<p> AU - Hamilton J </p>

<p> AU - Edgar L </p>

<p> TI - A survey examining nurses' knowledge of pain control </p>

<p> AB - IN: Victoria General Hosp, Halifax, NS, Canada LA:
English AB: Surveyed 318 nurses at an acute </p>

<p> care teaching hospital to identify their knowledge of pain
assessment and management. Two pain </p>

<p> instruments by M. McCaffery et al (1990) were combined and
adapted for use. The final instrument, the Pain </p>

<p> Control Survey, was administered to Ss. Ss lacked knowledge
and understanding of opioid addiction, </p>

<p> equivalent dosing, properties of opioids, and differences in
acute and chronic pain. No significant differences </p>

<p> were found in the scores by level of educational preparation
or by years of experience. Presentation of the </p>

<p> results unit by unit demonstrated that the instrument was
suitable as an educational tool as well as an </p>

<p> effective strategy to introduce Ss to nursing research.
(PsycLIT Database Copyright 1992 American </p>

<p> Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: knowledge of
pain assessment &amp; management with narcotic </p>

<p> opioid analgesics; nurses at acute care teaching hospital AN:
79-29038 </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pain and Symptom Management 1992;7:18-2<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000165 </p>

<p> AU - Litman RS </p>

<p> AU - Shapiro BS </p>

<p> TI - Oral patient-controlled analgesia in adolescents </p>

<p> AB - Adolescence is a time when concerns about independence
and self-control are of paramount </p>

<p> importance. These developmental issues must be considered
when planning treatment for adolescents with </p>

<p> acute or chronic pain. Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) is
a method of administering opioids that </p>

<p> reinforces patient autonomy. Traditionally, opioids given by
PCA are administered via the intravenous or </p>

<p> subcutaneous route. Issues of autonomy and control, however,
are no less important for patients receiving </p>

<p> oral opioids. To augment patient autonomy, we have provided
oral medication kept at the bedside (oral </p>

<p> bedside PCA) for adolescents with diverse pain problems. We
describe our selection criteria and methods for </p>

<p> using oral bedside PCA with adolescents and present 4
patients who used this method. </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pain &amp; Symptom Management 1992;7:78-8<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000162 </p>

<p> AU - McQuay HJ </p>

<p> AU - Jadad AR </p>

<p> AU - Carroll D </p>

<p> AU - Faura C </p>

<p> AU - Glynn CJ </p>

<p> AU - Moore RA </p>

<p> AU - Liu Y </p>

<p> TI - Opioid sensitivity of chronic pain: a patient-controlled
analgesia method </p>

<p> AB - Twenty-two patients with chronic pain of malignant or
nonmalignant origin were given intravenous </p>

<p> morphine by patient-controlled analgesia. A prestudy judgment
was made from the characteristics of the pain </p>

<p> as to whether it was nociceptive or neuropathic. Analgesic
efficacy was assessed by a nurse-observer; </p>

<p> adverse events were noted and plasma morphine and metabolitie
concentrations measured. Three categories </p>

<p> of opioid response were distinguished. Good responders
obtained &gt; 70 mm relief on the visual analogue </p>

<p> scale, with minimal or manageable adverse events. Moderate
responders obtained &lt; 70 but &gt; 30 mm relief </p>

<p> with more problematic adverse events, and poor responders had
&lt; 30 mm relief with troublesome adverse </p>

<p> events. This method for the study of opioid sensitivity
allowed a wide dosage range to be studied. The </p>

<p> simultaneous analgesic and adverse event measurements showed
that the spectrum of observed response was </p>

<p> wide, and response category could be judged for the majority
by 4 h. In those with poor or moderate </p>

<p> response, adverse event severity limited further dose
increment. The relationship between pain </p>

<p> characteristics and response showed that some pains judged to
be neuropathic had a good response to opioid </p>

<p> (5/13), and some pains judged to be nociceptive did not
(5/14). The study suggests that the pattern of </p>

<p> response is not as black and white as the prediction of good
response from nociceptive pain and poor from </p>

<p> neuropathic pain would suggest, although nociceptive pain was
more likely than neuropathic pain to show a </p>

<p> good response. For the moderate responders opioid titration
may, in the absence of other effective </p>

<p> treatments, be useful, but the analgesic endpoint may not be
totally satisfactory. The method provides an </p>

<p> operational definition of opioid sensitivity. </p>

<p> SO - Anaesthesia 1992;47:757-76<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000169 </p>

<p> AU - Moulin DE </p>

<p> AU - Johnson NG </p>

<p> AU - Murray-Parsons N </p>

<p> AU - Geoghegan MF </p>

<p> AU - Goodwin VA </p>

<p> AU - Chester MA </p>

<p> TI - Subcutaneous narcotic infusions for cancer pain:
treatment outcome and guidelines for use [see </p>

<p> comments] </p>

<p> AB - OBJECTIVE: To provide guidelines for the institution and
maintenance of a continuous subcutaneous </p>

<p> narcotic infusion program for cancer patients with chronic
pain through an analysis of the narcotic </p>

<p> requirements and treatment outcomes of patients who underwent
such therapy and a comparison of the costs </p>

<p> of two commonly used infusion systems. DESIGN: Retrospective
study. SETTING: Tertiary care facilities </p>

<p> and patients' homes. PATIENTS: Of 481 patients seen in
consultation for cancer pain between July 1987 </p>

<p> and April 1990, 60 (12%) met the eligibility criteria (i.e.,
standard medical management had failed, and they </p>

<p> had adequate supervision at home). INTERVENTION: Continuous
subcutaneous infusion with </p>

<p> hydromorphone hydrochloride or morphine started on an
inpatient basis and continued at home whenever </p>

<p> possible. OUTCOME MEASURES: Patient selectivity, narcotic
dosing requirements, discharge rate, patient </p>

<p> preference for analgesic regimen, side effects, complications
and cost-effectiveness. RESULTS: The mean </p>

<p> initial maintenance infusion dose after dose titration was
almost three times higher than the dose required </p>

<p> before infusion (hydromorphone or equivalent 6.2 v. 2.1
mg/h). Eighteen patients died, and the remaining 42 </p>

<p> were discharged home for a mean of 94.4 (standard deviation
128.3) days (extremes 12 and 741 days). The </p>

<p> mean maximum infusion rate was 24.1 mg/h (extremes 0.5 and
180 mg/h). All but one of the patients </p>

<p> preferred the infusion system to their previous oral
analgesic regimen. Despite major dose escalations nausea </p>

<p> and vomiting were well controlled in all cases. Twelve
patients (20%) experienced serious systemic toxic </p>

<p> effects or complications; six became encephalopathic, which
necessitated dose reduction, five had a </p>

<p> subcutaneous infection necessitating antibiotic treatment,
and one had respiratory depression. The </p>

<p> programmable </p>

<p> computerized infusion pump was found to be more
cost-effective than the disposable infusion device after a </p>

<p> break-even point of 8 months. CONCLUSIONS: Continuous
subcutaneous infusion of opioid drugs with the </p>

<p> use of a portable programmable pump is safe and effective in
selected patients who have failed to respond to </p>

<p> standard medical treatment of their cancer pain. Dose
titration may require rapid dose escalation, but this is </p>

<p> usually well tolerated. For most communities embarking on
such a program a programmable infusion system </p>

<p> will be more cost-effective than a disposable system </p>

<p> SO - Canadian Medical Association Journal 1992;146:891-89<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000015 </p>

<p> AU - Ollat H </p>

<p> TI - Traitement pharmacologique de la douleur neuropathique.
/ Pharmacological treatment of </p>

<p> neuropathic pain </p>

<p> AB - IN: Association pour la Neuro-Psycho-Pharmacologie,
Paris, France LA: French AB: Reviews the </p>

<p> recent literature on pharmacological treatment of neuropathic
pain (i.e., chronic pain resulting from injury to </p>

<p> the peripheral nervous system and induced by functional
changes in peripheral and central pathways). Drugs </p>

<p> currently prescribed for neuropathic pain are discussed in
terms of their effectiveness, indications, and </p>

<p> mechanisms of action. Data are presented on the use of
various antidepressants, opiates, and anticonvulsants </p>

<p> for different neuropathic pain syndromes (e.g., trigeminal
neuralgia, diabetic neuropathy, and postherpetic </p>

<p> neuralgia). Preliminary data from new pharmacological
approaches (e.g., capsaicin, local anesthetics, and </p>

<p> anti-inflammatory agents) are reviewed, and research
recommendations are provided. (English abstract) </p>

<p> (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1993 American Psychological Assn,
all rights reserved) KP: pharmacological </p>

<p> treatment &amp; drug indications &amp; mechanisms of action;
chronic neuropathic pain resulting from peripheral </p>

<p> nervous system injury; research review AN: 30-86136 </p>

<p> SO - Revue Neurologique 1992;148:521-53<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000156 </p>

<p> AU - Osipova NA </p>

<p> AU - Petrova VV </p>

<p> AU - Novikov GA </p>

<p> AU - Beresnev VA </p>

<p> AU - Sergeeva IE </p>

<p> AU - Dolgopolova TV </p>

<p> TI - [Norfin in oncological practice]. [Russian] </p>

<p> AB - A synthetic opiate agonist-antagonist norphin
(buprenorphin) has been studied in 297 cancer patients </p>

<p> as an analgetic component of general anesthesia, in
postoperative analgesia and in the treatment of chronic </p>

<p> pain syndrome. In modified neuroleptanalgesia based on
norphin, diazepam, droperidol and N2O the patient </p>

<p> is more adequately prevented from surgical trauma than in
conventional neuroleptanalgesia based on </p>

<p> fentanyl. This is confirmed by greater stability in
circulation, metabolism and stress </p>

<p> hormone parameters, however this anesthesia technique is less
manageable and may be accompanied by </p>

<p> prolonged postanesthesia depression of the central nervous
system. Good results have been obtained when </p>

<p> norphin pills were used sublingually for the treatment of
long-lasting intensive chronic pain syndrome in </p>

<p> incurable cancer patients. Norphin is no less effective than
morphin, however, unlike morphin, it causes no </p>

<p> severe adverse reactions. </p>

<p> SO - Anesteziologiya i Reanimatologiya 1992;:3-<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000163 </p>

<p> AU - Patterson KL </p>

<p> TI - Pain in the pediatric oncology patient </p>

<p> AB - Pediatric oncology nurses face many challenges in
treating the pain associated with childhood cancer. </p>

<p> The type and severity of pain children with cancer experience
varies from acute, short-term, procedure- </p>

<p> related pain to the progressive chronic pain associated with
terminal illness. In addition, the unfounded fears </p>

<p> of using strong narcotic analgesics and the underutilization
of psychological techniques to treat pain in </p>

<p> children limit the effectiveness of pain management. Armed
with objective data, pediatric oncology nurses </p>

<p> can work with other members of the cancer treatment team to
provide relief from the pain associated with </p>

<p> the diagnosis and treatment of childhood cancer. </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pediatric Oncology Nursing 1992;9:119-13<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000157 </p>

<p> AU - Rothman RB </p>

<p> TI - A review of the role of anti-opioid peptides in morphine
tolerance and dependence. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Studies on the mechanisms of tolerance and dependence
have mostly focused on changes at the </p>

<p> receptor level. These experiments, conducted with model
systems ranging from clonal cell lines to whole </p>

<p> animals, have identified a number of important adaptive </p>

<p> mechanisms which occur at the receptor level. However, none
of these adaptive mechanisms can completely </p>

<p> account for the phenomena which serve to define the state of
morphine tolerance and dependence, especially </p>

<p> the observation that as an animal becomes more tolerant to
morphine, less naloxone is required to trigger </p>

<p> withdrawal. The data reviewed in this paper provide strong
support for the hypothesis that the brain </p>

<p> synthesizes and secretes neuropeptides which act as part of a
homeostatic system to attenuate the effects of </p>

<p> morphine and endogenous opioid peptides. According to this
model, administration of morphine releases </p>

<p> anti-opioid peptides (AOP), which then attenuate the effects
of morphine. As more morphine is given, more </p>

<p> AOP are released, thereby producing tolerance to the effects
of morphine. Cessation of morphine </p>

<p> administration, or administration of naloxone, produces a
relative excess of anti-opioid, which is in part </p>

<p> responsible for the withdrawal syndrome. Since endogenous and
exogenous antagonists might together </p>

<p> produce synergistic effects, less naloxone might be required
to trigger withdrawal in the presence of higher </p>

<p> levels of AOPs. Although the study of AOP is in its infancy,
a deeper understanding of the central nervous </p>

<p> system (CNS) anti-opioid systems may lead to new treatments
for chronic pain, substance abuse, and </p>

<p> psychiatric disorders. [References: 114] </p>

<p> SO - Synapse 1992;12:129-13<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000168 </p>

<p> AU - Sagen J </p>

<p> TI - Chromaffin cell transplants for alleviation of chronic
pain </p>

<p> AB - Treatment of intractable pain with parenteral,
subarachnoid, or epidural narcotics is often </p>

<p> unsatisfactory due to tolerance and other systemic
complications that accompany increasing dosages of these </p>

<p> drugs. Other disadvantages include the potential infections
with implantable pumps and the inconvenience of </p>

<p> repeated narcotic administration. During the past several
years, studies at the author's laboratory indicated </p>

<p> that transplantation of adrenal medullary tissue or isolated
chromaffin cells into the spinal subarachnoid </p>

<p> space can significantly reduce pain in several rodent models
without resulting in development of tolerance. </p>

<p> Adrenal medullary chromaffin cells were selected because they
produce high levels of both opioid peptides </p>

<p> and catecholamines, agents that independently, and possibly
synergistically, reduce pain when injected locally </p>

<p> into the spinal subarachnoid space. The adrenal medullary
transplants survive for prolonged periods, and </p>

<p> continue to produce high levels of both catecholamines and
met-enkephalin. These transplants reduce pain in </p>

<p> two rodent chronic pain models, an arthritis model and a
peripheral neuropathy model, both of which closely </p>

<p> resemble human chronic pain syndromes. The success of the
animal studies has led to initiation of human </p>

<p> clinical trials in patients with chronic cancer pain; results
are promising. </p>

<p> SO - ASAIO Journal 1992;38:24-2<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000166 </p>

<p> AU - Smythe M </p>

<p> TI - Patient-controlled analgesia: a review. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - The patient-activated analgesic system was introduced in
1968. Early trials, although uncontrolled, </p>

<p> supported the safety and efficacy of patient-controlled
analgesia (PCA) in several kinds of pain, such as that </p>

<p> relating to surgery, cancer, trauma, and obstetric
procedures. In the past decade, prospective, randomized </p>

<p> trials have reported several advantages of PCA over
conventional analgesia in the early postoperative period. </p>

<p> Although not supported by all controlled trials, they include
improved pain relief, less sedation, lower level </p>

<p> of narcotic consumption, fewer postoperative complications,
greater patient satisfaction, and improved </p>

<p> pulmonary function. Preliminary results in the management of
chronic pain indicate that PCA can lead to </p>

<p> significant lifestyle improvements in ambulatory patients
with cancer. The most significant, although </p>

<p> infrequent, adverse effect is respiratory depression, the
majority of cases occurring in patients predisposed </p>

<p> secondary to concomitant illness or as a result of human
error. The clinical use of PCA will likely see a </p>

<p> significant increase among persons with cancer, and an
increase in epidural administration. The cost benefit </p>

<p> of PCA has yet to be assessed in inpatient and outpatient
settings. [References: 114] </p>

<p> SO - Pharmacotherapy 1992;12:132-14<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000159 </p>

<p> AU - Sorensen HT </p>

<p> AU - Rasmussen HH </p>

<p> AU - Moller-Petersen JF </p>

<p> AU - Ejlersen E </p>

<p> AU - Hamburger H </p>

<p> AU - Olesen F </p>

<p> TI - Epidemiology of pain requiring strong analgesics outside
hospital in a geographically defined </p>

<p> population in Denmark </p>

<p> AB - Based on obligatory notifications from pharmacies to the
National Board of Health about prescription </p>

<p> of strong analgesics as well as questionnaires to the
prescribing doctors, the occurrence and causes of pain </p>

<p> requiring strong analgesics outside hospitals were analysed
over a period of one month in Denmark in a </p>

<p> limited population (480,000), corresponding to nearly 10% of
the Danish population. During one month, </p>

<p> strong analgesics were prescribed to 0.2 per cent of the
population. The commonest acute conditions were </p>

<p> back pain (23%) and trauma (17%). The commonest recurrent
acute conditions were headache (25%) and </p>

<p> angina pectoris (17%). The commonest chronic non-malignant
conditions were back pain (29%) and </p>

<p> pancreatitis (7%). The commonest malignant conditions were
lung cancer (20%) and colorectal cancer </p>

<p> (14%). The commonest conditions indicated under the chronic
pain syndrome were headache (33%) and </p>

<p> back pain (13%). Conditions requiring strong analgesics
reflect to some extent the distribution of painful </p>

<p> conditions in the general population. </p>

<p> SO - Danish Medical Bulletin 1992;39:464-46<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000160 </p>

<p> AU - Terman GW </p>

<p> AU - Loeser JD </p>

<p> TI - A case of opiate-insensitive pain: malignant treatment
of benign pain </p>

<p> AB - OBJECTIVE: We report the case of a woman with presumed
cancer pain treated with escalating </p>

<p> doses of opiates despite no evident improvement in her pain
and several deleterious side effects. PATIENT: </p>

<p> A 62-year-old woman with cervical myelopathy and a diagnosis
of a spinal cord tumor was referred to the </p>

<p> University of Washington Medical Center complaining of chest
tightness, multiple joint pains, nausea, </p>

<p> constipation, seizures and a deteriorating memory. At the
time of admission she was confined to her bed </p>

<p> with a full-time attendant and was receiving 240 milligrams
of intravenous morphine per hour for her pain. </p>

<p> INTERVENTION: Diagnostic studies failed to find any evidence
of neoplasm and revealed only an old </p>

<p> Return-Path: &lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> Comments: Authenticated sender is
&lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> From: tanante@nwlink.com </p>

<p> To: schaffer@smartlink.net </p>

<p> Date: Sat, 1 Jun 1996 17:18:59 +0000 </p>

<p> Subject: Re: Pain Medication #1 </p>

<p> Priority: normal<br>
</p>

<p> hemorrhage within the cervical spinal cord. A program of
increasing physical and occupational therapy and </p>

<p> decreasing opiate intake was initiated. RESULTS: Within a
month the patient's pain complaints decreased, </p>

<p> as did the rest of her presenting complaints. Her activities
of daily living greatly increased making attendant </p>

<p> care no longer necessary. CONCLUSIONS: This case report
illustrates some of the hazards of opioid </p>

<p> therapy in the management of patients with chronic pain. Our
patient's opiate therapy was expensive, gave </p>

<p> her undesirable side effects, and did not reduce her pain
complaints or improve her function. In the treatment </p>

<p> of chronic pain, of noncancerous or cancerous origin, a)
systemic opioids may not be effective in reducing </p>

<p> pain complaints in every patient, b) treatment efficacy
evaluation should always include functional endpoints, </p>

<p> and c) nonefficacious treatments should not be continued
indefinitely </p>

<p> SO - Clinical Journal of Pain 1992;8:255-25<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000167 </p>

<p> AU - Tobias JD </p>

<p> AU - Oakes L </p>

<p> AU - Austin BA </p>

<p> TI - Pediatric analgesia with epidural fentanyl citrate
administered by nursing staff </p>

<p> AB - Even though epidural analgesia is effective and has
advantages over conventional postoperative </p>

<p> analgesia, it is also labor intensive, requiring 24-hour
supervision by an anesthesiologist. In an effort to </p>

<p> decrease the manpower requirements, some hospitals allow the
nursing staff to administer epidural narcotics </p>

<p> to adult patients. In children, however, this practice has
been limited. We retrospectively reviewed our </p>

<p> experience over 12 months with this procedure. Epidural
catheters (caudal, lumbar, or thoracic) were placed </p>

<p> in 43 pediatric patients for acute and chronic pain
management. All patients received a continuous epidural </p>

<p> infusion of bupivacaine hydrochloride with fentanyl citrate.
Eleven (26%) of the 43 patients required </p>

<p> supplemental analgesia and were given 45 doses of epidural
fentanyl. Adequate analgesia was achieved in all </p>

<p> patients. No intravascular or intrathecal injections were
noted, nor did any inadvertent epidural injections of </p>

<p> medications occur. No patient had respiratory depression
(respiratory rate less than 10% for age). We </p>

<p> believe epidural administration of fentanyl by a carefully
educated nursing staff is safe and effective in </p>

<p> children. </p>

<p> SO - Southern Medical Journal 1992;85:384-38<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000158 </p>

<p> AU - Wilson JF </p>

<p> AU - Brockopp GW </p>

<p> AU - Kryst S </p>

<p> AU - Steger H </p>

<p> AU - Witt WO </p>

<p> TI - Medical students' attitudes toward pain before and after
a brief course on pain [see comments] </p>

<p> AB - The effectiveness of a brief clinical and basic science
seminar on pain for 1st year medical students was </p>

<p> examined by comparing attitudes about pain prior to the
seminar to attitudes 5 months after the seminar. The </p>

<p> 6-h course combined written materials conveying facts about
behavioral, social and biological aspects of pain </p>

<p> with clinical observations of an acute and a chronic pain
treatment team. Examination of responses to a </p>

<p> questionnaire assessing attitudes toward pain patients
revealed that medical students have limited personal </p>

<p> experience with pain and medications for pain, and limited
knowledge about pain. Pre-course attitudes </p>

<p> toward pain patients were dominated by perceived negative
characteristics of pain patients and the belief that </p>

<p> working with such patients is difficult. Attitudes measured 5
months after the course reflected increased </p>

<p> complexity, greater emphasis that pain is real and not
imaginary, and stronger belief that working with pain </p>

<p> patients is rewarding. Five months after the seminar,
students reported more accurate estimates of the </p>

<p> frequency of problems with addiction stemming from acute pain
treatment and exaggerated the prevalence of </p>

<p> pain problems in the society. The importance of integrating
clinical and basic science experiences in order to </p>

<p> influence long-term clinical attitudes and produce lasting
changes in clinically relevant knowledge is </p>

<p> discussed. </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1992;50:251-25<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000173 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> AU - Strumpf M </p>

<p> AU - Tryba M </p>

<p> TI - Long-term oral opioid therapy in patients with chronic
nonmalignant pain </p>

<p> AB - In contrast to the use of opioids for the treatment of
acute and chronic cancer pain, the administration </p>

<p> of chronic opioid therapy for pain not due to malignancy
remains controversial. We describe 100 patients </p>

<p> who were chronically given opioids for treatment of
nonmalignant pain. Most patients experienced </p>

<p> neuropathic pain or back pain. We used sustained-release
dihydrocodeine, buprenorphine, and sustained- </p>

<p> release morphine. Pain reduction was measured with visual
analogue scales (VAS), and the Karnofsky </p>

<p> Performance Status Scale was used to assess the patient's
function. Good pain relief was obtained in 51 </p>

<p> patients and partial pain relief was reported by 28 patients.
Only 21 patients had no beneficial effect from </p>

<p> opioid therapy. There was a close correlation between the sum
and the peak VAS values (r = 0.983; p less </p>

<p> than 0.0001) and pain reduction was associated with an
increase in performance (p less than 0.0001). The </p>

<p> most common side effects were constipation and nausea. There
were no cases of respiratory </p>

<p> depression or addiction to opioids. Our results indicate that
opioids can be effective in chronic </p>

<p> nonmalignant pain, with side effects that are comparable to
those that complicate the treatment of cancer </p>

<p> pain </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pain &amp; Symptom Management 1992;7:69-7<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000017 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> AU - Strumpf M </p>

<p> AU - Tryba M </p>

<p> TI - Long-term oral opioid therapy in patients with chronic
nonmalignant pain </p>

<p> AB - IN: Universitatsklinik Bergmannsheil, Klinik fur
Anaesthesiologie, Intensiv und Schmerztherapie, </p>

<p> Bochum, Germany LA: English AB: Chronically administered
dihydrocodeine, buprenorphine, or morphine </p>

<p> to 100 patients (aged 29-81 yrs) with nonmalignant pain. Ss
were administered the Visual Analogue Scale </p>

<p> (VAS), a performance status scale. Good pain relief was
obtained in 51 Ss, and partial pain relief was </p>

<p> reported by 28 Ss. There was a close correlation between the
sum and the peak VAS values, and pain </p>

<p> reduction was associated with an increase in performance. The
most common side effects were constipation </p>

<p> and nausea. The case report of a 35-yr-old male is presented.
Opioids can be effective in chronic </p>

<p> nonmalignant pain, with side effects that are comparable to
those that complicate the treatment of cancer </p>

<p> pain. (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1992 American Psychological
Assn, all rights reserved) KP: long term </p>

<p> dihydrocodeine or buprenorphine or morphine; pain relief
&amp; side effects; 29-81 yr olds with chronic </p>

<p> nonmalignant pain AN: 79-32549 </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pain and Symptom Management 1992;7:69-7<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000022 </p>

<p> AU - Abdelhamid EE </p>

<p> AU - Sultana M </p>

<p> AU - Portoghese PS </p>

<p> AU - Takemori AE </p>

<p> TI - Selective blockage of delta opioid receptors prevents
the development of morphine tolerance and </p>

<p> dependence in mice </p>

<p> AB - IN: Alexandria U, Faculty of Science, Egypt LA: English
AB: Studied the effect of the selective delta </p>

<p> antagonist naltrindole (NTI) and its nonequilibrium analog
naltrindole 5'-isothiocyanate (5'-NTII) on the </p>

<p> development of morphine tolerance and dependence in male
mice. Degree of morphine tolerance was </p>

<p> monitored by determining the ED-sub-5-sub-0 of morphine
sulfate in a tail-flick antinociceptive assay; </p>

<p> degree of physical </p>

<p> dependence on morphine was assessed by estimating the amount
of naloxone required to induce withdrawal </p>

<p> jumping. Both NTI and 5'-NTII suppressed the development of
opiate tolerance and dependence in acute </p>

<p> and chronic models. The antagonists had no influence on the
activity of the mu opioid receptor agonist </p>

<p> DAMGO. Thus, the inhibitory effect of NTI and 5'-NTII
appeared to be due to their antagonist actions </p>

<p> solely on delta opioid receptors. Implications for the
management of chronic pain are discussed. (PsycLIT </p>

<p> Database Copyright 1992 American Psychological Assn, all
rights reserved) KP: naltrindole vs naltrindole 5- </p>

<p> isothiocyanate; development of morphine tolerance &amp;
dependence; male mice; implications for chronic pain </p>

<p> management AN: 79-00730 </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics
1991;258:299-30 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000116 </p>

<p> AU - Boogaerts J </p>

<p> AU - Lafont N </p>

<p> TI - [Mechanism of action and clinical use of opioids
administered by the peripheral perineural </p>

<p> route]. [Review] [French] </p>

<p> AB - Experimental studies have shown that opioids could
produce two types of effect on neuronal </p>

<p> excitability. The first one, aspecific, is a local anesthetic
action on the nerve fiber with a diminution of </p>

<p> sodium and potassium conductance. The second is specific: the
sodium conductance lowering is due to a </p>

<p> linkage of the opioid with a receptor on the internal face of
the membrane. Opioids could also migrate to the </p>

<p> posterior horn of the spinal cord after linkage with axonal
receptors. Clinical studies have proved that </p>

<p> opioid injection in peripheral nervous trunks and specially
in the brachial plexus produce a </p>

<p> prolonged analgesia status in the post operative period but
also and mostly in the chronic pain. The </p>

<p> more liposoluble opioids like fentanyl and buprenorphine are
the more effective. [References: 52] </p>

<p> SO - Cahiers d Anesthesiologie 1991;39:91-9<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000117 </p>

<p> AU - Eledjam JJ </p>

<p> AU - Viel E </p>

<p> AU - Bassoul B </p>

<p> AU - Bruelle P </p>

<p> TI - [Non-analgesic effects of opioids]. [Review] [French] </p>

<p> AB - The aim of the regional administration of opioids is to
provide an efficient and prolonged analgesia. </p>

<p> Then, opiates can be useful for postoperative analgesia and
for the treatment of chronic pain of malignant </p>

<p> origin. Analgesia is correlated with several adverse effects
of which the most frequent are nausea and itching </p>

<p> and the most severe is respiratory depression. Beside the
adverse effects, other properties of opiates could </p>

<p> be responsible of favourable effects which can be taken in
advantage in specific indications. In the </p>

<p> postoperative period, epidurally administered opioid can
attenuate the neuroendocrine and metabolic </p>

<p> responses to surgery and pain. This effect is responsible of
a reduction of the resistance to insulin and of a </p>

<p> better nutritional balance, especially after major abdominal
surgical procedures. Opioids also act by a </p>

<p> reduction of the motor functions of the bowel, which perhaps
could reduce the incidence of anastomotic </p>

<p> breakdowns. Finally, other effects have been reported, as
anecdotes, such as the treatment of spasm after </p>

<p> bilateral replantation of the ureters, neurologic bladder
dysfunctions and enuresis. Spinal administration of </p>

<p> opioids has also been used as a treatment of premature
ejaculation. [References: 41] </p>

<p> SO - Cahiers d Anesthesiologie 1991;39:111-11<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000109 </p>

<p> AU - Ferrell BA </p>

<p> AU - Ferrell BR </p>

<p> TI - Pain management at home. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - The management of chronic pain should be a priority in
geriatric home care. Pain is a common </p>

<p> problem that has tremendous potential to influence the
physical function and quality of life of elderly people </p>

<p> during their remaining years. The experience of pain and its
management at home are not analogous to </p>

<p> institutional settings. Family and caregivers have important
influences on pain management and may require </p>

<p> education and support for the long-term management of chronic
pain patients. Existing pain management </p>

<p> strategies should be tailored to meet the special needs of
geriatric patients and be sensitive to caregiver </p>

<p> concerns. Implications, indications, and applications for
high-tech pain management strategies need to be </p>

<p> clarified for the management of older people at home.
[References: 27] </p>

<p> SO - Clinics in Geriatric Medicine 1991;7:765-77<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000122 </p>

<p> AU - Fogel BS </p>

<p> AU - Fretwell MD </p>

<p> TI - Common mental health problems in geriatric practice.
Part II: Insomnia, chronic pain, troubled </p>

<p> families, and other dilemmas </p>

<p> SO - Rhode Island Medical Journal 1991;74:68-7<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000112 </p>

<p> AU - Foldes FF </p>

<p> TI - Pain control with intrathecally and peridurally
administered opioids and other drugs. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Sharp pain is conducted rapidly by myelinated delta A
fibers and diffused pain slowly by </p>

<p> nonmyelinated C fibers to pseudobipolar neurons in the
posterior ganglion and </p>

<p> from there to neurons located in the posterolateral horn of
the spinal cord. From here on nociferous impulses </p>

<p> are transmitted by excitatory peptides (e.g. substance P) or
amino acids (e.g. glutamate, aspartate) through </p>

<p> interconnecting neurons of the pain pathways, primarily on
the contralateral side, to the brain stem and from </p>

<p> there to the sensory cortex, where they are appreciated and
acted upon. There are specific inhibitory </p>

<p> receptors located on axon terminals, near to the release
sites of the excitatory amino acids and peptides. </p>

<p> Stimulation of these receptors by their appropriate ligands
such as endogenous (e.g. enkephalis, endorphins) </p>

<p> or exogenous opioids, clonidine, serotonin, somatostatin
inhibits the release of excitatory neurotransmitters </p>

<p> and relieves pain. There are at least 3 different opioid
receptors, called mu-, kappa- and delta-receptors in </p>

<p> the spinal cord. These can be differentiated from one another
by their specific affinity toward different </p>

<p> endogenous or exogenous opioids and the pure narcotic
antagonist, naloxone. It appears that the nociferous </p>

<p> impulses transmitted by parallel pathways equipped with
different inhibitory receptors have to be integrated </p>

<p> to produce pain sensation and partial inhibition of
transmission in different pathways or complete inhibition </p>

<p> in one of the pathways may relieve pain. In recent years the
concept of &quot;selective spinal analgesia&quot; has been </p>

<p> applied clinically for the relief of postoperative,
obstetrical and chronic pain. At first it was expected that the </p>

<p> intrathecal or peridural administration of morphine will
produce analgesia without the side effects of </p>

<p> systemically administered morphine. It soon became evident,
however, that intrathecally and peridurally </p>

<p> administered morphine after several hours of delay reaches
the fourth ventricle and by stimulating mu- </p>

<p> receptors may cause respiratory depression and other
undesired effects (e.g. nausea, vomiting, pruritus). </p>

<p> Several different approaches are being investigated for the
production of selective spinal analgesia without </p>

<p> side effects. They include: a. the use of more lipophilic,
long-lasting opioids (e.g. lofentanil) which would be </p>

<p> almost completely absorbed by the spinal cord and therefore
would not reach the medullary centers; b. the </p>

<p> development of opioids with specific affinity to kappa- and
for delta- and little or no affinity to mu- </p>

<p> receptors, primarily responsible for side effects; and c.
combining lower doses of opioid agonists with alpha </p>

<p> 2-adrenergic agonists (e.g. clonidine) or with somatostatin.
It is conceivable that in the not-too-distant </p>

<p> future, it will be possible to achieve through these
measures, selective spinal analgesia without side effects. </p>

<p> [References: 68] </p>

<p> SO - Anaesthesiologie und Reanimation 1991;16:287-29<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000118 </p>

<p> AU - Forman WB </p>

<p> AU - Stratton M </p>

<p> TI - Current approaches to chronic pain in older patients.
[Review] </p>

<p> AB - As the population ages, primary care physicians face an
increasing number of individuals who suffer </p>

<p> from the effects of chronic diseases, including the
accompanying chronic pain. This article reviews the </p>

<p> common causes of pain in the elderly and suggests a system
for assessing its severity. Five different </p>

<p> approaches to treating pain in this population are outlined,
as are guidelines for managing the potential side </p>

<p> effects of treatment. [References: 20] </p>

<p> SO - Geriatrics 1991;46:47-5<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000171 </p>

<p> AU - Hassenbusch SJ </p>

<p> AU - Stanton-Hicks MD </p>

<p> AU - Soukup J </p>

<p> AU - Covington EC </p>

<p> AU - Boland MB </p>

<p> TI - Sufentanil citrate and morphine/bupivacaine as
alternative agents in chronic epidural infusions </p>

<p> for intractable non-cancer pain </p>

<p> AB - Intraspinal narcotic (usually intrathecal morphine)
infusions with implanted pumps are increasingly </p>

<p> used in patients with intractable chronic pain not caused by
cancer. In some patients, pain control is difficult </p>

<p> with infusions of morphine. Seven patients with diagnoses of
arachnoiditis, epidural scarring, and/or </p>

<p> vertebral body compression fracture were treated with
alternative solutions in an epidural route. For </p>

<p> maximal flexibility, Medtronic implanted programmable
infusion pumps with catheters to T6-T10 were used, </p>

<p> and pain was monitored by verbal pain scales. In three
patients, epidural infusions of morphine in 0.5% </p>

<p> bupivacaine (MS-MARC) resulted in little or no pain relief
without significant side effects (e.g., headache, </p>

<p> nausea, or vomiting). In these same patients, epidural
infusions of sufentanil citrate resulted in pain scale </p>

<p> reductions of 92%, 82%, and 40%, respectively, with no side
effects. Four other patients found more </p>

<p> effective pain relief when switched from initial sufentanil
citrate infusions to MS-MARC. Pain scale </p>

<p> reductions (with no side effects) were 92%, 76%, 59%, and 47%
in these patients. Pain relief and minimal </p>

<p> side effects with sufentanil citrate is theorized to result
from its higher lipophilicity promoting local </p>

<p> transdural diffusion to spinal cord and limiting upward
diffusion to the brain stem. Sufentanil citrate is also </p>

<p> advantageous for programmable pumps because it is 100 times
more potent than morphine and therefore </p>

<p> allows longer pump refill times and higher infusion doses.
Although this study was done on a limited number </p>

<p> of patients, sufentanil citrate and MS-MARC in epidural
infusions using programmable infusion pumps for </p>

<p> non-cancer patients provide significant alternative drug
combinations and routes. </p>

<p> SO - Neurosurgery 1991;29:76-81; discussion 81-<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000252 </p>

<p> AU - Hogan O </p>

<p> AU - Weissman DE </p>

<p> AU - Haddox JD </p>

<p> AU - Abram S </p>

<p> AU - Taylor ML </p>

<p> AU - Janjan N </p>

<p> TI - EPIDURAL OPIATES AND LOCAL ANESTHETICS FOR THE
MANAGEMENT OF </p>

<p> CANCER PAIN (MEETING ABSTRACT) </p>

<p> AB - AB - The Medical College of Wisconsin multispecialty
cancer pain service reviewed its experiences </p>

<p> with epidural analgesia by retrospectively reviewing
hospital/clinic charts from January 1987 through </p>

<p> December 1989. 1205 patients (pts) were admitted to the
inpatient oncology service during the study period, </p>

<p> and epidural analgesia was used 16 times (15 pts, 1.2%).
Indications for epidural analgesia included failure </p>

<p> of systemic opioids and other noninvasive drug and nondrug
therapies per WHO guidelines. The mean pre- </p>

<p> epidural equianalgesic dose of im morphine was 300 mg/day.
Temporary catheters were used to assess </p>

<p> response to epidural morphine; if no response bupivacaine was
added; if no response the catheter was </p>

<p> removed; if analgesia was obtained the temporary catheter was
replaced by a tunneled catheter for long-term </p>

<p> use. Analgesia was successfully obtained in 12/16 epidural
attempts; 6 with morphine alone, 6 with morphine </p>

<p> plus bupivacaine. 4/16 attempts were discontinued due to
unacceptable toxicity or technical problems. </p>

<p> Tunneled catheters were used for a mean of 83 days (range
6-965 days). Catheter problems included </p>

<p> malfunction (7), infection (4), injection pain (4), epidural
hematoma (1), hyperesthesia (1). Epidural </p>

<p> analgesia is infrequently indicated, bupivacaine extends the
efficacy of epidural analgesia and complications </p>

<p> are common AD - Medical Coll. of Wisconsin AD - Milwaukee AD
- WI 53211 UI - 91672498 </p>

<p> SO - Proc Annu Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:A1161-A116<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000170 </p>

<p> AU - Hoskin PJ </p>

<p> AU - Hanks GW </p>

<p> TI - Opioid agonist-antagonist drugs in acute and chronic
pain states. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - The agonist-antagonist opioid analgesics are a
heterogeneous group of drugs with moderate to strong </p>

<p> analgesic activity comparable to that of the pure agonist
opioids such as codeine and morphine but with a </p>

<p> limited effective dose range. The group includes drugs which
act as an agonist or partial agonist at one </p>

<p> receptor and an antagonist at another (pentazocine,
butorphanol, nalbuphine, dezocine) and drugs acting as a </p>

<p> partial agonist at a single receptor (buprenorphine). These
drugs can be classified as nalorphine-like or </p>

<p> morphine-like. Meptazinol does not fit into either
classification and occupies a separate category. </p>

<p> Pentazocine, butorphanol and nalbuphine are weak
mu-antagonists and kappa-partial-agonists. All three </p>

<p> drugs are strong analgesics when given by injection:
pentazocine is one-sixth to one-third as potent as </p>

<p> morphine, nalbuphine is slightly less potent than morphine,
and butorphanol is 3.5 to 7 times as potent. The </p>

<p> duration of analgesia is similar to that of morphine (3 to 4
hours). Oral pentazocine is closer in analgesic </p>

<p> efficacy to aspirin and paracetamol (acetaminophen) than the
weak opioid analgesics such as codeine. </p>

<p> Neither nalbuphine nor butorphanol is available as an oral </p>

<p> formulation. At usual therapeutic doses nalbuphine and
butorphanol have respiratory depressant effects </p>

<p> equivalent to that of morphine (though the duration of such
effects with butorphanol may be longer). Unlike </p>

<p> morphine there appears to be a ceiling to both the
respiratory depression and the analgesic action. All of </p>

<p> these 3 drugs have a lower abuse potential than the pure
agonist opioid analgesics such as morphine. </p>

<p> However, all have been subject to abuse and misuse, and
pentazocine (but not the others) is subject to </p>

<p> Controlled Drug restrictions. Buprenorphine is a potent
partial agonist at the mu-receptor, and by </p>

<p> intramuscular injection is 30 times as potent as morphine. A
ceiling to the analgesic effect of buprenorphine </p>

<p> has been demonstrated in animals and it is also claimed in
humans. However, there are no reliable data </p>

<p> available to define the maximal dose of buprenorphine in
humans. A practical ceiling exists for sublingual use </p>

<p> in that the only available formulation is a 2 micrograms
tablet and few patients will accept more than 3 or 4 </p>

<p> of these in a single dose. The duration of analgesia is
longer than that of morphine, at 6 to 9 hours. There </p>

<p> have been suggestions that buprenorphine causes less
respiratory depression than morphine, but viewed </p>

<p> overall it appears that in equianalgesic doses the 2 drugs
have similar respiratory depressant </p>

<p> effects.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS) [References: 118] </p>

<p> SO - Drugs 1991;41:326-34<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000113 </p>

<p> AU - Mendelson G </p>

<p> AU - Mendelson D </p>

<p> TI - Legal aspects of the management of chronic pain
[published erratum appears in Med J Aust 1991 </p>

<p> Dec 2-16;155(11-12):856] </p>

<p> AB - OBJECTIVE: To review the legal provisions which control
the prescription of opioid analgesics in </p>

<p> Australia, and to summarise the areas in which practitioners
who treat patients with chronic pain may expect </p>

<p> to become involved with the legal system. DATA SOURCES: The
relevant legislation was reviewed, and a </p>

<p> selective review was undertaken of literature dealing with
the legal aspects of pain and suffering which may </p>

<p> form a basis for personal injury claims. Case law which deals
with issues of consent to treatment was also </p>

<p> examined. DATA SYNTHESIS: Statutory requirements which
control the prescription of opioids were </p>

<p> summarised. Leading cases on patient consent were discussed
to clarify for the practitioner the principles </p>

<p> which the Courts use in the assessment of the validity of the
consent given by patients for treatment. The </p>

<p> assessment of the pain patient involved in litigation was
briefly discussed. CONCLUSIONS: The </p>

<p> prescription and administration of opioid analgesics must be
in accordance with the legislative provisions. </p>

<p> Treatment options must be discussed and explained to patients
so that valid consent can be obtained. </p>

<p> Patients' questions must be answered in full, and
documentation in the clinical record is required </p>

<p> SO - Medical Journal of Australia 1991;155:640-64<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000110 </p>

<p> AU - Merry AF </p>

<p> AU - Schug SA </p>

<p> AU - Richards EG </p>

<p> AU - Large RG </p>

<p> TI - Opioids in the treatment of chronic pain of nonmalignant
origin </p>

<p> SO - New Zealand Medical Journal 1991;104:520-52<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000121 </p>

<p> AU - Pendergrass JS </p>

<p> TI - Epidural analgesia: a viable option for pain control </p>

<p> AB - Epidural analgesia is an important intervention for both
acute and chronic pain management. It has </p>

<p> been in use since the early 1900s, but the technique using
local application of opiate analgesics has only been </p>

<p> in use since the late 1970s (Moulin &amp; Coyle, 1986).
Today, many patients receive epidural analgesia for </p>

<p> postoperative pain control, and its use for acute or chronic
pain management in a hospital, pain clinic, or </p>

<p> home setting also continues to increase. Epidural analgesia
is also being utilized to manage acute pain in the </p>

<p> pediatric client. Epidural analgesia requires meticulous
techniques, beginning with placement of the epidural </p>

<p> catheter and continuing with administration of medications
and nursing management of the catheter. Nursing </p>

<p> assessment and development of protocols along with
preoperative and postoperative patient and family </p>

<p> teaching are vital components of the total plan of care. The
nurse practitioner (NP) or other health care </p>

<p> provider must be cognizant of safety considerations, whether
in the hospital environment, pain clinic, or </p>

<p> home setting. </p>

<p> SO - Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners
1991;3:25-2 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000119 </p>

<p> AU - Pincus DF </p>

<p> TI - When and why I use pethidine </p>

<p> AB - Pethidine is a valuable drug in general practice. It is
useful in the acute pain of trauma and renal or </p>

<p> biliary colic. It should be used by intramuscular injection,
not orally. It should not be used for chronic pain, </p>

<p> malignancy, head injury, heart failure, undiagnosed acute
abdominal pain and if opiate addiction is suspected </p>

<p> SO - Australian Family Physician 1991;20:392, 394-392, 39<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000123 </p>

<p> AU - Poniatowski BC </p>

<p> TI - Continuous subcutaneous infusions for pain control </p>

<p> AB - Chronic moderate-to-severe pain is a common problem that
directly impacts on the quality of life of </p>

<p> the patient with a malignant neoplasm. It is estimated that
pain is a major symptom in 70% of cancer </p>

<p> patients. Continuous subcutaneous infusion of opioids has
proved to be an efficacious and safe method to </p>

<p> control the chronic pain of the home-bound and hospitalized
patient. A wide variety of opioids can be used, </p>

<p> including morphine, hydromorphone, and methadone. The
subcutaneous route offers economic as well as </p>

<p> physiologic advantages. The primary disadvantage to the
system is volume limitations. Competent nursing </p>

<p> management of the subcutaneous infusion helps to maximize the
effectiveness of the opioid, thereby </p>

<p> improving the patient's quality of life </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Intravenous Nursing 1991;14:30-3<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000115 </p>

<p> AU - Richlin DM </p>

<p> TI - Nonnarcotic analgesics and tricyclic antidepressants for
the treatment of chronic nonmalignant </p>

<p> pain </p>

<p> AB - Chronic nonmalignant pain is often characterized by
multiple treatment failures, a pattern of </p>

<p> maladaptive behavior, and depression. Often there is a
history of inappropriate and excessive use of </p>

<p> medications for pain. Prior and ongoing use of narcotics and
sedatives acts to compound and aggravate the </p>

<p> chronic pain syndrome. A first step in treatment is
controlled withdrawal of these agents. Nonnarcotic </p>

<p> analgesics, NSAIDs, and tricyclic antidepressants are
commonly employed in patients with chronic pain. </p>

<p> Effective use of these agents requires understanding of their
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic </p>

<p> properties. Use of a fixed-time schedule is necessary to
achieve an effective, sustained therapeutic response. </p>

<p> Careful patient education and monitoring for side effects and
toxicity are necessary, particularly in the </p>

<p> elderly and patients with coexisting medical disorders.
Incidence of side effects and toxicity may be reduced </p>

<p> by choice of drug and modification of dosing regimen.
Nonnarcotic analgesics, TCAs, and NSAIDs are </p>

<p> seldom effective by themselves in resolving the pain and
distress of patients with chronic nonmalignant pain. </p>

<p> This is particularly true when maladaptive behavior coexists.
A comprehensive multimodal pain management </p>

<p> program encompassing additional pain-relieving strategies and
behavior-modifying techniques should be </p>

<p> considered and utilized in conjunction with medication. </p>

<p> SO - Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine 1991;58:221-22<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000114 </p>

<p> AU - Schug SA </p>

<p> AU - Merry AF </p>

<p> AU - Acland RH </p>

<p> TI - Treatment principles for the use of opioids in pain of
nonmalignant origin. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Inadequately treated acute and chronic pain remains a
major cause of suffering, in spite of enormous </p>

<p> advances in pharmacology and technology. Opioids provide a
powerful, versatile, widely available means of </p>

<p> managing this pain, but their use is too often restrained by
ignorance and mistaken fears of addiction. The </p>

<p> management of postoperative pain (perhaps the most common
form of acute pain) is traditionally attempted </p>

<p> with fixed dosages of analgesics by relatively unpredictable
routes (e.g. oral, rectal and intramuscular). </p>

<p> Intravenous opioid infusions (an improvement) risk
respiratory depression and require close monitoring and </p>

<p> titration. Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA), by contrast,
permits the most efficacious medication (pure </p>

<p> opioid agonist) by the optimal route (intravenous) under
direct control of the patient, and provides high </p>

<p> levels of satisfaction and safety. Ideally, any opioid use
should be integrated with a wide spectrum of other </p>

<p> analgesic modalities in an anaesthesiology-based 'acute pain
service'. The use of opioids for chronic pain of </p>

<p> nonmalignant origin remains controversial. There is a
perceived conflict between patients' interests and those </p>

<p> of society. However, problems (such as tolerance, physical
dependence, addiction and chronic toxicity), </p>

<p> anticipated from experience with animal experiments and
pain-free abusers, seldom cause difficulties when </p>

<p> opioids are used appropriately to treat pain (so-called 'dual
pharmacology'). With sensible guidelines, and in </p>

<p> the context of a multidisciplinary pain clinic, opioids may
provide the only hope of relief to many sufferers of </p>

<p> chronic pain. [References: 88] </p>

<p> SO - Drugs 1991;42:228-23<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000111 </p>

<p> AU - Schwartz RH </p>

<p> AU - Johnson NP </p>

<p> AU - Hornung CA </p>

<p> AU - Phelps GL </p>

<p> AU - Berg EW </p>

<p> TI - Awareness of substance abuse in orthopedic patients: a
survey of orthopedic surgeons </p>

<p> AB - We surveyed 178 orthopedic physicians in the Washington,
DC, area to ascertain the effect on patient </p>

<p> care of previous education in the area of drug and alcohol
issues. The return rate was 75%. Of the </p>

<p> respondents, 99% were male, average age was 46.7 years (+/-
9.3), and average number of years in practice </p>

<p> was 15.2 (+/- 9.6). A majority of respondents indicated that
they did not have training in the abuse </p>

<p> potential of analgesics (92 [69%]), characteristics of
benzodiazepine abuse (77 [58%]), or when to </p>

<p> seek the assistance of an addiction medicine specialist for
patients with chronic pain (106 [80%]). </p>

<p> Only 41 (31%) of the orthopedists indicated that they inquire
about alcohol and drug use before prescribing </p>

<p> opiates for more than a week. We offer suggestions for
self-education for interested physicians </p>

<p> SO - Southern Medical Journal 1991;84:1455-145<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000020 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant F </p>

<p> AU - Shannon JA </p>

<p> AU - Nork JG </p>

<p> AU - Sagherian A </p>

<p> TI - Abnormal adrenal gland metabolism in opioid addicts:
Implications for clinical treatment </p>

<p> AB - IN: Research Ctr for Dependency Disorders &amp; Chronic
Pain, West Covina, CA, US LA: English AB: </p>

<p> Examined whether methadone maintenance treatment (MMT) causes
diminution of pituitary-adrenal reserve </p>

<p> or if that condition preexists in the heroin addict. Ss were
14 male heroin addicts who voluntarily sought </p>

<p> outpatient detoxification. Results indicate that most active
heroin addicts have low adrenal reserve prior to </p>

<p> entering MMT. Chronic opioid administration may induce
adrenal insufficiency or an addisonian state. There </p>

<p> is a need to normalize adrenal gland metabolism during
treatment of heroin addicts. (PsycLIT Database </p>

<p> Copyright 1992 American Psychological Assn, all rights
reserved) KP: abnormal adrenal gland metabolism </p>

<p> as preexisting condition vs methadone maintenance side
effect; male heroin addicted patients in </p>

<p> detoxification AN: 79-24914 </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 1991;23:135-14<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000021 </p>

<p> AU - Toro R </p>

<p> AU - Perez Infante M </p>

<p> TI - Treatment of chronic pain with LARQ 731, a new
alternative to opiate analgesics </p>

<p> AB - IN: Inst Venezolano de los Seguros Sociales, Hosp
General &quot;Miguel Perez Carreno&quot; Servicio de </p>

<p> Anestesiologia, Caracas, Venezuela LA: English AB: LARQ 731
(a drug combination of carisoprodol, </p>

<p> dipyrone, and salicylamide) was administered to 42 36-88 yr
old patients with advanced cancer who </p>

<p> complained of severe pain and who required frequent
medication with opiate analgesics. To test the </p>

<p> analgesic efficacy of the combination, the arm-cuff method
was used before and after drug administration to </p>

<p> evaluate the pain threshold. A large increase in pain
threshold after LARQ 731 administration was observed. </p>

<p> No significant changes were found in routine laboratory
examinations, blood pressure, heart, or breathing </p>

<p> rate. (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1992 American Psychological
Assn, all rights reserved) KP: carisoprodol </p>

<p> &amp; dipyrone &amp; salicylamide; analgesic efficacy &amp;
pain thresholds; 36-88 yr old cancer patients with severe </p>

<p> pain AN: 79-10330 </p>

<p> SO - Current Therapeutic Research 1991;49:187-19<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000018 </p>

<p> AU - Verhaag DA </p>

<p> AU - Ikeda RM </p>

<p> TI - Prescribing for chronic pain. Special Issue:
Prescription drug issues: Public policy and clinical </p>

<p> practice </p>

<p> AB - IN: Medical Board of California, Sacramento, US LA:
English AB: Offers guidelines in the following </p>

<p> areas for physicians who treat patients with chronic
intractable pain with opiates: history and medical </p>

<p> examination, diagnosis/medical indication, written treatment
plan with recorded measurable objectives, </p>

<p> informed consent, periodic reviews and modifications,
consultation, and record keeping. (PsycLIT Database </p>

<p> Copyright 1992 American Psychological Assn, all rights
reserved) KP: opiate prescription guidelines for </p>

<p> chronic pain patients; physicians AN: 79-32546 </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 1991;23:433-43<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000024 </p>

<p> AU - Weingarten MA </p>

<p> TI - Chronic opioid therapy in patients with a remote history
of substance abuse </p>

<p> AB - LA: English AB: Presents 2 cases of male patients with a
history of substance abuse who were </p>

<p> successfully maintained on narcotics for chronic pain
problems, without escalation of dose or abuse. It is </p>

<p> suggested that the criteria proposed by R. K. Portenoy (see
PA, Vol 77:23432) for institution of narcotic </p>

<p> maintenance in chronic pain patients should not be considered
absolute. (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1991 </p>

<p> American Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: chronic
narcotic therapy; chronic pain; male patients </p>

<p> with history of substance abuse; case reports AN: 78-16376 </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pain and Symptom Management 1991;6:2-<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000255 </p>

<p> AU - Weissman DE </p>

<p> AU - Joranson DE </p>

<p> AU - Hopwood MB </p>

<p> TI - Wisconsin physicians' knowledge and attitudes about
opioid analgesic regulations </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] AD - Division of Cancer and
Blood Diseases AD - Medical College of </p>

<p> Wisconsin AD - Milwaukee 53226 UI - 93118350 </p>

<p> SO - Wis Med J 1991;90:671-67<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000253 </p>

<p> AU - Weissman DE </p>

<p> AU - Joranson DE </p>

<p> AU - Hopwood M </p>

<p> TI - THE INFLUENCE OF DRUG REGULATIONS ON OPIOID ANALGESIC
PRESCRIBING </p>

<p> PRACTICE (MEETING ABSTRACT) </p>

<p> AB - AB - 200 Wisconsin Mds chosen at random were mailed a
survey in June 1990 to assess </p>

<p> knowledge/attitudes concerning regulatory law. 90 surveys
(45%) were evaluable for review, including </p>

<p> internists (27), surgeons (25), family practitioners (19),
other (19). MDs had poor knowledge of drug </p>

<p> schedule and number of allowable refills of seven different
opioids. 32% of MDs did not know that an </p>

<p> emergency supply of a schedule II drug could be prescribed by
telephone. MDs were very concerned about </p>

<p> possible investigation when using opioids: 15, 17 and 19
times more concerned about prescribing morphine, </p>

<p> hydromorphone and methadone, respectively, than when
prescribing codeine with acetaminophen. MDs </p>

<p> were 8 times more concerned about possible investigation when
using opioids to treat chronic cancer pain </p>

<p> than when using opioids for acute pain and 20 times more
concerned if the patient had a history of drug </p>

<p> abuse, even with a 'real' reason to have pain. MDs were less
concerned about investigation than about </p>

<p> addiction, tolerance or respiratory depression. Wisconsin MDs
have serious concerns about using opioid </p>

<p> analgesics and poor knowledge of regulatory laws. Education
is needed to lessen these fears, especially as </p>

<p> they apply to the treatment of cancer-related pain AD -
Medical Coll. of Wisconsin AD - Milwaukee AD - </p>

<p> WI 53211 UI - 91672474 </p>

<p> SO - Proc Annu Meet Am Soc Clin Oncol 1991;10:A1129-A112<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000120 </p>

<p> AU - Yue SK </p>

<p> AU - St.Marie B </p>

<p> AU - Henrickson K </p>

<p> TI - Initial clinical experience with the SKY epidural
catheter </p>

<p> AB - The new SKY epidural catheter was evaluated, based upon
information collected about implant and </p>

<p> use of 53 catheters by 51 patients. Catheters were used to
treat chronic pain of a malignant (n = 25) and </p>

<p> nonmalignant (n = 28) origin. Of 3450 treatment days, 89%
occurred at home. Mean catheter use for </p>

<p> malignant and nonmalignant conditions were 58.6 and 76.3
days/patient, respectively. Visual analogue pain </p>

<p> scores in the first wk after implant indicated 79% of
patients achieved good to excellent pain relief. Clinical </p>

<p> impressions indicated this group achieved substantial
long-term pain relief. No serious complications were </p>

<p> observed. Two types of leakage required removing 5 catheters,
prompting changes that eliminated </p>

<p> subsequent leakages of both types. Accidental patient
retraction and subcutaneous infection each required a </p>

<p> catheter removal. No subarachnoid or epidural infections
occurred. The SKY catheter proved to be safe and </p>

<p> reliable. Therapy was cost-effective, since patients achieved
substantial pain relief while treated at home </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pain &amp; Symptom Management 1991;6:107-11<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000174 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> AU - Sorge J </p>

<p> TI - Is the therapeutic use of opioids adversely affected by
prejudice and law?. [Review] </p>

<p> SO - Recent Results in Cancer Research 1991;121:43-5<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000142 </p>

<p> AU - Allen A </p>

<p> TI - Notes from the annual meeting of the American Society of
Anesthesiologists </p>

<p> AB - Several important developments were reported at the 1989
Annual Meeting of the American Society </p>

<p> of Anesthesiologists: (1) a computerized machine called
HealthQuiz asks patients health questions, and in </p>

<p> less than 10 minutes provides a printout of answers, a
summary of symptoms, and a list of suggested </p>

<p> laboratory tests; (2) a simple device provides continuous
measurements of a critically ill patient's oxygen and </p>

<p> carbon dioxide levels; (3) near-infrared reflectance is a new
technique that may provide the first accurate </p>

<p> real-time measurement of critical oxygen levels in the brain;
(4) pulse oximeters may provide false readings </p>

<p> in patients who smoke cigarettes; (5) a new test may
accurately predict the survival chances of a child in a </p>

<p> coma; (6) the fastest growing subspecialty in anesthesiology
is chronic pain management clinics; (7) alpha-2 </p>

<p> adrenergic agonists improve pain relief without the unwanted
side effects of narcotics; (8) clonidine appears </p>

<p> to suppress the dangerous shivering that often occurs in
postanesthesia patients; (9) flumazenil was </p>

<p> successfully tested as an agent to reverse the drowsiness
caused by midazolam; and (10) ephedrine </p>

<p> minimizes nausea and vomiting in patients undergoing
ambulatory surgery </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Post Anesthesia Nursing 1990;5:96-10<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000136 </p>

<p> AU - Cole L </p>

<p> AU - Hanning CD </p>

<p> TI - Review of the rectal use of opioids. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - The rectal route for the administration of opioid
analgesics is often forgotten by physicians seeking </p>

<p> alternatives to the oral route. This article reviews the
physiology of rectal drug absorption and such data as </p>

<p> exists on the different opioids that have been administered
by this route. Conventional fatty-based </p>

<p> suppositories have a place in the management of chronic pain
but the variability in dissolution and drug </p>

<p> absorption limit their usefulness. Recently, sustained
release vehicles have become available that offer the </p>

<p> prospect of the attainment of steady analgesic drug
concentrations with once or twice daily dosing. Early </p>

<p> studies with the morphine hydrogel suppository suggest that
it may be capable of fulfilling this prospect. </p>

<p> Their inherent safety, as dose-dumping is impossible, will
make them suitable for use in the home. </p>

<p> [References: 43] </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pain &amp; Symptom Management 1990;5:118-12<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000201 </p>

<p> AU - Coyle N </p>

<p> AU - Adelhardt J </p>

<p> AU - Foley KM </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Character of terminal illness in the advanced cancer
patient: pain and other symptoms during </p>

<p> the last four weeks of life [see comments] </p>

<p> AB - AB - There is a great variability among advanced cancer
patients in the experience of symptoms and </p>

<p> their impact on life's activities. A subgroup of difficult
patients particularly tax the clinical skills and </p>

<p> compassion of practitioners. Although the need for
information about these patients is evident, their </p>

<p> characteristics have not been explored heretofore. We
describe our experience with such patients, a group </p>

<p> referred to the Supportive Care Program of the Pain Service
at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. </p>

<p> Prevalence of pain and other symptoms, patterns of opioid use
and routes of drug administration, and the </p>

<p> prevalence of suicidal ideation and requests for euthanasia
are discussed UI - 90270702 </p>

<p> SO - J Pain Symptom Manage 1990;5:83-9<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000127 </p>

<p> AU - Devulder J </p>

<p> AU - De Colvenaer L </p>

<p> AU - Rolly G </p>

<p> AU - Caemaert J </p>

<p> AU - Calliauw L </p>

<p> AU - Martens F </p>

<p> TI - Spinal cord stimulation in chronic pain therapy </p>

<p> AB - Spinal cord stimulation was undertaken in 45 patients
referred to the University Hospital in Ghent. </p>

<p> Failed back surgery was the major indication for
implantation. Raynaud's phenomenon, causalgia, </p>

<p> polyneuropathy, phantom limb pain, and diverse causes were
the other indications. Before neurosurgical </p>

<p> implantation of the system, a percutaneous epidural trial
procedure was performed. The efficacy of the </p>

<p> implanted stimulation system was estimated by considering the
use of medication and the patients' personal </p>

<p> appreciation of the obtained pain relief. Thirty-five
patients experienced very good pain relief. Only two </p>

<p> patients needed further narcotic analgesics. Eight patients
stopped using the stimulation system. To ensure </p>

<p> good results, strict selection criteria and many surgical
reinterventions seemed to be necessary. Although </p>

<p> spinal cord stimulation is a nonablative technique, many
complications may occur </p>

<p> SO - Clinical Journal of Pain 1990;6:51-5<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000131 </p>

<p> AU - Eriksen J </p>

<p> AU - Jensen NH </p>

<p> AU - Frolich S </p>

<p> TI - [Why are chronic pain patients given opioids via
injections? (letter)]. [Danish] </p>

<p> SO - Ugeskrift for Laeger 1990;152:3181-318<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000135 </p>

<p> AU - Finley RS </p>

<p> TI - Pain management with spinally administered opioids.
[Review] </p>

<p> AB - The use of spinally administered opioids to manage pain
is discussed. Central action on opioid </p>

<p> receptors of the substantia gelatinosa allows opioids to be
administered spinally for pain originating </p>

<p> anywhere inferior to the cranial nerves. Spinal opioids are
most commonly administered for intractable </p>

<p> midline sacral and perineal pain. The best candidates for
spinal opioids are patients in whom appropriate </p>

<p> &quot;conventional&quot; therapy no longer provides adequate
relief, patients who experience severe adverse effects </p>

<p> from conventional therapy, and patients for whom alternative
anesthetic procedures are inappropriate or </p>

<p> have failed. A reasonably safe initial dose is morphine
sulfate 1 mg intrathecally. The availability of </p>

<p> preservative-free, concentrated morphine sulfate enables
larger doses to be safely and comfortably </p>

<p> administered. Increased dosage requirements may result from
tolerance, progression of disease, increased </p>

<p> systemic absorption, or slippage of the catheter tip. As with
systemically administered opioids, care must be </p>

<p> exercised when discontinuing spinal opioid therapy. Adjuvant
drugs used with spinal opioids include </p>

<p> systemically administered analgesics, antidepressants,
corticosteroids, and spinal local anesthetics. The </p>

<p> administration of spinal opioids with systemic opioids or
other CNS depressants may result in excessive </p>

<p> sedation, respiratory depression, nausea, vomiting,
constipation, pruritus, and other adverse effects. Spinally </p>

<p> administered opioids can be used to manage severe chronic
pain effectively, safely, and comfortably. </p>

<p> [References: 29] </p>

<p> SO - American Journal of Hospital Pharmacy 1990;47:S14-S1<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000143 </p>

<p> AU - Gostomzyk JG </p>

<p> AU - Heller WD </p>

<p> TI - [Long-term use of narcotics in pain therapy]. [German] </p>

<p> AB - From 1. 1. 1976 to 30. 6. 1987, a total of 25,611
prescriptions for narcotics were obtained from </p>

<p> pharmacies by 4131 persons living in a town of 250,000
inhabitants in the Federal Republic of Germany. </p>

<p> 2412 patients (58.4%) had been prescribed narcotics on only
one occasion, 3178 patients (76.9%) over a </p>

<p> limited period of six months, presumably for acute pain. Only
520 patients (12.6%) received, over a period </p>

<p> of at least six months, five or more narcotic prescriptions
per six months. Reasons for the latter prescriptions </p>

<p> were malignant tumours in 273 (6.6%) and chronic pain due to
benign diseases in 144 (3.5%). In 21 patients </p>

<p> (0.5%) the narcotic dosage had risen over two years,
presumably because of the development of tolerance. </p>

<p> 19 patients had been on narcotics for at least eight years,
without their doctor diagnosing addiction. The </p>

<p> data suggest that, in prescribing narcotics for patients with
incurable disease, the risk of addiction should </p>

<p> play no role </p>

<p> SO - Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift 1990;115:763-77<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000133 </p>

<p> AU - Hansberry JL </p>

<p> AU - Bannick KH </p>

<p> AU - Durkan MJ </p>

<p> TI - Managing chronic pain with a permanent epidural catheter
</p>

<p> SO - Nursing 1990;20:52-5<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000141 </p>

<p> AU - Hassenbusch SJ </p>

<p> AU - Pillay PK </p>

<p> AU - Magdinec M </p>

<p> AU - Currie K </p>

<p> AU - Bay JW </p>

<p> AU - Covington EC </p>

<p> AU - Tomaszewski MZ </p>

<p> TI - Constant infusion of morphine for intractable cancer
pain using an implanted pump [see </p>

<p> comments] </p>

<p> AB - In the past, pain control for chronic pain syndromes
using narcotic infusion has been carried out </p>

<p> primarily via the intrathecal (subarachnoid) route. This
report presents one of the first large series of </p>

<p> terminally ill cancer patients with intractable pain treated
with continuous epidural morphine infusions by </p>

<p> means of implanted pumps and epidural spinal catheters. The
purpose of the study was to demonstrate that </p>

<p> the epidural route is effective with minimal complications,
and that screening with temporary epidural </p>

<p> catheter infusions results in a high rate of subsequent pain
relief. A multidisciplinary team (neurosurgeon, </p>

<p> anesthesiologists, psychiatrists, oncologists, and nurse
clinicians) evaluated and treated all of the patients </p>

<p> studied. Percutaneous placement of temporary epidural
catheters for a trial assessment was performed by the </p>

<p> anesthesiologists. Pain evaluations were conducted
independently by psychiatrists using both verbal and </p>

<p> visual analog scales. From 1982 to 1988, 41 (59.4%) of 69
patients evaluated for eligibility experienced </p>

<p> good pain control during trial assessment and were
subsequently implanted with Infusaid infusion pumps. </p>

<p> Preinfusion pain analog values were 8.6 +/- 0.3 and
postimplantation values at 1 month were 3.8 +/- 0.4 (p </p>

<p> less than 0.001). Over this same 1-month period. requirements
of systemic morphine equivalents decreased </p>

<p> by 79.3% with epidural infusions as compared to preinfusion
requirements (p less than 0.001). There were </p>

<p> no instances of epidural scarring, respiratory depression,
epidural infections, meningitis, or catheter </p>

<p> blockage. One patient developed apparent drug tolerance and
three patients required further catheter </p>

<p> manipulations. This series strongly suggests that significant
reductions in cancer pain can be obtained with </p>

<p> few complications and a low morphine tolerance rate using
chronic epidural morphine infusion. </p>

<p> Anesthesiology and psychiatry input, along with temporary
catheter infusion screening and quantitative pain </p>

<p> evaluations using analog scales, are essential </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Neurosurgery 1990;73:405-40<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000138 </p>

<p> AU - Juul A </p>

<p> AU - Pedersen AT </p>

<p> TI - [Endogenous opioids and their therapeutic use in the
treatment of pain]. [Review] [Danish] </p>

<p> AB - Cancer patients with chronic pain and obstetric patients
have participated in clinical trials of the </p>

<p> analgesic effects of endogenous opioids. It is possible to
achieve adequate relief of pain in these patients </p>

<p> following epidural or intrathecal administration of
endogenous opioids. Further investigations are required. </p>

<p> [References: 30] </p>

<p> SO - Ugeskrift for Laeger 1990;152:372-37<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000023 </p>

<p> AU - Kennedy JA </p>

<p> AU - Crowley TJ </p>

<p> TI - Chronic pain and substance abuse: A pilot study of
opioid maintenance </p>

<p> AB - IN: U Colorado School of Medicine, Addiction Research
&amp; Treatment Services, Denver, US LA: </p>

<p> English AB: Presents a pilot study of methadone maintenance
treatment for 4 patients (aged 27-38 yrs) with </p>

<p> both chronic pain and substance abuse. The study evaluated
the program's ability to attract and hold patients, </p>

<p> the methodology for assessing change, and the problems and
pitfalls. Weekly random urinalysis, weekly </p>

<p> psychotherapy, and quarterly self-report tests of pain, mood,
and function were used to evaluate change. </p>

<p> Three patients remained in treatment for 19-21 mo. Two
stopped needle use and substance abuse, and the </p>

<p> 3rd stopped cocaine use and abusing the medical system to
obtain opioids. All Ss appeared to have improved </p>

<p> functionally. (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1991 American
Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: </p>

<p> methadone maintenance; substance abusing 27-38 yr olds with
chronic pain AN: 78-16651 </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 1990;7:233-23<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000125 </p>

<p> AU - King SA </p>

<p> AU - Strain JJ </p>

<p> TI - Benzodiazepine use by chronic pain patients </p>

<p> AB - Of 114 patients presenting to the Pain Management
Service at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine </p>

<p> with chronic pain, 38% (N = 43) were taking one or more
benzodiazepine drugs at the time of the initial </p>

<p> assessment. The majority of patients were chronic users, with
14% (N = 6) having taken the medications for </p>

<p> 1-2 years and 46% (N = 20) for 2 years or longer.
Ninety-three percent (N = 40) of those given a </p>

<p> benzodiazepine drug stated that it was initiated after the
onset of pain. Although 86% (N = 37) were using </p>

<p> the medication (all or in part) to improve sleep, they
continued to report as many problems with sleep as the </p>

<p> nonbenzodiazepine group did. Other drugs prescribed
concurrently with the benzodiazepine drugs were </p>

<p> narcotic drugs (58% of patients), antidepressant drugs (32%),
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents (26%), </p>

<p> and others (16%). Benzodiazepines have been reported to
provide little therapeutic benefit to chronic pain<br>
</p>

<p> Return-Path: &lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> Comments: Authenticated sender is
&lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> From: tanante@nwlink.com </p>

<p> To: schaffer@smartlink.net </p>

<p> Date: Sat, 1 Jun 1996 17:18:59 +0000 </p>

<p> Subject: Re: Pain Medication #1 </p>

<p> Priority: normal<br>
</p>

<p> patients, and may even exacerbate their symptoms. We have
shown that benzodiazepine drugs are frequently </p>

<p> prescribed for long-term use, for sleep, and in conjunction
with narcotic drugs. Such use is contrary to </p>

<p> generally accepted guidelines </p>

<p> SO - Clinical Journal of Pain 1990;6:143-14<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000134 </p>

<p> AU - Koeller JM </p>

<p> TI - Understanding cancer pain. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - The pathogenesis of cancer pain, the incidence of pain
associated with specific types of malignant </p>

<p> tumors, and the nature of acute and chronic pain are
discussed, and alternative delivery systems for pain </p>

<p> management are described. More than 80% of cancer patients
with advanced metastatic disease suffer </p>

<p> moderate to severe pain. Most cancer pain is caused by direct
tumor infiltration; approximately 20% of </p>

<p> cancer pain may be attributed to the effects of surgery,
radio-therapy, or chemotherapy. The incidence of </p>

<p> cancer pain is related to tumor type; 70% or more of patients
with tumors of the bone, cervix, and ovaries </p>

<p> suffer cancer-related pain, while only 5% of patients with
leukemia have pain. Pain is defined by the organs </p>

<p> involved. Somatic pain is usually dull and well localized;
visceral pain is generalized and difficult to describe. </p>

<p> Other types of pain, including deafferentation pain and
referred pain, are particularly difficult to manage. </p>

<p> Cancer pain may be acute or chronic. The latter may cause
psychological reactions that make effective </p>

<p> treatment more challenging. Opiate analgesic agents,
administered by the epidural or intrathecal routes, </p>

<p> block pain more selectively and produce fewer adverse
reactions than systemic analgesic agents. The </p>

<p> duration and onset of analgesia depend on the lipophilicity
of the agent used. Because pain is the most </p>

<p> common complaint of the patient with cancer, clinicians
should be aware of the range of pharmacologic and </p>

<p> nonpharmacologic analgesic modalities available to them.
Familiarity with newer modalities and delivery </p>

<p> routes, such as spinal administration of opiate analgesics,
is recommended. [References: 6] </p>

<p> SO - American Journal of Hospital Pharmacy 1990;47:S3-S<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000139 </p>

<p> AU - Lee TL </p>

<p> AU - Kumar A </p>

<p> AU - Baratham G </p>

<p> TI - Intraventricular morphine for intractable craniofacial
pain </p>

<p> AB - This case management report on a patient with advanced
craniofacial neoplasm discusses the </p>

<p> successful treatment of chronic pain by the cortical
intraventricular narcotic administration. A previously </p>

<p> treated patient with surgery and radiotherapy for carcinoma
of the palate developed severe intractable pain </p>

<p> despite high dose oral morphine therapy. Investigations
revealed that neoplasm had reoccurred with </p>

<p> extensive infiltration. Intraventricular morphine therapy was
discussed and accepted by the patient and </p>

<p> family. A ventricular shunt with an Ommaya reservoir was
inserted under local anaesthesia. Preservative-free </p>

<p> morphine sulphate in increasing doses of 0.25 to 1 mg was
administered, once daily, which kept the patient </p>

<p> in a pain-free state. The treatment was initiated in the
hospital and continued at home till the demise of the </p>

<p> patient on the 9th week. The home care was provided by the
nurses of Home Nursing Foundation and </p>

<p> Singapore Cancer Society under physician supervision. There
were no complications which had been </p>

<p> reported in the literature, observed in the management of
this patient </p>

<p> SO - Singapore Medical Journal 1990;31:273-27<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000124 </p>

<p> AU - Lipman AG </p>

<p> TI - Clinically relevant differences among the opioid
analgesics. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - The mechanism of action of opioids and clinically
relevant differences among the opioid analgesics are </p>

<p> described. Both endorphins (endogenous morphine-like
substances) and exogenous opioids (opium alkaloids </p>

<p> and their derivatives) bind to opioid receptors in the human
central nervous system to provide analgesia and </p>

<p> other effects. Some drugs, such as morphine, are true
agonists, i.e., they bind to and activate receptors. </p>

<p> Some are partial agonists, binding to part of the receptor
and causing effects that are similar to, but perhaps </p>

<p> less pronounced than, the effects produced by agonists.
Others are antagonist, i.e., they bind to the receptor </p>

<p> but do not cause the associated effects. Some drugs, termed
agonist-antagonist opioids, act as antagonists at </p>

<p> one type of receptor and agonists at another type of
receptor. True agonists tend to have relatively straight- </p>

<p> line dose-response curves; in other words, their effect
increases with increasing doses over a broad dosage </p>

<p> range. Partial agonists and agonist-antagonists tend to have
ceiling effects; that is, they do not have the </p>

<p> broad dosage range of drugs such as morphine, methadone,
hydromorphone, and other &quot;strong&quot; opioids. </p>

<p> This fact mediates against the use of partial agonists and
agonist-antagonists in cancer patients who have </p>

<p> chronic pain that may increase as the disease progresses.
Three major factors that should be considered </p>

<p> when a drug is selected for clinical use are (1) relative
affinities for the different opioid receptor types, (2) </p>

<p> pharmacokinetic characteristics that influence onset and
duration of action, and (3) whether the opioids are </p>

<p> strong or weak. For treatment of cancer pain, drugs with long
durations of action are </p>

<p> preferable.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) [References: 11]
</p>

<p> SO - American Journal of Hospital Pharmacy 1990;47:S7-1<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000128 </p>

<p> AU - McKinney MW </p>

<p> AU - Londeen TF </p>

<p> AU - Turner SP </p>

<p> AU - Levitt SR </p>

<p> TI - Chronic TM disorder and non-TM disorder pain: a
comparison of behavioral and psychological </p>

<p> characteristics </p>

<p> AB - The purpose of this paper is to determine whether
patients with chronic temporomandibular disorder </p>

<p> (TMD) pain manifest behavioral, experimental, and
psychological characteristics similar to patients with </p>

<p> other chronic pain illnesses. The Chronic Pain Battery (CPB),
a multidimensional assessment tool for chronic </p>

<p> pain patients, was used to compare several important
variables between 78 TM disorder (TMD) patients and </p>

<p> 98 non-TMD chronic pain patients. The study found that
chronic TMD patients had lower &quot;usual&quot; pain </p>

<p> intensity and suffering levels, fewer vegetative symptoms
associated with depression, higher pain tolerance, </p>

<p> less impairment of activity, more hope about treatment
outcome, lower health care system utilization, but </p>

<p> higher reported stress levels than non-TMD chronic pain
patients. The two groups manifested no significant </p>

<p> differences in use of narcotics, sedatives, and sleeping
pills; levels of depression, anxiety, somatization, </p>

<p> hostility, or psychoticism; illness behavior reinforcement in
their social surroundings; or ratings of problems </p>

<p> with work, family, self-esteem, or suicidal impulses. These
findings suggest that chronic TMD pain patients </p>

<p> (with a symptom duration of over six months) are behaviorally
and psychologically similar to non-TMD </p>

<p> chronic pain patients, but that they differ in their
perceptions of their disorder, rendering them less </p>

<p> handicapped by their problems. Psychological, social, and
behavioral treatment methods useful for treating </p>

<p> chronic pain syndrome may thus also be applied along with
dental therapy for optimal treatment of TMD </p>

<p> associated with chronic pain </p>

<p> SO - Cranio 1990;8:40-4<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000130 </p>

<p> AU - Morawetz RF </p>

<p> AU - Schreithofer D </p>

<p> AU - Bostjancic G </p>

<p> AU - Walter MH </p>

<p> AU - Namestnik E </p>

<p> AU - Benzer H </p>

<p> TI - [The multidisciplinary outpatient pain clinic in
relation to anesthesia. An important task for the </p>

<p> anesthesiologist]. [Review] [German] </p>

<p> AB - Anesthesiologists have always played a leading role in
research into pain and its treatment. Their </p>

<p> efforts, however, have been focused on acute or postoperative
pain problems. It was the American </p>

<p> anesthesiologist John J. Bonica who fought for an increased
interest in chronic pain. The establishment of </p>

<p> the first Multidisciplinary Pain Center at the University of
Washington in Seattle, the foundation of the </p>

<p> International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) and
Melzack and Wall's now 25 year old gate control </p>

<p> theory were the driving forces behind rapid developments in
research and treatment in the area of chronic </p>

<p> pain. The realization that chronic pain was the most frequent
cause of disability in the United States also </p>

<p> gave an impetus for new efforts in treatment. The classic
anesthesiological topics, such as operative </p>

<p> anesthesia emergency medicine and intensive care, have been
extended to include acute pain services and </p>

<p> chronic pain treatment facilities. This reflects the
understanding that anesthesiological knowledge and </p>

<p> techniques can be valuable to patients in severe acute pain
and those in lingering long-term chronic pain </p>

<p> phases. Anesthesiologists are skilled in the use of opioid
narcotics and in the administration of strong </p>

<p> analgesics. Many severe pain problems can be solved by
correct use of the analgesic regimen. Special ways </p>

<p> of administering narcotic analgesics, such as epidural
infusion or patient-controlled analgesia, have already </p>

<p> alleviated the pain problems of many patients.
Anesthesiological techniques are also crucial in diagnosis. </p>

<p> Sequential differential blockade and simple nerve blocks can
be helpful in the diagnosis and classification of </p>

<p> the pain problems. Anesthesiological contributions to a
chronic pain service are not restricted to medical </p>

<p> interventions. Organizational skills are also needed for
efficient running of multidisciplinary pain treatment </p>

<p> facilities. Clinical practice in surgical anesthesia means
that anesthesiologists are experienced in </p>

<p> interdisciplinary work and familiar with the advantages and
dangers of team work. Despite international </p>

<p> acceptance of the multidisciplinary approach to chronic pain,
there is still a lack of appropriate facilities in </p>

<p> the German-speaking countries, and we consider it important
that anesthesiologists commit themselves to </p>

<p> increasing general awareness of what is needed. [References:
45] </p>

<p> SO - Anaesthesist 1990;39:456-46<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000129 </p>

<p> AU - Osipova NA </p>

<p> AU - Novikov GA </p>

<p> AU - Ziai GR </p>

<p> AU - Mel'nikova ZL </p>

<p> TI - [Tramal in the treatment of acute and chronic pain
syndromes in cancer patients]. [Russian] </p>

<p> AB - The study of 65 cancer patients has demonstrated the
advantages and disadvantages of tramal as an </p>

<p> agent used for the relief of acute and chronic pain syndrome.
In 18 patients tramal was used in postoperative </p>

<p> analgesia, in 17 patients it was used for the treatment of
chronic pain syndrome. It has been shown that in </p>

<p> the postoperative period tramal has no noticeable advantages
over promedol. However, tramal had definite </p>

<p> advantages over other opiate agonists when used for the
treatment of chronic pain syndrome in incurable </p>

<p> cancer patients. Thus, the data obtained show that tramal, a
synthetic analgesic of a new generation, has no </p>

<p> dangerous side effects, is effective in a convenient,
non-invasive drug form, interacts well with non-narcotic </p>

<p> and supplementary agents and causes no clinical signs of drug
tolerance or addiction in prolonged </p>

<p> application </p>

<p> SO - Anesteziologiya i Reanimatologiya 1990;:55-5<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000144 </p>

<p> AU - Payne R </p>

<p> TI - Medication-induced performance deficits: analgesics and
narcotics </p>

<p> AB - Pain is the most common medical complaint, and analgesic
drugs are often used for its management. </p>

<p> Seven out of 10 Americans took nonprescription pain relievers
in the last year. Analgesics are classified as </p>

<p> nonnarcotics (acetaminophen, aspirin, and nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs), narcotics (which include </p>

<p> the morphine-like drugs), and analgesic adjuvants (a
heterogeneous group of drugs, including antihistamines, </p>

<p> phenothiazines, anticonvulsants, calcium channel blockers,
and tricyclic antidepressants), which may have </p>

<p> intrinsic analgesic efficacy for specific pain syndromes or
may be used as co-analgesics in combination with </p>

<p> the traditional nonnarcotic and narcotic agents. Although
these agents can be used safely most of the time by </p>

<p> patients with acute or chronic pain, all classes of
analgesics may impair cardiovascular and neuropsychiatric </p>

<p> functioning, which may influence job performance in specific
instances </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Occupational Medicine 1990;32:362-36<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000137 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Chronic opioid therapy in nonmalignant pain. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - This review draws on data obtained in the cancer pain,
nonmalignant pain, and addict populations to </p>

<p> examine critically the major issues raised by the use of
chronic opioid therapy in nonmalignant pain. The </p>

<p> available evidence suggests that there is probably a selected
subpopulation of patients with chronic </p>

<p> nonmalignant pain who may obtain sustained partial analgesia
without the development of toxicity or the </p>

<p> psychologic and behavioral characteristics of addiction.
Future discussions of this approach must adequately </p>

<p> define the terminology of addiction and strive to distinguish
medical considerations from the societal and </p>

<p> regulatory influences that may affect prescribing behavior.
Those who treat patients with chronic pain must </p>

<p> actively participate in these discussions lest decisions with
enormous impact on patient care be made solely </p>

<p> by those whose primary responsibility is the elimination of
substance abuse. [References: 114] </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pain &amp; Symptom Management 1990;5:S46-S62 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000208 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> AU - Foley KM </p>

<p> AU - Inturrisi CE </p>

<p> TI - The nature of opioid responsiveness and its implications
for neuropathic pain: new hypotheses </p>

<p> derived from studies of opioid infusions [see comments] </p>

<p> SO - (Unknown Journal!) 1990;:<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000140 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> AU - Hagen NA </p>

<p> TI - Breakthrough pain: definition, prevalence and
characteristics [see comments] </p>

<p> AB - In the cancer population, the term breakthrough pain
typically refers to a transitory flare of pain in the </p>

<p> setting of chronic pain managed with opioid drugs. The
prevalence and characteristics of this phenomenon </p>

<p> have not been defined, and its impact on patient care is
unknown. We developed operational definitions for </p>

<p> breakthrough pain and its major characteristics, and applied
these in a prospective survey of patients with </p>

<p> cancer pain. Data were collected during a 3 month period from
consecutive patients who reported moderate </p>

<p> pain or less for more than 12 h daily and stable opioid
dosing for a minimum of 2 consecutive days. Of 63 </p>

<p> patients surveyed, 41 (64%) reported breakthrough pain,
transient flares of severe or excruciating pain. </p>

<p> Fifty-one different pains were described (median 4 pains/day;
range 1-3600). Pain characteristics were </p>

<p> extremely varied. Twenty-two (43%) pains were paroxysmal in
onset; the remainder were more gradual. The </p>

<p> duration varied from seconds to hours (median/range: 30
min/1-240 min), and 21 (41%) were both </p>

<p> paroxysmal and brief (lancinating pain). Fifteen (29%) of the
pains were related to the fixed opioid dose, </p>

<p> occurring solely at the end of the dosing interval.
Twenty-eight (55%) of the pains were precipitated; of </p>

<p> these, 22 were caused by an action of the patient (incident
pain), and 6 were associated with a non-volitional </p>

<p> precipitant, such as flatulence. The pathophysiology of the
pain was believed to be somatic in 17 (33%), </p>

<p> visceral in 10 (20%), neuropathic in 14 (27%), and mixed in
10 (20%). Pain was related to the tumor in 42 </p>

<p> (82%), the effects of therapy in 7 (14%), and neither in 2
(4%). Diverse interventions were employed to </p>

<p> manage these pains, with variable efficacy. These data
clarify the spectrum of breakthrough pains and </p>

<p> indicate their importance in cancer pain management </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1990;41:273-28<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000199 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - The management of cancer pain </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] AD - Department of
Neurology AD -Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer </p>

<p> Center AD - New York AD - NY 10021 UI - 90151022 </p>

<p> SO - Compr Ther 1990;16:53-6<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000202 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Chronic opioid therapy in nonmalignant pain </p>

<p> AB - AB - This review draws on data obtained in the cancer
pain, nonmalignant pain, and addict </p>

<p> populations to examine critically the major issues raised by
the use of chronic opioid therapy in nonmalignant </p>

<p> pain. The available evidence suggests that there is probably
a selected subpopulation of patients with chronic </p>

<p> nonmalignant pain who may obtain sustained partial analgesia
without the development of toxicity or the </p>

<p> psychologic and behavioral characteristics of addiction.
Future discussions of this approach must adequately </p>

<p> define the terminology of addiction and strive to distinguish
medical considerations from the societal and </p>

<p> regulatory influences that may affect prescribing behavior.
Those who treat patients with chronic pain must </p>

<p> actively participate in these discussions lest decisions with
enormous impact on patient care be made solely </p>

<p> by those whose primary responsibility is the elimination of
substance abuse UI -90217697 </p>

<p> SO - J Pain Symptom Manage 1990;5:S46-S6<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000132 </p>

<p> AU - Sagen J </p>

<p> AU - Wang H </p>

<p> AU - Pappas GD </p>

<p> TI - Adrenal medullary implants in the rat spinal cord reduce
nociception in a chronic pain model </p>

<p> AB - Previous work in this laboratory has indicated that the
transplantation of adrenal medullary tissue into </p>

<p> the subarachnoid space of the rat spinal cord can reduce pain
sensitivity to acute noxious stimuli, particularly </p>

<p> following stimulation by nicotine. This most likely results
from the stimulated release of opioid peptides and </p>

<p> catecholamines from the transplanted chromaffin cells.
However, chronic pain models may more closely </p>

<p> resemble human clinical pain, and the arthritic rat model has
been used for screening potential therapeutic </p>

<p> strategies. The purpose of the present study was to assess
the potential for adrenal medullary tissue </p>

<p> implanted into the spinal subarachnoid space to alleviate
chronic pain. Adrenal medullary tissue was </p>

<p> implanted into adjuvant-induced arthritic rats, and changes
in body weight and vocalization responses were </p>

<p> monitored over the 10 week course of the disease. Results
indicate that the severe weight reduction </p>

<p> normally associated with this inflammatory arthritis was
attenuated by adrenal medullary, but not control, </p>

<p> implants. In addition, vocalizations were reduced in animals
implanted with adrenal medullary, but not </p>

<p> control tissue following nicotine stimulation. This reduction
was blocked by the opiate antagonist, naloxone, </p>

<p> and partially attenuated by the alpha-adrenergic antagonist,
phentolamine. Together, these results suggest </p>

<p> that the transplantation of adrenal medullary tissue into the
subarachnoid space of the spinal cord may </p>

<p> provide a local source of opioid peptides and catecholamines
for the reduction of chronic pain </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1990;42:69-7<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000126 </p>

<p> AU - Tom CM </p>

<p> AU - Arias LM </p>

<p> AU - Barolat G </p>

<p> TI - Spinal opiate administration: a case of catheter
misplacement </p>

<p> AB - Continuous spinal opiate administration via permanently
implantable drug delivery devices has been </p>

<p> proven to provide profound analgesia for chronic pain
conditions. We present a case in which the catheter of </p>

<p> an implantable subarachnoid device was misplaced into the
subdural/extra-arachnoid space despite the free </p>

<p> flow of cerebrospinal fluid. This was verified by x-ray dye
studies. It is postulated that this misplacement of </p>

<p> the catheter likely occurred as a result of recent lumbar
punctures the patient had undergone. Extravasation </p>

<p> of cerebrospinal fluid created a false space and contributed
to the misplacement and ultimate failure of the </p>

<p> device to provide analgesia </p>

<p> SO - Clinical Journal of Pain 1990;6:60-6<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000072 </p>

<p> AU - Ansuategui M </p>

<p> AU - Naharro L </p>

<p> AU - Feria M </p>

<p> TI - Noradrenergic and opioidergic influences on the
antinociceptive effect of clomipramine in the </p>

<p> formalin test in rats </p>

<p> AB - Although tricyclic antidepressants are especially useful
in the treatment of chronic pain conditions, </p>

<p> most of the work about its mechanism of action has been made
on acute pain tests. The present study was </p>

<p> aimed at studying the role played by noradrenergic and
opioidergic influences on the antinociceptive activity </p>

<p> of subchronically administered clomipramine in the formalin
test (a tonic pain model) in rats. Clomipramine </p>

<p> produced antinociception after 7 days, administration (2.5
mg/kg/day), an effect equivalent to that obtained </p>

<p> by acute morphine (5 mg/kg). The antinociceptive effect of
clomipramine was inhibited by the following: </p>

<p> nonspecific blocking of alpha 1- and alpha 2-adrenoceptors by
phentolamine, specific blocking of alpha 1- </p>

<p> adrenoceptors by prazosin; stimulation of alpha 2 receptors
by clonidine; and blocking of the opioid </p>

<p> receptors by naloxone. Blocking the alpha 2-receptors with
yohimbine did not antagonize the effect of </p>

<p> clomipramine. These results suggest that clomipramine
produces antinociception in this test, partly via the </p>

<p> participation of the endogenous opioid system and partly by
further activating or potentiating previously </p>

<p> activated noradrenergic pathways which are involved in the
control of pain information </p>

<p> SO - Psychopharmacology 1989;98:93-9<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000069 </p>

<p> AU - Arnold C </p>

<p> TI - Intraspinal analgesia: a new route for an old drug </p>

<p> AB - Chronic pain control is a pressing world health problem.
Despite the magnitude of this health issue, </p>

<p> health care professionals receive little formal training in
pain management, hence attempts to deal with </p>

<p> chronically suffering patients may be futile. A new
intervention, the infusion of low-dose spinal opiates via a </p>

<p> totally implanted continuous flow pump, is providing a new
approach to pain control and offering a desirable </p>

<p> alternative to the need for escalating systemic narcotics and
neuroablative procedures. A brief overview of </p>

<p> the anatomy and physiology of the pain mechanism will be
discussed as well as rationale for the use of </p>

<p> continuous infusion of spinal opiates. Nursing interventions
for the patient receiving intraspinal analgesia will </p>

<p> also be discussed </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Neuroscience Nursing 1989;21:30-3<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000025 </p>

<p> AU - Berde C </p>

<p> AU - Sethna NF </p>

<p> AU - Masek B </p>

<p> AU - Fosburg M </p>

<p> TI - Pediatric pain clinics: Recommendations for their
development </p>

<p> AB - IN: Children's Hospital Dept of Anesthesia, Boston, MA,
US LA: English AB: Adult clinics serve as </p>

<p> models for pediatric pain programs, although adult and
pediatric pain syndromes differ substantially. The </p>

<p> paper describes attributes of a pediatric acute pain
management program, including involvement of clinicians </p>

<p> with both medical and psychosocial orientations, a
cognitive-behavioral program, and rational use of </p>

<p> systemic opioids. Chronic cancer pain management is
discussed, and psychological and pharmacological </p>

<p> approaches to chronic pain not due to cancer are considered.
(PsycLIT Database Copyright 1991 American </p>

<p> Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: model of pain
management program using medical &amp; </p>

<p> psychosocial orientation &amp; cognitive behavioral &amp;
opioid treatment; children AN: 78-07772 </p>

<p> SO - Pediatrician 1989;16:94-10<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000070 </p>

<p> AU - Boisaubin EV </p>

<p> TI - The assessment and treatment of pain in the emergency
room. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - A broad spectrum of painful conditions presents to the
modern emergency center (EC). The three </p>

<p> most common categories are acute, self-limited disorders;
chronic medical or surgical syndromes with acute </p>

<p> exacerbation; and psychic pain syndromes in which the
etiology cannot be easily ascertained. Many factors </p>

<p> may differentiate pain from suffering, and physicians should
educate patients not only about the nature of </p>

<p> their condition and its prognosis, but also about anticipated
discomfort. Clinical concerns in the EC include </p>

<p> physicians' tendency to undertreat or even ignore pain, the
need for appropriate but flexible dosage </p>

<p> schedules, and physicians' concern about masking important
signs and symptoms. Nonsteroidal anti- </p>

<p> inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are currently the safest and most
effective group of oral analgesics. Important </p>

<p> factors for drug selection include efficacy, dosage, lack of
side effects, and cost. Two special groups of </p>

<p> patients, those with psychic pain syndromes and those with
drug-seeking behavior, can create problems for </p>

<p> the physician. Patients with chronic pain syndromes need
special follow-up but do not benefit from </p>

<p> additional analgesic drug therapy. Patients who seek and
abuse drugs can be difficult to identify, may have </p>

<p> true underlying medical pathology, and should not be given
narcotic prescriptions. [References: 15] </p>

<p> SO - Clinical Journal of Pain 1989;5 Suppl 2:S19-24;
discussion S24-<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000076 </p>

<p> AU - Busch EH </p>

<p> AU - Atchison SR </p>

<p> TI - Steroid celiac plexus block for chronic pancreatitis:
results in 16 cases </p>

<p> AB - Sixteen cases in which celiac plexus block with depot
steroid was used to treat chronic pancreatitis </p>

<p> pain were reviewed. Only 4 of 16 patients reported pain
relief with the procedure. Of the 12 patients who </p>

<p> did not obtain relief, narcotic dependence was present in 11
of 12. No patients in the &quot;relief&quot; group were </p>

<p> narcotic dependent. Prior pancreatic surgery was present in 9
of the 12 patients without relief and in 1 of 4 </p>

<p> patients with relief. It is postulated that refractory
chronic pancreatitis pain may be an extreme form of what </p>

<p> has been termed &quot;abnormal illness behavior.&quot;
Furthermore, these results underscore the poor results </p>

<p> experienced using neural blockade for the relief of chronic
pain when narcotic dependence is present </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Clinical Anesthesia 1989;1:431-43<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000068 </p>

<p> AU - Delay-Goyet P </p>

<p> AU - Kayser V </p>

<p> AU - Zajac JM </p>

<p> AU - Guilbaud G </p>

<p> AU - Besson JM </p>

<p> AU - Roques BP </p>

<p> TI - Lack of significant changes in mu, delta opioid binding
sites and neutral endopeptidase EC </p>

<p> 3.4.24.11 in the brain and spinal cord of arthritic rats </p>

<p> AB - The possible changes in neutral endopeptidase EC
3.4.24.11 (&quot;enkephalinase&quot;, NEP), mu and delta </p>

<p> opioid binding sites, were investigated using in vitro
quantitative radioautography in various regions of the </p>

<p> central nervous system of the Freund's adjuvant-induced
arthritic rat, a model of chronic pain. Enkephalinase </p>

<p> was labeled by a specific tritiated inhibitor,
[3H]N-[(2RS)-3-hydroxyaminocarbonyl-2-benzyl-1- </p>

<p> oxopropyl]glycine ([3H]HACBO-Gly), while mu and delta opioid
binding sites were selectively labelled with </p>

<p> [3H]Tyr-D-Ala-Gly-(Me)Phe-Gly-ol ([3H]DAGO) and
[3H]Tyr-D-Thr-Gly-Phe-Leu-Thr ([3H]DTLFT), </p>

<p> respectively. As compared to controls, no significant
modifications were found in NEP, mu or delta binding </p>

<p> sites at both supraspinal and spinal levels of arthritic
rats. These results suggest that the enhanced efficiency </p>

<p> of exogenous opioids or endogenous enkephalins, reported to
occur in this model of chronic inflammatory </p>

<p> pain, are not directly related to changes in mu and delta
opioid binding sites or steady state levels of NEP </p>

<p> SO - Neuropharmacology 1989;28:1341-134<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000071 </p>

<p> AU - Ellis JS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Ramamurthy S </p>

<p> AU - Schoenfeld LS </p>

<p> AU - Hoffman J </p>

<p> AU - Walsh NE </p>

<p> TI - Diagnostic epidural opioid technique </p>

<p> AB - Diagnostic epidural blocks were performed on 27 chronic
pain patients sequentially using saline, </p>

<p> fentanyl, and lidocaine solution. The patients were divided
into one of four groups based on their response </p>

<p> to the epidural solutions: placebo response group--pain
relief with placebo solutions; fentanyl response </p>

<p> group--pain relief with epidural fentanyl; lidocaine response
group (LRG)--pain relief with lidocaine but not </p>

<p> fentanyl; and no response group--no pain relief with any of
the solutions used. The four groups were </p>

<p> compared on the basis of age, sex, site of pain, duration of
pain, narcotic use, pain assessment index, and </p>

<p> workmen's compensation claims. The comparisons resulted in
the conclusion that LRG patients had a much </p>

<p> longer average duration of pain than the other groups. On the
basis of the information gathered, it was </p>

<p> theorized that, despite their response to epidural lidocaine,
LRG patients may actually be a group of operant </p>

<p> pain patients. Their failure to receive analgesia from
epidural fentanyl may be a learned response such that </p>

<p> they associate any sensory input from the affected area as
painful. If follow-up studies support these </p>

<p> findings, then the diagnostic opioid technique may be a more
sensitive tool in diagnosing chronic pain </p>

<p> SO - Clinical Journal of Pain 1989;5:211-21<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000066 </p>

<p> AU - Fields HL </p>

<p> TI - Pain modulation: opiates and chronic pain. [Review] </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Research Monograph Series 1989;95:92-10<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000081 </p>

<p> AU - Hand CW </p>

<p> AU - Ryan KE </p>

<p> AU - Dutt SK </p>

<p> AU - Moore RA </p>

<p> AU - O'Connor J </p>

<p> AU - Talbot D </p>

<p> AU - McQuay HJ </p>

<p> TI - Radioimmunoassay of buprenorphine in urine: studies in
patients and in a drug clinic </p>

<p> AB - A radioimmunoassay kit (DPC buprenorphine double
antibody) was evaluated with clinical samples </p>

<p> and samples from a drug clinic. Urine samples were collected
over a 2-day period from 5 hospital in-patients </p>

<p> receiving sublingual buprenorphine, 400 to 2000
micrograms/day, for the relief of chronic pain. Samples </p>

<p> were measured before and after enzymatic hydrolysis. Urine
buprenorphine concentrations were measurable </p>

<p> at all doses studied (minimum value 5.6 ng/mL) and were
greater with larger doses. The increase in </p>

<p> concentration after hydrolysis averaged 49% and was similar
for all doses studied. The authors conclude that </p>

<p> the method has extensive cross-reactivity with glucuronides
of buprenorphine and its metabolites and that </p>

<p> samples may be analyzed without prior hydrolysis. The
prevalence of buprenorphine use in 97 patients </p>

<p> attending a drug clinic was also studied. Sixty (62%) had
measurable urinary buprenorphine concentrations </p>

<p> of 1 ng/mL or more by direct assay. The buprenorphine users
were significantly younger and reported </p>

<p> significantly greater use of opiates than nonusers </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Analytical Toxicology 1989;13:100-10<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000067 </p>

<p> AU - Herz A </p>

<p> AU - Millan MJ </p>

<p> AU - Stein C </p>

<p> TI - Arthritic inflammation in rats as a model of chronic
pain: role of opioid systems. [Review] </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Research Monograph Series 1989;95:110-11<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000077 </p>

<p> AU - Lipman JJ </p>

<p> AU - Blumenkopf B </p>

<p> TI - Comparison of subjective and objective analgesic effects
of intravenous and intrathecal </p>

<p> morphine in chronic pain patients by heat beam dolorimetry </p>

<p> AB - The pain tolerance latencies of 10 chronic pain patients
were evaluated by heat beam dolorimetry </p>

<p> (stimulus intensity 15.33 mW.cm-2.sec-1) prior to and
following administration of morphine by intrathecal </p>

<p> (n = 5) or intravenous (n = 5) routes. Patients not
undergoing opiate withdrawal evinced increased baseline </p>

<p> pain tolerance latencies prior to drug administration
compared with normal volunteers. Two patients </p>

<p> undergoing the opiate withdrawal syndrome at the time of test
experienced reduced pain tolerance latencies </p>

<p> compared with normal volunteers, most probably corresponding
to the hyperesthesia symptom of the </p>

<p> syndrome. Intravenous morphine infusion (30 mg) induced a
time-dependent increase in cutaneous pain </p>

<p> tolerance with peak effect occurring 1-2 h after
administration. This persisted for up to 4 h and thereafter </p>

<p> declined. The time course of subjective pain self-report by
visual pain analog scale (VPAS) measurements </p>

<p> corresponded to the time course of increasing cutaneous pain
tolerance latency assessed by dolorimetry. </p>

<p> Pain self-reports following intrathecal morphine infusion
(2.25 or 1 mg) followed a similar though slower </p>

<p> onset to that reported by patients receiving intravenous
morphine and was of lesser degree. In contrast, heat </p>

<p> beam dolorimetric evidence of increased cutaneous pain
tolerance (which was of lesser degree than </p>

<p> following i.v. morphine) did not reach its maximum during the
4 h measuring period. A dissociation was </p>

<p> noted therefore between the self-reported relief of
endogenous pain and dolorimetrically measured </p>

<p> cutaneous analgesia following intrathecal morphine
administration. Linear regression correlation analysis </p>

<p> characterized this phenomenon as a positive correlation
between cutaneous pain tolerance and pain relief </p>

<p> self-report following intravenous morphine infusion and a
negative correlation following intrathecal </p>

<p> administration. We propose that the phenomenon may be due to
intrathecal morphine acting via two </p>

<p> separate compartments: one spinal and one
supraspinal.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1989;39:249-25<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000082 </p>

<p> AU - Lombard MC </p>

<p> AU - Besson JM </p>

<p> TI - Electrophysiological evidence for a tonic activity of
the spinal cord intrinsic opioid systems in a </p>

<p> chronic pain model </p>

<p> AB - The aim of this electrophysiological investigation was
to evaluate the activity of the spinal endogenous </p>

<p> opioid systems in a chronic pain model, the arthritic rat.
The activity of nociceptive non-specific dorsal horn </p>

<p> neurons (n = 23) were recorded in 23 spinal unanesthetized
decerebrated rats. Naloxone (1 mg/kg i.v.) </p>

<p> induced a highly significant increase in the spontaneous
firing rate of these neurons. This observation is in </p>

<p> favor of a tonic activity of spinal opioid endogenous systems
in such a disease. In addition, the same dose of </p>

<p> naloxone facilitates the transmission of noxious messages at
the spinal level as revealed by the large </p>

<p> enhancement of the responses of these neurons to C-fiber
stimulation. These results are in good agreement </p>

<p> with behavioral data showing that such a relatively high dose
of naloxone induced well-reproducible </p>

<p> hyperalgesia and with some biochemical observations showing
an increase of levels and biosynthesis of </p>

<p> endogenous opioids in the spinal cord of the arthritic rat </p>

<p> SO - Brain Research 1989;477:48-5<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000075 </p>

<p> AU - McQuay HJ </p>

<p> TI - Opioids in chronic pain. [Review] </p>

<p> SO - British Journal of Anaesthesia 1989;63:213-226<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000080 </p>

<p> AU - Pettine KA </p>

<p> AU - Wedel DJ </p>

<p> AU - Cabanela ME </p>

<p> AU - Weeks JL </p>

<p> TI - The use of epidural bupivacaine following total knee
arthroplasty </p>

<p> AB - Pain relief and maximization of knee joint range of
motion (ROM) are the two major goals in the </p>

<p> postoperative management of the total knee arthroplasty (TKA)
patient. Epidural bupivacaine infusions have </p>

<p> been reported to be safe and effective for pain control in
obstetric anesthesia, chronic pain management, and </p>

<p> postoperative pain relief. The purpose of this study was to
evaluate the effect of continuous epidural </p>

<p> bupivacaine on postoperative pain and progressive knee ROM as
well as to record the incidence of urinary </p>

<p> retention and other side effects or complications. Continuous
epidural bupivacaine infusion was found to </p>

<p> provide safe, effective analgesia for TKA patients in the
immediate postoperative period. Excellent pain </p>

<p> relief with reduced narcotic requirements was observed in the
patients as compared to intramuscular narcotic </p>

<p> analgesia. No complications occurred and serum bupivacaine
levels remained well below toxic levels. Short </p>

<p> term clinical orthopaedic outcome was improved, and patient,
surgeon, and nurse acceptance of the </p>

<p> technique was excellent </p>

<p> SO - Orthopaedic Review 1989;18:894-901<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000203 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Use of methylphenidate as an adjuvant to narcotic
analgesics in patients with advanced cancer </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 89381479 </p>

<p> SO - J Pain Symptom Manage 1989;4:suppl 3:2,4-suppl 3:2,4<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000079 </p>

<p> AU - Racz GB </p>

<p> AU - McCarron RF </p>

<p> AU - Talboys P </p>

<p> TI - Percutaneous dorsal column stimulator for chronic pain
control </p>

<p> AB - This is a retrospective review of 26 patients with
chronic intractable pain in which dorsal column </p>

<p> stimulation was used as a salvage procedure. On follow-up of
12 to 42.7 months, 21 of the patients had </p>

<p> diminished narcotic usage. Seventeen patients subjectively
rated their pain relief as good to excellent. </p>

<p> Another five patients reported some relief of pain.
Two-thirds of the patients reported an increase in their </p>

<p> ability to perform daily activities such as walking, stair
climbing, and time spent sitting. There are still many </p>

<p> technical problems that plague this procedure, as evidenced
by a very high technical complication rate of </p>

<p> lead migration and lead breakage. Whether or not results
diminish over long-term follow-up remains to be </p>

<p> seen </p>

<p> SO - Spine 1989;14:1-4<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000074 </p>

<p> AU - Russegger L </p>

<p> TI - Chronic pain conditions--causes, manifestations and
neurosurgical treatment possibilities. </p>

<p> [Review] [German] </p>

<p> AB - The relief of chronic pain, which had lost its warning
function and had become a disease entity, is one </p>

<p> of the main scopes of the so-called &quot;functional
neurosurgery&quot;. If it is impossible to eliminate the origin
of </p>

<p> chronic pain condition, or if conservative treatment is not
effective, this is an indication for a surgical </p>

<p> intervention. &quot;Destructive methods&quot; in pain surgery
aim at interrupting the pathway of pain in one of its </p>

<p> three steps (neurons). The decision which method should be
used depends on character and localisation of </p>

<p> pain and requires well-founded experience by the surgeon.
&quot;Non-destructive&quot; operations include stimulation </p>

<p> methods of several CNS areas as well as implantation of drug
reservoirs which conceded a continuous </p>

<p> release of morphine or morphine derivatives to the opiate
receptors of the spinal cord. The paper evaluates </p>

<p> the most common surgical procedures in pain relief concerning
technique, indication and efficacy and gives a </p>

<p> survey on the pathophysiological background of chronic pain.
[References: 70] </p>

<p> SO - Fortschritte der Neurologie-Psychiatrie 1989;57:319-327 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000078 </p>

<p> AU - Swanson G </p>

<p> AU - Smith J </p>

<p> AU - Bulich R </p>

<p> AU - New P </p>

<p> AU - Shiffman R </p>

<p> TI - Patient-controlled analgesia for chronic cancer pain in
the ambulatory setting: a report of 117 </p>

<p> patients </p>

<p> AB - Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) represents a
drug-delivery system in which patients self-administer </p>

<p> predetermined doses of opiate analgesics. We have taken
advantage of recent advances in pump technology </p>

<p> and developed a system in which patients with severe pain
received a continuous narcotic infusion, along </p>

<p> with the capability of PCA bolus for breakthrough pain. All
patients were experiencing chronic pain related </p>

<p> to cancer and were unable to obtain adequate pain control
with either intermittent parenteral, oral, or rectal </p>

<p> narcotics. Sixty-nine percent of patients were treated in the
home setting, and the majority received </p>

<p> morphine sulfate subcutaneously (SQ). Admixture stability
studies using high-pressure liquid </p>

<p> chromatography (HPLC) showed that dexamethasone,
metoclopramide, and haloperidol could be added to </p>

<p> the morphine solutions and remain stable for 1 week at room
temperature. Of 117 patients entered, 95% </p>

<p> received excellent pain control, and side effects were rare,
consisting of subcutaneous needle site infection </p>

<p> and respiratory depression. Progressive pain due to either
advancing disease or development of drug </p>

<p> tolerance could be controlled by increasing opiate infusion
rates. We conclude that (1) continuous infusion </p>

<p> opiate with PCA bolus capability can be initiated and
administered safely in the home setting; (2) patients </p>

<p> with pain related to malignancy can be managed well with this
system; and (3) pain control programs can be </p>

<p> designed, implemented, and evaluated in the private practice
setting </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Clinical Oncology 1989;7:1903-1908<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000217 </p>

<p> AU - Vaccarino AL </p>

<p> AU - Tasker RA </p>

<p> AU - Melzack R </p>

<p> TI - Analgesia produced by normal doses of opioid antagonists
alone and in combination with </p>

<p> morphine </p>

<p> AB - AB - In a recent study [30] it was reported that
naloxone, at doses normally employed for opioid </p>

<p> antagonism, produced a dose-dependent analgesia in BALB/c
mice in the formalin test. We report here that </p>

<p> another opioid antagonists, naltrexone, also produces
analgesia under these conditions. Female BALB/c </p>

<p> mice were injected subcutaneously with naltrexone (0.01-1.0
mg/kg) or saline alone and tested for analgesia </p>

<p> using the formalin test. Naltrexone produced a statistically
significant dose-dependent analgesia, with an </p>

<p> ED50 of 0.05 mg/kg and almost total analgesia at doses of 0.1
mg/kg or greater. To determine the </p>

<p> relationship between naloxone analgesia and better documented
forms of opioid analgesia, BALB/c mice </p>

<p> were injected with naloxone or saline following the
administration of a pre-determined ED50 for morphine </p>

<p> and tested for analgesia using the tail-flick and formalin
tests. Naloxone antagonized morphine analgesia in </p>

<p> the tail-flick test at both doses used (0.3 and 10 mg/kg). In
the formalin test, however, naloxone attenuated </p>

<p> morphine analgesia at the lower doses (0.1 and 0.3 mg/kg) and
potentiated morphine analgesia at the highest </p>

<p> dose (10 mg/kg). The implications of this finding are
discussed AD - Department of Psychology AD -McGill </p>

<p> University AD - Montreal AD - Que AD - Canada UI - 89144631 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1989;36:103-109<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000251 </p>

<p> AU - Weissman DE </p>

<p> AU - Haddox JD </p>

<p> TI - Opioid pseudoaddiction--an iatrogenic syndrome </p>

<p> AB - AB - A case is presented of a 17-year-old with leukemia,
pneumonia and chest-wall pain. Inadequate </p>

<p> treatment of the patient's pain led to behavioral changes
similar to those seen with idiopathic opioid </p>

<p> psychologic dependence (addiction). The term pseudoaddiction
is introduced to describe the iatrogenic </p>

<p> syndrome of abnormal behavior developing as a direct
consequence of inadequate pain management. The </p>

<p> natural history of pseudoaddiction includes progression
through 3 characteristic phases including: (1) </p>

<p> inadequate prescription of analgesics to meet the primary
pain stimulus, (2) escalation of analgesic demands </p>

<p> by the patient associated with behavioral changes to convince
others of the pain's severity, and (3) a crisis of </p>

<p> mistrust between the patient and the health care team.
Treatment strategies include establishing trust </p>

<p> between the patient and the health care team and providing
appropriate and timely analgesics to control the </p>

<p> patient's level of pain AD - Division of Hematology/Oncology
AD - Medical College of Wisconsin AD - </p>

<p> Milwaukee 53226 UI - 89220105 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1989;36:363-366<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000073 </p>

<p> AU - Yaster M </p>

<p> AU - Deshpande JK </p>

<p> AU - Maxwell LG </p>

<p> TI - The pharmacologic management of pain in children.
[Review] </p>

<p> AB - We have attempted to dispel many of the myths and
misconceptions surrounding the use of narcotic </p>

<p> analgesics in the treatment of childhood pain. Our hope is
that an improved understanding and application of </p>

<p> effective and safe therapies will minimize the suffering of
the child with acute or chronic pain. [References: </p>

<p> 21] </p>

<p> SO - Comprehensive Therapy 1989;15:14-26<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000091 </p>

<p> AU - Amadio P Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Cummings DM </p>

<p> AU - Amadio PB </p>

<p> TI - A framework for management of chronic pain </p>

<p> AB - The management of chronic pain requires a physician who
is motivated to provide care for patients </p>

<p> with this difficult problem. A thorough search must be made
to determine the cause of the pain, the extent of </p>

<p> psychiatric overlay, the importance of the pain to the
patient (litigation, secondary gain), the extent of illness </p>

<p> behavior and the response to previous therapy. The physician
must be part of the treatment rather than part </p>

<p> of the problem. Narcotic analgesics should be avoided except
in patients with cancer pain or terminal illness </p>

<p> SO - American Family Physician 1988;38:155-160<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000090 </p>

<p> AU - Arner S </p>

<p> AU - Meyerson BA </p>

<p> TI - Lack of analgesic effect of opioids on neuropathic and
idiopathic forms of pain [see comments] </p>

<p> AB - The aim of the present study has been to assess the
responsiveness of various types of chronic pain to </p>

<p> opioids given i.v. and tested against placebo in a
double-blind, randomized fashion. Pain classified as primary </p>

<p> nociceptive was effectively alleviated (P greater than 0.001)
while neuropathic deafferentation pain was not </p>

<p> significantly influenced by morphine or equivalent doses of
other opioids. Also 'idiopathic' pain, defined as </p>

<p> chronic pain with no or little demonstrable pathology, failed
to respond. The results were not related to </p>

<p> whether the patients were regular users of narcotic
analgesics or not. The outcome of our double-blind </p>

<p> opioid test has proved useful to justify a continued, or
discontinued, use of narcotic medication in individual </p>

<p> patients. It may also support the indication and choice of
invasive stimulation procedures (spinal cord or </p>

<p> brain). The results of the study illustrate the misconception
of chronic pain as an entity and highlight the </p>

<p> importance of recognizing different neurobiological
mechanisms and differences in responsiveness to </p>

<p> analgesic drugs as well as to non-pharmacological modes of
treatment. The opioid test has thus become a </p>

<p> valuable tool in pain analysis and helpful as a guide for
further treatment </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1988;33:11-23<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000084 </p>

<p> AU - Barni S </p>

<p> AU - Lissoni P </p>

<p> AU - Rovelli F </p>

<p> AU - Crispino S </p>

<p> AU - Paolorossi F </p>

<p> AU - Esposti D </p>

<p> AU - Esposti G </p>

<p> AU - Fraschini F </p>

<p> AU - Tancini G </p>

<p> TI - Alteration of opioid peptide circadian rhythm in cancer
patients </p>

<p> AB - Endogenous opioid peptides have been seen to play a role
in regulating immunity and tumor growth. </p>

<p> This study was carried out to investigate opioid activity in
human cancer. We evaluated by </p>

<p> radioimmunoassay beta-endorphin plasma levels on blood
samples collected at 9.00 a.m. from 121 cancer </p>

<p> patients and 42 healthy subjects. In 22 cancer patients and
in 12 controls, beta-endorphin circadian rhythm </p>

<p> was also investigated. Finally, in 14 cancer patients and in
10 controls GH, PRL, FSH, LH and cortisol </p>

<p> serum levels were measured after the administration of a
metenkephalin analogue, FK 33-824 (0.3 mg i.v.). </p>

<p> No significant differences were seen in beta-endorphin mean
levels between cancer patients and normal </p>

<p> subjects. Moreover, no differences were found between
patients with or without metastases, nor between </p>

<p> those with or without chronic pain. beta-Endorphin circadian
rhythm appeared to be altered in 16/22 cancer </p>

<p> patients, and anomalous hormonal responses to FK 33-824 were
seen in 13/14 patients. This study shows an </p>

<p> altered opioid activity in human neoplasms, whose clinical
significance remains to be determined </p>

<p> SO - Tumori 1988;74:357-360<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000089 </p>

<p> AU - Beaver WT </p>

<p> TI - Impact of non-narcotic oral analgesics on pain
management. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Of the four categories of oral analgesics, three have
been available since the 19th century. Although </p>

<p> adequate doses of the more potent oral opioids such as
morphine and methadone are effective even in severe </p>

<p> pain, the commonly used &quot;weak&quot; narcotics such as
codeine and propoxyphene are no more effective than </p>

<p> usual doses of aspirin or acetaminophen. Furthermore, the
opioids produce gastrointestinal and central </p>

<p> nervous system adverse effects, and, during long-term
administration, tolerance may develop and there is a </p>

<p> risk of drug dependence. Aspirin and acetaminophen are the
traditional agents of choice for oral analgesic </p>

<p> therapy; until 10 years ago, there were no single-entity,
oral analgesics--with the exception of large doses of </p>

<p> oral narcotics--that were more effective than usual doses of
aspirin or acetaminophen. However, there is a </p>

<p> ceiling on the analgesic effect attainable with safe doses of
these drugs, which may in part be overcome </p>

<p> through the use of the third category of oral analgesics,
combinations of aspirin or acetaminophen with oral </p>

<p> opioids. The fourth category of oral analgesics constitutes
the most important recent development in pain </p>

<p> management with analgesic drugs: the newer peripherally
acting, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics, </p>

<p> some of which are clearly more efficacious than aspirin or
acetaminophen and compare favorably not only </p>

<p> with full doses of narcotic combination products but even, in
some cases, with strong injectable opioids. On </p>

<p> repeated dosing, some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
are better tolerated than aspirin and some have </p>

<p> a much longer duration of analgesic effect than aspirin or
acetaminophen. Further study is needed to </p>

<p> compare nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs among themselves
and to determine their value in chronic </p>

<p> pain and in combination therapy. [References: 37] </p>

<p> SO - American Journal of Medicine 1988;84:3-15<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000086 </p>

<p> AU - Deyo RA </p>

<p> AU - Bass JE </p>

<p> AU - Walsh NE </p>

<p> AU - Schoenfeld LS </p>

<p> AU - Ramamurthy S </p>

<p> TI - Prognostic variability among chronic pain patients:
implications for study design, </p>

<p> interpretation, and reporting </p>

<p> AB - Chronic pain patients share many characteristics, but
there is important prognostic variability among </p>

<p> them. By selecting for certain characteristics, different
recruitment methods and entry criteria for clinical or </p>

<p> research programs may influence the likelihood of success
regardless of treatment efficacy. This was </p>

<p> demonstrated when subjects (n = 55) were recruited through
lay publicity for a clinical trial of therapy for </p>

<p> chronic back pain. In comparison to routine pain clinic
patients (n=61), subjects in the clinical trial were </p>

<p> better educated, were more often employed, had more favorable
personality profiles, and were less likely to </p>

<p> have had surgery or narcotic use (all p less than 0.004).
Pain relief was significantly better for clinical trial </p>

<p> subjects, apparently due to baseline prognostic differences
rather than uniquely efficacious therapy. We </p>

<p> conclude that chronic pain patients vary in prognostically
important ways; that recruitment methods and </p>

<p> criteria strongly influence these characteristics; and that
greater attention to these details is needed when </p>

<p> interpreting and reporting clinical research </p>

<p> SO - Archives of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation
1988;69:174-178 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000085 </p>

<p> AU - Gottlieb H </p>

<p> AU - Alperson BL </p>

<p> AU - Schwartz AH </p>

<p> AU - Beck C </p>

<p> AU - Kee S </p>

<p> TI - Self-management for medication reduction in chronic low
back pain </p>

<p> AB - It has been demonstrated that pain relief is seldom
produced by medication or surgical methods where </p>

<p> there is evidence of emotional disturbance, as indicated by
the MMPI. A program that attempts to engender </p>

<p> a high level of patient responsibility in a population of
chronic low back pain patients is described. Self- </p>

<p> managed reduction of drug dependence is a major component of
this program. The data indicate that the </p>

<p> program produces a significant reduction in dependence on
opiates, derivatives, synthetic opiates, hypnotics, </p>

<p> sedatives, tranquilizers, and analgesics. Follow-up data
(with attrition controlled) at six months and 12 </p>

<p> months postdischarge do not provide any evidence for
deterioration (ie, return to pretreatment levels of drug </p>

<p> dependence). Thus, it appears that the programmatic impact is
stable over at least a 12-month period </p>

<p> postdischarge. Implications of these findings for the low
back pain population, as well as other chronic pain </p>

<p> populations, are discussed </p>

<p> SO - Archives of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation
1988;69:442-448 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000240 </p>

<p> AU - Hartman B </p>

<p> AU - Miyada DS </p>

<p> AU - Pirkle H </p>

<p> AU - Sedgwick P </p>

<p> AU - Cravey RH </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Wolen RL </p>

<p> TI - Serum propoxyphene concentrations in a cohort of opiate
addicts on long-term propoxyphene </p>

<p> maintenance therapy. Evidence for drug tolerance in humans </p>

<p> AB - AB - Propoxyphene, norpropoxyphene, and cyclic
dinorpropoxyphene concentrations in the sera of<br>
</p>

<p> Return-Path: &lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> Comments: Authenticated sender is
&lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> From: tanante@nwlink.com </p>

<p> To: schaffer@smartlink.net </p>

<p> Date: Sat, 1 Jun 1996 17:18:59 +0000 </p>

<p> Subject: Re: Pain Medication #1 </p>

<p> Priority: normal<br>
</p>

<p> eight opiate addicts were measured by gas chromatography. The
addicts were enrolled in a propoxyphene </p>

<p> maintenance program and had received 800-1600 mg of
propoxyphene napsylate daily for 13-50 months. </p>

<p> Serum propoxyphene and norpropoxyphene ranged from 127 to
1070 ng/mL and 814 to 2638 ng/mL, </p>

<p> respectively, and their ratio ranged from 0.1 to 0.4. A
roughly linear dose-to-serum-concentration </p>

<p> relationship was found for serum propoxyphene and
norpropoxyphene in the cohort. Cyclic </p>

<p> dinorpropoxyphene was detected in three of the subjects'
sera. Because tolerance to propoxyphene occurs, </p>

<p> knowledge of prior drug exposure is necessary to determine
whether an elevated propoxyphene or </p>

<p> norpropoxyphene concentration is toxic to patients or
decedents with apparent propoxyphene overdose. </p>

<p> Serum norpropoxyphene concentration exceeds that of
propoxyphene following chronic propoxyphene use. </p>

<p> Measurable cyclic dinorpropoxyphene implies chronic
propoxyphene use but its absence does not exclude </p>

<p> chronic use AD - Department of Pathology AD - Los Angeles
County High Desert Hospital AD - Lancaster </p>

<p> AD -CA UI - 88173501 </p>

<p> SO - J Anal Toxicol 1988;12:25-29<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000027 </p>

<p> AU - Larson AA </p>

<p> TI - Desensitization to intrathecal substance P in mice:
Possible involvement of opioids </p>

<p> AB - IN: U Minnesota, St Paul, US LA: English AB: Intrathecal
injection of substance P (SP) in mice </p>

<p> resulted in a behavioral syndrome characterized by caudally
directed biting and scratching. Repeated </p>

<p> injections of SP resulted in development of tachyphylaxis
(TP) to this SP-induced behavioral phenomenon. </p>

<p> Naloxone combined with SP blocked TP to SP in naive Ss.
Fluoxetine or phentolamine blocked TP to SP. </p>

<p> (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1989 American Psychological Assn,
all rights reserved) KP: chronic pain; </p>

<p> caudally directed biting &amp; scratching induced by
intrathecal substance P with vs without naloxone vs </p>

<p> fluoxetine vs phentolamine; mice AN: 76-04403 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1988;32:367-374<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000093 </p>

<p> AU - Mogensen T </p>

<p> AU - Scott NB </p>

<p> AU - Lund C </p>

<p> AU - Bigler D </p>

<p> AU - Hjortso NC </p>

<p> AU - Kehlet H </p>

<p> TI - The roles of acute and chronic pain in regression of
sensory analgesia during continuous </p>

<p> epidural bupivacaine infusion </p>

<p> AB - The purpose of this study was to investigate whether
regression of sensory analgesia during constant </p>

<p> epidural bupivacaine infusion was different in postoperative
patients with acute pain than in patients with </p>

<p> chronic nonsurgical pain. Sensory levels of analgesia (to
pinprick) and pain (on a five-point scale) were </p>

<p> assessed hourly for 16 hours during continuous epidural
infusion of 0.5% plain bupivacaine (8 ml/hr) in 12 </p>

<p> patients with chronic nonsurgical pain and in 30 patients
after major abdominal surgery performed under </p>

<p> combined bupivacaine and halothane--N2O general anesthesia.
No opiates were given. If sensory analgesia </p>

<p> decreased more than five segments from the initial level or
if the pain score reached 2 (moderate pain), the </p>

<p> patient was removed from the study. Initial levels of sensory
analgesia after loading doses of 21.8 +/- 0.5 </p>

<p> and 19.3 +/- 0.8 ml bupivacaine 0.5% were similar (T3.8 +/-
0.3 and T3.8 +/- 0.5) in the surgical and </p>

<p> chronic pain patients, respectively (mean +/- SEM). Of the
surgical patients, only 4 of the 30 (13%) </p>

<p> maintained the initial level of sensory analgesia, and a pain
score below 2 throughout the study compared </p>

<p> with 7 of the 12 patients with chronic pain (58%) (P less
than 0.01). Mean duration of sensory blockade was </p>

<p> significantly longer (P less than 0.005) in the patients with
chronic pain than in surgical patients (13.1 +/- 1.2 </p>

<p> and 8.5 +/- 0.7 hours, respectively). Thus, surgical injury
hastens regression of sensory analgesia during </p>

<p> continuous epidural bupivacaine infusion. The underlying
mechanism remains to be determined </p>

<p> SO - Anesthesia &amp; Analgesia 1988;67:737-740<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000094 </p>

<p> AU - Moossy JJ </p>

<p> AU - Nashold BS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - Dorsal root entry zone lesions for conus medullaris root
avulsions </p>

<p> AB - We have found dorsal root entry zone (DREZ) lesions to
be an effective treatment of chronic </p>

<p> deafferentation pain in patients who have had avulsions of
the dorsal rootlets from the spinal cord. Eight </p>

<p> patients were operated in whom chronic pain of the lower
extremity resulted from dorsal root avulsions from </p>

<p> the conus medullaris. In 7 of the 8 patients, the mechanism
of injury was a motor vehicle accident; all 7 </p>

<p> sustained severe pelvic trauma. Seven of the 8 patients
remained pain-free, off all narcotics, with an average </p>

<p> follow-up of 33 months. All patients had DREZ lesions of the
conus performed by radiofrequency </p>

<p> techniques </p>

<p> SO - Applied Neurophysiology 1988;51:198-205<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000187 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Practical aspects of pain control in the patient with
cancer </p>

<p> AB - Cancer-related pain can be well controlled in most
patients. With prolonged survival and cure now </p>

<p> possible with many tumors, pain management becomes a
compelling issue for the quality of the patient's </p>

<p> remaining life. In advanced stages of disease, analgesia is
an imperative for both the patient and family; it </p>

<p> provides the patient the opportunity for a dignified and
comfortable death and lifts from the family the added </p>

<p> burden of anger and despair that is so often associated with
uncontrolled pain in a loved one. Astute </p>

<p> assessment, a systematic approach to pharmacologic treatment,
and ongoing monitoring of therapy are the </p>

<p> fundamental elements of successful management of pain in most
patients </p>

<p> SO - CA Cancer J Clin 1988;38:327-352<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000191 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Practical aspects of pain control in the patient with
cancer </p>

<p> AB - Cancer-related pain can be well controlled in most
patients. With prolonged survival and cure now </p>

<p> possible with many tumors, pain management becomes a
compelling issue for the quality of the patient's </p>

<p> remaining life. In advanced stages of disease, analgesia is
an imperative for both the patient and family; it </p>

<p> provides the patient the opportunity for a dignified and
comfortable death and lifts from the family the added </p>

<p> burden of anger and despair that is so often associated with
uncontrolled pain in a loved one. Astute </p>

<p> assessment, a systematic approach to pharmacologic treatment,
and ongoing monitoring of therapy are the </p>

<p> fundamental elements of successful management of pain in most
patients AD - Department of Neurology AD </p>

<p> - Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center AD - New York AD -
New York UI -89027782 </p>

<p> SO - CA Cancer J Clin 1988;38:327-352<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000092 </p>

<p> AU - Reidenberg MM </p>

<p> AU - Goodman H </p>

<p> AU - Erle H </p>

<p> AU - Gray G </p>

<p> AU - Lorenzo B </p>

<p> AU - Leipzig RM </p>

<p> AU - Meyer BR </p>

<p> AU - Drayer DE </p>

<p> TI - Hydromorphone levels and pain control in patients with
severe chronic pain [published erratum </p>

<p> appears in Clin Pharmacol Ther 1991 Mar;49(3):313] </p>

<p> AB - To better understand the use of narcotic analgesics, the
hydromorphone concentration was measured </p>

<p> in serum samples from 43 patients with chronic severe pain
who were receiving this drug. At the time of </p>

<p> blood sampling, pain intensity, mood, and cognitive
performance were assessed. There was large individual </p>

<p> variation in the dose-drug level relationship. Seven patients
with bone or soft tissue pain and drug levels of </p>

<p> greater than or equal to 4 ng/ml had good pain control,
whereas 10 did not. None of 15 patients with levels </p>

<p> less than 4 ng/ml had pain control, despite drug doses
similar to those given patients with higher levels. Thus </p>

<p> 60% of the patients without control of their pain had
hydromorphone levels below the lowest level that </p>

<p> produced pain control. No patient with pain from nerve
infiltration or compression had good pain control, </p>

<p> irrespective of the drug level or dose. Poor mood correlated
with high pain intensity and low drug level. </p>

<p> Impaired cognitive performance was not related to drug level.
Knowing that there is a low concentration of </p>

<p> narcotic in the blood of a patient with chronic severe pain
who is receiving high drug doses and who shows </p>

<p> lack of both efficacy and side effects may reassure health
care professionals that further narcotic dosage </p>

<p> escalation is appropriate </p>

<p> SO - Clinical Pharmacology &amp; Therapeutics 1988;44:376-382
<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000026 </p>

<p> AU - Shippenberg TS </p>

<p> AU - Stein C </p>

<p> AU - Huber A </p>

<p> AU - Millan MJ </p>

<p> TI - Motivational effects of opioids in an animal model of
prolonged inflammatory pain: Alteration </p>

<p> in the effects of k- but not of m-receptor agonists </p>

<p> AB - IN: Max-Planck-Inst fur Psychiatrie, Martinsried, Fed
Rep Germany LA: English AB: A preference </p>

<p> conditioning procedure was used to examine the motivational
effects of opioids in naive male rats and male </p>

<p> rats suffering from prolonged pain associated with Freund's
adjuvant (FA)-induced inflammation of a </p>

<p> hindlimb. It was found that the mu- opioid agonist morphine
functioned as a reinforcer in naive Ss producing </p>

<p> marked preferences for the drug-paired place. Ss injected
with FA 7 days prior to conditioning exhibited a </p>

<p> preference for the morphine place. Administration of the
kappa- opioid receptor agonist U-69593 to naive </p>

<p> Ss produced dose-related place aversions. The aversive effect
of this kappa-agonist was, however, abolished </p>

<p> in FA-treated Ss. Data suggest that kappa- agonists may be
effective therapeutic agents in the management </p>

<p> of chronic pain states. (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1989
American Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) </p>

<p> KP: motivational effects of opioids; male rats; animal model
of prolonged inflammatory pain AN: 76-21813 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1988;35:179-186<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000087 </p>

<p> AU - Sjostrom S </p>

<p> TI - The relationship between the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of spinal opioids. </p>

<p> Minireview based on a doctoral thesis. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Spinal opioids have been used clinically since the late
seventies to treat acute, traumatic, obstetric and </p>

<p> chronic pain. In this article the influence of the
pharmacokinetics on the dynamics of intrathecal and epidural </p>

<p> opioid administration are discussed with reference to current
knowledge. [References: 121] </p>

<p> SO - Upsala Journal of Medical Sciences 1988;93:101-120<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000083 </p>

<p> AU - Tonelli L </p>

<p> AU - Setti T </p>

<p> AU - Falasca A </p>

<p> AU - Martignoni E </p>

<p> AU - Torcia E </p>

<p> AU - Calcaterra FM </p>

<p> AU - Merli GA </p>

<p> AU - Facchinetti F </p>

<p> TI - Investigation on cerebrospinal fluid opioids and
neurotransmitters related to spinal cord </p>

<p> stimulation </p>

<p> AB - The purpose of this study was to assess the biochemical
mechanisms underlying spinal cord </p>

<p> stimulation (SCS). Seventeen patients with chronic pain were
investigated by measuring cerebrospinal fluid </p>

<p> concentrations of endogenous opioids and biogenic amines
before and during dorsal column stimulation. </p>

<p> Basal cerebrospinal fluid beta-endorphin levels were below
the normal range. No significant change of </p>

<p> norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, beta-endorphin,
beta-lipotropin, or adrenocorticotropic hormone </p>

<p> levels were found after SCS. A 50% increase of cerebrospinal
beta-endorphin and beta-lipotropin levels </p>

<p> occurred in 6 out of 16 patients, namely those where SCS gave
the major pain relief. These data confirm the </p>

<p> derangement of the endogenous opioid system in chronic pain
conditions and suggest that the beta- </p>

<p> endorphin response to SCS could have clinical value in
predicting the success of treatment </p>

<p> SO - Applied Neurophysiology 1988;51:324-332<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000088 </p>

<p> AU - Yaster M </p>

<p> AU - Deshpande JK </p>

<p> TI - Management of pediatric pain with opioid analgesics.
[Review] </p>

<p> AB - We have attempted to dispel many of the myths and
misconceptions surrounding the use of narcotic </p>

<p> analgesics in the treatment of childhood pain. Our hope is
that an improved understanding and the </p>

<p> application of effective, safe therapy will minimize the
suffering of the child with acute or chronic pain. </p>

<p> [References: 83] </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Pediatrics 1988;113:421-429<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000175 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> TI - Epidural opiates and nerve blocks. [Review] </p>

<p> SO - Recent Results in Cancer Research 1988;108:18-27<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000040 </p>

<p> AU - Beliaev DG </p>

<p> AU - Frid IA </p>

<p> AU - Genin IB </p>

<p> TI - Analgesic therapy of cancer outpatients. [Russian] </p>

<p> AB - The results of treatment of 164 out-patients with far
advanced malignancies for chronic pain syndrome </p>

<p> are discussed. It was found that subarachnoid, peridural and
sacral blocks with alcohol, phenol glycerine and </p>

<p> carbolic acid can relieve pain for a long time, improve
general condition and save narcotic analgetics. The </p>

<p> most effective proved to be peridural block by
phenolglycerine which induced analgesia in 67% of cases and </p>

<p> maintained it for 45 days </p>

<p> SO - Voprosy Onkologii 1987;33:85-90<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000106 </p>

<p> AU - Boersma FP </p>

<p> AU - Buist AB </p>

<p> AU - Thie J </p>

<p> TI - Epidural pain treatment in the northern Netherlands.
Organizational and treatment aspects </p>

<p> AB - During the past six years opiates administered in the
vicinity of the medulla spinalis (intrathecally or </p>

<p> extradurally) were shown to be successful tools in the
treatment of both acute and chronic pain (1, 6). </p>

<p> Continuous installation and long-term treatment have become
possible by insertion of a permanent catheter </p>

<p> into the epidural space. In cases where conventional
analgesic therapy has remained ineffective or given rise </p>

<p> to serious side-effects this method of analgesia should be
preferred to control protracted painful conditions, </p>

<p> most typically in cancer patients. This article presents the
results of a number of cases of long-term treatment </p>

<p> with extradural opiates and mainly focuses on outpatient
treatment and the organization this requires </p>

<p> SO - Acta Anaesthesiologica Belgica 1987;38:213-216<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000103 </p>

<p> AU - Bonica JJ </p>

<p> TI - Importance of effective pain control. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Although the scientific study of pain in the modern
sense was initiated 150 years ago, and a number of </p>

<p> theories were subsequently proposed, until two decades ago
pain research remained conceptually stagnant </p>

<p> and the meager amount done was not commensurate with the
magnitude and clinical importance of pain. </p>

<p> Consequently, pain treatment remained somewhat empirical and
ineffective. Moreover, the knowledge and </p>

<p> effective therapeutic modalities that were available were not
properly applied, primarily because medical </p>

<p> students and physicians were not taught the basic principles
of pain management. Fortunately, during the </p>

<p> past 20 years significant advances have been made in our
knowledge of basic mechanisms of acute pain and </p>

<p> about some chronic pain syndromes, and a variety of new
therapeutic modalities have been introduced and </p>

<p> old ones have been refined. Among the most important advances
of the past decade have been the discovery </p>

<p> of opiate receptors, the extensive pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic studies of narcotics, the </p>

<p> development of very sensitive analytic techniques and
mathematic knowledge and many other advances </p>

<p> which have prompted the development of new drugs, novel drug
preparations and novel methods of </p>

<p> administration, of which intraspinal narcotic therapy is the
most important and widely used. [References: </p>

<p> 123] </p>

<p> SO - Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica, Supplement
1987;85:1-16 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000099 </p>

<p> AU - Bovill JG </p>

<p> TI - Which potent opioid? Important criteria for selection </p>

<p> AB - Opioids remain the drugs of choice for the treatment of
severe pain. In recent years several new potent </p>

<p> opioids have become available for clinical use. These newer
drugs are generally safer than the older </p>

<p> morphine-like compounds and their differing pharmacological
and pharmacokinetic properties allow the </p>

<p> physician to choose an appropriate drug according to the
clinical situation and need of an individual patient. </p>

<p> These drugs are classified according to their activity at the
opioid receptors. The opioid agonists produce </p>

<p> their pharmacological effect by an almost exclusive action at
mu-receptors. The agonist-antagonist group are </p>

<p> kappa-receptor agonists and either competitive antagonists at
the mu-receptor or weak mu-agonists. The use </p>

<p> of the potent opioid agonists, because of their potential for
causing respiratory depression, is restricted to </p>

<p> hospitals. Fentanyl, the oldest drug of this class, is
extensively used as a supplement to general anaesthesia, </p>

<p> or in high doses as a 'complete' anaesthetic for patients
undergoing cardiac surgery. Alfentanil and sufentanil </p>

<p> are newer fentanyl derivatives. Alfentanil is unique in
having a very short elimination half-life. This is a </p>

<p> particular advantage during short operations and for day-case
surgery. For longer operations alfentanil can </p>

<p> be given as a continuous infusion to supplement nitrous oxide
anaesthesia. Sufentanil is about 10 times more </p>

<p> potent than fentanyl and is more rapidly eliminated. Initial
reports suggest that it may be more effective than </p>

<p> fentanyl as an anaesthetic supplement and that recovery may
be more rapid. Both sufentanil and alfentanil </p>

<p> are also used in cardiac anaesthesia. The newer
agonist-antagonist opioids, butorphanol, nalbuphine and </p>

<p> buprenorphine, have largely replaced pentazocine in clinical
practice. Unlike pentazocine, they cause a low </p>

<p> incidence of dysphoric side effects. Like the pure agonists,
they cause respiratory depression; however, in </p>

<p> contrast to the pure agonists this is not dose related,
reaching a 'ceiling' as dose increases. The risk of </p>

<p> dependence is also less, so that these drugs are safer for
the treatment of chronic pain. Additionally, it is </p>

<p> particularly worth noting that buprenorphine and nalbuphine
cause minimal cardiovascular changes, and are </p>

<p> safe and effective drugs for treatment of pain associated
with myocardial infarction. Buprenorphine, which is </p>

<p> effective parenterally, orally and sublingually, has a
prolonged duration of action (up to 12 hours after a </p>

<p> single dose) </p>

<p> SO - Drugs 1987;33:520-530<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000037 </p>

<p> AU - Bruera E </p>

<p> AU - Brenneis C </p>

<p> AU - Michaud M </p>

<p> AU - Chadwick S </p>

<p> AU - MacDonald RN </p>

<p> TI - Continuous sc infusion of narcotics using a portable
disposable device in patients with advanced </p>

<p> cancer </p>

<p> AB - Fifty-six patients with chronic pain due to advanced
cancer were treated with an sc infusion of </p>

<p> morphone (34 patients) or hydromorphone (22 patients) using a
portable disposable infusor. The infusion </p>

<p> was maintained for 26 +/- 14 days. Twenty-five patients (45%)
were discharged to the home for a mean </p>

<p> period of 18 days (range, 2-138). The mean daily increase in
dose was 2.6% +/- 1.4% of the initial dose. The </p>

<p> sc site needed to be changed every 8 days (range, 2-31).
Local toxicity consisted of infection in two patients </p>

<p> (3%), chemical irritation in three (5%), and bleeding in one
(2%). After 48 hours of treatment, 54 of 56 </p>

<p> patients (96%) preferred the sc infusion to their previous
parenteral treatment. We conclude that this is a </p>

<p> safe and simple method for the administration of narcotics to
inpatients and outpatients </p>

<p> SO - Cancer Treatment Reports 1987;71:635-637<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000042 </p>

<p> AU - Bruera E </p>

<p> AU - Chadwick S </p>

<p> AU - Brenneis C </p>

<p> AU - Hanson J </p>

<p> AU - MacDonald RN </p>

<p> TI - Methylphenidate associated with narcotics for the
treatment of cancer pain </p>

<p> AB - Thirty-two patients with chronic pain due to advanced
cancer were treated with methylphenidate (10 </p>

<p> mg with breakfast and 5 mg with lunch) for 3 days, versus
placebo, in a randomized, double-blind, cross- </p>

<p> over study designed to evaluate the capacity of
methylphenidate to potentiate the analgesic effect of </p>

<p> narcotics and/or to decrease sedation induced by narcotics.
In 28 evaluable patients, the intensity of pain </p>

<p> (visual analogue 0-100) and intake of extra doses of
analgesics (number of doses/day) were 43 +/- 27 and </p>

<p> 2.2 +/- 2.4 during methylphenidate, versus 55 +/- 24 (P less
than 0.02) and 2.9 +/- 2.9 (P less than 0.002) </p>

<p> during placebo, respectively. Activity and drowsiness (visual
analogue 0-100) were 57 +/- 25 and 58 +/- 24 </p>

<p> after methylphenidate, respectively, versus 41 +/- 26 (P less
than 0.05) and 45 +/- 27 (P less than 0.02) after </p>

<p> placebo. Upon completion of the study, the investigator and
the patient chose methylphenidate blindly as a </p>

<p> more useful drug in 23 cases (83%) and 20 cases (70%),
respectively (P less than 0.02). No cases of severe </p>

<p> toxicity were observed. We conclude that methylphenidate can
increase the analgesic effect and decrease </p>

<p> sedation of narcotics in this population </p>

<p> SO - Cancer Treatment Reports 1987;71:67-70<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000039 </p>

<p> AU - Carmody J </p>

<p> AU - Cooper K </p>

<p> TI - Swim stress reduces chronic pain in mice through an
opioid mechanism </p>

<p> AB - Chronic nociception has been studied in male mice by
means of the formalin test in which forelimb </p>

<p> motor behaviour is scored after subcutaneous formalin
injection. The rating remained above 2.0 for 30 min </p>

<p> after the injection (scale range 0-3). The magnitude of the
nociception has been compared with that reported </p>

<p> in other animal types. Mice are more sensitive than rats,
cats and monkeys. The stress of a swim of 3 min has </p>

<p> been found to reduce nociception by up to 25%. This analgesia
is wholly opioid in nature, being abolished by </p>

<p> a moderate dose of naloxone (1 mg/kg) </p>

<p> SO - Neuroscience Letters 1987;74:358-363<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000033 </p>

<p> AU - Colpaert FC </p>

<p> AU - Bervoets KJ </p>

<p> AU - Van den Hoogen RH </p>

<p> TI - Pharmacological analysis of hyperventilation in
arthritic rats </p>

<p> AB - The study examined the validity of increased minute
volume of ventilation as a measurement of </p>

<p> chronic pain in arthritic rats. The opiates morphine and R 62
818 attenuated arthritic hyperventilation, but </p>

<p> only at doses which also reduced the ventilatory response to
CO2 in normal rats. The non-steroidal anti- </p>

<p> inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), indomethacin and suprofen, the
corticosteroids, cortisone and </p>

<p> dexamethasone, and the tranquillizers, haloperidol and
chlordiazepoxide, were essentially ineffective except </p>

<p> at doses that also produced anti-inflammatory and/or toxic
effects. A combination of an in itself ineffective </p>

<p> dose of R 62 818 with an ineffective dose of suprofen did
attenuate arthritic hyperventilation, and the </p>

<p> combination constituted the only pharmacological treatment
that did so in the absence of anti-inflammatory, </p>

<p> toxic or intrinsic respiratory effects. The data are
consistent with the hypothesis that pain rather than acidosis </p>

<p> mediates arthritic hyperventilation. They also suggest that
combinations of an opiate with an NSAID may </p>

<p> perhaps be effective in alleviating this pain </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1987;30:243-258<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000108 </p>

<p> AU - Dickenson AH </p>

<p> AU - Sullivan AF </p>

<p> TI - Subcutaneous formalin-induced activity of dorsal horn
neurones in the rat: differential response </p>

<p> to an intrathecal opiate administered pre or post formalin </p>

<p> AB - Many studies of pain and nociception use short-lasting
acute stimuli which may have limited relevance </p>

<p> to prolonged or chronic pain states. Using extracellular
single-unit recording in the dorsal horn of the rat </p>

<p> lumbar spinal cord the present study examines the response of
neurones to a long-lasting nociceptive </p>

<p> stimulus, i.e., 50 microliter 5% formalin injected into the
corresponding receptive field in the ipsilateral hind </p>

<p> paw, and modulation of this response by an opioid. Formalin
produced a distinct biphasic excitatory </p>

<p> response in all convergent neurones tested; an immediate
acute or phasic peak of neuronal firing (mean </p>

<p> maximum 22 spikes/sec) 0-10 min post injection, and a second
more prolonged tonic excitatory response </p>

<p> (mean maximum 12 spikes/sec) over a period 20-65 min after
formalin. Cells only activated by innocuous </p>

<p> stimuli were not excited by formalin indicating the
involvement of C fibre afferents in the excitatory response </p>

<p> of convergent neurones to formalin. Both the biphasic nature
and the time course of the neuronal response </p>

<p> are similar to those observed in behavioural studies.
Intrathecal DAGO (Tyr-D-AlaGlyMePheGly-ol), a </p>

<p> potent and selective mu opioid receptor agonist, applied 20
min prior to formalin completely inhibited both </p>

<p> peaks of excitation. Co-administration of intrathecal
naloxone with the agonist restored the biphasic </p>

<p> response. By contrast, when the administration of naloxone
was delayed to 2 min post formalin so that </p>

<p> inhibition of the first peak by DAGO pretreatment occurred,
there was no subsequent second peak of </p>

<p> activity although antagonism of the opioid would have
occurred. When DAGO was applied 2 min post </p>

<p> formalin so the initial acute response occurred, the
inhibitory effect of the agonist on the second peak was </p>

<p> far less. Thus the relative ability of DAGO to modulate the
biphasic excitatory response of cells to formalin </p>

<p> depends on whether the agonist is administered prior to or
after the formalin and the appearance of the </p>

<p> second peak may depend on the presence of the first. These
results are discussed in light of the role of these </p>

<p> neurones in nociception, opioid effects and changes in neural
systems following peripheral stimuli </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1987;30:349-360<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000102 </p>

<p> AU - Hanks GW </p>

<p> TI - The clinical usefulness of agonist-antagonistic opioid
analgesics in chronic pain. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - The mixed agonist-antagonist analgesics do not have a
major role in the treatment of chronic pain. </p>

<p> Pentazocine, the first and most widely used of this group of
drugs has two major limitations: by mouth it is </p>

<p> not a strong analgesic, but is closer in efficacy to the
peripherally acting drugs aspirin and paracetamol than </p>

<p> the weak opioids; and its use is associated with
psychotomimetic side effects in 10-20 percent of patients. </p>

<p> The weak opioid analgesics codeine and dextropropoxyphene are
more effective and better tolerated than </p>

<p> pentazocine. Buprenorphine is the most useful of the
agonist-antagonists in chronic pain patients. It is </p>

<p> potent, long-acting (6-9 h) and effective when given
sublingually. However, it has a limited effective dose </p>

<p> range and produces the same side effects as morphine-like
drugs, possibly more frequently at equianalgesic </p>

<p> doses. It may be used in the treatment of cancer pain, or in
patients with chronic arthritides or other forms of </p>

<p> chronic non-cancer pain who require a potent conventional
analgesic, as an alternative to the weak opioids </p>

<p> or to morphine in low doses. Nalbuphine and butorphanol are
only available for parenteral administration </p>

<p> which means that their usefulness in the treatment of chronic
pain is limited. Meptazinol is restricted by its </p>

<p> manufacturers to 'short term' treatment and there is little
information on its use in chronic pain patients. </p>

<p> [References: 46] </p>

<p> SO - Drug &amp; Alcohol Dependence 1987;20:339-346<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000028 </p>

<p> AU - Hanks GW </p>

<p> TI - The clinical usefulness of agonist-antagonistic opioid
analgesics in chronic pain </p>

<p> AB - IN: U London, Inst of Cancer Research, England LA:
English AB: Contends that the mixed agonist- </p>

<p> antagonist analgesics do not have a major role in the
treatment of chronic pain. Pentazocine, the first and </p>

<p> most widely used of this group of drugs has 2 major
limitations: by mouth it is not a strong analgesic, and its </p>

<p> use is associated with psychotomimetic side effects in 10-20%
of patients. The weak opioid analgesics </p>

<p> codeine and dextropropoxyphene are more effective and better
tolerated. Buprenorphine is the most useful </p>

<p> of the agonist-antagonists in chronic pain patients. However,
it has a limited effective dose range and </p>

<p> produces the same side effects as morphine-like drugs.
Nalbuphine and butorphanol are only available for </p>

<p> parenteral administration, which means that their usefulness
in the treatment of chronic pain is limited. </p>

<p> Meptazinol is restricted by its manufacturers to short term
treatment and there is little information on its use </p>

<p> in chronic pain patients. (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1989
American Psychological Assn, all rights </p>

<p> reserved) KP: utility of pentazocine vs butorphanol vs
nalbuphine vs buprenorphine vs meptazinol in </p>

<p> treatment of chronic pain AN: 76-02480 </p>

<p> SO - Drug and Alcohol Dependence 1987;20:339-346<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000100 </p>

<p> AU - Herrmann WM </p>

<p> AU - Kern U </p>

<p> AU - Aigner M </p>

<p> TI - On the adverse reactions and efficacy of long-term
treatment with flupirtine: preliminary results </p>

<p> of an ongoing twelve-month study with 200 patients suffering
from chronic pain states in arthrosis or </p>

<p> arthritis </p>

<p> AB - In order to investigate the efficacy and safety of
long-term treatment with flupirtine in patients with </p>

<p> chronic pain, in particular arthrosis and arthritis, a study
was planned which, when completed, will </p>

<p> encompass the treatment of 200 patients over a 12-month
period. The present paper is a preliminary report </p>

<p> of this ongoing study. The report deals with 104 patients: 55
of whom completed the 12-month treatment </p>

<p> period and a 2-week follow-up phase, during which flupirtine
was replaced by placebo in order to be able to </p>

<p> detect drug-withdrawal effects. Forty nine patients withdrew
from the study. Most of the patients were </p>

<p> suffering from degenerative rheumatic arthrosis or
inflammatory rheumatic arthritis. The average daily </p>

<p> dosage was 300 mg. The incidence of drop-outs was highest in
the first months with hardly any patients </p>

<p> withdrawing in the last six months. Fifteen patients dropped
out because of side effects (dizziness, nausea, </p>

<p> sleep disturbances, and headache). Ten patients dropped out
because of ineffectiveness, seven because of </p>

<p> side effects plus ineffectiveness, and three because of side
effects and other reasons. The remaining 14 </p>

<p> patients dropped out because of other or non-medical reasons.
For the 55 patients who completed the study, </p>

<p> the analgesic took effect within 45 minutes to 2 hours, the
duration of effect was 4-6 hours. Three-quarters </p>

<p> of the patients responded to the drug, one-quarter did not.
The analgesic effect remained constant during the </p>

<p> 12-month treatment, as did the average number of capsules
taken per month. There was no evidence that </p>

<p> tolerance developed. The most frequent side effects were
drowsiness (9% of patients), dizziness (11%), dry </p>

<p> mouth (5%) and pruritis (9%). The withdrawal symptom scale
completed every month during treatment (to </p>

<p> determine baseline values) and every day throughout the
2-week placebo post-treatment phase showed no </p>

<p> changes in the median. The mean value increased during the
withdrawal phase, however, indicating that the </p>

<p> symptomatology was more pronounced in some subjects. After
withdrawal, the non-specific symptoms </p>

<p> increased to a greater extent than symptoms from the opiate
scale. The symptoms were present throughout </p>

<p> the withdrawal phase. If the withdrawal phenomena had
corresponded to the flupirtine's terminal half-life, </p>

<p> then the symptoms ought to have been present mainly in the
first few days. There was a slight trend for </p>

<p> lowering systolic blood pressure but no changes in diastolic
blood pressure or heart rate, nor changes in the </p>

<p> ECG or laboratory analysis that could be related to
flupirtine.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 </p>

<p> WORDS) </p>

<p> SO - Postgraduate Medical Journal 1987;63 Suppl 3:87-103<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000034 </p>

<p> AU - Isakova ME </p>

<p> AU - Larionova VB </p>

<p> AU - Sidorkin VA </p>

<p> AU - Tsirikhov SM </p>

<p> TI - Treatment of the pain syndrome in cancer patients by
peridural administration of low doses of </p>

<p> opiates. [Russian] </p>

<p> AB - Peridural injections of morphine were given to 180
incurable cancer patients suffering chronic pain. </p>

<p> The effectiveness of the said procedure as well as its
side-effects were assessed. A relationship between the </p>

<p> external respiration parameters, on the one hand, and drug
dosage and time postinjection, on the other, was </p>

<p> studied. The data obtained point to the effectiveness of the
said method and suggest that it be used as a </p>

<p> universal procedure for the treatment of intractable pain in
incurable patients </p>

<p> SO - Voprosy Onkologii 1987;33:94-97<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000096 </p>

<p> AU - Jimenez AC </p>

<p> AU - Gusmorino P </p>

<p> AU - Pinter I </p>

<p> AU - Snow B </p>

<p> TI - The use of clonidine for the treatment of meperidine
withdrawal in a multidisciplinary pain </p>

<p> program setting. A case presentation </p>

<p> AB - The management of iatrogenic drug dependence in
individuals with pain can be more difficult than the </p>

<p> treatment of the pain itself. In addition to a
multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of a patient with </p>

<p> chronic pain, there is a need for a rapid, safe, and
effective method of detoxification from opiate use. </p>

<p> Clonidine HCl, a nonopiate, has been found, in this case
presentation, to be a valuable option </p>

<p> SO - Bulletin of the Hospital for Joint Diseases Orthopaedic
Institute 1987;47:72-77<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000098 </p>

<p> AU - Kriegler JS </p>

<p> AU - Ashenberg ZS </p>

<p> TI - Management of chronic low back pain: a comprehensive
approach. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - The treatment approach presented in this article is an
obvious departure from ways physicians are </p>

<p> typically trained to handle patients' pain complaints.
Traditional medical training focuses primarily on the </p>

<p> management of acute pain. Unfortunately, the treatment
modalities appropriate for acute pain are not </p>

<p> applicable to most chronic pain disorders. Since physicians'
practices contain many chronic pain patients, it is </p>

<p> important for them to develop a more comprehensive and
effective approach to the management of CLBP. </p>

<p> Through the use of case vignettes, this article has attempted
to elucidate some common problems </p>

<p> experienced by patients with CLBP. It is a complex disorder
that requires that the physicians be sensitive to </p>

<p> the biologic, psychologic, and social aspects of the illness.
Simply handing a patient with CLBP a set of back </p>

<p> exercises or prescriptions for narcotics and sedatives will
not be beneficial. Rather, the patient must be </p>

<p> educated about the pain and taught to take an active role in
his own treatment. By working with patients and </p>

<p> their families, physicians can teach patients with CLBP the
self-management skills essential for the </p>

<p> resumption of a normal, productive life. [References: 30] </p>

<p> SO - Seminars in Neurology 1987;7:303-312<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000035 </p>

<p> AU - Meyers FJ </p>

<p> AU - Meyers FH </p>

<p> TI - Management of chronic pain </p>

<p> AB - Relief of pain without drug toxicity can be achieved in
cancer patients by adhering to basic </p>

<p> pharmacologic principles. Agents should be chosen on the
basis of potency and route of administration. </p>

<p> Tolerance can be dealt with by combining different classes of
drugs, such as phenothiazines and aspirin, and </p>

<p> by using special routes of administration. Patients with
severe pain from illnesses other than cancer can be </p>

<p> effectively palliated in a similar manner </p>

<p> SO - American Family Physician 1987;36:139-146<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000095 </p>

<p> AU - Millan MJ </p>

<p> AU - Morris BJ </p>

<p> AU - Colpaert FC </p>

<p> AU - Herz A </p>

<p> TI - A model of chronic pain in the rat: high-resolution
neuroanatomical approach identifies </p>

<p> alterations in multiple opioid systems in the periaqueductal
grey </p>

<p> AB - Inoculation of the tail base of rats with Mycobacterium
butyricum led to an arthritic swelling and </p>

<p> inflammation of the limbs which displayed a hyperalgesia to
noxious pressure: these effects peaked at 3 </p>

<p> weeks postinoculation. In vitro autoradiography of coronal
sections of rat brain was used for a parallel </p>

<p> determination of binding to mu-, delta- and kappa-opioid
binding sites. In only two regions, the dorsomedial </p>

<p> and dorsolateral parts of the periaqueductal grey (PAG), was
a significant change seen: this comprised an </p>

<p> increase in binding to kappa-sites, whereas mu- and
delta-sites therein were unaffected. This region was </p>

<p> analysed for opioid peptides derived from each of the three
opioid peptide families known. While no change </p>

<p> was seen in levels of immunoreactive (ir)-dynorphin1-17 A
(DYN) and ir-Met-enkephalin, a decrease was </p>

<p> detected in those of ir-beta-endorphin (beta-EP): this change
was restricted to the PAG. These data </p>

<p> demonstrate a highly localized and selective influence of
chronic arthritic pain upon multiple opioid systems </p>

<p> in the PAG of the rat, a structure playing a key role in the
control of pain and in the expression of the </p>

<p> antinociceptive actions of opioids. The data suggest a
possible significance of PAG pools of beta-EP and </p>

<p> kappa-receptors in the response to and modulation of chronic
pain </p>

<p> SO - Brain Research 1987;416:349-353<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000097 </p>

<p> AU - Millan MJ </p>

<p> AU - Czlonkowski A </p>

<p> AU - Pilcher CW </p>

<p> AU - Almeida OF </p>

<p> AU - Millan MH </p>

<p> AU - Colpaert FC </p>

<p> AU - Herz A </p>

<p> TI - A model of chronic pain in the rat: functional
correlates of alterations in the activity of opioid </p>

<p> systems </p>

<p> AB - Intradermal inoculation of rats at the tail base with
Mycobacterium butyricum led to the gradual </p>

<p> development of an arthritic swelling of the limbs which
peaked at 3 weeks and subsided thereafter. Arthritic </p>

<p> rats displayed a loss of body weight, hypophagia, and
hypodipsia in addition to a disruption of the diurnal </p>

<p> rhythms of ingestive behavior and of core temperature. The
activity of adenohypophyseal beta-endorphin- </p>

<p> (beta-EP) secreting corticotrophs, in contrast to
prolactin-(PRL) secreting lactotrophs, was increased in </p>

<p> arthritic rats. Indeed, hypertrophy of the adrenal glands was
seen. Arthritic rats also showed an elevation in </p>

<p> spinal cord levels of immunoreactive dynorphin (DYN), an
endogenous ligand of the kappa-opioid receptor. </p>

<p> The paws and tail of arthritic rats showed lower thresholds
in response to noxious pressure (hyperalgesia), </p>

<p> higher thresholds in response to noxious heat (hypoalgesia),
and no change in their response to noxious </p>

<p> electrical stimulation. Neither naloxone nor ICI-154, 129 (a
preferential delta-receptor antagonist) modified </p>

<p> the responses of the paw or tail to pressure. However, MR
2266 (an antagonist with higher activity at </p>

<p> kappa-receptors) decreased thresholds to pressure in
arthritic, but not control, rats; that is, it potentiated the </p>

<p> hyperalgesia. This action was stereospecific. None of the
antagonists modified the response to heat. MR </p>

<p> 2266 did not affect the response to pressure in rats with
acute inflammation produced by yeast. Thus, the </p>

<p> potentiation of pressure hyperalgesia by MR 2266 in chronic
arthritic rats is highly selective. Arthritic rats </p>

<p> showed a reduced response to the analgesic effect of a
kappa-agonist (U-50, 488H), whereas the response </p>

<p> to a mu-agonist (morphine) was enhanced. These effects were
specific to nociception in that their influence </p>

<p> upon endocrine secretion (PRL and beta-EP) was otherwise
changed. The secretion of beta-EP and PRL </p>

<p> was stimulated by both morphine and U-50,488H, and the
influence of U-50,488H upon the release of beta- </p>

<p> EP (from the adenohypophysis) was enhanced in arthritic rats.
It is suggested that polyarthritis is a complex </p>

<p> condition entailing many changes, both behavioral and
endocrinological. Further, arthritic rats cannot simply </p>

<p> be described as &quot;hyperalgesic&quot;: of critical
importance is the nature of the nociceptive stimulus applied. The
</p>

<p> parallel alterations in spinal cord pools of DYN and
kappa-receptors (see also Millan et al., 1986) and the </p>

<p> changes in the influence on nociception of kappa-agonists and
kappa-antagonists suggest an increased </p>

<p> activity of spinal DYN. Thus, spinal kappa-receptors may play
a role in the modulation of nociception under </p>

<p> chronic pain.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS) </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Neuroscience 1987;7:77-87<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000107 </p>

<p> AU - Miller BE </p>

<p> AU - Lipman JJ </p>

<p> AU - Byrne WL </p>

<p> TI - Partial characterization of a novel endogenous opioid in
human cerebrospinal fluid </p>

<p> AB - Human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contains many
uncharacterized endogenous opioids, in addition to </p>

<p> the known enkephalins, endorphins, and dynorphins. These
opioids may be separated by gel filtration </p>

<p> chromatography and identified by radioreceptor assay for
opioid activity. One region of the chromatographic </p>

<p> elution profile, designated &quot;Peak B&quot; has previously
been shown to be related to the pain status of chronic </p>

<p> pain patients. We now report that human Peak B isolated from
the CSF of pain-free elective surgery patients </p>

<p> is present at a typical concentration equivalent in activity
to 1.4 pmol of morphine sulfate per ml of CSF </p>

<p> measured by radioreceptor assay. At a dose of 0.06 and 0.12
pmol morphine sulfate equivalents of CSF </p>

<p> (MSE), injected into the cerebroventricular system of the
mouse, Peak B produced an antinociceptive effect, </p>

<p> the intensity and duration of which was dose-dependent and
which was antagonized by naloxone. The mouse </p>

<p> vas deferens (MVD) preparation was inhibited by Peak B in a
manner that was sensitive to antagonism by </p>

<p> naloxone only at low (less than 1.0 microM) but not at higher
(greater than 6.0 microM) concentrations of </p>

<p> the antagonist. Peak B activity in the MVD assay was
unaffected by treatment with trypsin or alpha- </p>

<p> chymotrypsin </p>

<p> SO - Life Sciences 1987;41:2535-2545<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000036 </p>

<p> AU - Miser AW </p>

<p> AU - Dothage JA </p>

<p> AU - Wesley RA </p>

<p> AU - Miser JS </p>

<p> TI - The prevalence of pain in a pediatric and young adult
cancer population </p>

<p> AB - The prevalence and nature of pain in the population of
children and young adults with malignancy </p>

<p> treated by the Pediatric Branch of the National Cancer
Institute were assessed over a 6 month period. One </p>

<p> hundred and thirty-nine patients were evaluated during 161
in-patient days and 195 out-patient clinic visits. </p>

<p> Approximately 50% of the patients assessed in the hospital
and 25% of the patients assessed in the out- </p>

<p> patient clinic were found to be experiencing some degree of
pain at the time of assessment. Therapy-related </p>

<p> pain predominated in both in-patients and out-patients; only
one-third of the pain experienced by in-patients </p>

<p> and less than 20% of the pain experienced by out-patients was
due to tumor. Tumor pain was due primarily </p>

<p> to bony invasion. In order to control pain in those
individuals experiencing pain, narcotic analgesics were </p>

<p> being used by one-half of the in-patients and one-third of
the out-patients. Overall pain control was good, </p>

<p> with the medium visual analogue scale score being 26 mm on a
0-100 mm scale. During the study period 7 </p>

<p> patients were identified to have chronic pain for greater
than 1 year following eradication of all known tumor </p>

<p> from the site of pain. One was receiving massive doses of
narcotics (120 mg/day of methadone) apparently </p>

<p> out of proportion to his underlying pain </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1987;29:73-83<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000041 </p>

<p> AU - Obbens EA </p>

<p> AU - Hill CS </p>

<p> AU - Leavens ME </p>

<p> AU - Ruthenbeck SS </p>

<p> AU - Otis F </p>

<p> TI - Intraventricular morphine administration for control of
chronic cancer pain </p>

<p> AB - Twenty cancer patients with severe chronic pain have
been treated with intraventricular morphine </p>

<p> sulfate. Adequate pain relief until death was achieved in 10
patients; 1 patient has been treated for 9 months </p>

<p> and is still being treated. In 2 patients, the effects of the
morphine sulfate on their unilateral pelvic pain wore </p>

<p> off after 4 and 6 months because of tumor progression. At
that time, they underwent chordotomy </p>

<p> procedures elsewhere. The treatment was discontinued in 4
patients for reasons other than inadequate pain </p>

<p> relief, such as medical complications or resolution of pain.
In 3 patients, the procedure was abandoned when </p>

<p> emotional and psychological factors interfered with pain
control. Dose requirements of intraventricular </p>

<p> morphine sulfate varied greatly, depending on the total daily
dose of systemic narcotic intake at the onset of </p>

<p> the study. Intraventricular morphine sulfate is a feasible
and reliable method to achieve pain relief in selected </p>

<p> cancer patients with severe chronic pain when the maximum
tolerated dose of systemic narcotic analgesics </p>

<p> has become insufficient to control their pain </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1987;28:61-68<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000105 </p>

<p> AU - Paladini VA </p>

<p> AU - Gioseffi M </p>

<p> AU - Benvegnu M </p>

<p> AU - Signoretto F </p>

<p> AU - Gobbato E </p>

<p> AU - Mocavero G </p>

<p> TI - Parenteral opiates and late somatosensory evoked
potentials in chronic pain. [Italian] </p>

<p> SO - Minerva Anestesiologica 1987;53:535-542<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000195 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Continuous intravenous infusion of opioid drugs </p>

<p> AB - AB - Continuous intravenous infusion of opioid drugs is
a widely accepted alternative approach to the </p>

<p> management of cancer pain. This review critically evaluates
the safety and efficacy of the technique and </p>

<p> proffers guidelines for management based on the available
literature and clinical experience AD - Albert </p>

<p> Einstein College of Medicine AD - Bronx AD - New York UI -
87143234 </p>

<p> SO - Med Clin North Am 1987;71:233-241<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000197 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - NOVEL METHODS OF OPIOID ADMINISTRATION </p>

<p> AB - AB - General considerations in the administration of
opioids to cancer patients are discussed, and the </p>

<p> available routes of administration are described, including
how they are used and with which drugs. The </p>

<p> routes of administration covered are oral, buccal,
sublingual, rectal, parenteral (continuous iv administration, </p>

<p> continuous sc administration, and patient-controlled
analgesia), spinal (epidural and intrathecal), and </p>

<p> intraventricular. These routes of administration offer to the
clinician many options in the pursuit of a safe, </p>

<p> affordable, and effective method of opioid analgesia for the
patient with chronic cancer pain. Regular dosing </p>

<p> with oral medication offers the simplest, most reliable, and
least expensive method of pain control; it remains </p>

<p> the preferred approach. There should be a specific indication
for the use of any particular route of </p>

<p> administration. Appropriate use of these administration
routes depends on careful assessment of the patient </p>

<p> and detailed knowledge of both the literature and the
clinical utility relevant to each. (22 Refs) AD - Dept. of </p>

<p> Neurology AD - Albert Einstein Coll. of Medicine AD - Bronx
AD - NY UI - 88645128 </p>

<p> SO - Cancer Nurs 1987;10:138-142<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000193 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Optimal pain control in elderly cancer patients </p>

<p> AB - The optimal management of pain in the elderly cancer
patient is founded on astute assessment of pain </p>

<p> and other symptoms, development of a pain diagnosis derived
from the clinical evaluation, treatment of </p>

<p> underlying causes where possible, and the expert application
of analgesic techniques. Analgesic techniques </p>

<p> themselves are multimodal. Pharmacologic approaches are the
mainstay, but an individual patient may </p>

<p> benefit from the use of anesthetic, neuroaugmentative,
surgical, physiatric, or psychological methods, as </p>

<p> well. Guidelines for the assessment and integrated management
of these patients are suggested, with specific </p>

<p> emphasis on the use of pharmacologic therapy AD - Unified
Pain Service AD - Albert Einstein College of </p>

<p> Medicine AD - Bronx AD - New York UI - 87192031 </p>

<p> SO - Geriatrics 1987;42:33-6, 39-40, 44<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000101 </p>

<p> AU - Przewlocki R </p>

<p> TI - Opioid peptides in relation to antinociception. [Review]
</p>

<p> AB - Three families of endogenous opioid peptides, each
derived from distinct precursor, as well as their </p>

<p> localization, affinity and interaction with different
subtypes of opioid receptors are described. The release of </p>

<p> opioid peptides upon various stimulation procedures is also
presented. The emphasis is made on the role of </p>

<p> opioid peptides in analgesia by describing their
antinociceptive potency and discussing the role of peptides </p>

<p> deriving from the different precursors in conveying the acute
pain stimuli and on the changes in activity of </p>

<p> opioid peptide systems in chronic pain. [References: 88] </p>

<p> SO - Polish Journal of Pharmacology &amp; Pharmacy
1987;39:609-621 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000038 </p>

<p> AU - Scherrer P </p>

<p> AU - Schelling JL </p>

<p> TI - Drug therapy of chronic pain in cancer patients. Survey
among hospitalized patients. [French] </p>

<p> SO - Revue Medicale de la Suisse Romande 1987;107:69-76<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000104 </p>

<p> AU - Young RF </p>

<p> AU - Chambi VI </p>

<p> TI - Pain relief by electrical stimulation of the
periaqueductal and periventricular gray matter. </p>

<p> Evidence for a non-opioid mechanism </p>

<p> AB - Pain relief following stimulation of the periaqueductal
gray matter (PAG) or periventricular gray </p>

<p> matter (PVG) in man has been ascribed to stimulation-induced
release of endogenous opioid substances. </p>

<p> Forty-five patients were studied and followed for at least 1
year after placement of chronic stimulating </p>

<p> electrodes in the PAG or PVG to determine if pain relief due
to stimulation could be ascribed to an </p>

<p> endogenous opioid mechanism. Three criteria were assessed:
the development of tolerance to stimulation; </p>

<p> the possibility of cross-tolerance to morphine; and
reversibility of stimulation-induced pain relief by the </p>

<p> opiate antagonist naloxone. Sixteen patients (35.6%)
developed tolerance to stimulation, that is, they </p>

<p> obtained progressively less effective pain relief. Twelve
(44.4%) of 27 patients undergoing stimulation of the </p>

<p> thalamic sensory relay nuclei for treatment of chronic pain
(a presumably non-opioid mechanism) also </p>

<p> developed tolerance. Morphine sulfate was administered in a
blind, placebo-controlled protocol to 10 </p>

<p> patients who had become tolerant to PAG-PVG stimulation and
none showed evidence of cross-tolerance. </p>

<p> Fifteen of 19 patients, already tolerant to morphine at the
time of PAG-PVG electrode implantation, </p>

<p> experienced excellent pain relief by stimulation, also
indicating a lack of cross-tolerance. Twenty-two </p>

<p> patients who experienced excellent pain relief from chronic
PAG-PVG stimulation received intravenous </p>

<p> naloxone in a double-blind, placebo-controlled protocol. Pain
intensity as assessed by the visual analog scale </p>

<p> was increased to the same degree by both placebo and
naloxone. Eight patients showed no increase in pain </p>

<p> intensity with either placebo or naloxone. Although tolerance
to PAG-PVG stimulation developed in these </p>

<p> patients, the frequency of tolerance was similar to that seen
in patients undergoing thalamic sensory nuclear </p>

<p> stimulation. Since the latter technique presumably relieves
pain by a non-opioid mechanism, the development </p>

<p> of tolerance to PAG-PVG stimulation does not, in itself,
confirm an opioid mechanism. Cross-tolerance </p>

<p> between PAG-PVG stimulation and morphine was not seen and
cross-tolerance to PAG-PVG stimulation in </p>

<p> patients already tolerant to morphine was rare. The
pain-relieving effect of PAG-PVG stimulation was </p>

<p> reversed to an approximately equal degree by naloxone and
placebo. The authors do not believe that, in </p>

<p> most patients, pain relief elicited by PAG-PVG stimulation
depends on an endogenous opioid mechanism. It </p>

<p> appears that other, non-opioid mechanisms are primarily
responsible for such pain relief </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Neurosurgery 1987;66:364-371<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000176 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> TI - Therapy of pain caused by gastrointestinal tumors.
[German] </p>

<p> AB - Therapy of pain induced by malignant diseases is an
important task for any physician. A proper </p>

<p> diagnosis is necessary for an adequate treatment. Pain in the
bones can be treated successfully with </p>

<p> peripherally acting analgesics such as acetylsalicylic acid,
paracetamol or metamizole. On the other hand, </p>

<p> certain tumors require local blockade as in cases with
pancreatic or perianal tumors. If such a therapeutic </p>

<p> approach is not possible or if pain is felt all over the body
then centrally acting analgesics such as opiates are </p>

<p> necessary. Opiates should be administered according to a
tight schedule and not on demand. Combinations </p>

<p> of certain analgesic drugs are often quite useful. Apart from
their peripheral application opiates can also be </p>

<p> administered epidurally or intrathecally which reduces the
required dosage </p>

<p> SO - Leber, Magen, Darm 1987;17:238-243<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000054 </p>

<p> AU - Bach V </p>

<p> AU - Carl P </p>

<p> AU - Ravlo O </p>

<p> AU - Crawford ME </p>

<p> AU - Werner M </p>

<p> TI - Potentiation of epidural opioids with epidural
droperidol. A one year retrospective study<br>
</p>

<p> Return-Path: &lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> Comments: Authenticated sender is
&lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> From: tanante@nwlink.com </p>

<p> To: schaffer@smartlink.net </p>

<p> Date: Sat, 1 Jun 1996 17:18:59 +0000 </p>

<p> Subject: Re: Pain Medication #1 </p>

<p> Priority: normal<br>
</p>

<p> AB - During a period of one year, 119 patients with chronic
pain received injections of opioids via a </p>

<p> catheter inserted in the lumbar epidural space. Twenty-three
patients (19%) showed evidence of tolerance </p>

<p> and were given droperidol 1.25-5.0 mg epidurally. In 20
patients in this study, there was a significant </p>

<p> reduction in the number of epidural opioid injections. Six
patients complained of excessive sedation, which </p>

<p> disappeared when the dose of droperidol was reduced, although
this did not affect the analgesia. One patient </p>

<p> given an accidental overdose of droperidol developed
reversible Parkinsonism. It is concluded that epidural </p>

<p> administration of the dopamine antagonist droperidol may be
beneficial as supplementary medication to </p>

<p> epidural opioids when tolerance develops </p>

<p> SO - Anaesthesia 1986;41:1116-1119<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000052 </p>

<p> AU - Baskin DS </p>

<p> AU - Mehler WR </p>

<p> AU - Hosobuchi Y </p>

<p> AU - Richardson DE </p>

<p> AU - Adams JE </p>

<p> AU - Flitter MA </p>

<p> TI - Autopsy analysis of the safety, efficacy and cartography
of electrical stimulation of the central </p>

<p> gray in humans </p>

<p> AB - Electrical brain stimulation is effective in controlling
certain intractable chronic pain syndromes in </p>

<p> humans, but the specific target site(s) for stimulation
producing a maximal analgesic effect is (are) not well </p>

<p> defined. This prospective study correlates the clinical
results of chronic stimulation of the periaqueductal </p>

<p> gray (PAG) and periventricular gray (PVG) matter in humans
with the anatomic site of electrode placement </p>

<p> as determined at autopsy, and documents the histologic
reactions to electrode implantation and electrical </p>

<p> stimulation of the area. Seven patients underwent electrode
implantation to control their chronic pain; two </p>

<p> had electrodes implanted bilaterally. All patients obtained
complete analgesia with stimulation, although 3 </p>

<p> subsequently found the stimulation to have diminished
efficacy. The opiate antagonist naloxone reversed the </p>

<p> analgesia in the 4 patients so tested. All 7 patients later
died of causes unrelated to electrode implantation or </p>

<p> stimulation. Postmortem analysis showed that, for 6 of the 9
electrodes implanted, the electrode tip was </p>

<p> located in the ventrolateral PAG at the level of the
posterior commissure; the other 3 electrodes were found </p>

<p> in the white matter adjacent to the PAG. No evidence of
gliosis or parenchymal reaction was observed along </p>

<p> the tracts and tips of the electrodes. The results indicate
that the ventrolateral PAG and PVG matter at the </p>

<p> level of the posterior commissure is the optimal site for
therapeutic electrical brain stimulation for opiate- </p>

<p> responsive pain in humans </p>

<p> SO - Brain Research 1986;371:231-236<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000056 </p>

<p> AU - Baumann TJ </p>

<p> AU - Batenhorst RL </p>

<p> AU - Graves DA </p>

<p> AU - Foster TS </p>

<p> AU - Bennett RL </p>

<p> TI - Patient-controlled analgesia in the terminally ill
cancer patient </p>

<p> AB - Patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) is a relatively new
therapeutic modality which has allowed </p>

<p> postsurgical patients to safely and effectively
self-administer doses of intravenous narcotics via a syringe </p>

<p> pump and sequencing device. A pilot study was designed to
evaluate PCA's safety and effectiveness in the </p>

<p> terminally ill cancer patient. Eight patients whose chronic
pain was not adequately controlled by oral </p>

<p> narcotics were permitted to use PCA for a minimum of 48
hours. Respiratory rates, sedation rankings, and </p>

<p> pain rankings indicated these patients achieved satisfactory
analgesia with a minimum of sedation and </p>

<p> experienced no respiratory depression. Three patients were
switched to oral regimens using PCA dosing as a </p>

<p> guide. Pain and sedation rankings were similar to those
registered while exclusively on PCA. This self- </p>

<p> dosing technique was judged to be safe, effective, and able
to accommodate wide fluctuations in analgesic </p>

<p> need when treating pain in the terminally ill cancer patient.
The results obtained in these patients support </p>

<p> further trials using PCA to individualize oral analgesic
regimens </p>

<p> SO - Drug Intelligence &amp; Clinical Pharmacy
1986;20:297-301 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000216 </p>

<p> AU - Cohen SR </p>

<p> AU - Melzack R </p>

<p> TI - Habenular stimulation produces analgesia in the formalin
test </p>

<p> AB - AB - Electrical stimulation of the habenula produces a
striking reduction of continuous, formalin- </p>

<p> induced pain in the rat. The analgesia occurs at current
levels which do not appear aversive and persists for </p>

<p> variable durations, ranging from 1 to 21 min in this
experimental situation. The effect is not blocked by </p>

<p> subcutaneous administration of a large dose of naloxone prior
to the stimulation, indicating that it is not </p>

<p> dependent on an opiate-sensitive system. Stimulation of the
adjacent paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus </p>

<p> was either aversive or had no effect on the pain scores. The
anatomical connections of the habenula suggest </p>

<p> that it may mediate the interaction of limbic forebrain
structures with midbrain structures known to play a </p>

<p> role in pain and analgesia UI - 87039849 </p>

<p> SO - Neurosci Lett 1986;70:165-169<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000050 </p>

<p> AU - Coombs DW </p>

<p> TI - Management of chronic pain by epidural and intrathecal
opioids: newer drugs and delivery </p>

<p> systems. [Review] </p>

<p> SO - International Anesthesiology Clinics 1986;24:59-74<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000055 </p>

<p> AU - Doleys DM </p>

<p> AU - Dolce JJ </p>

<p> AU - Doleys AL </p>

<p> AU - Crocker M </p>

<p> AU - Wolfe SE </p>

<p> TI - Evaluation, narcotics and behavioral treatment
influences on pain ratings in chronic pain </p>

<p> patients </p>

<p> AB - Changes in self-reported pain ratings were assessed in
95 chronic pain patients from data collected at </p>

<p> three times: pretreatment evaluation, initial days of
treatment and final days of treatment. These data were </p>

<p> collected separately for regular, sporadic and nonusers of
narcotic medication. Each patient completed a </p>

<p> four-week interdisciplinary behaviorally based noninvasive
treatment program. There was an average </p>

<p> decrease of 7% in self-reported pain ratings between
evaluation and the onset of treatment for the three </p>

<p> groups. An additional decrease of 21%, 16% and 10% for the
sporadic, nonusers and regular users of </p>

<p> narcotics respectively was noted during treatment.
Statistical analysis revealed a significant decrease in pain </p>

<p> ratings across assessment phases but not between groups.
Sporadic users of narcotics showed a pattern </p>

<p> more similar to nonusers than to the regular users </p>

<p> SO - Archives of Physical Medicine &amp; Rehabilitation
1986;67:456-458 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000049 </p>

<p> AU - Farkash AE </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - The pharmacological management of chronic pain in the
paraplegic patient. [Review] </p>

<p> SO - Journal of the American Paraplegia Society 1986;9:41-50 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000200 </p>

<p> AU - Farkash AE </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - The pharmacological management of chronic pain in the
paraplegic patient </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 87059866 </p>

<p> SO - J Am Paraplegia Soc 1986;9:41-50<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000225 </p>

<p> AU - Halpern LM </p>

<p> AU - Dong WK </p>

<p> TI - D-phenylalanine: a putative enkephalinase inhibitor
studied in a primate acute pain model </p>

<p> AB - D-Phenylalanine, along with morphine, acetylsalicylic
acid and zomepirac sodium were evaluated for </p>

<p> their antinociceptive actions in monkeys (M. fascicularis)
trained to autoregulate nociceptive stimulation </p>

<p> using a discrete-trials, aversive-threshold paradigm.
Morphine sulfate produced dose-related increases in </p>

<p> aversive threshold which were reversible after administration
of naloxone (12.5 or 25 micrograms/kg i.m.). </p>

<p> D-Phenylalanine (500 mg/kg p.o.) produced a small increase in
aversive threshold which was not statistically </p>

<p> significant and not naloxone reversible. Acetylsalicylic acid
(200 mg/kg p.o.) but not zomepirac sodium (200 </p>

<p> mg/kg p.o.) in combination with D-phenylalanine (500 mg/kg)
produced a small statistically significant </p>

<p> increase in aversive threshold. Our results argue against the
hypothesis that D-phenylalanine is responsible </p>

<p> for increasing aversive thresholds via opiate receptor
mechanisms involving increased activity of enkephalins </p>

<p> at synaptic loci. Previous studies by others in rats and mice
showed that D-phenylalanine and acetylsalicylic </p>

<p> acid produced increases in nociceptive thresholds which were
naloxone reversible. Our failure to find opiate </p>

<p> receptor mediated analgesia in a primate model with
demonstrated opiate receptor selectivity and sensitivity </p>

<p> is discussed in terms of previous basic and clinical research
indicating an analgesic role for D-phenylalanine. </p>

<p> Possible species difference in drug action is discussed in
terms of inhibition by D-phenylalanine of carboxy- </p>

<p> peptidase-like enkephalin processing enzymes as well as
inhibition of carboxypeptidase-like enkephalin </p>

<p> degrading enzymes UI - 86176317 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1986;24:223-237<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000185 </p>

<p> AU - Kanner RM </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Are the people who need analgesics getting them? </p>

<p> AB - [No Abstract Available] </p>

<p> SO - Am J Nurs 1986;86:589-589<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000189 </p>

<p> AU - Kanner RM </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Are the people who need analgesics getting them? </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 86212419 </p>

<p> SO - Am J Nurs 1986;86:589-589<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000205 </p>

<p> AU - Kanner RM </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Unavailability of narcotic analgesics for ambulatory
cancer patients in New York City </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 87035134 </p>

<p> SO - J Pain Symptom Manage 1986;1:187-189<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000044 </p>

<p> AU - Kayser V </p>

<p> AU - Besson JM </p>

<p> AU - Guilbaud G </p>

<p> TI - Analgesia produced by low doses of the opiate antagonist
naloxone in arthritic rats is reduced in </p>

<p> morphine-tolerant animals </p>

<p> AB - In a model of experimental chronic pain
(adjuvant-induced arthritic rats), low doses of the opiate </p>

<p> antagonist naloxone produced a profound analgesia. Maximum
analgesia was seen with 3 micrograms/kg </p>

<p> (i.v.). In contrast, hyperalgesia was obtained with much
higher doses (1-3 mg/kg, i.v.). The hyperalgesic </p>

<p> effects were not affected in arthritic animals rendered
tolerant to morphine, but the paradoxical analgesic </p>

<p> effects were significantly reduced. This decrease suggests
that naloxone analgesia involves interaction with </p>

<p> opiate receptors and that the operation of endorphinergic
systems differs in normal animals and animals </p>

<p> which experience persistent pain </p>

<p> SO - Brain Research 1986;371:37-41<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000031 </p>

<p> AU - Millan MJ </p>

<p> AU - Millan MH </p>

<p> AU - Czlonkowski A </p>

<p> AU - Pilcher CWT </p>

<p> AU - Hollt V </p>

<p> AU - Colpaert FC </p>

<p> AU - Herz A </p>

<p> TI - Functional response of multiple opioid systems to
chronic arthritic pain in the rat </p>

<p> ED - </p>

<p> BK - Stress-induced analgesia. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, Vol. 467. (Dennis D. Kelly, </p>

<p> Ed.), pp. 182-193. New York Academy of Sciences, New York,
NY, US; 449 pp.&lt;&lt;SEE BOOK&gt;&gt; </p>

<p> AB - AN: CHAPTER 86-246012-015&lt;&lt;SEE PREVIOUS
CHAPTER&gt;&gt; &lt;&lt;SEE NEXT CHAPTER&gt;&gt; IN: </p>

<p> Max-Planck-Inst fur Psychiatrie LA: English SP: Sponsor;
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Bonn, </p>

<p> Federal Republic of Germany CR: (from the chapter) there is
...a multiplicity of opioid ligands and opioid </p>

<p> receptors that display a differential distribution and
modulation and appear to subserve contrasting functional </p>

<p> roles / in addition, there are many independently localized
pools of the respective opioid peptides and opioid </p>

<p> receptors / consequently, the often-formulated question as to
the role of opioid systems in pain control may </p>

<p> be a misleading oversimplification / it is necessary to
examine these questions within the perspective of the </p>

<p> multiplicity of these opioid systems /// summarizes the
findings of our recent work in which such an </p>

<p> approach was adopted for an evaluation of the functional
response of particular opioid systems to a model of </p>

<p> chronic pain in the rat--adjuvant-induced arthritis </p>

<p> SO - New York, NY, US ,New York Academy of Sciences
1986;:182-193 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000045 </p>

<p> AU - Millan MJ </p>

<p> AU - Millan MH </p>

<p> AU - Czlonkowski A </p>

<p> AU - Hollt V </p>

<p> AU - Pilcher CW </p>

<p> AU - Herz A </p>

<p> AU - Colpaert FC </p>

<p> TI - A model of chronic pain in the rat: response of multiple
opioid systems to adjuvant-induced arthritis </p>

<p> AB - Chronic arthritic pain was induced by intradermally
inoculating rats at the tail-base with </p>

<p> Mycobacterium butyricum, which results in swelling,
inflammation, and hyperalgesia of the joints. These </p>

<p> symptoms peak at 3 weeks after inoculation and disappear by
10 weeks. The following changes were seen at </p>

<p> 3 weeks. Immunoreactive dynorphin (ir-Dyn) and
ir-alpha-neo-endorphin (alpha-NE) manifested comparable </p>

<p> patterns of change. Their levels were increased in the
anterior, but not neurointermediate, pituitary. The </p>

<p> thalamus showed a rise in ir-Dyn and ir-alpha-NE, but no
alterations were seen in other brain regions. In </p>

<p> each case, cervical, thoracic, and lumbosacral sections of
the spinal cord showed a rise in ir-Dyn and ir- </p>

<p> alpha-NE: This was most pronounced in the lumbosacral region,
where the magnitude of these shifts </p>

<p> correlated with the intensity of arthritic symptoms. In
addition, a moderate elevation in ir-methionine- </p>

<p> enkephalin (ME) was seen in lumbosacral spinal cord. In
brain, ir was not changed. The level of ir-beta- </p>

<p> endorphin (beta-EP) was elevated both in the plasma and the
anterior, but not the neurointermediate, </p>

<p> pituitary. In addition, the content of messenger RNA encoding
the beta-EP precursor, proopiomelanocortin </p>

<p> (POMC), was enhanced in the anterior lobe. Thus, there was a
selective activation of synthesis of beta-EP </p>

<p> in, and its secretion from, the anterior lobe. In no brain
tissue did levels of ir-beta-EP change. At 10 weeks </p>

<p> postinoculation, the above changes were no longer apparent,
indicating their reversibility.(ABSTRACT </p>

<p> TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Neuroscience 1986;6:899-906<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000198 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> AU - Moulin DE </p>

<p> AU - Rogers A </p>

<p> AU - Inturrisi CE </p>

<p> AU - Foley KM </p>

<p> TI - I.v. infusion of opioids for cancer pain: clinical
review and guidelines for use </p>

<p> AB - AB - To assess the safety, efficacy, and use of
continuous iv infusion (CI) of opioids for cancer pain, </p>

<p> we reviewed the clinical experience of 36 patients who
received 46 CIs. CI was always preceded by a period </p>

<p> of repetitive dosing of opioids. Morphine was used in 36 CIs,
methadone in four, hydromorphone in four, </p>

<p> oxymorphone in one, and levorphanol in one. Mean doses during
CI were the morphine equivalent of 17 </p>

<p> mg/hour (range, 0.7-100) at the start, 69 mg/hour (range, 4-
480) at the maximum, and 52 mg/hour (range, </p>

<p> 1-480) at termination. Pain relief was acceptable during 28
CIs, unacceptable during 17, and unknown </p>

<p> during one. There were few toxic effects other than sedation.
Twenty-five patients died, 12 resumed im or </p>

<p> oral opioids, six continued CI with a different opioid
(yielding analgesia in two), and outcome was </p>

<p> undetermined in three. This review suggests that (a) CI is
safe, (b) analgesia may require rapid escalation of </p>

<p> infusion rates, (c) patient response varies and lack of
acceptable analgesia may occur in up to one-third, (d) </p>

<p> ineffective CI with one drug may be followed by success with
another, (e) CI should be preceded by a period </p>

<p> of repetitive iv boluses with the same drug, and (f)
guidelines can be developed which incorporate </p>

<p> pharmacokinetic principles AD - Department of Neurology AD -
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center </p>

<p> AD - New York AD - NY 10021 UI - 86217834 </p>

<p> SO - Cancer Treat Rep 1986;70:575-581<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000190 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Continuous infusion of opioids </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 86155965 </p>

<p> SO - Am J Nurs 1986;86:318, 322-318, 322<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000196 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> AU - Moulin DE </p>

<p> AU - Rogers AG </p>

<p> AU - Inturrisi CE </p>

<p> AU - Foley KM </p>

<p> TI - INTRAVENOUS INFUSION OF OPIOIDS IN CANCER-RELATED PAIN:
REVIEW OF CASES </p>

<p> AND GUIDELINES FOR USE </p>

<p> AB - AB - Continuous iv infusion (CI) of opioid analgesics as
an alternative approach to analgesia has </p>

<p> found increasing use in the management of postoperative pain
and chronic pain. Despite the popularity of </p>

<p> CI, little documentation exists for its safety and efficacy.
In order to assess these concerns, clinical </p>

<p> characteristics of 46 infusions in 36 patients with
cancer-related pain were reviewed retrospectively. Hospital </p>

<p> charts were analyzed for patient characteristics, prior
opioid exposure, rationale for iv administration of drug </p>

<p> and for CI, course of infusion, and outcome. Details of the
characteristics of the study population are </p>

<p> presented in a table. All patients had cancer and all but one
had active disease. Thirty-two patients had pain </p>

<p> due to tumor invasion, whereas three had pain caused by
cancer therapy and one had pain unrelated to the </p>

<p> diagnosis of cancer. All patients had been exposed to opioid
medications before the CI was begun. Thirty-six </p>

<p> infusions were begun with morphine sulfate, while methadone
was used in four infusions, hydromorphone in </p>

<p> four, oxymorphone in one, and levorphanol in one. Additional
medications, including the opioid analgesics, </p>

<p> were often given during the CI; their nature and frequency of
use are tabulated. During 42 infusions, the max </p>

<p> infusion rate was greater than that at the start; during 17
infusions, the rate at CI termination was lower than </p>

<p> the max rate. Three patterns of dosing during CI were
observed and are displayed graphically. The duration </p>

<p> of CI ranged from 1 to 45 days. Five patients were treated
for less than 3 days, 13 for 4-6 days, 13 for 7- 13 </p>

<p> days, 7 for 14-21 days, 3 for 22-29 days, 2 for 30-37 days,
and 3 for 38-45 days. For 25 patients, the CI was </p>

<p> maintained until the patients died. Side effects due to the
CI were difficult to determine precisely, since </p>

<p> 34/46 patients were receiving repetitive iv bolus injections
of opioids prior to CI, and the medical conditions </p>

<p> of the patients were often deteriorating during the infusion.
Progressive sedation was by far the most </p>

<p> common side effect during CI. Respiratory depression, easily
reversed with iv naloxone, occurred in a single </p>

<p> patient who received intrathecal morphine during CI. Safety
and efficacy of CI are discussed. Guidelines in </p>

<p> the management of CI are listed in a table. (21 Refs) AD -
Pain Research Program AD - Dept. of Neurology </p>

<p> AD - Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center AD - New York AD
- NY 10021 UI - 87637003 </p>

<p> SO - Adv Pain Res Ther 1986;8:413-424<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000204 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Continuous infusion of opioid drugs in the treatment of
cancer pain: guidelines for use </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 87059287 </p>

<p> SO - J Pain Symptom Manage 1986;1:223-228<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000209 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> AU - Foley KM </p>

<p> TI - Chronic use of opioid analgesics in non-malignant pain:
report of 38 cases </p>

<p> AB - AB - Thirty-eight patients maintained on opioid
analgesics for non- malignant pain were </p>

<p> retrospectively evaluated to determine the indications,
course, safety and efficacy of this therapy. Oxycodone </p>

<p> was used by 12 patients, methadone by 7, and levorphanol by
5; others were treated with propoxyphene, </p>

<p> meperidine, codeine, pentazocine, or some combination of
these drugs. Nineteen patients were treated for </p>

<p> four or more years at the time of evaluation, while 6 were
maintained for more than 7 years. Two-thirds </p>

<p> required less than 20 morphine equivalent mg/day and only 4
took more than 40 mg/day. Patients </p>

<p> occasionally required escalation of dose and/or
hospitalization for exacerbation of pain; doses usually </p>

<p> returned to a stable baseline afterward. Twenty-four patients
described partial but acceptable or fully </p>

<p> adequate relief of pain, while 14 reported inadequate relief.
No patient underwent a surgical procedure for </p>

<p> pain management while receiving therapy. Few substantial
gains in employment or social function could be </p>

<p> attributed to the institution of opioid therapy. No toxicity
was reported and management became a problem </p>

<p> in only 2 patients, both with a history of prior drug abuse.
A critical review of patient characteristics, </p>

<p> including data from the 16 Personality Factor Questionnaire
in 24 patients, the Minnesota Multiphasic </p>

<p> Personality Inventory in 23, and detailed psychiatric
evaluation in 6, failed to disclose psychological or social </p>

<p> variables capable of explaining the success of long-term
management. We conclude that opioid maintenance </p>

<p> therapy can be a safe, salutary and more humane alternative
to the options of surgery or no treatment in </p>

<p> those patients with intractable non-malignant pain and no
history of drug abuse UI - 86258701 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1986;25:171-186<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000186 </p>

<p> AU - Portenoy RK </p>

<p> TI - Continuous infusion of opioids </p>

<p> AB - [No Abstract Available] </p>

<p> SO - Am J Nurs 1986;86:318, 322-318, 322<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000047 </p>

<p> AU - Przewlocki R </p>

<p> AU - Lason W </p>

<p> AU - Silberring J </p>

<p> AU - Herz A </p>

<p> AU - Przewlocka B </p>

<p> TI - Release of opioid peptides from the spinal cord of rats
subjected to chronic pain </p>

<p> AB - Chronic localized pain increased the level of the opioid
peptides, dynorphin (DYN), alpha- </p>

<p> neoendorphin (ANEO), Met-enkephalin (MET) and
Mets-enkephalin-Arg6-Gly7-Leu8 (MEAGL), in the </p>

<p> lumbar enlargement of the rat spinal cord. It was accompanied
with a reduction of the spontaneous and K+- </p>

<p> stimulated release of ANEO and MEAGL from spinal cord slices
in vitro and a decreased release of ANEO </p>

<p> from the spinal cord in vivo. The results indicate that the
reduction in the activity of endogenous opioid </p>

<p> peptide systems might occur in the spinal cord of rats
subjected to chronic pain </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Research Monograph Series 1986;75:422-425<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000234 </p>

<p> AU - Seecof R </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - Subjective perceptions to the intravenous
&quot;rush&quot; of heroin and cocaine in opioid addicts </p>

<p> AB - AB - Subjective responses to intravenous heroin and
cocaine administration were investigated by </p>

<p> questionnaire in a population of 40 male and 29 female
confirmed heroin addicts. Responses of males and </p>

<p> females were very similar for the heroin rush, ranking
pleasure, relaxation, satisfaction, warmth, and thirst </p>

<p> highest among 20 feelings surveyed and ranking feelings like
sexual orgasm low, only fifteenth out of 20. </p>

<p> Responses of males and females for the cocaine rush were
similar in that both ranked excitement, pleasure, </p>

<p> thirst, strength, and anxiety very high, in the top six
responses, and both rated feelings like sexual orgasm </p>

<p> relatively low, rank 9 for males and 15 for females. However,
male and female responses for cocaine differed </p>

<p> in that males ranked power very high, rank 2; and females
ranked power relatively low, rank 10; but ranked </p>

<p> satisfaction, rank 5; warmth, rank 5; and relaxation, rank
12; much higher than males who ranked them 15, </p>

<p> 16, and 17, respectively. Despite the fact that sexual
feelings were infrequently identified with rushes, the </p>

<p> results best supported an interpretation that the population
was largely inorgasmic without drugs, but found </p>

<p> attractive orgasmic pleasure in heroin and cocaine. Males and
females perceived the cocaine rush differently, </p>

<p> but the reason of these differences is uncertain UI -
87073331 </p>

<p> SO - Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 1986;12:79-87<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000046 </p>

<p> AU - Shatin D </p>

<p> AU - Mullett K </p>

<p> AU - Hults G </p>

<p> TI - Totally implantable spinal cord stimulation for chronic
pain: design and efficacy </p>

<p> AB - Neurostimulators used to treat chronic, intractable pain
have evolved from technical developments in </p>

<p> pacemaker technology. A totally implantable spinal cord
stimulation (SCS) system was designed based on </p>

<p> elements of a widely used cardiac pacemaker. This paper
reports on the transformation of pacemaker </p>

<p> technology for neurostimulation applications and presents
results of using this system for the treatment of 90 </p>

<p> patients with chronic, intractable pain of the low back
and/or legs. Significant reduction in pain levels </p>

<p> resulted from use of a totally implantable spinal cord
stimulation system. Seventy percent of the patients </p>

<p> experienced good or excellent pain relief at an average of
14.5 months after implant. Patients who used an </p>

<p> automatic ON/OFF cycling mode of stimulation reported greater
pain relief than patients who were </p>

<p> stimulated continuously </p>

<p> SO - Pace - Pacing &amp; Clinical Electrophysiology
1986;9:577-583 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000043 </p>

<p> AU - Simonnet G </p>

<p> AU - Taquet H </p>

<p> AU - Floras P </p>

<p> AU - Caille JM </p>

<p> AU - Legrand JC </p>

<p> AU - Vincent JD </p>

<p> AU - Cesselin F </p>

<p> TI - Simultaneous determination of radio-immunoassayable
methionine-enkephalin and radioreceptor-active </p>

<p> opiate peptides in CSF of chronic pain suffering and non
suffering patients </p>

<p> AB - Radio-immunoassayable methionine-enkephalin (ME) and
radioreceptor-active opiate peptide levels </p>

<p> (OP) were determined in CSF from patients, both with and
without chronic pain, under investigation for </p>

<p> vertebral disk disease. This study showed: that there was no
direct correlation between ME and OP levels in </p>

<p> CSF; OP levels were negatively correlated with the ME/OP
ratio; migraine patients had higher levels of ME; </p>

<p> ME concentrations were reduced in patients receiving
anti-inflammatory drugs (nonsteroidal): patients with </p>

<p> chronic pain (non migraine, no anti-inflammatory drug
therapy) had lower ME levels than patients without </p>

<p> pain. The data are discussed in relation to animal models of
chronic pain </p>

<p> SO - Neuropeptides 1986;7:229-240<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000051 </p>

<p> AU - Staren ED </p>

<p> AU - Cullen ML </p>

<p> TI - Epidural catheter analgesia for the management of
postoperative pain. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Since its introduction to North America in 1942, the use
of epidural catheter analgesia has increased </p>

<p> dramatically. Improved equipment, methods and medications
have broadened its application to include </p>

<p> among others, surgical anesthesia, chronic pain relief and
the management of postoperative pain. Numerous </p>

<p> techniques for epidural puncture and insertion of the
catheter have been described. Although complications </p>

<p> have been associated with placement of an epidural catheter,
these are rare when performed by an </p>

<p> experienced anesthesiologist. Epidural analgesia was first
accomplished by blockade with local anesthetics. </p>

<p> Bupivacaine has been called the local anesthetic of choice
for epidural infusion. Bolus administration of </p>

<p> epidural local anesthetics gives effective analgesia;
however, its use is limited by brief duration and </p>

<p> occasionally severe hypotension. Epidural local anesthetics
have been administered by continuous infusion in </p>

<p> an attempt to minimize side effects. Nevertheless,
hypotension, as well as motor block, numbness, nausea </p>

<p> and urinary retention have occurred. Epidural analgesia with
local anesthetics is effective in relieving </p>

<p> postoperative pain, but its safety and feasibility have been
questioned because of the frequent, potentially </p>

<p> serious side effects. These problems led to trials of
epidural narcotics for postoperative pain management. </p>

<p> The exact site of action of epidural narcotic analgesics is
debatable; however, the bulk of evidence supports </p>

<p> a direct spinal action. Epidural narcotics appear to
specifically inhibit nociceptive stimuli. The prolonged and </p>

<p> profound analgesia that occurs with epidural narcotics
relative to parenteral administration is due to a higher </p>

<p> concentration of drug reaching the CSF through the epidural
route. Since nervous transmission is not </p>

<p> completely blocked this technique cannot provide anesthesia
during operation. Morphine has been the most </p>

<p> frequently used narcotic for epidural analgesia. Results of
several recent, randomized double-blind studies </p>

<p> have shown that epidural narcotics give adequate analgesia
comparable with that observed with epidural </p>

<p> bupivacaine. Epidural morphine provides a greater duration of
analgesia and may cause fewer side effects. </p>

<p> Improved analgesia has been reported when epidural narcotics
are used in combination with local </p>

<p> anesthetics. Continuous administration of low dosage epidural
narcotics has been shown to have less </p>

<p> frequent side effects than bolus administration.
Nevertheless, pruritus, urinary retention, hypotension and </p>

<p> severe respiratory depression have been reported with both
methods.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 </p>

<p> WORDS) [References: 133] </p>

<p> SO - Surgery, Gynecology &amp; Obstetrics 1986;162:389-404<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000229 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Rawson RA </p>

<p> AU - Pumphrey E </p>

<p> AU - Seecof R </p>

<p> TI - Clinical experiences with 959 opioid-dependent patients
treated with levo-alpha-acetylmethadol </p>

<p> (LAAM) </p>

<p> AB - AB - Levo-alpha-acetylmethadol (LAAM) is an orphan drug
that will soon be generally available to </p>

<p> treatment facilities. We have recently treated 959 opioid
addicts with LAAM for periods up to 36 </p>

<p> consecutive months. Three times per week dosing of LAAM
proved to be a safe and effective treatment </p>

<p> agent for the majority of subjects. During LAAM induction
there is a delay in opioid activity as LAAM </p>

<p> forms its long-acting metabolites, therefore, symptomatic
withdrawal medication must usually be </p>

<p> administered during the first 96 hours of treatment to
adequately suppress opioid withdrawal symptoms and </p>

<p> prevent self- administration of drugs by the patient. No
long-term hepatic toxicity or tumor formation could </p>

<p> be demonstrated by liver function studies and liver-spleen
imaging in a subgroup of patients. Some opioid </p>

<p> addicts report that they prefer LAAM over methadone, but the
reverse was reported by about 40% of our </p>

<p> patients which suggests that both drugs are needed for
adequate maintenance treatment of the opioid- </p>

<p> addicted population AD - UCLA School of Public Health AD -
UCLA Center for Health Sciences 90024 UI </p>

<p> - 87112832 </p>

<p> SO - J Subst Abuse Treat 1986;3:195-202<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000053 </p>

<p> AU - Todd B </p>

<p> TI - Narcotic analgesics for chronic pain. Drugs and the
elderly </p>

<p> SO - Geriatric Nursing - New York 1986;7:53-55<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000248 </p>

<p> AU - Urban BJ </p>

<p> AU - France RD </p>

<p> AU - Steinberger EK </p>

<p> AU - Scott DL </p>

<p> AU - Maltbie AA </p>

<p> TI - Long-term use of narcotic/antidepressant medication in
the management of phantom limb pain </p>

<p> AB - AB - The successful management of 5 consecutive patients
with intractable phantom limb pain is </p>

<p> described. The main therapy is a combination of a narcotic
and antidepressant. Medication remained </p>

<p> effective during the average observation time of 22 months.
There were no signs of habituation or addiction. </p>

<p> We conclude that narcotics can be safely and successfully
utilized for long-term management of phantom </p>

<p> limb pain UI - 86176313 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1986;24:191-196<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000048 </p>

<p> AU - Wallenstein SL </p>

<p> AU - Kaiko RF </p>

<p> AU - Rogers AG </p>

<p> AU - Houde RW </p>

<p> TI - Crossover trials in clinical analgesic assays: studies
of buprenorphine and morphine </p>

<p> AB - Analgesic studies of buprenorphine, a thebaine
derivative and potent partial narcotic agonist, were </p>

<p> carried out in patients with cancer who had postoperative or
chronic pain. Intramuscular buprenorphine was </p>

<p> compared with intramuscular morphine in a series of
sequentially related, twin crossover assays and was </p>

<p> found to be about 25 times as potent as morphine. Side
effects were essentially morphine-like. In a second </p>

<p> assay, the acceptability and analgesic activity of sublingual
buprenorphine was studied in a 6-dose, balanced, </p>

<p> incomplete block assay, a modification of the twin crossover
design employed in the all-intramuscular trial. </p>

<p> Sublingual buprenorphine was found to be about 15 times as
potent as intramuscular morphine and was well </p>

<p> accepted by our patients. The 4-dose twin crossover trial in
which doses are adjusted sequentially is more </p>

<p> flexible in that a wide range of doses may be studied, but it
lacks the ability of the 6-dose design to provide </p>

<p> estimates of the curvature of the dose-response slopes of the
study drugs. When first-dose-only data were </p>

<p> analyzed as parallel group assays, the main difference in
results compared with the crossover studies was a </p>

<p> decrease in efficiency and sensitivity </p>

<p> SO - Pharmacotherapy 1986;6:228-235<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000062 </p>

<p> AU - Auld AW </p>

<p> AU - Maki-Jokela A </p>

<p> AU - Murdoch DM </p>

<p> TI - Intraspinal narcotic analgesia in the treatment of
chronic pain </p>

<p> AB - The results of intraspinal narcotic analgesia (INA) in
43 patients with chronic nonmalignant pain </p>

<p> syndromes are reviewed. A protocol has been established to
improve proper patient selection and includes </p>

<p> three phases of study. Most of the patients have had INA for
2 years now. In those patients qualifying for </p>

<p> continuous delivery systems (CDS), 65% had good to excellent
relief of pain while 34% were considered </p>

<p> failures for a variety of reasons. Apparent tolerance
development in many of the patients was, in fact, due to </p>

<p> technical problems with the epidural catheter instead </p>

<p> SO - Spine 1985;10:777-781<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000058 </p>

<p> AU - Cherry DA </p>

<p> AU - Gourlay GK </p>

<p> AU - McLachlan M </p>

<p> AU - Cousins MJ </p>

<p> TI - Diagnostic epidural opioid blockade and chronic pain:
preliminary report </p>

<p> AB - A technique is described which helps in the
differentiation between pain of a mainly physical (organic) </p>

<p> and emotional (psychogenic) basis. This is based upon the
patients' subjective response to the epidural </p>

<p> administration of fentanyl and placebo agents. Patients
initially had both physical and psychological </p>

<p> assessment in a multidisciplinary pain management unit and
because of doubt of the underlying diagnosis, </p>

<p> were subjected to this procedure. Eight patients are
described in whom the following solutions were </p>

<p> administered at 20 min intervals: 2 aliquots of normal saline
(5 ml) via an epidural catheter; 1 microgram/kg </p>

<p> fentanyl via the epidural catheter; intravenous naloxone 0.4
mg, then, depending upon results obtained, 15- </p>

<p> 20 ml 2% plain lignocaine via the epidural catheter. If a
patient's visual analogue score decreased following </p>

<p> epidural fentanyl and subsequently increased following
naloxone, then a predominantly physical basis for the </p>

<p> pain was likely. In contrast, little change in visual
analogue score following fentanyl and naloxone suggested </p>

<p> a diagnosis of a predominantly emotional basis for the pain.
The diagnoses were substantiated by subsequent </p>

<p> follow-up and treatment. It is suggested that this test has
both prognostic and diagnostic value when used in </p>

<p> the context of thorough physical and psychologic assessment
of a patient with chronic pain </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1985;21:143-152<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000215 </p>

<p> AU - Cohen SR </p>

<p> AU - Melzack R </p>

<p> TI - Morphine injected into the habenula and dorsal
posteromedial thalamus produces analgesia in the </p>

<p> formalin test </p>

<p> AB - AB - Microinjection of morphine into the area of the
habenula and dorsal posteromedial thalamus (H- </p>

<p> PMT) produces analgesia for tonic pain as measured by the
formalin test in the rat. Control injections of </p>

<p> morphine into sites near the H-PMT result in less or no
reduction in pain, indicating that the analgesia </p>

<p> observed is probably due to a site of action within the H-PMT
rather than at surrounding neural structures. </p>

<p> The analgesia is fully developed by the first time of
testing, 10-16 min following the microinjection, and is </p>

<p> completely reversible by naloxone, an opiate antagonist. The
analgesia recorded is most likely due to </p>

<p> morphine's action on the habenula, parafascicular or
paraventricular nucleus of the thalamus, or a </p>

<p> combination of these structures UI - 86078584 </p>

<p> SO - Brain Res 1985;359:131-139<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000029 </p>

<p> AU - Cruzado JA </p>

<p> TI - Peptidos opiaceos, analgesia inducida por estres y
sistemas endogenos de control del dolor. (Opioid </p>

<p> peptides, stress-induced analgesia, and endogenous
pain-inhibiting systems.) </p>

<p> AB - IN: U Complutense de Madrid, Spain LA: Spanish AB:
Reviews the physiological and behavioral </p>

<p> roles of opioid peptides. Emphasis is on their chemical
structure, classification, anatomical distribution, and </p>

<p> role in pain modulation, with descriptions given of the basic
neural locations involved in pain control. </p>

<p> Involvement of a dysfunction of the endogenous opiate system
in the etiopathogenesis of chronic pain is </p>

<p> proposed. The role of opioid peptides in the neural
mechanisms of reinforcement, memory, </p>

<p> psychopathology, and cardiovascular control is summarized.
(121 ref) (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1987 </p>

<p> American Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP:
physiological &amp; behavioral characteristics of opioid </p>

<p> peptides; pain modulation AN: 74-03300 </p>

<p> SO - Informes de Psicologia 1985;4:39-66<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000065 </p>

<p> AU - Drexel H </p>

<p> AU - Lang AH </p>

<p> AU - Spiegel RW </p>

<p> AU - Abbrederis K </p>

<p> TI - Pump-guided continuous subcutaneous opiate infusion for
the treatment of the most severe pain. </p>

<p> [German] </p>

<p> AB - The continuous subcutaneous infusion of opiate, a new
approach to the alleviation of severe chronic </p>

<p> pain, has been carried out using a pump system normally
employed for the infusion of insulin. Relapses of </p>

<p> pain can be controlled with bolus doses. This mode of
application was compared with conventional therapy </p>

<p> in 11 patients. All patients were free of pain during the
continuous infusion, but none showed a satisfactory </p>

<p> response during conventional treatment. The improved response
under continuous opiate infusion was </p>

<p> attained with much lower doses and thus with fewer side
effects. The procedure is therefore highly effective </p>

<p> and well tolerated </p>

<p> SO - Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift 1985;110:1063-1067<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000221 </p>

<p> AU - Halpern LM </p>

<p> AU - Robinson J </p>

<p> TI - Prescribing practices for pain in drug dependence: a
lesson in ignorance </p>

<p> AB - AB - Chronic pain syndromes arise when usual strategies
to treat pain and its underlying pathology </p>

<p> fail, excessive reliance on medication is related to
increased dysfunction and, there is suspicion of psychiatric </p>

<p> component to the pain behaviors exhibited. Opiate and
sedative medications are generally cited as a </p>

<p> contributing factor in the development of chronic
non-malignant pain. The recent proliferation of clinics </p>

<p> specializing in treatment of chronic pain and related
disorders is a new and interesting development. These </p>

<p> units consider detoxification from sedatives and opiates
mandatory if chronic pain is to be treated and </p>

<p> function restored. A literature review shows an amazing
paucity of rigorous research in chronic pain patients </p>

<p> which supports the widely held belief that medications
contribute to dysfunction in chronic pain thus patients </p>

<p> require detoxification. The following discussion explores the
data upon which are based current strategies </p>

<p> for the use of narcotics in chronic pain UI -86183317 </p>

<p> SO - Adv Alcohol Subst Abuse 1985;5:135-162<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000064 </p>

<p> AU - Halpern LM </p>

<p> AU - Robinson J </p>

<p> TI - Prescribing practices for pain in drug dependence: a
lesson in ignorance </p>

<p> AB - Chronic pain syndromes arise when usual strategies to
treat pain and its underlying pathology fail, </p>

<p> excessive reliance on medication is related to increased
dysfunction and, there is suspicion of psychiatric </p>

<p> component to the pain behaviors exhibited. Opiate and
sedative medications are generally cited as a </p>

<p> contributing factor in the development of chronic
non-malignant pain. The recent proliferation of clinics </p>

<p> specializing in treatment of chronic pain and related
disorders is a new and interesting development. These </p>

<p> units consider detoxification from sedatives and opiates
mandatory if chronic pain is to be treated and </p>

<p> function restored. A literature review shows an amazing
paucity of rigorous research in chronic pain patients </p>

<p> which supports the widely held belief that medications
contribute to dysfunction in chronic pain thus patients </p>

<p> require detoxification. The following discussion explores the
data upon which are based current strategies </p>

<p> for the use of narcotics in chronic pain </p>

<p> SO - Advances in Alcohol &amp; Substance Abuse 1985;5:135-162
<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000030 </p>

<p> AU - Kroening RJ </p>

<p> AU - Oleson TD </p>

<p> TI - Rapid narcotic detoxification in chronic pain patients
treated with auricular electroacupuncture and </p>

<p> naloxone </p>

<p> AB - IN: U California, Pain Management Ctr, Los Angeles LA:
English AB: Studied severe narcotic </p>

<p> withdrawal signs that accompany detoxification, using 14
28-63 yr old chronic pain patients taking high </p>

<p> levels of analgesic medications. A rapid narcotic
detoxification procedure using auricular electroacupuncture </p>

<p> was applied to Ss, who were to be withdrawn from their opiate
medications. All Ss were first switched to </p>

<p> oral methadone. They were then given bilateral electrical
stimulation to needles inserted in the &quot;lung&quot; and </p>

<p> &quot;shen men&quot; acupuncture points on the ear, followed
by periodic intravenous injections of low doses of </p>

<p> naloxone (0.8-40 mg/day). 12 Ss were completely withdrawn
from narcotic medications within 2-7 days, and </p>

<p> they experienced no to minimal side effects. These results
are explained by the relationship of </p>

<p> electroacupuncture to the release of endorphins. (44 ref)
(PsycLIT Database Copyright 1987 American </p>

<p> Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: auricular
electroacupuncture &amp; naloxone; rapid narcotic </p>

<p> detoxification; 28-63 yr old chronic pain patients withdrawn
from opiate analgesic therapy AN: 74-02304 </p>

<p> SO - International Journal of the Addictions
1985;20:1347-1360 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000063 </p>

<p> AU - Michon F </p>

<p> AU - Des Mesnards VG </p>

<p> AU - Girard M </p>

<p> AU - Fischler M </p>

<p> AU - Vourc'h G </p>

<p> TI - Long-term peridural morphine analgesia in neoplastic and
vascular pathology. [French] </p>

<p> AB - Epidural analgesia using morphine has been used on 44
patients with intractable chronic pain, resistant </p>

<p> to analgesics (including opiates). The pain was due to cancer
in 24 cases, of vascular origin in 20. An </p>

<p> indwelling tunnelized epidural catheter afforded repeated
injections of morphine for a long period (up to 129 </p>

<p> days) either in hospital or at home. The quality of analgesia
achieved was rated as excellent or good, in 68 p. </p>

<p> 100 of cases. Two cases only were total failures. Side
effects, relatively common, were usually transient and </p>

<p> minor; no case of respiratory depression or of infection has
been recorded </p>

<p> SO - Cahiers d Anesthesiologie 1985;33:39-42<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000060 </p>

<p> AU - Moulin DE </p>

<p> AU - Max MB </p>

<p> AU - Kaiko RF </p>

<p> AU - Inturrisi CE </p>

<p> AU - Maggard J </p>

<p> AU - Yaksh TL </p>

<p> AU - Foley KM </p>

<p> TI - The analgesic efficacy of intrathecal
D-Ala2-D-Leu5-enkephalin in cancer patients with chronic pain </p>

<p> AB - D-Ala-D-Leu-enkephalin (DADL) is a pentapeptide which,
compared to morphine, preferentially </p>

<p> binds to the delta receptor. We compared the analgesic and
side effects of intrathecal (i.t.) DADL and i.t. </p>

<p> morphine sulfate (MS) in 10 tolerant cancer patients with
chronic pain at or below the T12 level who were </p>

<p> receiving inadequate relief or unacceptable side effects from
systemic opiates. These patients were given i.t. </p>

<p> DADL and i.t. MS in a randomized, double-blind, cross-over
study on separate days at least 1 day apart. I.t. </p>

<p> DADL produced analgesia in all patients tested. Total pain
relief was greater with DADL than MS in 6 </p>

<p> patients, equal in 1 patient and less with DADL in 3. Side
effects, most commonly drowsiness, were similar </p>

<p> with both MS and DADL and suggest supraspinal effects by both
drugs. At the doses given i.t. DADL </p>

<p> produced effective pain relief in patients tolerant to
systemic opiates although no significant difference in </p>

<p> analgesic efficacy between MS and DADL was observed. Studies
of the relative analgesic potency of i.t. </p>

<p> DADL in man are necessary to fully assess its value in those
patients tolerant to systemic or i.t. opiates </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1985;23:213-221<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000057 </p>

<p> AU - Schmidt WK </p>

<p> AU - Tam SW </p>

<p> AU - Shotzberger GS </p>

<p> AU - Smith DH Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Clark R </p>

<p> AU - Vernier VG </p>

<p> TI - Nalbuphine. [Review] </p>

<p> AB - Nalbuphine is a potent analgesic with a low side effect
and dependence profile in animals and man. </p>

<p> Nalbuphine is distinguished from other agonist/antagonist
analgesics in having greater antagonist activity and </p>

<p> fewer behavioral effects at analgesic doses than pentazocine,
butorphanol or buprenorphine. At equi- </p>

<p> analgesic doses, nalbuphine is quantitatively similar to
nalorphine in regard to its large ratio of antagonist to </p>

<p> analgetic activity. Clinical studies have confirmed this
balance of strong antagonist to analgesic activity. </p>

<p> Nalbuphine has been shown to effectively antagonize the
respiratory depressant activity of narcotic </p>

<p> analgesics while concomitantly adding to their analgetic
responses. Unlike nalorphine or pentazocine, </p>

<p> nalbuphine produces few overt behavioral or autonomic effects
in animals at doses over 300 times its </p>

<p> analgesic range. These findings are confirmed by clinical
results which show that nalbuphine produces few </p>

<p> psychotomimetic effects, even at elevated dose levels, in
contrast to nalorphine or pentazocine. Nalbuphine </p>

<p> produces limited respiratory depression in animals and in
man. Significant cardiovascular effects have not </p>

<p> been found. Nalbuphine was found to produce significantly
less inhibition of gastrointestinal activity than any </p>

<p> of the clinically useful narcotic or agonist/antagonist
analgesics tested in animals. Nalbuphine's analgetic </p>

<p> effects are reversed by naloxone doses similar to those which
reverse nalorphine's agonist effects. Results in </p>

<p> this and other tests suggest that nalbuphine is primarily a
kappa-agonist/mu-antagonist analgesic. Unlike </p>

<p> pentazocine or buprenorphine, nalbuphine does not suppress
the narcotic abstinence syndrome in partly- </p>

<p> withdrawn morphine-dependent animals or man. Rather, due to
nalbuphine's strong antagonist activity, </p>

<p> analgesic-range doses of nalbuphine severely exacerbate the
withdrawal syndrome in partly-withdrawn mice, </p>

<p> monkeys and humans. Nalbuphine also precipitates a strong
abstinence response in non-withdrawn </p>

<p> morphine-dependent animals and man. In post-addict humans,
analgesic-range doses of nalbuphine are </p>

<p> perceived as minimally morphine-like, but higher doses are
judged to be progressively more nalorphine-like </p>

<p> (i.e. dysphoric), which further limits nalbuphine's abuse
potential in drug-seeking individuals. Primary </p>

<p> dependence studies have demonstrated that physical dependence
is possible at high dose levels that produce </p>

<p> marked side effects. Other studies show that dependence is
unlikely to be of significance within nalbuphine's </p>

<p> usual analgesic range. Six-month studies in patients with
chronic pain have confirmed that analgesic </p>

<p> tolerance or physical dependence is uncommon.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS) </p>

<p> [References: 47] </p>

<p> SO - Drug &amp; Alcohol Dependence 1985;14:339-362<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000059 </p>

<p> AU - Slattery PJ </p>

<p> AU - Boas RA </p>

<p> TI - Newer methods of delivery of opiates for relief of pain.
[Review] </p>

<p> AB - Successful pain management using opiates requires both
an analgesic with sufficient intrinsic activity </p>

<p> and an effective administration system. Most instances of
unsatisfactory pain control, however, are due to </p>

<p> failure to achieve and maintain adequate blood concentrations
of the chosen drug. Newer techniques of </p>

<p> administration aim to overcome this problem. Oral opiate
therapy with conventional or sustained-release </p>

<p> formulations of morphine provide good control of terminal
cancer pain provided that a regular dosing </p>

<p> pattern is established and reviewed according to the
patient's needs. This represents a significant departure </p>

<p> from the traditional 'as required' prescription of this type
of drug. In the management of acute severe pain, </p>

<p> sublingual and intravenous opiates--self-administered as
needed, or given by mandatory dosing schedules-- </p>

<p> have also been shown to overcome the limitations of
intermittent intramuscular injections. A further novel </p>

<p> development, stemming from basic neuroscience research, is
the selective application of opiates to the spinal </p>

<p> cord via the epidural or intrathecal route. This
controversial technique has led to major improvements in </p>

<p> treatment of some types of acute and chronic pain.
[References: 61] </p>

<p> SO - Drugs 1985;30:539-551<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000061 </p>

<p> AU - Young RF </p>

<p> AU - Kroening R </p>

<p> AU - Fulton W </p>

<p> AU - Feldman RA </p>

<p> AU - Chambi I </p>

<p> TI - Electrical stimulation of the brain in treatment of
chronic pain. Experience over 5 years </p>

<p> AB - Forty-eight patients underwent electrical stimulation of
the brain for treatment of chronic pain </p>

<p> between 1978 and 1983. Average pain duration prior to
treatment was 4.5 years. Before selection for this </p>

<p> procedure patients underwent pain treatment in a
multidisciplinary pain center, intensive psychological and </p>

<p> psychiatric evaluation, and assessment of pain responsiveness
to intravenous administration of placebo, </p>

<p> morphine, and naloxone. A total of 71 electrodes were placed
in the 48 patients at a variety of stimulating </p>

<p> targets, including the periaqueductal gray matter,
periventricular gray matter, thalamus, and internal capsule. </p>

<p> Seventy-two percent of patients experienced complete or
partial pain relief. In addition, 59% of patients </p>

<p> were able to discontinue narcotic usage. Twenty-five percent
of patients returned to normal physical </p>

<p> activities and another 33% showed marked improvement in
functional capacity. Follow-up periods ranged </p>

<p> from 2 to 60 months; with a mean follow-up period of 20
months. A variety of relatively minor </p>

<p> complications occurred, but no mortality or permanent
sequelae were experienced. No patient's pain was </p>

<p> made worse as a result of electrical stimulation. Electrical
stimulation of the brain offers a safe and relatively </p>

<p> effective method for the treatment of chronic pain in
appropriately selected patients, who are unresponsive </p>

<p> to other forms of therapy </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Neurosurgery 1985;62:389-396<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000177 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> AU - Piepenbrock S </p>

<p> AU - Tryba M </p>

<p> TI - Epidural opiates: long-term experiences in cancer pain </p>

<p> AB - Epidural opiates were administered to 139 patients with
pain due to malignant diseases via a chronic </p>

<p> indwelling catheter inserted percutaneously. So far, 9,716
days of treatment can be evaluated. In 87% of the </p>

<p> patients whose pain previously could not be controlled with
conventional analgesic approaches, epidural </p>

<p> opiates resulted in remarkable pain relief. With a mean daily
dose of 15.6 mg morphine (range 2-290 mg) or </p>

<p> 0.86 mg buprenorphine (range 0.15-7.2 mg) half of the
patients could be treated as outpatients. The mean </p>

<p> duration of therapy was 72 days (range 1-700 days), 26
catheters being in place for more than 100 days and </p>

<p> one catheter being in place for 510 days. Two severe
side-effects (meningitis) were observed, both patients </p>

<p> being free of symptoms after catheter removal and antibiotic
therapy. Epidural opiates proved to be a </p>

<p> valuable method of pain control in terminal illness. The
method should be reserved for those patients, for </p>

<p> whom oral opiates fail to produce effective pain relief </p>

<p> SO - Klinische Wochenschrift 1985;63:225-229<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000214 </p>

<p> AU - Cohen SR </p>

<p> AU - Abbott FV </p>

<p> AU - Melzack R </p>

<p> TI - Unilateral analgesia produced by intraventricular
morphine </p>

<p> AB - AB - Morphine injected into the lateral ventricle of the
rat produced unilateral analgesia in the </p>

<p> formalin test, which involves continuous, moderate pain. In
contrast, analgesia was produced bilaterally in </p>

<p> the foot-flick test which involves brief, rapidly rising
pain. In the formalin test, intraventricular morphine </p>

<p> produced analgesia in the ipsilateral but not the
contralateral hindpaw. Analgesia was achieved with </p>

<p> relatively low doses of morphine (2.5-10.0 micrograms) in the
formation test while very high doses (50-200 </p>

<p> micrograms) were necessary to produce analgesia in the
foot-flick test. These results add to other data </p>

<p> indicating that different neural mechanisms underlie opiate
analgesia in different types of pain. Moreover, </p>

<p> they indicate that, in the formation test, the neural
mechanisms of morphine analgesia are somatotopically </p>

<p> organized and that forebrain structures are likely to be
involved UI - 84258471 </p>

<p> SO - Brain Res 1984;303:277-287<br>
<br>
</p>

<p> Return-Path: &lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> Comments: Authenticated sender is
&lt;tanante@mail.nwlink.com&gt; </p>

<p> From: tanante@nwlink.com </p>

<p> To: schaffer@smartlink.net </p>

<p> Date: Sat, 1 Jun 1996 17:18:59 +0000 </p>

<p> Subject: Re: Pain Medication #1 </p>

<p> Priority: normal<br>
<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000250 </p>

<p> AU - France RD </p>

<p> AU - Urban BJ </p>

<p> AU - Keefe FJ </p>

<p> TI - Long-term use of narcotic analgesics in chronic pain </p>

<p> AB - AB - The use of narcotic analgesics have been avoided by
clinicians in patients with chronic pain </p>

<p> syndromes. Uncertainty as to the etiological cause of chronic
pain, development of addiction and habituation </p>

<p> and associated psychological and behavioral symptoms found in
chronic pain states which are not amenable </p>

<p> to narcotic medications are the major reasons narcotics are
not prescribed. This communication describes the </p>

<p> long-term use of low dose narcotic analgesics as a treatment
component of a comprehensive pain </p>

<p> management program and addresses the questions of whether or
not narcotic efficacy is maintained in long- </p>

<p> term use, improvement of patients' function is continued and
side effects develop as a result of this treatment </p>

<p> UI - 85168356 </p>

<p> SO - Soc Sci Med 1984;19:1379-1382<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000243 </p>

<p> AU - Rawson RA </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - Five-year follow-up of opiate addicts with naltrexone
and behavior therapy </p>

<p> AB - AB - A group of 58 heroin addicts were treated with
naltrexone and behavior therapy and followed </p>

<p> for 5 years. At one-year post-treatment, almost half of the
naltrexone-treated subjects were opiate free. </p>

<p> Follow-up results at 5 years post-treatment indicate that
over 90% of those patients treated with naltrexone </p>

<p> became re-addicted for various periods of time. However,
naltrexone-treated subjects did feel their treatment </p>

<p> with naltrexone had provided them with the ability to remain
opiate free for blocks of time. The results </p>

<p> suggest that naltrexone is not a &quot;cure&quot; for opiate
dependence, but is a medication which can be useful in </p>

<p> protecting patients from re- addiction and is a modality
patients should be encouraged to return to if they </p>

<p> feel vulnerable to re-addiction UI - 85012611 </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Res Monogr 1984;49:289-295<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000228 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Rawson RA </p>

<p> AU - Cohen AJ </p>

<p> AU - Mann A </p>

<p> TI - Clinical experience with naltrexone in suburban opioid
addicts </p>

<p> AB - AB - In a study of 160 patients (including 114 active
heroin addicts and 42 former heroin addicts </p>

<p> maintained on methadone, propoxyphene napsylate, or LAAM),
subjects were retained on treatment with </p>

<p> naltrexone for a mean of 50.7 days (range, 1-635). Clonidine
or guanabenz acetate was used to detoxify </p>

<p> subjects who received naltrexone within 10 days of their last
dose of opioid. Because of the number of </p>

<p> subjects dropping out of treatment after only a few days, it
is recommended that there be an opioid-free </p>

<p> period of 5 or more days for heroin-dependent subjects and 10
or more days for those on medical </p>

<p> maintenance. A naloxone challenge should be administered at a
dosage of 0.8 mg. Use of naltrexone </p>

<p> combined with psychotherapy appears to promote long periods
of opioid abstinence but does not prevent </p>

<p> relapse after treatment. Trained clinicians utilizing an
appropriate induction protocol can effectively treat </p>

<p> volunteer opioid addicts with naltrexone UI - 84289325 </p>

<p> SO - J Clin Psychiatry 1984;45:42-45<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000242 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Rawson RA </p>

<p> TI - Guanabenz acetate: a new, long-acting alpha-two
adrenergic agonist for opioid withdrawal </p>

<p> AB - AB - Guanabenz Acetate (GA) is a new long-lasting
alpha-two agonist. We found that it effectively </p>

<p> suppressed opioid withdrawal in the majority of 47
opioid-dependent subjects. GA was usually given in </p>

<p> twice per day dosages and did not appear to have as many side
effects as clonidine. It may have greater </p>

<p> acceptance among heroin addicts than clonidine UI - 85012622 </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Res Monogr 1984;49:338-343<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000002 </p>

<p> AU - Woody GE </p>

<p> AU - McLellan AT </p>

<p> AU - O'Brien CP </p>

<p> TI - Treatment of behavioral and psychiatric problems
associated with opiate dependence </p>

<p> AB - IN: Philadelphia VA Medical Ctr, PA LA: English AB:
Discusses behavioral and psychiatric problems </p>

<p> associated with opiate dependence and its treatment, noting
that diverse medical, behavioral, and psychiatric </p>

<p> problems interact to produce constellations of complex
disorders in opiate addicts. Previous research has </p>

<p> identified depression as the most common disorder, followed
by alcoholism, antisocial personality, anxiety, </p>

<p> schizophrenia, mania, and hypomania. Other situational
reactions involve intense anger, psychiatric disorders </p>

<p> complicated by medical conditions (e.g., hepatitis), and
illnesses or injuries producing chronic pain (e.g., </p>

<p> pancreatitis, sickle cell anemia, nerve root irritation).
Loitering is also a behavioral problem due to drug </p>

<p> dealing that occurs when patients loiter. Management and
orientation of these problems from a practical </p>

<p> perspective are discussed, and it is asserted that it is
essential for drug treatment programs to place a high </p>

<p> priority on problem control, which is best accomplished
through consistent enforcement of rules. Further </p>

<p> recommendations are presented with regard to staffing,
policies, physical facilities, diagnosis and treatment, </p>

<p> and research and clinical efforts. (4 ref) (PsycLIT Database
Copyright 1984 American Psychological Assn, </p>

<p> all rights reserved) KP: treatment of behavioral &amp;
psychiatric problems associated with opiate dependence </p>

<p> AN: 71-32471 </p>

<p> SO - National Institute on Drug Abuse Research Monograph
Series 1984;:1984 Mono 46 23-1984 Mono </p>

<p> 46 35<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000180 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> TI - Spinal opiate analgesia. [German] </p>

<p> AB - The spinal application of opiates is followed by a
long-lasting and strong pain relief. This action is </p>

<p> based upon the binding of opiates to specific opiate
receptors situated in the substantia gelatinosa of the </p>

<p> spinal cord. Two possible approaches exist -intrathecally or
epidurally. The intrathecal opiate analgesia is </p>

<p> combined with a very high incidence of side effects, so that
this way cannot be recommended. The epidural </p>

<p> opiate analgesia has proven good results with few side
effects in the treatment of postoperative pain, pain of </p>

<p> multiple rib fractures and other thoracic trauma or cancer
pain. In obstetrics analgesia by spinal opiates was </p>

<p> disappointing. Mode of action, possible side effects and the
results of epidural opiates are discussed </p>

<p> SO - Arzneimittel-Forschung 1984;34:1089-1092<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000181 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> TI - Epidural opiates for the treatment of cancer pain </p>

<p> SO - Recent Results in Cancer Research 1984;89:107-114<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000001 </p>

<p> AU - Atkinson JH </p>

<p> AU - Kremer EF </p>

<p> AU - Risch SC </p>

<p> AU - Bloom FE </p>

<p> TI - Neuroendocrine function and endogenous opioid peptide
systems in chronic pain </p>

<p> AB - IN: U California-San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla
LA: English AB: Reviews the literature on </p>

<p> neuroendocrine abnormalities in patients with chronic pain
syndrome, with an emphasis on evidence in this </p>

<p> population of (a) failure to suppress plasma cortisol
concentration in the low-dose dexamethasone </p>

<p> suppression test (DST) and (b) elevated opioid peptide
immunoreactivity. 24 chronic pain patients (aged 32- </p>

<p> 82 yrs) were administered the DST, the Beck Depression
Inventory, and the Hamilton Rating Scale for </p>

<p> Depression. Results suggest that endogenous opioid peptide
system disfunction and neuroendocrine </p>

<p> abnormalities occur regularly in chronic pain patients. It is
concluded that further study of the DST could </p>

<p> lead to its being of predictive value for responses to
behavioral intervention or pharmacologic treatment. (31 </p>

<p> ref) (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1985 American Psychological
Assn, all rights reserved) KP: endogenous </p>

<p> opioid peptide system dysfunction &amp; neuroendocrine
abnormalities; 32-82 yr old chronic pain patients AN: </p>

<p> 72-01628 </p>

<p> SO - Psychosomatics 1983;24:899-913<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000003 </p>

<p> AU - Cohen MR </p>

<p> AU - Pickar D </p>

<p> AU - Dubois M </p>

<p> TI - The role of the endogenous opioid system in the human
stress response </p>

<p> AB - IN: NIMH Clinical Neuroscience Branch, Section on
Clinical Studies, Bethesda, MD LA: English AB: </p>

<p> Reviews the utilized strategies and the status of
experimental work on the involvement of the endogenous </p>

<p> opioid system (EOS) in human adaptation to stressors. Three
principal research strategies have been used: </p>

<p> (1) measurement of endorphin levels in body fluids (CSF and
plasma) in relationship to the stress response </p>

<p> and the evaluation of effects on the stress response, (2)
enhancement of the functioning of the EOS by </p>

<p> administering an opioid agonist, and (3) suppression of the
functioning of the EOS by the administration of </p>

<p> an opioid antagonist (principally naloxone). Clinical studies
with humans have demonstrated some stress- </p>

<p> induced analgesia, increased plasma levels of beta-endorphin
after demanding physical exercise and in later </p>

<p> stages of labor, and decreases in lumbar CSF opioid levels in
Ss suffering from chronic pain. In surgical </p>

<p> studies, evidence was found that elevated plasma
beta-endorphin levels may be considered a biologic marker </p>

<p> of the human stress response. In addition, alterations in the
physiological response to surgical stress followed </p>

<p> administration of opiates, suggesting the potential of the
EOS to modify stress responses. (75 ref) (PsycLIT </p>

<p> Database Copyright 1984 American Psychological Assn, all
rights reserved) KP: endogenous opioids; stress </p>

<p> responses; humans; literature review AN: 71-28038 </p>

<p> SO - Psychiatric Clinics of North America 1983;6:457-471<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000212 </p>

<p> AU - Dennis SG </p>

<p> AU - Melzack R </p>

<p> TI - Effects of cholinergic and dopaminergic agents on pain
and morphine analgesia measured by three pain </p>

<p> tests </p>

<p> AB - AB - The effects of several cholinergic and dopaminergic
agents on pain and morphine analgesia were </p>

<p> assessed using three pain tests. These tests--tail-flick,
hot-plate, and Formalin--allow comparison of the </p>

<p> effects of different noxious stimuli and different motor
responses. Each pain test yielded a unique </p>

<p> constellation of cholinergic and dopaminergic influences,
suggesting that variation of stimulus and response </p>

<p> parameters can change the functional expression of
cholinergic and dopaminergic systems related to pain </p>

<p> processing. Significant analgesia was observed in the
Formalin test, compared with the saline control, after </p>

<p> administration of choline (30 or 60 mg/kg), atropine (2
mg/kg), mecamylamine (2 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg), or </p>

<p> apomorphine (0.3 or 8 mg/kg). No analgesic effects in this
test were observed after atropine (10 mg/kg) or </p>

<p> pimozide (0.125 or 0.5 mg/kg). In contrast, there was no
evidence of analgesia produced by any of these </p>

<p> drugs, in the doses given, in the hot-plate test, and only
apomorphine (8 mg/kg) produced analgesia in the </p>

<p> tail-flick test. When these cholinergic and dopaminergic
agents were administered to rats after an injection of </p>

<p> 2.5 mg/kg morphine, which by itself has been shown not to
produce analgesia in any of the tests, a general </p>

<p> pattern of facilitation was observed in the Formalin test but
not in the tail- flick or hot-plate tests. Facilitation </p>

<p> was produced by choline, atropine, mecamylamine, apomorphine,
and pimozide (at 0.5 mg/kg but not 0.125 </p>

<p> mg/kg). The data suggest that differences in the type of
noxious stimulation and in the motor responses </p>

<p> required in various pain tests are crucial in determining the
observed pharmacologic profile of pain and </p>

<p> opiate analgesia UI - 83234877 </p>

<p> SO - Exp Neurol 1983;81:167-176<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000005 </p>

<p> AU - Freeman TB </p>

<p> AU - Campbell JN </p>

<p> AU - Long DM </p>

<p> TI - Naloxone does not affect pain relief induced by
electrical stimulation in man </p>

<p> AB - IN: New York U Medical Ctr, Dept of Neurosurgery LA:
English AB: Investigated whether pain </p>

<p> relief that resulted from transcutaneous (TNS) or spinal cord
electrical stimulation in patients with chronic </p>

<p> pain was due to activation of an endogenous opiate-related
pain control system. Naloxone (0.4-10 mg, iv) or </p>

<p> saline was injected in double-blind fashion into opiate-naive
Ss with chronic pain who achieved 30% or </p>

<p> greater pain relief with spinal cord stimulation (4 patients)
or TNS (9 patients). Ss (aged 14-62 yrs) rated </p>

<p> their pain during stimulation and 2, 5, 10, and 15 min after
the injection. Two days or more later the </p>

<p> procedure was repeated using the alternate agent (naloxone or
saline). Naloxone did not decrease the pain </p>

<p> relief induced by stimulation, suggesting that the effects of
stimulation are probably not mediated by the </p>

<p> endogenous opiates. (27 ref) (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1984
American Psychological Assn, all rights </p>

<p> reserved) KP: naloxone; pain relief resulting from
transcutaneous or spinal cord electrical stimulation; </p>

<p> chronic pain patients; implications for non-opiate mechanisms
in pain control AN: 71-20982 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1983;17:189-195<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000006 </p>

<p> AU - Gillman MA </p>

<p> AU - Lichtigfeld FJ </p>

<p> TI - &quot;Naloxone fails to antagonize nitrous oxide
analgesia for clinical pain&quot;: Comment </p>

<p> AB - LA: English AB: Contends that the claim of J. D. Levine
et al (see PA, Vol 69:6297) that their </p>

<p> investigation is the first in which the effect of naloxone
N-sub-2O analgesia was tested in clinical pain is </p>

<p> unfounded since the present authors (1981) had previously
conducted a study of chronic pain patients. The </p>

<p> present authors have also developed a hypothesis to explain
the paradoxical effects of naloxone on the basis </p>

<p> of a dual system involving both opiate and anti-opiate
actions. (9 ref) (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1984 </p>

<p> American Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP:
naloxone; nitrous oxide-induced analgesia; chronic </p>

<p> pain patients; comments on research of J. D. Levine et al AN:
71-18416 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1983;17:103-104<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000178 </p>

<p> AU - Piepenbrock S </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> AU - Gorus R </p>

<p> AU - Link J </p>

<p> AU - Reinhart K </p>

<p> TI - Buprenorphine and pentazocine for postoperative
analgesia. A double blind study following abdominal </p>

<p> surgery. [German] </p>

<p> AB - A randomized double-blind study was done to test the two
opiates buprenorphine (0.3 mg i.v.) and </p>

<p> pentazocine (30 mg i.v.) with regard to their applicability
for the postoperative phase. These substances </p>

<p> were chosen because they are not subject to drug prescription
regulations. 60 patients who had undergone </p>

<p> epigastric and hypogastric interventions under
thiopental-sodium-induced halothane anesthesia received i.v. </p>

<p> injections of one of the two analgetics as soon as they
requested a pain-killer postoperatively. The subjective </p>

<p> pain intensity registered by means of a visual analogue scale
shows a gradual decrease after buprenorphine </p>

<p> with maximal effects 1-3 h post injectionem (7.3 leads to
1.5). The duration of action is 8.2 +/- 0.7 h on the </p>

<p> average (median 8 h; range 4-22 h). The maximal analgetic
effect of pentazocine is already attained after 10 </p>

<p> min (6.3 leads to 3.2). Thereafter the pain-intensity curve
rises again. Pentazocine has a mean duration of </p>

<p> action of 2.35 +/- 0.24 h (median 2 h; range 0.5-5 h). The
inadequate analgetic effect of pentazocine </p>

<p> manifests itself in an only slight initial reduction of the
respiratory rate (19.5 leads to 17.5 min-1), which, on </p>

<p> the other hand, decreases significantly and continuously
under buprenorphine (20.8 leads to 13.5 min-1). </p>

<p> Both substances cause increases of PaCO2 (buprenorphine 37.3
leads to 46.8 mmHg; pentazocine 36.3 leads </p>

<p> to 43.0 mmHg), values greater than 50 mmHg being attained in
individual cases.(ABSTRACT </p>

<p> TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </p>

<p> SO - Anaesthesist 1983;32:601-609<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000004 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS </p>

<p> TI - (--)-a-Acetylmethadol for treatment of chronic pain
patients who abuse opioids </p>

<p> AB - IN: U California Ctr for Health Science, School of
Public Health, Los Angeles LA: English AB: Levo- </p>

<p> alpha-acetylmethadol (LAAM), an opioid with a duration of
action up to 72 hrs, relieved pain and eliminated </p>

<p> abuse of opioids in 3 of 4 patients (aged 26-62 yrs) who had
chronic pain secondary to permanent, </p>

<p> anatomical alterations. LAAM appears particularly suited to
chronic pain patients who require opioid </p>

<p> analgesia but abuse opioids. (14 ref) (PsycLIT Database
Copyright 1984 American Psychological Assn, all </p>

<p> rights reserved) KP: levo-alpha-acetylmethadol; 26-62 yr old
chronic pain patients who abuse opioids AN: </p>

<p> 71-26756 </p>

<p> SO - Drug and Alcohol Dependence 1983;12:243-247<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000244 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Rawson RA </p>

<p> AU - Miranda L </p>

<p> AU - Obert J </p>

<p> TI - Outpatient treatment of prescription opioid dependence:
comparison of two methods </p>

<p> AB - AB - Outpatient treatment of 42 patients who presented
with dependence upon prescription opioids </p>

<p> was attempted by two different methods. The first group of 21
patients was treated by 21-day detoxification </p>

<p> followed by psychotherapeutic counseling (D/C), and the next
21 patients were offered 21-day detoxification </p>

<p> to be followed by opioid maintenance if detoxification was
unsuccessful (D/M). Only 5 of 21 (23.8%) </p>

<p> patients in the D/C group compared to 20 of 21 (95.2%) in the
D/M group completed three weeks of </p>

<p> treatment (P less than .001). On admission, no patient
perceived that chronic pain due to a medical condition </p>

<p> would be an impediment to withdrawal from opioids, but pain
which was masked by opioid dependency and </p>

<p> which emerged during detoxification proved to be an
insurmountable barrier to total withdrawal in the </p>

<p> majority of patients. Treatment of outpatients who presented
with dependence upon prescription opioids </p>

<p> was best provided in the study by opioid maintenance and
adjunctive pain therapy UI - 83271438 </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Res Monogr 1983;43:315-321<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000235 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - (-)-alpha-Acetylmethadol for treatment of chronic pain
patients who abuse opioids </p>

<p> AB - AB - (-)-alpha-Acetylmethadol (LAAM) is an opioid with a
duration of action up to 72 h. It appeared </p>

<p> to relieve pain and eliminate abuse of opioids in three of
four patients who had chronic pain secondary to </p>

<p> permanent, anatomical alterations. LAAM may be very helpful
in the treatment of many chronic pain patients </p>

<p> SO - Drug Alcohol Depend 1983;12:243-247<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000183 </p>

<p> AU - Twycross R </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> TI - Use of oral morphine in incurable pain. [German] </p>

<p> AB - Oral morphine sulphate is the strong narcotic of choice
at most hospices. Administered in simple </p>

<p> aqueous solution (e.g. 10 mg in 10 ml). No advantage in
giving as &quot;Brompton Cocktail.&quot; Usual starting dose </p>

<p> 10 mg every 4 h. If patient has previously only had a weak
narcotic analgesic, 5 mg may be adequate. If </p>

<p> changing to morphine from alternative strong narcotic, such
as dextromoramide, levorphanol, methadone, a </p>

<p> considerably higher dose may be needed. With frail elderly
patients, it may be wise to start on sub-optimal </p>

<p> dose in order to reduce likelihood of initial drowsiness and
unsteadiness. Adjust upwards after first dose if </p>

<p> not more effective than previous medication. Adjust after 24
h &quot;if pain not 90% controlled.&quot; Most patients </p>

<p> are satisfactorily controlled on dose of between 5 and 30 mg
4 hourly; however, some patients need higher </p>

<p> doses, occasionally up to 500 mg. Giving a larger dose at
bedtime (1,5 or 2 x daytime dose) may enable a </p>

<p> patient to go through the night without waking in pain. Use
co-analgesic medication as appropriate. Eigher </p>

<p> prescribe an antiemetic concurrently or supply (in
anticipation) for regular use should nausea or vomiting </p>

<p> develop. Prescribe laxative. Adjust dose according to
response. Suppositories may be necessary. Unless </p>

<p> carefully monitored, constipation may be more difficult to
control than the pain. Write out regimen in detail </p>

<p> with times to be taken, names of drugs and amounts to be
taken. Warn patient of possibility of initial </p>

<p> drowsiness. Arrange for close liaison and follow up </p>

<p> SO - Anaesthesist 1983;32:279-283<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000182 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> AU - Piepenbrock S </p>

<p> AU - Tryba M </p>

<p> AU - Bramswig H </p>

<p> TI - Peridural opiate analgesia. Clinical results of a 2-year
study. [German] </p>

<p> AB - Postoperative pain relief, consumption of analgesics and
the incidence of postoperative complications </p>

<p> were investigated in a retrospective cohort-study on 470
patients following abdominal surgery. 221 of these </p>

<p> patients received epidural morphine or buprenorphine for
postoperative pain relief (Group I). Another group </p>

<p> of 249 patients received conventional opiate analgesics
intravenously or intramuscularly (Group II). On </p>

<p> average the analgesia lasted 14 h after epidural morphine and
11 h after epidural buprenorphine. The overall </p>

<p> amount of morphine in the postoperative period was 13.3 +/-
14.9 mg and 0.89 +/- 0.55 mg buprenorphine </p>

<p> respectively. 5 cases of pneumonia (2.3%) were seen in the
epidural group (Group I). 22 pneumonia cases </p>

<p> (8.8%) were registered in the group with conventional
analgesics (Group II). Besides the advantage of </p>

<p> stronger and longer duration, small dosage and minor central
depressive side effects, epidural opiate </p>

<p> analgesia has proven to result in positive clinical
consequences. The low incidence of postoperative </p>

<p> pneumonia is due to the strong regional pain relief, which
improves mechanical pulmonary function and gas </p>

<p> exchange </p>

<p> SO - Anaesthesist 1983;32:289-294<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000179 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> AU - Piepenbrock S </p>

<p> AU - Tryba M </p>

<p> AU - Klauke W </p>

<p> AU - Everlien M </p>

<p> TI - Sublingual buprenorphine tablets: initial clinical
experiences in long-term therapy of cancer pain. </p>

<p> [German] </p>

<p> AB - Buprenorphine sublingual tablets (0.2 mg) were
investigated in therapy of cancer pain. In 67 patients </p>

<p> there was a good analgetic effect in 60%, even in those cases
treated with other opiates before. The </p>

<p> induction time was quite long (60 min.) but is no problem in
chronic administration. Effective pain relief was </p>

<p> obtained even in final stages of cancer. The mean daily dose
of buprenorphine had been 1.2-1.7 mg, the </p>

<p> mean duration of analgesia being 6-8 hours with a single dose
of 0.2-1.0 mg buprenorphine. Typical opiate- </p>

<p> side-effects were registered and well tolerated after some
days' treatment. There was no respiratory </p>

<p> depression. Buprenorphine sublingual tablets are certainly a
good alternative in orally available opioids </p>

<p> SO - Fortschritte der Medizin 1983;101:191-194<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000222 </p>

<p> AU - Aronoff GM </p>

<p> TI - The use of non-narcotic drugs and other alternatives for
analgesia as part of a comprehensive pain </p>

<p> management program </p>

<p> AB - AB - Chronic pain remains an enigma which mystifies the
most experienced clinicians. The traditional </p>

<p> approaches to malignant pain employ narcotic analgesics,
radiotherapy, surgical intervention, and </p>

<p> chemotherapy. Within the context of a &quot;therapeutic
community&quot; oriented pain unit, we attack this major </p>

<p> public health problem differently. The use of non-narcotic
analgesics, mood altering medications, various </p>

<p> forms of psychotherapy (individual, group, family, gestalt,
psychomotor) and peer pressure when used in </p>

<p> conjunction with various physical modalities of treatment
(including biofeedback, transcutaneous electrical </p>

<p> nerve stimulator, physical therapy, whirlpool, massage, ice,
heat, etc.) appear most efficacious. Frequently, </p>

<p> the powerful tools of psychological medicine are taken for
granted; yet, depression in the United States is </p>

<p> widespread and so significantly complicates medical illness
that any treatment program designed for pain </p>

<p> patients must be holistic in its orientation if it is to be
effective AD - Boston Pain Unit AD -Massachusetts </p>

<p> Rehabilitation Hospital AD - Boston AD - MA UI -83084453 </p>

<p> SO - J Med 1982;13:191-202<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000007 </p>

<p> AU - Ehrenpreis S </p>

<p> TI - D-phenylalanine and other enkephalinase inhibitors as
pharmacological agents: Implications for some </p>

<p> important therapeutic applications </p>

<p> AB - IN: University of the Health Sciences/Chicago Medical
School LA: English AB: Dextrophenylalanine </p>

<p> has proven to be beneficial in many human patients with
chronic, intractable pain and is anti-inflammatory as </p>

<p> well. It is suggested that the enkephalinase inhibitors may
be effective in a number of human &quot;endorphin </p>

<p> deficiency diseases&quot; such as depression, schizophrenia,
convulsive disorders, and arthritis. Such compounds </p>

<p> may alleviate other conditions associated with decreased
endorphin levels, such as opiate withdrawal </p>

<p> symptoms. (57 ref) (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1984 American
Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) </p>

<p> KP: dextrophenylalanine &amp; enkephalinase inhibitors;
treatment of chronic pain &amp; endorphin deficiency </p>

<p> diseases &amp; opiate withdrawal symptoms AN: 71-10228 </p>

<p> SO - Acupuncture and Electro Therapeutics Research
1982;7:157-172 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000008 </p>

<p> AU - Hameroff SR </p>

<p> TI - Doxepin effects on chronic pain, depression and plasma
opioids </p>

<p> AB - IN: U Arizona Health Science Ctr, Dept of
Anesthesiology, Tucson LA: English AB: Studied 30 26- </p>

<p> 65 yr old patients with chronic low back or cervical pain
combined with clinical depression in a randomized, </p>

<p> double-blind comparison of doxepin and placebo. Dependent
variables included Hamilton Rating Scale for </p>

<p> Depression (HDRS) scores; the Clinical Global Assessment
Scale (CGAS); the Profile of Mood States </p>

<p> (POMS); and subjective ratings (visual analog scales) of pain
severity, percent of time pain was felt, and </p>

<p> effect of pain on activity, muscle tension, sleep, mood, and
analgesic consumption. Significant improvements </p>

<p> in the doxepin-treated group compared to the placebo group
were seen in HDRS, CGAS, and POMS </p>

<p> scores; percent of time pain was felt; and effect of pain on
sleep, muscle tension, and mood. Some </p>

<p> improvement was observed after 1 wk, although most
improvement occurred at 6 wks, when the mean </p>

<p> doxepin dose was 2.5 mg/kg and plasma doxepin and
desmethyldoxepin averaged 70 ng/ml. Nonspecific </p>

<p> enkephalinlike activity (but not beta-endorphins) increased
for the treatment group and decreased for the </p>

<p> placebo group. Doxepin may be a valuable treatment for
patients with chronic pain and depression. (12 ref) </p>

<p> (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1983 American Psychological Assn,
all rights reserved) KP: doxepin; </p>

<p> treatment of low back or cervical pain combined with
depression; 26-65 yr old patients AN: 69-06286 </p>

<p> SO - Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 1982;43:22-27<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000227 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Rawson RA </p>

<p> TI - Outpatient treatment of prescription opioid dependence:
comparison of two methods </p>

<p> AB - AB - Twenty-one patients dependent on prescription
opioids were treated by 21-day detoxification </p>

<p> followed by psychotherapeutic counseling (D/C), and 21
patients were detoxified 21 days and provided </p>

<p> opioid maintenance if detoxification was unsuccessful (D/M).
Only five of 21 (23.8%) patients in the D/C </p>

<p> group compared with 20 of 21 (95.2%) in the D/M group
completed three weeks of treatment. No patient </p>

<p> initially perceived that chronic pain due to a medical
condition would be an impediment to withdrawal from </p>

<p> opioids, but pain that was masked by opioid dependency and
that emerged during detoxification proved to </p>

<p> be an insurmountable barrier to total withdrawal in the
majority of patients. Treatment of outpatients with </p>

<p> dependence on prescription opioids is best provided by opioid
maintenance therapy and adjunctive pain </p>

<p> therapy UI - 83021493 </p>

<p> SO - Arch Intern Med 1982;142:1845-1847<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000245 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Rawson RA </p>

<p> TI - Propoxyphene napsylate maintenance treatment of narcotic
dependence: use of a non-methadone model </p>

<p> AB - AB - One hundred seventy-eight (178) heroin addicts
entered propoxyphene napsylate (PN) </p>

<p> maintenance. Patients attended a general medical clinic two
times each week and took home a three-to four- </p>

<p> day supply of PN which was usually taken in doses of 300 to
400 mg three to four times per day. Over a 21- </p>

<p> month period, the subjects entered and re- entered PN
treatment 166 times (1.5 times per patient) and </p>

<p> remained a mean of 10.6 weeks per treatment. A comparison
with a group of methadone maintenance </p>

<p> patients indicated similar performance in employment and
heroin use. The ability to take PN, attend a clinic </p>

<p> less often than daily, and discontinue and re-enter treatment
on a discretionary basis is preferred treatment </p>

<p> approach for some narcotic addicts UI - 83012906 </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Res Monogr 1982;41:246-252<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000009 </p>

<p> AU - Jorum E </p>

<p> TI - Endogene opiater og deres rolle i smerte-opplevelsen.
(Endogenous opiates' role in pain perception.) </p>

<p> AB - IN: U Oslo, Nevrofysiologisk Inst, Norway LA: Norwegian
AB: The recent discovery of morphine- </p>

<p> like substances and their receptors in the CNS has resulted
in further understanding of the complex </p>

<p> phenomenon of pain. The endogenous opiates--the enkephalins
and endorphins--are richly presented in brain </p>

<p> structures involved in pain perception and emotional
behavior. The physiological part played by these </p>

<p> opiates seems to be pain relief in situations of fear and
anxiety. Disturbances in the endogenous level of </p>

<p> endorphins and enkephalins may result in chronic pain and
psychiatric disorders. Acupuncture analgesia is </p>

<p> produced by a rise in the brain level of opiates, most likely
the endorphins, further activating the descending </p>

<p> midline serotonin system from the raphe nuclei known to exert
inhibitory effects on spinal pain transmission. </p>

<p> (5 ref) (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1982 American
Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: </p>

<p> endogenous opiates; pain perception AN: 68-00559 </p>

<p> SO - Tidsskrift for Norsk Psykologforening 1981;18:565-570<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000247 </p>

<p> AU - Rawson RA </p>

<p> AU - Washton AM </p>

<p> AU - Resnick RB </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - Clonidine hydrochloride detoxification from methadone
treatments: the value of naltrexone aftercare </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 81172979 </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Res Monogr 1981;34:101-108<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000236 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Rawson RA </p>

<p> TI - Propoxyphene napsylate maintenance treatment for
narcotic dependence: a non-methadone model </p>

<p> AB - AB - One hundred and seventy eight heroin addicts
entered propoxyphene napsylate (PN) </p>

<p> maintenance. Patients attended a general medical clinic twice
each week and took home a three- to four-day </p>

<p> supply of PN, to be taken in doses of 300 to 400 mg three or
four times per day. Over a 21-month period, </p>

<p> subjects entered and re-entered PN treatment 266 times (1.5
times per patient) and remained in treatment a </p>

<p> mean of 10.6 weeks. When compared with a group of methadone
maintenance patients, similar </p>

<p> characteristics in employment and heroin use were found. The
ability to take PN, attend a clinic less often </p>

<p> than daily and discontinue and re-enter treatment on a
discretionary basis is a preferred treatment approach </p>

<p> for some narcotic addicts UI -82050191 </p>

<p> SO - Drug Alcohol Depend 1981;8:79-83<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000246 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - The California registration system for habitues to
schedule II drugs </p>

<p> AB - AB - In order to help control abuse and prevent
over-prescribing, California has developed triplicate </p>

<p> prescriptions for Schedule II narcotics as well as a system
for physicians to publicly register patients who are </p>

<p> habitues to Schedule II Controlled Substances. A preliminary
evaluation indicates that there is under- </p>

<p> reporting and confusion among physicians about the system,
but it has probably helped control Schedule II </p>

<p> narcotic abuse in California while not depriving patients of
needed treatment. Physicians appear to prescribe </p>

<p> Schedule II narcotics for serious medical conditions but may
underprescribe narcotics for some chronic pain </p>

<p> patients and subject others to potential complications of
high, chronic doses or oral narcotics which are </p>

<p> combined with salicylate, acetaminophen, or phenacetin.
Despite some defects, California's system of </p>

<p> triplicate prescriptions and public registration of habitues
appears a viable alternative to the removal of </p>

<p> abusable, Schedule II drugs from the commercial market UI -
81172994 </p>

<p> SO - NIDA Res Monogr 1981;34:193-198<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000184 </p>

<p> AU - Zenz M </p>

<p> TI - Peridural opiate analgesia. [German] </p>

<p> SO - Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift 1981;106:483-485<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000257 </p>

<p> AU - Porter J </p>

<p> AU - Jick H </p>

<p> TI - Addiction Rare in Patients Treated With Narcotics </p>

<p> AB - ABSTRACT: In a survey of 11,882 patients receiving
narcotics, only 4 documented cases of </p>

<p> addiction. TPH 4/28/94 </p>

<p> SO - N Engl J Med 1980;302:123-123<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000256 </p>

<p> AU - Porter J </p>

<p> AU - Jick H </p>

<p> TI - Addiction rare in patients treated with narcotics
[letter] </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 80077926 </p>

<p> SO - N Engl J Med 1980;302:123-123<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000232 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Uelmen GF </p>

<p> TI - Prescribing narcotics to habitual and addicted narcotic
users. Medical and legal guidelines in California </p>

<p> and some other Western states </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 81128307 </p>

<p> SO - West J Med 1980;133:539-545<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000241 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - Physician extender protocols for urgent situations in
drug and alcohol clinics </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 80251766 </p>

<p> SO - J Psychedelic Drugs 1979;11:211-215<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000013 </p>

<p> AU - Akil H </p>

<p> AU - Watson SJ </p>

<p> AU - Sullivan S </p>

<p> AU - Barchas JD </p>

<p> TI - Enkephalin-like material in normal human CSF:
Measurement and levels </p>

<p> AB - IN: Stanford U School of Medicine, Nancy Pritzker Lab of
Behavioral Neurochemistry LA: English </p>

<p> AB: Identified an opioid substance in lumbar cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) that appears to resemble methionine- </p>

<p> enkephalin in its behavior in 2 chromatographic systems. Ss
were 10 normal 19-28 yr old males and 5 Ss </p>

<p> with chronic intractable pain who were undergoing a
neurosurgical procedure for the alleviation of that pain. </p>

<p> The substance appears to interact with the opiate receptor
assay and with a methionine-enkephalin </p>

<p> radioimmunoassay. While this material resembles enkephalin,
it could not be identified as such with the </p>

<p> techniques employed in the present study. (9 ref) (PsycLIT
Database Copyright 1979 American </p>

<p> Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: identification
&amp; measurement of enkephalin-like material in </p>

<p> cerebrospinal fluid; 19-28 yr old males &amp; Ss with chronic
pain AN: 62-13062 </p>

<p> SO - Life Sciences 1978;23:121-125<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000012 </p>

<p> AU - Almay BG </p>

<p> TI - Endorphins in chronic pain: I. Differences in CSF
endorphin levels between organic and psychogenic </p>

<p> pain syndromes </p>

<p> AB - IN: U Umea, Sweden LA: English AB: Investigated
neurologic and psychiatric variables in 37 patients </p>

<p> with chronic pain. 20 Ss were classified as having mainly
organic (i.e., somatogenic) pain syndromes, while </p>

<p> 17 Ss were suffering from psychogenic pain syndromes. Samples
of lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were </p>

<p> obtained from the Ss and analyzed for the presence of opiate
receptor-active material, here called </p>

<p> endorphins. Ss classified as having mainly organic pain
syndromes were found to have significantly lower </p>

<p> endorphin levels than Ss with predominantly psychogenic pain
syndromes. In the total group of Ss as well as </p>

<p> in the 2 subgroups, there was a significant correlation
between CSF endorphin levels and the depth of </p>

<p> depressive symptomatology as reported by the patients. On the
other hand, there was no correlation between </p>

<p> CSF endorphin levels and extent of anxiety or motor
retardation. It is concluded that CSF endorphins reflect </p>

<p> central processes involved in chronic pain syndromes. (28
ref) (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1980 American </p>

<p> Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: cerebrospinal
fluid levels of endorphins &amp; depressive </p>

<p> symptomatology &amp; anxiety &amp; motor retardation;
patients with chronic pain of somatogenic vs psychogenic </p>

<p> origin AN: 63-01246 </p>

<p> SO - Pain 1978;5:153-162<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000238 </p>

<p> AU - Beckett GE </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - Coordination of institution and parole services: an
innovation within California's Civil Addict Program </p>

<p> AB - AB - Parole outcome was measured 1 year after release of
397 narcotic addicts processed by an </p>

<p> experimental program in which both institution and parole
services were administered together. Conparison </p>

<p> of outcome of this group to the outcome of 361 traditionally
processed addicts revealed a positive effect on </p>

<p> parole outcome of violators (those with prior parole
experience) compared to new commitments (p less than </p>

<p> .05). This was particularly true for the community parole
unit which made most use of community resources </p>

<p> (p less than .05). Community adjustment of some narcotic
addicts may be increased by administrative </p>

<p> interdependence and by optimal use of other community
resources. The future for such programs seems </p>

<p> brightest at the local level of government UI - 78150140 </p>

<p> SO - Int J Addict 1978;13:249-256<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000224 </p>

<p> AU - Brodner RA </p>

<p> AU - Taub A </p>

<p> TI - Chronic pain exacerbated by long-term narcotic use in
patients with nonmalignant disease: clinical </p>

<p> syndrome and treatment </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 78199525 </p>

<p> SO - Mt Sinai J Med 1978;45:233-237<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000010 </p>

<p> AU - Kerr FW </p>

<p> AU - Wilson PR </p>

<p> TI - Pain </p>

<p> AB - IN: Mayo Clinic &amp; Foundation, Rochester, MN LA:
English AB: Reviews recent contributions </p>

<p> towards understanding pain mechanisms, including
stimulus-produced analgesia, identification of the opiate </p>

<p> receptor, elucidation of the mechanisms and sites of action
of morphine analgesia, and the discovery and </p>

<p> characterization of an entirely new endogenous analgesic
system. The literature cited deals primarily with </p>

<p> animal research, but the application of these findings to
human investigations and to medical procedures </p>

<p> (such as dorsal rhizotomy and cordotomy) is also considered.
The lack of an acceptable animal model for </p>

<p> human chronic pain is noted. The authors theorize that pain
is mediated via a specific system that is </p>

<p> particularly sensitive to noxious stimuli. However, pain
control as an ultimate research goal is still elusive. </p>

<p> (51/2 p ref) (PsycLIT Database Copyright 1980 American
Psychological Assn, all rights reserved) KP: role </p>

<p> of stimulus produced analgesia &amp; identification of
endogenous opiate receptors &amp; mechanisms &amp; sites of </p>

<p> action of morphine analgesia in understanding of pain
mechanisms; literature review AN: 64-02761 </p>

<p> SO - Annual Review of Neuroscience 1978;1:83-102<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000213 </p>

<p> AU - Mount BM </p>

<p> AU - Melzack R </p>

<p> AU - MacKinnon KJ </p>

<p> TI - The management of intractable pain in patients with
advanced malignant disease </p>

<p> AB - AB - The Brompton mixture is a highly effective,
flexible, safe and convenient means to control </p>

<p> chronic pain of malignant disease. The mixture is a solution
containing morphine, the dose of narcotic </p>

<p> varying with the need for analgesia, and is given regularly,
usually every 4 hours, with a phenothiazine. The </p>

<p> main aims of therapy are prevention of pain rather than
treatment, an unclouded sensorium and a normal </p>

<p> effect. Terminally ill cancer patients were given the
Brompton mixture and a phenothiazine in an attempt to </p>

<p> control their pain. The mixture was administered to patients
in 3 hospital environments: 1) a palliative care </p>

<p> unit, 2) general wards and 3) private rooms. Pain was
measured in 92 patients with the McGill- Melzack </p>

<p> pain questionnaire. The Brompton mixture controlled pain in
90 per cent of patients in the palliative care unit </p>

<p> and in 75 to 80 per cent of patients in the wards or private
rooms. The differences in pain scores between </p>

<p> patients in the palliative care unit and the other groups
were significant. The mixture produced substantial </p>

<p> decreases in the 3 major dimensions of pain: 1) sensory, 2)
affective and 3) evaluative. Comparison of these </p>

<p> results with data obtained in an outpatient pain clinic
showed that the Brompton mixture was strikingly more </p>

<p> effective than the traditional methods of managing cancer
pain UI - 79091506 </p>

<p> SO - J Urol 1978;120:720-725<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000011 </p>

<p> AU - Villet B </p>

<p> TI - Opiates of the mind: The biggest medical discovery since
penicillin </p>

<p> AB - LA: English AB: Surveys the progress in the field of
neuropharmacology since the 1950s, including </p>

<p> the development or discovery of chlorpromazine, monoamine
neurotransmitters, ACTH, enkephalins, and </p>

<p> endorphins. The roles of mitochondria, cell membranes, and
the pituitary gland are mentioned. Beta </p>

<p> endorphin's action as a biochemical switch is described, as
are the results of its use on animals and humans </p>

<p> for chronic pain, narcotic addiction, schizophrenia,
depression, and agoraphobia. Presently, endorphins </p>

<p> represent the most promising area of research for the
treatment of many diseases. (PsycLIT Database </p>

<p> Copyright 1980 American Psychological Assn, all rights
reserved) KP: progress in neuropharmacology since </p>

<p> 1950; use of endorphins for pain &amp; narcotic addiction
&amp; mental disorders AN: 63-09307 </p>

<p> SO - Atlantic Monthly 1978;241:82-89<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000219 </p>

<p> AU - Halpern LM </p>

<p> TI - Analgesic drugs in the management of pain </p>

<p> AB - AB - The use of potent narcotics to control severe pain
should be of short duration and limited to </p>

<p> patients with acute diseases or inoperable or metastatic
cancer who require long-term relief. Continued and </p>

<p> prolonged use of narcotics in patients with chronic benign
pain is not recommended because of serious </p>

<p> behavioral consequences, the development of tolerance, and
addiction liability. Long-term use of analgesic </p>

<p> drugs in chronic pain usually produces negative behavioral
complications that are more difficult to manage </p>

<p> than the pain it was desired to eliminate. The use of
antidepressant drugs in the pain regimen has been found </p>

<p> to provide increased relief of pain and often allows the dose
of narcotic analgesic to be reduced or totally </p>

<p> eliminated UI - 77220872 </p>

<p> SO - Arch Surg 1977;112:861-869<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000218 </p>

<p> AU - Mount BM </p>

<p> AU - Melzack R </p>

<p> AU - MacKinnon KJ </p>

<p> TI - The management of intractable pain in patients with
advanced malignant disease </p>

<p> AB - AB - The Brompton mixture is a highly effective,
flexible, safe and convenient means to control </p>

<p> chronic pain of malignant disease. The mixture is a solution
containing morphine, the dose of narcotic </p>

<p> varying with the need for analgesia, and is given regularly,
usually every 4 hours, with a phenothiazine. The </p>

<p> main aims of therapy are prevention of pain rather than
treatment, an unclouded sensorium and a normal </p>

<p> effect. Terminally ill cancer patients were given the
Brompton mixture and a phenothiazine in an attempt to </p>

<p> control their pain. The mixture was administered to patients
in 3 hospital environments: 1) a palliative care </p>

<p> unit, 2) general wards and 3) private rooms. Pain was
measured in 92 patients with the McGill- Melzack </p>

<p> pain questionnaire. The Brompton mixture controlled pain in
90 per cent of patients in the palliative care unit </p>

<p> and in 75 to 80 per cent of patients in the wards or private
rooms. The differences in pain scores between </p>

<p> patients in the palliative care unit and the other groups
were significant. The mixture produced substantial </p>

<p> decreases in the 3 major dimensions of pain: 1) sensory, 2)
affective and 3) evaluative. Comparison of these </p>

<p> results with data obtained in an outpatient pain clinic
showed that the Brompton mixture was strikingly more </p>

<p> effective than the traditional methods of managing cancer
pain UI - 79119156 </p>

<p> SO - Trans Am Assoc Genitourin Surg 1977;69:84-91<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000014 </p>

<p> AU - Omura Y </p>

<p> TI - Patho-physiology of acupuncture effects, ACTH and
morphine-like substances, pain, phantom </p>

<p> sensations (phantom pain, itch and coldness), brain
micro-circulation, and memory </p>

<p> AB - IN: Heart Disease Research Foundation, New York, NY LA:
English AB: Suggests that, although </p>

<p> acupuncture is being gradually integrated by many US
physicians into their daily practice of medicine, other </p>

<p> scientists, physicians, and academicians are still claiming
that acupuncture has no scientific basis or is only a </p>

<p> form of hypnosis. A narrow approach to acupuncture research
limits itself to study of the nervous system, </p>

<p> although there are equally important effects in the
circulatory and endocrine systems. Previous research by </p>

<p> the author has shown that acupuncture effects on the
microcirculatory system can normally be classified into </p>

<p> 3 consecutively changing phases: vasoconstriction,
quasi-control, and vasodilation of capillaries and </p>

<p> arterioles. Vasodilation effects are often accompanied by
significant blood chemistry and complete blood </p>

<p> count changes, most of which resemble ACTH effects. Changes
such as generalized vasodilation effects can </p>

<p> give various degrees of improvement in insomnia,
irritability, impaired learning, memory, and brain </p>

<p> circulation. Pain threshold to electrical stimulation is
often enhanced by acupuncture in the acupunctured </p>

<p> area, without respiratory depressant effect characteristics
of opiates. The author proposes a concept of </p>

<p> &quot;coded stored memory molecules&quot; for chronic pain
and phantom sensation, using examples of phantom pain, </p>

<p> phantom itch, and phantom coldness. The interrelationship of
the effects of morphine derivaties and their </p>

<p> analogs and antagonists and acupuncture is discussed. (French
&amp; German abstracts) (40 ref) (PsycLIT </p>

<p> Database Copyright 1979 American Psychological Assn, all
rights reserved) KP: molecular memory codes </p>

<p> for chronic &amp; phantom pain; role of acupuncture &amp;
ACTH &amp; morphine derivatives in pain reduction AN: </p>

<p> 61-00418 </p>

<p> SO - Acupuncture and Electro Therapeutics Research
1977;2:1-31 <br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000233 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Krantz KD </p>

<p> AU - Dobrin EI </p>

<p> TI - Use of difenoximide (SC-26100) for narcotic
detoxification: a preliminary tolerance and efficacy study </p>

<p> AB - AB - Difenoximide (SC-26100) is closely related to the
antidiarrheal agent, diphenoxylate, which is a </p>

<p> chemical congener of meperidine. It has been shown to have a
greater ability than methadone to suppress </p>

<p> opiate withdrawal in addicted mice, and it has produced less
physical dependence than morphine and </p>

<p> methadone in laboratory animals. In this study difenoximide
was administered to nine active heroin addicts. </p>

<p> A dose of 4 mg administered 4 times per day for 3 days
effectively suppressed opiate withdrawal, while a </p>

<p> dose of 8 mg produced symptoms resembling those of narcotic
excess in subjects who had recently self- </p>

<p> administered heroin. No side effect were observed at the
therapeutic dosage level, and the drug was well </p>

<p> accepted by subjects. Difenoximide was shown to be a
potentially useful narcotic treatment agent in this </p>

<p> impatient study UI - 78163354 </p>

<p> SO - Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 1977;4:123-135<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000249 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Detels R </p>

<p> TI - Relationship of alcohol, cigarette, and drug abuse in
adulthood with alcohol, cigarette and coffee </p>

<p> consumption in childhood </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 76176338 </p>

<p> SO - Prev Med 1976;5:70-77<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000237 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Tate JA </p>

<p> AU - Ruckel E </p>

<p> TI - Clinical trial in post-addicts with oxilorphan
(levo-BC-2605): a new narcotic antagonist </p>

<p> AB - AB - Oxilorphan (levo-BC-2605) is a new, long-acting,
narcotic antagonist that has agonist </p>

<p> properties. Twenty-one (21) heroin addicts in Los Angeles
were detoxified and given at least one oral dose </p>

<p> of oxilorphan. Only three (14.3%) patients took daily doses
for 14 days, which was the maximal time </p>

<p> allowed for oxilorphan administration in this study. The
remainder discontinued oxilorphan because of </p>

<p> subjective side effects or for unknown reasons. Side effects
most responsible for dropouts were dysphoria, </p>

<p> insomnia, weakness, hallucinations, nausea, drowsiness and
anorexia. Oxilorphan provided 24-hour </p>

<p> protection with a single, oral dose, but subjective side
effects encountered during inductiolinical trials with </p>

<p> oxilorphan should be attempted with other addict populations
to fully determine its potential therapeutic </p>

<p> value UI - 77115504 </p>

<p> SO - Drug Alcohol Depend 1976;1:329-337<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000226 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Detels R </p>

<p> AU - Clark V </p>

<p> TI - Some childhood antecedents of drug and alcohol abuse </p>

<p> AB - AB - Unsatisfactory intrafamilial relationships and
child-rearing practices have frequently been </p>

<p> implicated as prime determinants of personalities that are
susceptible to drug and alcohol abuse. Five </p>

<p> thousand forty-four US Army soldiers were surveyed by
anonymous questionnaires. The reported </p>

<p> occurrence of a variety of activities, events and behaviors
in childhood among drug and alcohol abusers were </p>

<p> compared to non users. Childhood antecedents that were
associated with non-use of illegal drugs and which </p>

<p> showed as much as a 20% difference in reported occurrence
between abusers and non-users of illegal drugs </p>

<p> were: spanking, church attendance, first alcoholic drink
after 15 years, and perceived &quot;happy&quot; parental </p>

<p> marriage. These associations were found uithin white and
non-white groups and in subjects with divorced or </p>

<p> separated parents. There was no antecedent that showed as
much as a 20% difference in reported </p>

<p> occurrence between alcohol abusers and non-users UI -
76085301 </p>

<p> SO - Am J Epidemiol 1975;102:377-385<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000230 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> AU - Russell BA </p>

<p> AU - Casas SK </p>

<p> AU - Bleich RN </p>

<p> TI - Heroin detoxification. A comparison of propoxyphene and
methadone </p>

<p> AB - AB - Propoxyphene napsylate and methadone hydrochloride
were each administered under double- </p>

<p> blind conditions to 36 outpatients for 21- day heroin
detoxification. The initial dosage was 24 mg/day for </p>

<p> methadone hydrochloride and 800 mg/day for propoxyphene
napsylate. At these dosages, methadone more </p>

<p> effectively suppressed the opiate- withdrawal syndrome, and
patients remained in treatment longer in the </p>

<p> methadone group (P greater than .05). In regard to heroin
abstinence, however, results were not statistically </p>

<p> significant in either group, as indicated by the number of
patients whose urine was positive for morphine on </p>

<p> admission and became negative during treatment, and the
number who had morphine-negative urine at the </p>

<p> conclusion of 21-day treatment. A one-month follow-up of
patients showed that more patients given </p>

<p> methadone had entered long-term medical maintenance while
more patients given propoxyphene were </p>

<p> heroin-abstinent. This study indicates that 21-day heroin
detoxification, regardless of chemotherapeutic </p>

<p> agent, yields a low rate of heroin abstinence UI - 75153849 </p>

<p> SO - JAMA 1975;232:1019-1022<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000223 </p>

<p> AU - Halpern LM </p>

<p> TI - Treating pain with drugs </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 74108808 </p>

<p> SO - Minn Med 1974;57:176-184<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000239 </p>

<p> AU - Silsby H </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - Short-term, ambulatory detoxification of opiate addicts
using methadone </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 75014945 </p>

<p> SO - Int J Addict 1974;9:167-170<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000220 </p>

<p> AU - Halpern LM </p>

<p> TI - Analgesics and other drugs for relief of pain </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 73169798 </p>

<p> SO - Postgrad Med 1973;53:91-100<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000258 </p>

<p> AU - Marks RM </p>

<p> AU - Sachar EJ </p>

<p> TI - Undertreatment of Medical Inpatients with Narcotic
Analgesics </p>

<p> AB - Structured interviews of 37 medical inpatients being
treated with narcotic analgesics for pain showed </p>

<p> that 32% of the patients were continuing to experience severe
distress, despite the analgesic regimen, and </p>

<p> another 41% were in moderate stress. Chart review suggested
significant undertreatment with narcotics: </p>

<p> Meperidine in doses of 50 mg every 3-4 hours or less (if
needed) was prescribed for 63% of the 37 patients; </p>

<p> a dose of 75 mg was prescribed for only 1 patient </p>

<p> SO - Ann Intern Med 1973;78:173-181<br>
</p>

<p> UI - 000231 </p>

<p> AU - Tennant FS Jr. </p>

<p> TI - Drug abuse in the US Army, Europe </p>

<p> AB - AB - [No Abstract Available] UI - 73152205 </p>

<p> SO - JAMA 1972;221:1146-1149<br>
<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>