
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-34</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B002-40</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GovPubs/amhab/amhabc9e.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122032016 text/html 9621
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:20:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:25:28 GMT
Content-length: 9404
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Preventing Drug Abuse: What Can We Do?</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Consultant Paper: Preventing Drug Abuse: What Can We Do? </h2>

<p>By Dr. Arnold M. Washton. Submitted: October 1, 1985. Dr.
Washton is Director of the Addiction Research and Treatment
Center, The Regent Hospital, New York, New York; and Research
Director of The National Cocaine Hotline &quot;800-COCAINE,&quot;
Fair Oaks Hospital, Summit, New Jersey. </p>

<p>The most dramatic increase in drug use has occurred since the
1960's, a time of radical change in political and social beliefs,
lifestyles and mores. Traditional values, authorities, and
restrictions on behavior were vehemently challenged. Psychoactive
drugs and the breakdown of traditional taboos against using them
became symbols of the rebellion against the established order. We
have come to recognize in the 1980's that we are paying a very
high price for the casual attitude towards drugs that developed
in the 1960's. Much misinformation has been corrected, and we
have begun to formulate a more realistic appraisal of the
problem, but now we must take specific actions to reduce the
demand for drugs. </p>

<p>Interventions that merely condemn drug use and try to frighten
children about the potential dangers (&quot;scare tactics&quot;)
are futile. The most effective prevention strategies are those
that address the factors that make drugs attractive and thwart
the process that leads youngsters to try them. Children use drugs
for many different reasons. Usually there are at least several
factors that enter into the decision to experiment or continue
with drug use. Drug use itself is no evidence that parents have
failed to properly raise their children. Many children with a
good family upbringing have yielded to the enormous outside
pressures to use drugs. The influence of peers can often override
even the best parental input. </p>

<p>Effective drug abuse prevention must address the most basic
and fundamental forces that promote drug-taking in our society.
These fall into two main categories: supply and demand. </p>

<p>Reducing Supply </p>

<p>Reducing the supply of illicit drugs is an obvious way of
curtailing use. Although this does little to alter the demand for
drugs, the widespread availability and abundant supplies of many
different types of powerful mood-altering substances makes it
easier for our citizens to become involved in drug use. It
reinforces the notion that illicit drugs are an expected part of
American life. People are more likely to try drugs when they are
surrounded by them - and children are no exception. Most American
adolescents know someone who &quot;deals&quot; drugs, uses drugs,
or is able to get them. </p>

<p>To counter the supply problem, we must continue to enforce and
strengthen our laws against the manufacture, sale, and possession
of drugs. We must also take a firmer stand against drug-producing
countries that receive American foreign aid. </p>

<p>The failure of Prohibition is a dramatic example of how
difficult it is to eliminate the use of a drug by law enforcement
efforts alone; especially when the drug is so well-entrenched in
society. Nonetheless, to legalize drugs, such as cocaine,
marijuana, or heroin would cause nothing short of a national
disaster. When drugs are cheaper and more readily available, more
people use them, become addicted to them, and suffer serious
consequences to their health and functioning. Legalization of
drugs would create an epidemic of unprecedented proportions. </p>

<p>Although enforcement efforts are necessary to check abuse,
they cannot prevent the problem by themselves. Neither can
treatment programs, which are utilized only after a serious drug
abuse problem has been identified. </p>

<p>Reducing Demand </p>

<p>Prevention of drug use in the United States must focus
intensively on the problem of demand. The cultural forces that
encourage and perpetuate drug use in our society must be
eliminated. We must recognize that drugs have become a
deeply-ingrained part of American life and that prevention cannot
occur unless social attitudes toward drug use change. Changing
social attitudes toward drugs is a difficult undertaking, but not
an impossible one. Many segments of society must become involved
in the effort. The message that drug use is unacceptable,
unhealthy, and unnecessary must be communicated in a credible and
consistent manner by the family, schools, media, business
community, medical and legal experts, politicians, professional
athletes, and other public figures. This message must be
reflected in every aspect of American life including education,
entertainment, business management practices, and law
enforcement. Being free of drugs must become a highly desirable
personal attribute: one that is seen as mandatory for success in
our society. One might hope that non-involvement with drugs would
become at least as desirable as physical fitness and
attractiveness. </p>

<p>Several prevention strategies are outlined below. </p>

<p>Recommendations </p>

<p>1. Public Education and Media Campaigns. The media is
potentially one of our most powerful prevention tools. It could
be used to better educate the public about the dangers of drugs
and to change attitudes about drug use through direct and
indirect communications. Public service messages, educational
programs, documentaries, and greater efforts to eliminate
pro-drug programs, might help to counteract accepting attitudes
toward drugs. </p>

<p>2. School-based Prevention Programs. Every school system in
the United States must have an active and creative drug abuse
prevention program. Prevention efforts, such as saying
&quot;NO&quot; to drugs and learning of their potential dangers,
must start in the early grades, not just in high school. Studies
show that drug use often starts before the 7th grade and that by
the time youngsters reach teenage it may be too late to change
their attitudes about drugs or their willingness to
&quot;try&quot; drugs. Nonetheless, early identification of
drug-abusing youngsters and swift efforts to ameliorate the
problem are essential in our nation's high schools. </p>

<p>In this regard, the &quot;Student Assistance Program&quot;
(SAP) in New York's Westchester County has served as a model
program to other school systems around the country. The SAP is
based on the EAP (Employee Assistance Program) model used
successfully in business and industry, utilizing on-site
substance abuse counselors, who are especially skilled at
identifying drug-abusing youngsters and providing the necessary
assistance or referral. </p>

<p>3. Education of Health Professionals. Despite epidemic levels
of drug abuse over the past two decades, most health
professionals receive no formal training in the diagnosis and
treatment of drug dependency. This situation must be corrected by
mandating that a core curriculum in the clinical management of
drug abuse problems be part of the training of physicians,
nurses, psychologists, social workers, and other health
professionals. </p>

<ol>
    <li>Drug Testing in DWIs. Currently, not a single state in
        the United States requires drug testing of drivers
        stopped for suspected driving under the influence of
        alcohol. Someone &quot;stoned&quot; on drugs may be able
        to pass a breathalyzer test with no difficulty, but still
        be too impaired to drive safely. </li>
</ol>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>