
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B012-352</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/MISC/testscam.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122101301 text/html 13279
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:12:51 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:41 GMT
Content-length: 13061
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>The Drug Test Scam</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h1><font size="3">THE DRUG - TEST SCAM</font></h1>

<p><font size="3">by Ian Williams Goddard</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Alas, the sorry sound of a Big Lie crashing: </font></p>

<p><font size="3">The stereotype of the lazy, illicit-drug using
bum promotes an acceptance of claims that il- licit drug use
imposes heavy economic burdens upon businesses and society, and
consequently that universal drug testing is the most cost-
effective reaction to this unprofitable burden. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">But how true are these claims, which seem to
enjoy the support of reputable scientific re- search?Under
examination these claims are proven to be nothing more than a
greedy scam designed to expand the bureaucratic empires and
profits of a few by sacrificing the most fundamental liberties of
the many.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">ILLICIT DRUG USERS WORK MORE</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Contradicting the &quot;unproductive drug
user&quot; stereotype, while the National Household Sur- vey on
Drug Abuse [1] finds that 71% of il- licit-drug users are
employed, U.S. Depart- ment of Labor statistics [2] show that
only 65% of those 20 and over are employed. From the data we can
extrapolate that the aver- age illicit-drug user is more likely
to be employed than the average person [3].</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The evidence suggests that, while not favor-
able to police-state mega profits, the most true-to-life
stereotype could be: &quot;The pro- ductive and motivated drug
user.&quot; </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Why might this be so? It's possible that the
desire for the reward of drug intoxication acts as astronger
incentive to work more (in an effort to earn the money necessary
to purchase the drug-reward) than non-drug rewards act as an
incentive for nonusers to work more. Such is Economics 101: the
higher the reward, the higher the output to acquire it; or, the
sweeter the carrot on the stick, the faster the horse will run
after it. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">ILLICIT DRUG USERS COST LESS &amp; WORK HARDER</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The journal SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN [4] cited a
study of workers at two utility companies: Utah Power &amp; Light
and Georgia Power Company. The workers who tested positive for
illicit drugs were found to (a) cost employers $215 less per
worker per year in health insurance, and (b) have a higher rate
of promotion. Work- ers testing positive for cannabis only had an
absentee rate 30% lower than average. The logical conclusion:
illicit users were less costly to employers while at the same
time being more productive and reliable. More for less! -- now
there's a deal.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The JOURNAL OF GENERAL INTERNAL MEDICINE [5]
published a study that found &quot;no difference between
drug-positive and drug-negative em- ployees.&quot;However, the
study's author ob- served that during the study, 11 of the non-
users were fired while none of the users were fired. Ironically,
once the study end- ed, all of the users could have been fired
for using the &quot;wrong&quot; drugs, regardless of their
productivity and professionalism.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The claim that illicit-drug use costs busi-
nesses X billion dollars per year, is der- ived from a 1982 study
by the Research Tri- angle Institute. The study found that house-
holds with at least one member who used can- nabis daily at some
point in their life had a 28% lower income than the average
house- hold income. Yet the study also showed that those
currently using any illicit drug had an income equivalent to the
average [4]. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">If we conclude that because cannabis use pre-
ceded a lower income, therefore, cannabis use caused a lower
income(a post hoc ergo prop- ter hoc fallacy), then we must also
conclude based on the data that if you used cannabis in the past,
you should start using it again to increase your income to
current-user rates. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Interesting to note:if current drug users earn
more than former users, this supports the theory that drug
rewards are a more powerful incentive for work than nondrug
rewards.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">THE RIGGING OF RESEARCH</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In an effort to push Congress to pass manda-
tory illicit-drug-testing legislation, U.S. Chamber of Commerce
officials, in testimony before Congress, claimed that research
showed illicit-drug users were &quot;3.6 times more like- ly to
injure themselves or another person in a workplace
accident...[and] five times more likely to file a workers'
compensation claim.&quot; However, as SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN [4]
observed:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In fact, the study on which the claim is based
has &quot;nothing to do with [illicit] drug users,&quot;
according to a 1988 article in the University of Kansas Law Re-
view by John P. Morgan of the City University of New York Med-
ical School. Morgan, an author- ity on drug testing, has traced
the Chamber of Commerce claim to an informal study by the Fire-
stone Tire and Rubber Company of employees undergoing treatment
for alcoholism. ^^^^^^^^^^ Using the devastating effects of the
govern- ment subsidized drug alcohol to initiate a leg- islative
pogrom against safer, albeit, illicit drugs -- an obvious and
shameless scam. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">This scam is promoted not only by governmental
interests in an effort to expand bureaucratic empires,but also by
private interests in an effort to maximize profits, as the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN observed: &quot;The pharmaceutical giant
Hoffman-La Roche, which is leading an anti- drug campaign among
businesses (and has a big share of the drug-testing market), also
promul- gates this claim in 'educational' literature.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN observed other errors in
the research promoted by the GovtMedia that purports to show that
drug users are bad for business. For example, a study that found
a higher absentee rate among users failed to note that most users
in the study were minor- ities, and minorities have an absentee
rate, regardless of drug use, identical to the rate observed in
the study.Logic therefore dic- tates, contrary to the GovtMedia's
conclusion, that NO statistically significant correlation between
drug use and absenteeism was found.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">CONCLUSIONARY OVERVIEW</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Ultimately, the drug-testing and drug-rehab-
ilitation program is a massive cannabis-user- identification and
reeducation pogrom. This is because 90% of drug-positive urine
tests are for cannabis, which is due to the fact that inactive
metabolites of THC remain in the urine for up to 30 days after a
single use, whereas most other drugs are out of the system in a
day or even less. But why sacri- fice primary liberties for
cannabis control?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Not only is cannabis one of the safest known
drugs [6], and, as we have just observed, is correlated to better
employee performance, but there is no established correlation
bet- ween cannabis and motor-skill impairment; thus, unlike legal
alcohol, it cannot even be said to impair driving skills, which
is a major drug testing pretext. Observing the safety of cannabis
use, the National High- way Traffic Safety Administration [7]
said:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">No clear relationship has ever been
demonstrated between mari- juana smoking and either serious- ly
impaired driving performance or the risk of accident involve-
ment... [T]here is little if any evidence to indicate that
drivers who have used marijuana alone are any more likely to
cause serious accidents than drug free drivers.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The most exhaustive review of the research
clearly confirms that there is simply no compelling case for the
intrusive Orwellian surveillance of private activity that is im-
posed by drug testing.As Dr. John Morgan, director of
pharmacology at City University of New York Medical School,
wisely observed: </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Urine testing is ... a method for surveillance,
not a tool for safety.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Indeed, drug testing is not about safety or job
performance; drug testing is a necessary feature of the
Surveillance State that is now being built around us to ensure
total cradle- to-grave surveillance and control of workers.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">While it's been said that those who are will-
ing to give up liberty for safety will soon have neither,in the
case of illicit-drug testing -- which cannot even promise improv-
ed safety -- we can say that those who are willing to give up
liberty for nothing will soon have only that for which they
surrend- ered their priceless liberty: nothing. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">________________________________________________________________________</font></p>

<p><font size="3">[1] National Household Survey on Drug Abuse,
1995. </font><a href="http://www.health.org/pubs/95hhs/any.htm"><font
size="3">http://www.health.org/pubs/95hhs/any.htm</font></a></p>

<p><font size="3">[2] U.S. Department of Labor statistics, 1996. </font><a
href="ftp://stats.bls.gov/pub/news.release/History/empsit.100496.news"><font
size="3">ftp://stats.bls.gov/pub/news.release/History/empsit.100496.news</font></a><font
size="3"> </font><a
href="ftp://stats.bls.gov/pub/news.release/empsit.txt"><font
size="3">ftp://stats.bls.gov/pub/news.release/empsit.txt</font></a></p>

<p><font size="3">[3] The USDL statistics [2] indicate that the
Employment Population Ratio (EPR) for all men and women ages 20
and above is 65%. However, the NHSDA study [1], showing a 71% EPR
for il- licit-users, includes all users ages 18 and above. Would
this give the illicit users an unfair advantage in this analysis?
No, because the EPR for ages 18-19 is roughly 1 to 3% lower than
for ages 20 and above (likely due to being in school);this lower
rate of employment for ages 18-19 would serve only to lower the
il- licit-user EPR results.Therefore, the inclu- sion of ages
18-19 in the NHSCA study must lo- wer, NOT inflate, the higher
rate of employ- ment measured among illicit users. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">[4] SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN: Testing Negative, a
look at the &quot;evidence&quot; justifying illicit-drug testing,
3/90. </font><a
href="http://www.pantless.com/~pdxnorml/test.html"><font size="3">http://www.pantless.com/%7Epdxnorml/test.html</font></a></p>

<p><font size="3">[5] JOURNAL OF GENERAL INTERNAL MEDICINE: Rela-
tion of the Pre-employment Drug Testing Result to Employment
Status, A One-year Follow-up. Parish, David C.Jan/Feb, 1989.pp.
44-47. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">[6] </font><a
href="http://www.erols.com/igoddard/hempsafe.htm"><font size="3">http://www.erols.com/igoddard/hempsafe.htm</font></a></p>

<p><font size="3">[7] NATIONAL HIGHWAY AND TRAFFIC SAFETY
ADMINIS- TRATION. &quot;Marijuana and Actual Driving
Performance,&quot; Robbe, H., O'Hanlon, J., National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration, Nov. 1993. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Special thanks to Eric Skidmore for his
assistance.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>