
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-37</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B033-83</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/holl8.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065852 text/html 29367
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:58:44 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:27:18 GMT
Content-length: 29148
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Man Who Turned On the World - Chapter 8</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Michael Hollingshead">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<hr width="50%">
<center>

<h4>CHAPTER EIGHT</h4>

<h3>'WHERE THE WILD THINGS ARE'</h3>
</center>

<hr width="50%">

<h4>Scandinavia 1967</h4>

<blockquote>
    <p>'And when he came to the place where the wild things are
    they roared their terrible roars and gnashed their terrible
    teeth and rolled their terrible eyes and showed their
    terrible claws till Max said &quot;BE STILL!&quot;<br>
    and tamed them with the magic trick <br>
    of staring into all their yellow eyes without blinking once
    and they were frightened and called him the most wild thing
    of all<br>
    and made him king of all wild things&#133; '<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; (From a children's
    story by Maurice Sendak) </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; My life has something of Peer Gynt's about it, more
intimate to me even than I am intimate to myself; just now I
happened to hear Solveig's song on the radio; it quite got hold
of me; to wait loyally a whole lifetime for someone&#133; the
kind of love that triumphs over the hostility of space and time
and separation: this is love. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; So it is not entirely without reason that it is to
Norway my spirit will sometimes return, back, I suppose, to its
mythological roots and the magic landscape from which it sprang.
For I am at heart a Northerner, most at home in my Scandinavian
Kingdoms of the snows; essentially a Tundra type. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It had been a long, steamy pig of a summer in
prison and I wanted to empty its bog breath out of my bones:
Norway sounded like the one good place to be. It was thus with a
delicious sense of escaping from the freedom of the cage that I
sat down at the First Engineer's table on the <i>M.S. Blenheim</i>
as she slowly broke anchor in the Tyne at the start of a two-day
voyage to Oslo. This I had arranged.... Once more Proteus expands
across the space of the North Sea, returning to a place where
there is someone 'who loves him best of all', to the land where
the trolls and the Solveigs live&#151;to the Gudbrandsdal Valley,
to be exact. </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; A few days later I was sitting by myself in an
outfarm high on the upper reaches and timber line of <i>Rayneberg</i>
overlooking Lake Mjoesa and the town of Lillehammer, where the
air is as thin and as pure as Vichy water; and all sounds are
permanently sharp in the mountain stillness. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Rock was now a feature of my landscape&#151;and the
tiny farm I rented sat plum in a nest of great rocks, and it was
easy to see why the old dalesman family left it for a
State-provided modern apartment in the town. My window looked out
over an untouched moor and the eye was drawn downwards down
tousled slopes of ubiquitous bracken to the lake some 2500 feet
below. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There was a prehistoric feel about the place and I
now understood why it was this valley which Ibsen chose to set
the home of Peer Gynt, the universal wanderer, the exile in the
heart of each one of us. Yet would a Himalayan <i>Rishi</i>
understand Nordic gods (which the vision of these mountains quite
naturally created in my soul) were he to observe the landscape of
this valley?&#151;I think not; he would probably die of excessive
cold. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Yet I loved the place, especially at night, sitting
by the open <i>peis</i> or fireplace, listening to the softly
stirring firs outside, so silent in my solitary retreat. For my
life here had something of Advent about it&#151;waiting and
hoping and getting on with ordinary things. In certain moods I'd
occupy my time translating Old Norse Sagas. I found this to be an
excellent aid to concentration. There is one text I particularly
remember, from <i>Morkinskinna,</i> a history of twelfth-century
Norwegian kings, which was compiled by an Icelander in 1220; the
text is called 'Audun buys himself a white bear', which actually
turned out to be something of a white elephant; the story is
about one Audun who, desiring to see the world, made the
dangerous voyage from Iceland to Greenland; there he exchanged
his entire cargo for a single white bear. That is all. Nothing
more; it is an exquisite story, exquisitely told: and in the mind
of the thirteenth-century narrator, Audun's behaviour in spending
his cash like this was perfectly reasonable, for Greenland was an
important place at that time, and a white bear a great
treasure&#151;like a white Cadillac might be today, something
whose price is simply our All and not a penny less. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I also got to know a few people in the district and
also in Lillehammer itself, where I would go for my weekly
shopping. On one of these trips I met a Norwegian poet&#151;whose
name escapes me who invited me to attend a reading of 'Nordic
poets' which he had arranged at the local Folk High School, when
I could also read something myself if I so wished. A lot of
people from Oslo were going to be there. And Vesaas, the
celebrated author of <i>The Ice Palace</i>&#151;by which English
reviewers are not much impressed&#151;had promised to attend. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Thus it was, on the appointed day, at the appointed
time, and with due solemnity appropriate to the almost
reverential sense of 'presence', if that is the right word for a
rather stiff atmosphere. It reminded me more of a meeting of Kirk
Elders than any poetry-reading I had been to before. Absolute
seriousness is not without a dose of humour except in Norway,
where it is absolutely serious that is, until the 'snaps' begins
to flow, when everyone seems to get very wild and something in
the structure of their thought completely snaps, as it were; it
is a completely different psychophysical effect from that of
getting stoned on hashish or marijuana. (A recent report by WHO,
Geneva&#151;'The Use of Cannabis' notes that 'Individuals who
have no taste for the cannabis experience <i>per se</i>&#151;regardless
of moral or other considerations&#151;are more apt to exhibit a
preference of a controlled, structured, rational and secure
approach to life,' as it also suggested that alcohol is much more
closely associated with crime, aggression, and violence than is
cannabis.) <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At any rate, I had taken the precaution of smoking
several joints on my way down the mountain, and arrived very
stoned that is, 'quiet' and 'sensing'.... 'Those who enjoy
cannabis tend to prefer an unstructured and spontaneous style of
life, are relatively prone to take risks, value states of altered
consciousness, and tend to seek such effects both through drugs
and through other methods.' (Same WHO report). <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Soon the booze began to have its effect, and the
first poet&#151;from Sweden&#151;was helped on to the stage,
where he raged through his mother tongue like a prairie fire, his
bull voice crashing through our heads like falling
masonry&#151;and with about as many mixed metaphors in each line
as in my description of his reading. He finally collapsed in a
wave of laughter or tears, and disappeared backstage and was seen
again no more. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Then followed a lady poet from Denmark, who read a
series of poems on the theme of Vietnam, and in the form of
imaginary letters from a Vietcong private to his mother in
Haiphong, telling her about the effects on his mind of being
bombed from planes 'too high in the sky even to see'. And this
had a temporary sobering effect on the listeners, who had perhaps
become aware, even if ever so faintly, that they were somehow, in
some way, also a bit culpable. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Three or four poets in quick succession. And then
it was my turn.... 'Cannabis users are most frequently young,
male, unmarried, and exhibit some instability with respect to
residence, work, school and goals.' <i>(Ibid)</i>&#133; I seated
myself on the stage in the half-lotus position, lit two candles,
which I put on either side of me, and asked that the hall lights
be put out, which was done, though not without a bit of protest
from members of a party from Oslo, who had, I gathered, been
wanting to dance on one of the large tables. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There was a hush, finally. And into this silent
space I inserted, <i>in the Danish,</i> Timothy Leary's
translation of Tao Sutra number fourteen from the Chinese
classic, the <i>Tao Te Ching,</i> which I reproduce here in its
more familiar English form: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'Gazing &#133; they do not see it <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; they call it empty space.<br>
    Listening &#133; they do not hear it <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; they call it silence or noise<br>
    Groping &#133; they do not grasp it <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; they call it intangible<br>
    But here &#133;<br>
    We &#133; spin through it<br>
    Electric &#133; Silent &#133; Subtle' </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And since it was the last poem of the evening, and
since Tarjaas Vesaas insisted only upon us speaking what for me
was the obscure dialect form of 'Nynorsk', I made my farewells
and silently&#133;softly&#133; I spun off into a crisp, clear
night of stars, gliding like a fish upstream, reaching <i>Ravneberg</i>
just as a new dawn was breaking. To the sounds of the clapper of
the cattle bells swinging back and forth, moving in flow,
regular, without stop or start so harmoniously held&#133; </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; After a few hours' quiet reflection, I realised
that what had really upset me about the poetry-reading the
evening before was an overheard remark following Ulla Ryum's
'Vietnam poems'&#133; 'Det tross alt er farlig aa leve i Norge
ogsaa&#151;hva med superhighwayene og alt, ikke?' ('Despite that,
it is pretty dangerous living in Norway too&#151;what with these
&quot;superhighways&quot; coming along and everything.') From one
point of view, the person was right but I could imagine there
were many in Vietnam who would gladly exchange the dangers of
Norwegian highways for the sort of life they had to contend with
there. But if I felt this strongly, why should I remain 'aloof
with Hermit Eye' ? Wasn't my situation just as much a 'cop-out'
as for the indifferent majority&#151;just living out our simple
life or death? Or in some Nietzschean sense, was not my life now
also a kind of 'germinative regression', an attempt to return to
my roots ? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; I had taken to acid and later to myths and ancient
stories to seek a formula that would turn the surrounding world
to dust and reveal the sought for paradise. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'For now I am homesick <br>
    after my own kind: and these people <br>
    touch me not.... ' <br>
    I remember myself as an ancient hero, a wild man <br>
    of the mountains, a guardian of the door, a paradox&#151;<br>
    To sing&#133; of heroes&#133; Now ? <br>
    In this forgotten age ? of giant men ? <br>
    No!<br>
    &#151;Yet I shall speak<br>
    that our giant flies might listen and would know<br>
    the glory that man is&#133;<br>
    IN THE BEGINNING, then <br>
    were men<br>
    men hard and tall, the warriors, who fought <br>
    with man and beast, who knew <br>
    the call of blood and fire, and whose swords <br>
    cut paths to&#133; <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; but who shall hear
    this&#151;here ? <br>
    The paths, the paths! Immortal paths! Cuhulain rides <br>
    his five fiery chariots across the firmament!<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Arthur and Lancelot in battle! The ground
    shakes!<br>
    IN THE BEGINNING was blood and fire&#133;<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; And now ? <br>
    The matterings of the civilised yet impotent <br>
    conscience of modern society ?<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; No. <br>
    The sound a new-minted coin makes upon a concrete street ?<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; No.<br>
    Silence then ? <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Yes&#151;silence. Heroes are dead! <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; We buried them, and did the rites <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; And they've long forgotten us.<br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; (by Kristof
    Konstanty Jastrzebski-Glinka) </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And thus one sits, day in, day out, in urn-like
silence, staring wearily into nothing&#151;you can almost see the
nothing. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And yet in this nothing it was something to know
that it's not enough to see the light; you have to market the
message. The meaning of silence is only the suspense of our
breath before the storm and the stillness is nothing but the
prelude to catastrophe&#133; like a thunder-cloud in the process
of materialisation, it is the tension of violence held in check.
And do we notice ? Not a bit. We sail on in our aimless craft
lulled in the cradle of all that is&#151;that supremely ordinary
human condition of wakefulness which accepts, without reflection,
the universe as we find it. We are the proverbial
'sleepwalkers'&#133; we experience without any awareness of the
meaning of our experience of life; we are the monolithic mass who
act and speak like men asleep. We are as good as dead. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And is acid to help us wake, or help us dream ? It
can make us conscious of our own mental states as somehow
dependent on the predispositions left by the world we experience
as an impersonal universe; the all too personal soul fashions its
own world in the imagining of dreams&#151;the spirit serves as
light for itself: or worse, we somehow see the visionary delight
of the ego in its own spirituality, its purity, as if it were
itself absolute and infinite.... 'Behold! from the travails of my
soul, before me, above me, between heaven and earth, finite and
yet all penetrating, I see a tremendous figure growing out of the
nothingness of my being, the figure of One whose materialisation
is the Spirit Mercurius !'&#151;Or is it 'Aquarius' ?&#151;there
is such a pantheon of gods in the alchemic line. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But about the state of <i>conscious wakefulness,</i>
or <i>prajna</i> (wisdom), the Vedas tell us that it is a divine
attribute in one who has become aware of the One and is full of
Bliss, Bliss, Bliss.... 'In conscious wakefulness there is no
need or greet, no desire, no thought, and all confusions are
fused into a blessed peace; only knowledge and Bliss remain.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And as for the state of 'transcendental
wakefulness', the truly wise know it is incapable of being spoken
of, grasped held, imagined or manipulated; it is without
distinctive marks of any kind&#151;unthinkable, unnameable, for
it is that into which the essence of the knowledge of the One is
resolved, it is the Peaceful, the Benign, the Non-dual.
And&#151;the metaphysical paradox!&#151;One is the self; 'He' is
to be known. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Whenever imaginative man penetrates into the
mystical universe which surrounds him, it brings forth spirits
and gods. And the creatures thus born into the world appear
different according to the peculiarity of their parents&#151;just
look at all the historical pantheons, the first recorded
divinities of the Vedic poets, the gods of the Old Testament, the
Egyptian and Greek gods&#151;sometimes maternal, sometimes
paternal&#133; But the unknowable, unnameable, ungraspable 'He'
is at the root of them all, and thus the source of all that was,
and is, and will be, living as an ancestor continues to live in
His distant descendants. And occasionally 'He' appears again in
His own intrinsic form. 'He' is not Jahveh neither is he Allah
nor the Vishnu of the Hindus; 'He' is none of the historical
Gods, for 'He' is nameless. But when 'He' appears we know
it&#151;it was 'He' whom the tribes of Israel saw in the
wilderness, as it was also 'He' before whom the Aryans of the
Himalayas once trembled. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Thus Leary himself writes in each generation a few
men stumble upon the riddle of consciousness and its solution;
they discover, once again, that beyond the ordinary world of
macroscopic tangible, material things, there are endless levels
of energy transformations accessible to consciousness. They learn
again the age-old lesson taught by mystics and wise men of East
and West: that most of mankind is sleepwalking, moving
somnabulistically through a world of rote perceptions and
conflicting emotions. As have many internal explorers of the
past, they become dedicated to the process of consciousness
expansion, to the ideal of maximum wakefulness and internal
freedom. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It is perhaps significant that the psychedelic
experience, which has been popularised by Leary through his
lectures and books in America, has not helped a single American
to a higher education and here I do not exclude myself&#151;but,
on the other hand it has brought all the more into hospitals and
jails. LSD is considered, even in India, as dangerous. Or is it
that it takes a very great deal of acid to produce even a little
elevation of consciousness. The fact is, no one has yet proved
that an increase of individual human awareness&#151;drug-induced
or not&#151;is appropriate to the organisation of
twentieth-century society in the West; it may be that it does
more harm than good in the case of most people. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; No, I think the psychedelic experience does
something quite different&#151;it is not a question of the
validity of facts or even of personal manifestation of the
spirit, but <i>of becoming aware in oneself of how to fashion a
new and better reality.</i> </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; I wanted to go on living in Norway, but however
well one tries to understand oneself and sort out one's
priorities for happiness, reality is forever getting in the way.
You never know what you will be doing until you find yourself
doing it, mysteriously at work again. I had been toying with the
idea of writing a book about my experiences in America, something
positive and forward-looking, reflecting somehow the optimism I
had for the future, the 'practical Utopia' of the Underground s
manifesto of liberation. My need to communicate was very great
indeed, but it had nothing to do with the ego or things like
that; it was, I think, something similar to the urge that
compelled Marco Polo to write about his travels. But there are
two things more important than writing&#151;<i>action</i> and <i>meditation</i>&#151;and
I was impelled by the former. There is perhaps a
transcendentalist anticipation of what I mean in Emerson's
address on the American Scholar: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>'The sacredness which attaches to the act of creation, the
    act of thought, is transferred to the record. Instantly the
    book becomes noxious. the guide is a tyrant. The sluggish and
    perverted mind of the multitude having once received this
    book, stands upon it, and makes an outcry if it is destroyed.
    Colleges are built on it. Meek young men grow up in
    libraries. Hence, instead of Man Thinking, we have the
    bookworm. I had better never see a book than to be warped by
    its attraction clean out of my orbit, and make a satellite
    instead of a system. The one thing in the world, of value, is
    <i>the active soul.'</i> </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Books make bondage. But the bondage is to an
authority outside ourselves. Freedom lies in getting control of
our own lives back into our own hands&#151;'to stand on one's own
two feet'&#151;and everyone united by mutual affection with
personal relations as the touchstone, creating an environment of
creativity and harmony. But it will take a miracle to free the
human mind: because the invisible reins and chains are magical in
the first place; and each individual will only free himself in
the measure that he knows how to locate and discover his own
proper powers. Whitman, likewise in a transcendentalist sermon
says, 'You shall no longer take things at second or third hand,
nor look through the eyes of the dead, nor feed on the spectres
in books.' And the man who is not possessed of an active soul, or
of a self-conscious able to recognise that it is everywhere in
chains to authority outside itself, will not know how to set
about the task of magical self-liberation. But to concentrate
oneself in this direction is a thing which very few individuals
of the West have ever known how to do, for to the rational mind
the ideal of a 'practical Utopia' accomplished on earth is an
apparently impossible task. It would seem to depend upon direct
incarnation of the soul/spirit/Christ in each individual if he or
she were to give direct expression of spiritual values in daily
life. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Our Western philosophers have always been
rationalists, for their insights do not depend upon the awakening
of their own souls (most philosophers lead private lives that are
really quite hellish sometimes) but upon a special facility in
their treatment of symbols which awaken
spiritual/religious/philosophical associations in the mind of the
reader. Any true change would have to be based on a different
concentration from that of reason. We must create ourselves out
of whatever it is that is within ourselves, unconcerned with
standardized answers, the so-called scientific methods: it has an
inner rhythm, like that of music. Or, as my Guru puts it, 'We
must first recognise Atman within ourselves, and then realise him
in the world; we should assist Brahman, whose partial expression
we are, to perfect himself in appearance.' And this is something
beyond all power of words&#151;Life is not an art so much as an
experience. 'With the Pillar of Fire goes the Pillar of Cloud.'
At dawn, a pair of trousers; at noon, a cloud. But such mysteries
are unpublishable except as poetry, the veiled truth. This is
also the new doctrine of Ezra Pound, who says: 'Prose is not
education but the outer courts of the same. Beyond its doors are
the mysteries. Eleusis. Things not to be spoken of save in secret
The mysteries <i>self-defended,</i> the mysteries that cannot be
revealed Fools can only profane them. The dull can neither
penetrate the secretum nor divulge it to others.' <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; What is the poet doing in trying to express
mystical reality objectively ? He is looking for a scheme which
would circumscribe it from all sides. And if he describes its
contours clearly and correctly, then every other intelligent
human being could place the content there for himself, so that he
might believe that the poet had shown the 'thing'. But that is
impossible. All the poet has done is to present a frame for that
which we must be conscious of anyhow in order to recognise it.
And recognition is liberation <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; That is perhaps why people who have had a
psychedelic experience can 'tune-in' to the secret and occult, in
which God is better honoured and loved by silence than by words,
and better seen by closing the eyes to images than by opening
them. So let's not try to understand everything. LSD may provide
you with a clue as to what is happening. It opens the Doors of
Perception and beyond those doors who can really say ? </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; There is no future, with modern man and man of
the future, which does not resemble what 'free' people are doing
in the world. All are trying to get control over the making of
their own lives; growing their own food in country meadows or
backyards, building their own homes out in the forests, learning
how to farm 'liberated' land and live off the produce of the sea;
learning how to bake their own bread&#133; and learning to love
one another as one enormous family, and with a conscious relation
to, or respect for, the environment. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; And this implies, in one word, Revolution, not the
revolution against the 'given' which has since the time of Hegel
provided the avant-garde with an excuse for anarchist expression
or behaviours&#151;the answer from the outside&#151;but the
revolution within the self. Total Revolution is
inner-change-in-the-world; the tools are a cultural framework
which bypasses (transcends) the existing projection structure;
and 'religion' is an artistic tool for getting there, through
image, vision and symbol's symbol. ONE METAPHOR CAN CHANGE THE
WORLD: 'Peace of Mind brings Peace on Earth ?'&#151;Yes, but only
if we recognise how the ego is the cause of all the wars inside
the human mind and, by implication, also of all the wars in the
world-at-large. </p>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; How strange that I 'should' do anything again!
But these 'revolutionary' ideas were becoming decisive: action
would decide the rightness or wrongness of our ideas, success
that of volition. It is not enough to take your ease in the world
of ideas and live there naively, as I had earlier thought, for
this would mean that we had merely allowed ourselves to be driven
by the stream of events. We have to know how to guide ourselves
to the goal. I found it increasingly difficult simply to sit and
reflect on all this, for there was still the job of translating
recognition into action. I could not hope to 'change myself'
through 'meditation'&#151;a temperament like mine collapses under
the burden of living in another kind of existence that simply
'is' and needs the challenge of 'should' in order to realise the
goal of 'becoming', which is, I suppose what our Western sort of
life is all about&#151;we believe we 'should' <i>grow, become,
create, perform, perfect again</i>, and this is the impetus for
conscious volition, since our ideas remain nonexistent until they
have been tested in reality, with the self as the first testing
ground. From the point of view of the world, it is mere illusion,
if a holy man regards himself as an incarnation or a Saint he
must <i>become</i> saintly, change himself, if he wishes to be
taken seriously. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; In my own case, I felt strongly that I should
return to America, see how my old psychedelic friends were making
out on their 'voyages of self-discovery', meet Tim and Richard
Alpert again, perhaps even settle over there for a time and try
to build a structure in which 1 could exist without losing sight
of my goal. But it was a difficult decision to make, seeing how I
had been out of touch for so long. And apart from considerations
like these, there was the fact that life in America actually
scared me stiff. If paranoia is 'having some idea of what is
really going on', then you could say that I was definitely
paranoid about returning to our brave New World. Just thinking
about New York could send icicles up and down my spine.... my
paranoia took the form of imagining myself walking alone on 11
5th Street from Riverside to Broadway at midnight, or
equally&#151;due to some error in my direction&#151;ending up, an
object of unpleasant attention by members of the 'Roach Guards'
or the 'Five Points Gang', in Broome Street down on the
Bowery&#133; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; At any rate, my fears and doubts were overcome
somewhat by Christmas, and early in January I found myself once
again airborne over the Atlantic on a flight that was to land me
a few hours later at Boston's Logan Airport, and the start of a
new chapter&#133; </p>

<hr>
<a href="holl9.htm">

<p>Chapter 9</a></p>

<p> <!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" --> </p>
</body>
<!--
 This file is transmitted under the "Fair Use" rulings regarding the 1976 Copyright Act for NON-profit academic and general information purposes. -->
</html>
</DOC>