
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-15</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B027-339</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/saved1867.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095643 text/html 68547
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:56:31 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:58:39 GMT
Content-length: 68331
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>What Shall They Do to Be Saved - 1867</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">Harper's magazine 35, Aug. 1867, pp. 377-87</font></p>

<p><font size="4">What Shall They Do to Be Saved?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I have just returned from forty-eight hours'
friendly and professional attendance at a bedside where I would
fain place every young person in this country for a single hour
before the Responsibilities of Life have become the sentinels and
Habit the jailor of his Will.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">My patient was a gentleman of forty, who for
several years of his youth occasionally used opium, and, for the
last eight has habitually taken it. During these eight years he
has made at least three efforts to leave it off, in each instance
diminishing his dose gradually for a month before its entire
abandonment, and in the most successful one holding the enemy at
bay but for a single summer. In two cases he had no respite of
agony from the moment he dropped till he resumed it. In the third
case, a short period of comparative repose succeeded the first
fiery battle, but in the midst of felicitations on his victory he
was attacked by the most agonizing hemicranial headaches
(resulting from what I now fear to have been already permanent
disorganization of the stomach), and went back to his nepenthe in
a state of almost suicidal despair, only after the torture had
continued for weeks without a moment's mitigation.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">He had first learned its seductions, as happens
with the vast majority of Anglo-Saxon opium-eaters, through a
medical prescription. An attack of inflamed cornea was treated
with caustic applications, and the pian assuaged by internal
doses of M'Munn's Elixir. When my friend came out of his dark
room and bandages at the end of a month he had consumed twenty
ounces of this preparation, whose probable distinction from the
tincture known as laudanum I point out below in the note. [FN*]</font></p>

<p><font size="3">________</font></p>

<p><font size="3">* Mr. Frank A. Schlitz has kindly made for me a
special analysis of M'Munn's Elixir which seems to prove that the
process of its preparation amounts to more than the
denarcotization of opium, which is spoken of on the wrapper of
each vial. As nearly as can be ascertained, M'Munn's Elixir is
simply an aqueous infusion of opium--procured by the ordinary
maceration--and preserved from decomposing by the subsequent
addition of a small portion of alcohol. Narcotin being absolutely
insoluble in water is eliminated as the circular says. This face
along would not account for the difference between its action and
that of laudanum. This is explained by the fact that all the
other alkaloids possess diverse rates of solubility in water, and
exist in M'Munn's Elixir in very different relative proportions
from those which they bear to each other in the alcoholic
tincture called laudanum. _____</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Here it may not be superfluous to say that the
former preparation has all the essential properties of the
latter, save certain of the constipatory and stupefying
tendencies which, by a private process known to the assigns of
the inventor, have been so masked or removed that it possesses in
many cases an availableness which the practitioner can not
despise, though compelled by the secrecy of its formula to rank
it among quack medicines. The amount of it which my friend had
taken during this month's eclipse represents an ounce of dry gum
opium--in rough measurement a piece as large as a French billiard
ball. I thus particularize because he had never previously been
addicted to the drug; had inherited a sound constitution, and
differed from any other fresh subject only in the intensity of
his nervous temperament. I wish to emphasize the fact that the
system of a mere neophyte, with nothing to neutralize the effects
of the drug save the absorbency, so to speak, of the pain from
which it was given, could so rapidly adapt itself to them as to
demand an increase of the dose in such an alarming ratio. There
are certain men to whom opium is as fire to tow, and my friend
was one of these. On the 1st of October he sensibly perceived the
trifling dose of fifty drops; on the first of November he was
taking, without increased sensation, an ounce vial of
&quot;M'Munn&quot; daily.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">From that time--totally ignorant of the
terrible trap which lay grinning under the bait he dabbled
with--he continued to take opium at short intervals for several
years. When by the physician's orders he abandoned
&quot;M'Munn,&quot; on the subsidence of the eye-difficulty, his
symptoms were uneasy rather than distressing, and disappeared
after a few days' oppression at the pit of the stomach and a few
nights' troubled dreaming. But he had not forgotten the sweet
dissolving views at midnight, the great executive achievements at
noonday, the heavenly sense of a self-reliance which dare go
anywhere, say anything, attempt anything in the world. He had not
forgotten the nonchalance under slight, the serenity in pain, the
apathy to sorrow, which for one month set him calm as Boodh in
the temple-splendors of his darkened room. He had not forgotten
that the only perfect peace he had ever experienced was there,
and he remembered that peace as something which seemed to blend
all the assuaged passion and confirmed dignity of old age with
that energy of high emprise which thrills the nerves of manhood.
He had tasted as many sources of earthly pleasure as any man I
ever knew; but the ecstasies of form and color, wine, Eros,
music, perfume, all the luxuries of surrounding which wealth
could purchase or high-breeding appreciate, were as nothing to
him in comparison with the memory of that time on which his
family threw away their sympathy when they called it his
&quot;month of suffering.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Accordingly, without much more instinct of
concealment than if it were an occasional tendency to some slight
convivial excess, he had resort to M'Munn, in ounce doses,
whenever the world went wrong with him. If he had a headache or a
toothache; if the weather depressed him; if he had a certain
&quot;stint&quot; of work to do without the sense of native vigor
to accomplish it; if he was perplexed and wished to clear his
head of passion; if anxieties kept him awake; if irregularities
disturbed his digestion--he had always one refuge certain. No
fateful contingency could pursue him inside M'Munn's enchanted
circle. He was a young and wealthy bachelor, living the life of a
refined bon vivant; an insatiable traveler, surrounded by
flatterers, and without a single friend who loved him enough to
warn him of his danger excepting those who, like himself, were
too ignorant to know it. After three years of dalliance he became
an habitual user of opium, and had been one for eight years when
I was first called to him.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">By the time that the daily habit fastened
itself he had learned of other opiate preparations than M'Munn's,
and finding a certain insufficiency characterize that tincture as
he increased the size of the dose, had recourse to laudanum,
which contains the full native vigor of the drug unmodified. This
nauseated him. He had the same experience with gum opium, opium
pills, and opium powder; so that he was driven to that form of
exhibition which sooner or later naturally strikes almost every
opium-eater as the most portable, energetic, and
instantaneous--morphia or one of its salts. My friend usually
kept the simple alkaloid in a paper, and dissolved it as he
needed it in clear water, sometimes substituting an equivalent of
&quot;Magendie's Solution,&quot; which contains sixteen grams of
the salt diffused through an ounce of water by the addition of a
few drops of sulfuric acid. When I first saw him he had reached a
daily dose of twelve grains of sulphate of morphia, and on
occasions of high excitement had increased his dose without
exaggerating the sensible effect to nearly twenty. The twelve
which formed his habitual per diem were divided into two equal
doses, one taken immediately after rising, the other just before
sundown.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">As yet he had not begun to feel the worst
physical effects which sooner or later visit the opium-eater. His
digestion seemed unimpaired so long as he took his morphia
regularly; he was sallow and somewhat haggard, but thus far no
distressing biliary symptoms had manifested themselves; his sleep
was always dreamy, and he woke at short intervals during the
night, but invariably slept again at once, and had so adjusted
himself to the habit as to show no signs of suffering from
wakefulness; his hand was steady; his muscular system easily
exhausted, but by no means what one would call feeble. As he
himself told me, he had come to the conclusion to emancipate
himself because opium-eating was a horrible mental bondage. The
physical power of the drug over him he only realized when
attempting its abandonment. Its spiritual thralldom was his
hourly misery. He was connected by blood and marriage with
several of the best families in the land. Money had not been
stinted in his education, and his capabilities were as great as
his advantages. He was one of the bravest, fairest, most generous
natures I ever came in contact with; was versatile as a Yankee
Crichton; had ridden his own horse in a trotting match and beaten
Bill Woodruff; had carried his own little 30-ton schooner from
the Chesapeake to the Golden Gate through the Straits of
Magellan; had swum with the Navigators' Islanders, shot buffalo,
hunted chamois, and lunched on mangosteens at Penang. Through all
his wanderings the loftiest sense of what was heroic in human
nature and divine in its purified form, the monitions of a most
tender conscience, and the echoes of that Puritan education which
above all other schemes of training makes human responsibility
terrible, had gone with him like his tissue. He saw the good and
great things within reach of a fulfilled manhood, and of a sudden
waked up to feel that they could on earth never be his. He was
naturally very truthful, and, although the invariable tendency of
opium-eating is to extirpate this quality, could not flatter
himself. Other minds around him responded to a sudden call as his
own did not. Every day the need of energy took him more by
surprise.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The image-graving and project-building
characteristic of opium, which comes on with a sense of genial
radiation from the epigastrium about a quarter of an hour after
the dose, had not yet so entirely disappeared from its effect on
him, as it always does at a later stage of the indulgence. But
instead of being an instigation to the delightful reveries which
ensued on his earlier doses, this peculiarity was now an
executioner's knot in the hands of Remorse. He was daily and
nightly haunted by plans and pictures whose feverish unreal
beauty he remembered having seen through a hundred times. Those
Fata Morgana plans, should he again waste on them the effort of
construction? The result had been a chaos of aimless, ineffectual
days. Those pictures, why were they brought again to mock him?
Were they not horrible impossibilities? Were they not, through
the paralysis of his executive faculties, mere startling
likenesses of Disappointment? In his opium dreams he had seen his
own ships on the sea; commerce bustling in his warehouse; money
overflowing in this bank; babies crowing on his knee; a wife
nestling at his breast; a basso voice of tremendous natural power
and depth scientifically cultivated to its utmost power of
pleasing artists or friends; a country estate on the Hudson, or
at Newport, with emerald lawns sloping down to the amber river on
the leek-green sea; the political and social influence of a great
landholder. How pleasurably he had once perceived all these
possible joys and powers! How undeludedly he now saw their
impossible execution!</font></p>

<p><font size="3">So, coming to me, he told me that his object in
trying to leave off opium was to escape from these horrible
ghosts of a life's unfulfilled promise. Only when he tried to
abandon opium did he realize the physical hold the drug had on
him. Its spiritual thralldom was his hourly misery.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">For three months I tried to treat him in his
own house, here in the city. A practitioner of any experience
need not be told with what success. I could reduce him to a dose
of half a grain of sulphate of morphia a day, keep him there one
week, and making a morning call at the expiration of that time
discover that some nocturnal nervous paroxysm had necessitated
either a return to five grains or a use of brandy (which, though
no drinker, he tried to substitute) sufficient to demand a much
larger dose of opium in its reaction. He had lost most of his
near connections, and not for one hour could any hired attendant
have withstood his appeal, or that marvelous ingenuity by which,
without appeal, the opium-eater obtains the drug which, to him,
is like oxygen to the normal man.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This ingenuity manifests itself in subterfuges
of a complicated construction and artistic plausibility which
might have puzzled Richelieu; but it is really nothing to wonder
at when we recollect the law of nature by which any extreme
agony, so long as it continues remediable, sharpens and
concentrates all a man's faculties upon the one single object of
procuring the remedy. If my house is on fire, I run to the
hydrant by a mere automatic operation of my nerves. If my leg is
caught in the bite of a paying-out hawser, my whole brain focuses
at once on that single thought, &quot;an axe.' If I am enduring
the agony which opium alone can cause and cure, every faculty of
my mind is called to the aid of the tortured body which wants it.
When a man has used opium for a long time the condition of his
brain supervening on his deprivation of the drug for a period of
twenty-four hours is such as very frequently to render him
suicidal. Cottle tells us how Coleridge one day took a walk along
Bristol wharves, and sent his attendant down the pier to inquire
the name of a vessel, while he slipped into a druggist's on the
quay and bought a quart of laudanum; but in no fibre of his
nature could Cottle conceive the awful sense of a force
despotizing it over his will, a degradation descending on his
manhood, which Coleridge felt as he concentrated on that one
single cry of his animal nature and the laudanum which it spoke
for, fall the faculties of construction and insight which had
created the &quot;Ancient Mariner&quot; and the &quot;Aids to
Reflection.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Likewise I suppose there are very few people
who could patiently regard the fact that one of the very purest
and bravest souls I ever knew had become so demoralized by the
perseverance of disease and suffering as to deal like a lawyer
with his best friends, and shuffle to the very edge of falsehood,
when his nature clamored for opium. I was particular to tell him
whenever I detected any evasion (an occasion on which his shame
and remorse were terrible to witness) that I, personally, had
nonetheless respect for him. I knew he was dominated, and in no
sense more responsible for breaking his resolution than he would
have been had he vowed to hold his finger in the gas-blaze until
it burned off. In this latter case the mere translation of
chemical decomposition into pain, and round the automatic
nerve-arc into involuntary motion, would have drawn his finger
out of the blaze, as it did in the cases of Mutius Sevola and
Cranmer, if they ever attempted the feat credited them by
tradition. In his case the abandonment of opium brought on an
agony which took his actions entirely out of voluntary control,
eclipsing the higher ideals and heroisms of his imagination at
once, and reducing him to that automatic condition in which the
nervous system issues and enforces only those edicts which are
counseled by pure animal self- preservation. Whatever may have
been the patient's responsibility in beginning the use of
narcotics or stimulants (and I usually find, the case of
opium-eaters, that its degree has been very small indeed,
therapeutic use often fixing the habit forever before a patient
has convalesced far enough even to know what he is taking)
habituation invariably tends to reduce the man to the automatic
plane, in which the will returns wholly to the tutelage of
sensation and emotion, as it was in infancy; while all the
Intellectual, save Memory, and the most noble and imperishable
among the Moral faculties may survive this disorganization for
years, standing erect above the remainder of a personality
defrauded of its completion to show what a great and beautiful
house might have been built on such strong an shapely pillars.
Inebriates have been repeatedly known to risk imminent death if
they could not reach their liquor in any other way. The grasp
with which liquor holds a man when it turns on him, even after he
has abused it for a lifetime, compared with the ascendancy
possessed by opium over the unfortunate habituated to it for but
a single year, is as the clutch of an angry woman to the embrace
of Victor Hugo's Pieuvre. A patient whom, after habitual use of
opium for ten years, I met when he had spent eight years more in
reducing his daily dose to half a grain of morphia, with a view
to its eventual complete abandonment, once spoke to me in these
words:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;God seems to help a man in getting out of
every difficulty but opium. There you have to claw your way out
over red-hot coals on your hands and knees, and drag yourself by
main strength through the burning dungeon- bars.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This statement does not exaggerate the feeling
of many another opium- eater whom I have known.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Now, such a man is a proper subject, not for
reproof, but for medical treatment. The problem of his case need
embarrass nobody. It is as purely physical as one of small-pox.
When this truth is as widely understood among the laity as it is
known by physicians, some progress may be made in staying the
frightful ravages of opium among the present generation. Now,
indeed, it is a difficult thing to prevent relatives from
exacerbating the disorder and the pain of a patient, who, from
their uninformed standpoint, seems as sane and responsible as
themselves, by reproaches at which they would shudder, as at any
other cruelty, could they be brought to realize that their friend
is suffering under a disease of the very machinery of volition;
and no more to be judge harshly for his acts than a wound for
suppurating or the bowels for continuing the peristaltic motion.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Finding--as is common with all physicians I
have found so many times before--that no control of the case
could be obtained while the patient stayed at home, and deeply
renewing my often-experienced regret that the science and
Christian charity of this country have perfected no scheme by
which either inebriates or opium-eaters may be properly treated
in a special institution of their own, I was at length
reluctantly compelled to send my friend to an ordinary water-cure
at some distance from town.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The cause of my reluctance was not the prospect
of a too liberal use of water, for by arrangement with the heads
of the establishment I was able to control that as I chose;
moreover, an employment of the hot-bath in what would ordinarily
be excess is absolutely necessary as a sedative throughout the
first week of the struggle. I have had several patients whom
during this period I plunged into water at 110 degrees Fahrenheit
as often as fifteen times in a single day--each bath lasting as
long as the patient experienced relief. In some cases this
Elysium coming after the rack has been the only period for a
month in which the sufferer had anything resembling a doze. My
reluctance arose from the necessity of sending a patient in such
an advanced state of the opium disease so far away from me that I
must rely on reports written by people without my eyes, for
keeping personally au courant with the case; that I must consult
and prescribe by letter, subject to the execution of my plans by
men, who, though excellent and careful, were ignorant of my
theories of treatment, and had never made this particular disease
a specialty. I accordingly sent Mr. A. away to the water-cure,
all friendless and alone to fight the final battle of his life
against tougher odds than he had ever before encountered. At no
time in my life have I realized with greater bitterness the
helplessness of a practitioner who has no institution of his own
to take such cases to than when I shook his poor, dry sallow hand
and bade him goodbye at the station.</font></p>

<p><font size="3"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p><font size="3">As I said in the beginning, I am just home from
seeing the result. Mr. A. has fared as special cases always do
where there is no special provision for them. To speak plainly,
he had been badly neglected; and that, undoubtedly, without the
slightest intention on the part of the heads of the house to do
other than their duty. Six weeks ago I heard from the first
physician that any friend was entirely free from opium, and,
though still suffering, was steadily on the mend. I had no
further news from him till I was called to his bedside by a note
which said he feared he was dying, penciled in a hand as
tremulously illegible as the confession of Guy Fawkes. I was with
him by the earliest train I could take, after arranging with a
neighbor for my practice, and found him in a condition which led
him to say, as I myself said at the commencement of this article:
&quot;Would to God that every young person could stand for a
single hour by this bedside before Life's responsibilities have
become the sentinels and Habit the jailer of the Will!&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I had not been intelligently informed
respecting the progress of his case. He had been better at no
time when I was told he was so, though his freedom from opium had
been of even longer duration than I was advised. For ninety days
he had been without opium in any form. The scope of so
untechnical an article leaves no room to detail what had been
done for him as alleviation. His prostration had been so great
that he could not correspond with me himself until the moment of
his absolutely extremity; and only after repeated entreaties to
telegraph to myself and his family had been refused on the ground
that his condition was not critical, he managed to get off the
poor scrawl which brought me to his side.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">For the ninety days he had been going without
opium he had known nothing like proper sleep. I desire to be
understood with mathematical literalness. There had been periods
when he had been semi-conscious; when the outline of things in
his room grew vaguer and for five minutes he had a dull sensation
of not knowing where he was. This temporary numbness was the only
state which in all that time simulated sleep. From the hour he
first refused his craving, and went to the battlefield of bed, he
had endured such agony as I believe no man but the opium-eater
has ever known. I am led to believe that the records of fatal
lesion, mechanical childbirth, cancerous affection, the stake
itself, contains no greater torture than a confirmed opium-eater
experiences in getting free. Popularly this suffering is supposed
to be purely intellectual-- but nothing can be wider of the
truth. Its intellectual part is bad enough, but the physical
symptoms are appalling beyond representation. The look on the
face of the opium sufferer is indeed one of such keen mental
anguish that outsiders may well be excused for supposing that is
all. I shall never forget till my dying day that awful Chinese
face which actually made me rein my horse at the door of the
opium hong where it appeared, after a night's debauch, at six
o'clock one morning when I was riding in the outskirts of a
Pacific city. It spoke of such a nameless horror in its owner's
soul that I made the sign for a pipe and proposed, in
&quot;pigeon English,&quot; to furnish the necessary coin. The
Chinaman sank down on the steps of the hong, like a man hearing
medicine proposed to him when he was gangrened from head to foot,
and made a gesture, palms downward, toward the ground, as one who
said, &quot;It has done its last for me--I am paying the matured
bills of penalty.&quot; The man had exhausted all that opium
could give him; and now, flattery past, the strong one kept his
goods in peace. When the most powerful alleviative known to
medical science has bestowed the last Judas kiss which is
necessary to emasculate its victim, and, sure of the prey,
substitutes stabbing for blandishment, what alleviative, stronger
than the strongest, shall soothe such doom? I may give
chloroform. I always do in the denouement of bad
cases--ether--nitrous oxide. In employing the first two agents I
secure rest, but I induce death nine cases out of ten. Nothing is
better known to medical men than the intolerance of the system to
chloroform or ether after opium. Nitrous oxide I am still
experimenting with, but its simple undiffused form is too
powerful an agent to use with a patient who for many days must be
hourly treated for persevering pain. So the opium-eater is left
as entirely without anesthetic as the usual practice leaves him
without therapeutic means. Both here and abroad opium-eaters have
discovered the fact that, in an inveterate case, where opium
fails to act on the brain through the exhausted tissues of the
stomach, bichloride of mercury in combination with the dose
behaves like a mordant in the presence of a dye, and, so to
speak, precipitates opium upon the calloused surfaces of the
mucous and nervous layers. This expedient soon exhausts itself in
a death from colliquative diarrhea, produced partly by the final
decompositions of tissue which the poisonously antiseptic
property of opium has all along improperly stored away; partly by
the definite corrosions of the new addition to the dose. But in
no case is there any relief to a desperate case of opium-eating
save death.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Remembering that Chinaman's faced I can not
wonder at the popular notion regarding the abandonment of opium.
Men say it is a mental pain; because spiritual woe is the
expression of the sufferer's countenance. And so it is, but this
woe is underlain by the keenest brute suffering. Let me sketch
the opium-eater's experience on the rugged road upward.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Let us suppose him a resolute man, who means to
be free, and with that intent has reduced to a hundred drops the
daily dose which for several years had amounted to an ounce of
laudanum. I am not supposing an extreme case. An ounce of
laudanum is a small per diem for any man who has taken his
regular rations of the drug for a twelvemonth. In the majority of
cases I have found an old habitue's daily portion to exceed
three, or the equivalent of that dose in crude opium or morphia;
making seventy-two grains of the gum or twelve of its most
essential alkaloid. In one most interesting case I found a man
who having begun on the first of January with one half a grain of
sulphate of morphia for disease, at the end of March was, to all
appearance, as hopeless an opium-eater as ever lived, taking
thirty-two grains of the salt per day in the form of Magendie's
Solution. This, however, was an unusual case. According to my
experience the average opium-eater reaches twelve grains of
morphia [microfiche illegible]... and may live after that to
treble the amount: the worst case I ever knew attaining a dose of
ninety grains, or one and a half of the drachm vials ordinarily
sold. I am happy, in passing, to add that for more than two years
both the extreme cases just mentioned have been entirely cured.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">If the opium-eater has been in the habit of
dividing his daily dose he begins to feel some uneasiness within
an hour after his first deprivation, but it amounts to nothing
more than an indefinite restlessness. In any case his first
well-marked opium torments occur early after he has been without
the drug for twenty-four hours.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">At the expiration of that time he begins to
feel a peculiar corded and tympanic tightness about the
epigastrium. A feverish condition of the brain, which sometimes
amounts to absolute phantasia, now ensues, marked off into
periods of increasing excitement by a heavy sleep, which, after
each interval, grows fuller of tremendous dreams, and breaks up
with a more intensely irritable waking. I have held a man's hand
while he lay dreaming about the thirty-sixth hour of his
struggle. His eyes were closed for less than a minute by the
watch, but he awoke in a horrible agony of fear from what seemed
to have been a year-long siege of some colossal and demoniac
Vicksburg.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">After the opium-eater has been for forty-eight
hours without his solace this heavy sleep entirely disappears.
While it stays it never lasts over half an hour at a time, and is
so broken by the crash of stupendous visions as not to amount to
proper slumber. During its period of continuance the opium-eater
woos its approaches with an agony which shows his instinct of the
coming weeks of sleeplessness. It never rests him in any valid
sense. It is a congestive decomposition rather than any normal
reconstruction of the brain. He wakes out of it each time with a
heart more palpitating; in a perspiration more profuse; with a
greater uncertainty of sense and will; with a more confused
memory; in an intenser agony of body and horror of hopelessness.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Every nerve in the entire frame now suddenly
awakes with such a spasm of revivification that no parallel agony
to that of the opium-eater at this stage can be adduced, unless
it be that of the drowned person resuscitated by artificial
means. Nor does this parallel fully represent the suffering, for
the man resuscitated from drowning re-oxidizes all his surplus
carbon in a few minutes of intense torture, while the anguish
which burns away that carbon and other matter, properly effete,
stored away in the tissues by opium, must last for hours, days,
and weeks. Who is sufficient for this long, long pull?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">From the hour this pain begins to manifest
itself it continues (in any average case of a year's previous
habituation to the drug) for at least a week without one second's
lull or exhaustion. A man may catch himself dozing between spasms
of tic-douloureux or toothache; he never doubts whether he is
awake one instant in the first week after dropping his opium. One
patient whom I found years ago at a watercure followed the
watchman all night on crutches through his tour of inspection
around the establishment. Other people, after walking a long
time, shift from chair to chair in their rooms, talking to
anybody who may happen to be present in a low-voiced, suicidal
manner, which inexperience finds absolutely blood-freezing. Later
such rock to and fro, moaning with agony, for hours at a time,
but saying nothing. Still others go to their beds at once, and
lie writhing there until the struggle is entirely decided. I have
learned that this last class is generally the most hopeful.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The period during which this pain is to
continue depends upon two elements.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">1st. How long has the patient habitually taken
opium?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">2d. How much constitutional strength remains to
throw it off?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;How much has he taken in the
aggregate?&quot; is practically not an equivalent of the first
question. I have found an absolutely incurable opium-eater who
had never used more than ten grains of morphia per diem; but he
had been taking it habitually for a dozen years. In another case
the patient had for six months repeated before each meal the
ten-grain dose which served the other all day; but he was a man
whose pluck under pain equaled a woman's, and after a fortnight's
anguish of such horror that one could scarcely witness it without
being moved to tears came out into perfect freedom. The former
patient, although he had never in any one day experienced such
powerful effects from opium as the latter, had used the drug so
long that every part of his system had reconstructed itself to
meet the abnormal conditions, and must go through a second
process of reconstruction, without any anodyne to mask the pain
resulting from its decomposition, before it could again tolerate
existence of the normal kind. If opium were not an anodyne the
terrible structural changes which it works would cause no
surprise; it would be felt eating out its victim's life like so
much nitric acid. During the early part of the opium-eater's
career these structural changes go on with a rapidity which
partly accounts for the vast disengagements of nervous force, the
exhilaration, the endurance of effort, which characterize this
stage, later to be substituted by utter nervous apathy. By the
time the substitution occurs something has taken place throughout
the physical structure which may be rudely likened to the final
equilibrium of a neutral salt after the effervescence between an
acid and an alkali. So to speak, the tissues have now combined
with their full equivalent of all the poisonous alkaloids in
opium. Further use of it produces no new disengagements of
nervous force; the victim may double, quadruple his dose, but he
might as well expect further ebullition by adding more
aqua-fortis to a satisfied nitrate as to develop with opium
exhilarating currents in a tissue whose combination with that
drug have already reached their chemical limit. FN* _____ *FN I
say &quot;chemical&quot; because so much it is possible to known
experientally; and the very interesting examination of such
higher forces as constantly seem to intrude in any nervous
disturbance would here involve the discussion of a theoretical
&quot;vital principle&quot;-- something apart from and between
the soul and physical activities--which scientific men are
universally abandoning. ___</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The opium-eater now only continues his habit to
preserve the terrible static condition to which it has reduced
him, and to prevent that yet more terrible dynamic condition into
which he comes with every disturbance of equilibrium; a condition
of energetic and agonizing dissolutions which must last until
every fiber of wrongly changed tissue is burned up and healthily
replaced. Though I have called the early reactions of opium
rapid, they are necessarily much less so than those produced by a
simple chemical agent. No drug approaches it in the possession of
cumulative characteristics; its dependence on the time element
must therefore be always carefully considered in treating a case.
This fact leads us to understand the other element in the
question, how long the torments of the opium-fighter must
continue. Having ascertained the chronology of his case, we must
say, &quot;Given this period of subjection, has the patient
enough constitutional vigor left to endure the period of
reconstruction which must correspond to it?&quot; ** FN -------
** (FN) Not correspond day by day. At that rate a reforming
opium-eater (I use the particle in the physical sense, for very
few opium-eaters are more to blame than any other sick persons)
must pay a &quot;shent per shent&quot; which no constitution
could survive. The correspondence is simply proportional. -------</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I am naturally sanguine, and began my study of
opium-eaters with the belief that none of them were hopeless.
Experience has taught me that there is a point beyond which any
constitution--especially one so abnormally sensitive as the
opium-eater's--can not endure keen physical suffering without
death from spinal exhaustion. I once heard the eminent Dr.
Stevens say that he made it a rule never to attempt a surgical
operation if it must consume more than an hour. Similarly, I have
come to the conclusion never to amputate a man from his
opium-self if the agony must last longer than three months.
Uneasiness--corresponding to the irritations of dressing a
stump--may continue a year longer; and few victims of the habit
outlive a certain opium-prurience, which has also its analogue in
the occasional titillation of a healed wound--these are
comparatively tolerable; but, if we expect to save a patient's
life, we must not protract an agony which so absolutely
interferes with normal sleep as that of the opium-eater's for
longer than three months in the case of any constitution I have
thus far encountered.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Usually as early as the third day after its
abandonment (unless the constitution has become so impaired by
long habituation that there will probably be no vital reaction)
opium begins to show its dissolutions from the tissue by a
profuse and increasingly acrid bilious diarrhea, which must not
be checked if diagnosis has revealed sufficient constitutional
vigor to justify any attempt at abandonment of the drug.
Hemorrhoids may result; they must be topically treated; mild
astringents may be used when the tendency seems getting out of
eventual control; bland foods must be given as often as the
usually fastidious appetite will tolerate them; the only tonic
must be beef-tea--diffusible stimulus invariably increasing the
agony, whether in the form of ale, wine, or spirits. Short of
threatened collapse, the bowels must not be retarded. There is
nothing in the faintest degree resembling a substitute for opium,
but from time to time various alleviates, which can not be
discussed in an untechnical article, may be administered with
benefit. The spontaneous termination of the diarrhea will
indicate that the effete matters we must remove have been mainly
eliminated, and that we may shortly look for a marked mitigation
of the pain, followed by conditions of great debility but
increasingly favorable to the process of reconstruction. That
process, yet more than the alleviate, demands a book rather than
an article.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I have intentionally deferred any description
of the agony of the opium struggle as a sensation, until I
returned from depicting general symptoms, to relate the
particular case which is my text. The sufferings of the patient,
from whom I have just returned, are so comprehensive as almost to
be exhaustively typical.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">When simple nervous excitement had for two days
alternated with the already mentioned intervals of delirious
slumber, a dull, aching sensation began manifesting itself
between his shoulders and in the region of the loins. Appetite
for food had been failing since the first denial of that for
opium. The most intense gastric irritability now appeared in the
form of an aggravation of the typantic tightness, corrosive acid
ructations, heartburn, water-brash, and a peculiar sensation, as
painful as it is indescribable, of self-consciousness in the
whole upper part of the digestive canal. The best idea of this
last symptom may be found by supposing all the nerves of
involuntary motion which supply that tract with vitality,
suddenly to be gifted with the exquisite sensitiveness to their
own processes which is produced by its correlative object in some
organ of special sense--the whole organism assimilating itself to
a retina or a finger-tip. Sleep now disappeared. This initiated
an entire month during which the patient had not one moment of
even partial unconsciousness.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In less than a week from the beginning the
symptoms indicated a most obstinate chronic gastritis. There was
a perpetual sense of corrosion at the pit of the stomach very
like that which characterizes the fatal operation of arsenic.
There was less action of the liver than usually indicates a
salvable case, and no irritation of the lowest intestines. Pari
passu with the gastritic suffering, the neuralgic pain spread
down the extremities from an apparent center between the kidneys,
through the trunk, from another line near the left margin of the
liver, and through the whole medullary substance of the brain
itself. Although I was so unfortunate as not to be beside him
during this stage, I can still infallibly draw on my whole
experience for information regarding the intensity of this pain.
Tic-douloureux most nearly resembles it in character. Like that
agonizing affection, it has periods of exacerbation; unlike it,
it has no intervals of continuous repose. Like tic-douloureux,
its sensation is a curiously fluctuating one, as if pain had been
fluidized and poured in trickling streams through the tubules of
nerve tissue which are affected by it; but, unlike that, it
affects every tubule in the human body--not a single diseased
locality. Charles Reade chaffs the doctors very wittily in
&quot;Hard Cash&quot; on their penchant for the word
&quot;hyperaesthesia,&quot; but nothing else exactly defines that
exaggeration of nervous sensibility which I have invariably seen
in opium-eaters. Some of them were hurt by an abrupt slight
touch, and cried out at the jar of a heavy footstep like a
patient with acute rheumatism. Some developed sensitiveness with
the progress of expurgating the poison, until their very hair and
nails felt sore, and the whole surface of the skin suffered from
cold air or water like the lips of a wound. After all, utterly
unable to convey an idea of the kind of suffering, I must content
myself by repeating, of its extent, that no prolonged pain of any
kind known to science can equal it. The totality of the
experience is only conceivable by adding this physical torture to
a mental anguish which even the Oriental pencil of De Quincey has
but feebly painted; an anguish which slays the will, yet leaves
the soul conscious of its murder; which utterly blots out hope,
and either paralyzes the reasoning faculties which might suggest
encouragements, or deadens the emotional nature to them as
thoroughly as if they were not perceived; an anguish which
sometimes includes just, but always a vast amount of unjust
self-reproach which brings every failure and inconsistency, every
misfortune or sin of a man's life as clearly before his face as
on the day he was first mortified or degraded by it--before his
face, not in one terrible dream, which is once for all over with
sunrise, but as haunting ghosts, made out by the feverish eyes of
the soul down to the minutest detail of ghastliness, and never
leaving the side of the rack on which he lies for a moment of
dark or daylight, till sleep, at the end of a month, first drops
out of heaven on his agony.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A third element in the suffering must briefly
be mentioned. It results directly from the others. It is that
exhaustion of nervous power which invariably ensues on protracted
pain of mind or body. it proceeds beyond reaction to collapse in
a hopeless case; it stops this side of that in a salvable one.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">On reaching his room I found my friend
bolstered upright in bed, with a small two-legged crutch at hand
to prop his head on when he became weary of the perpendicular
position. This had been his attitude for fifty days. Whether from
its impeding his circulation, the distribution of his nervous
currents, or both, the prostrate posture invariably brought on
cessation of the heart and the sense of intolerable strangling.
His note told me he was dying of heart disease, but, as I
expected, I found that malady merely simulated by nervous
symptoms, and the trouble purely functional. His food was
arrowroot or sago, and beef-tea. Of the vegetable preparation he
took perhaps half a dozen tablespoonfuls a day; of the animal
variable quantities, averaging half a pint per diem. This, though
small, was far from the minimum of nutriment upon which life has
been supported through the most critical periods. Indeed, I have
known three patients tided over stages of disease otherwise
desperately typhoid by beef-tea baths, in which the proportion of
ozmazone was just perceptible, and the sole absorbing agency was
a faint activity left in the pores of the skin. But these
patients had suffered no absolute disorganization. The
practitioner had to encounter a swift specific poison, not to
make over tissues abnormally misconstructed by its long insidious
action. On examination I discovered facts which I had often
feared, but never before absolutely recognized, in my friend's
case. The stomach itself, in its most irreproducible tissue, had
undergone a partial but permanent disorganization. The substance
of the organ itself had been altered in a way for which science
knows no remedy.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Hereafter, then, it can only be rechanged by
that ultimate decomposition which men call death. Over the
opium-eater's coffin at least, thank God! a wife and sister can
stop weeping and say, &quot;He's free.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I called to my friend's bedside a consultation
of three physicians and the most nearly related survivor of his
family. I laid the case before them; assisted them to a full
prognosis; and invited their views. I spent two nights with my
friend. I have said that during the first month of trial he had
not a moment of even partial unconsciousness. Since that time
there had been perhaps ten occasions a day, when for a period
from one minute in length to five, his poor, pain-wrinkled
forehead sank on his crutch, his eyes fell shut, and to outsiders
he seemed asleep. But that which appeared sleep was internally to
him only one stupendous succession of horrors which confusedly
succeeded each other for apparent eternities of being, and ended
with some nameless catastrophe of woe or wickedness, in a waking
more fearful than the stage volcanically ruptured by it. During
the nights I sat by him these occasional relaxations, as I
learned, reached their maximum length, my familiar presence
acting as a sedative, but from each of them he woke bathed in
perspiration from sole to crown; shivering under alternate
flushes of chill and fever; mentally confused to a degree which
for half an hour rendered every object in the room unnatural and
terrible to him; with a nervous jerk, which threw him quite out
of bed, although in his waking state two men were requisite to
move him; and with a cry of agony as loud as any under
amputation.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The result of our consultation was a unanimous
agreement not to press the case further. Physicians have no
business to consider the speculative question, whether death
without opium is preferable to life with it. They are called to
keep people on the earth. We were convinced that to deprive the
patient longer of opium would be to kill him. This we had no
right to do without his consent. He did not consent, and I gave
him five grains of morphia** FN ----- ** (FN) To the younger men
of the profession rather than to the public generally I need here
to say that this dose is not as excessive as it would naturally
appear to be in the case of a man who had used no form of opium
for ninety days. When you have to resume the drug go cautiously.
But you will generally find the amount of it required to produce
the sedative effects in any case which returns to opium, after
abandonment of a long habituation, startlingly large, and slow in
its effects. ----- between 8 and 12 o'clock on the morning of the
day I had to return here. He was obliged to eat a few mouthfuls
of sago before the alkaloid could act upon his nervous system. I
need only point out the significance of this indication. The
shallower lying nervous fibers of the stomach had become
definitely paralyzed, and such digestion as could be perfected
under these circumstances was the only method of getting the
stimulant in contact with any excitable nerve-substance. In other
words, mere absorbent and assimilative tissue was all of him
which for the purpose of receiving opium partially survived
disorganization of the superficial nerves. Of that surviving
tissue, one mucous patch was irredeemably gone. (This particular
fact was the one which cessation from opium more distinctly
unmasked.) At noon he had become tolerably comfortable; before I
left (7 p.m.) he had enjoyed a single half hour of something like
normal slumber.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">He will have to take opium all his life.
Further struggle is suicide. Death will probably occur at any
rate not from an attack of what we usually consider disease, but
from the disintegrating effects on tissue of the habit itself.
So, whatever he may do, his organs march to death. He will have
to continue the habit which kills him only because abandoning it
kills him sooner; for self-murder has dropped out of the purview
of the moral faculties and become a mere animal question of time.
The only way left him to preserve his intellectual faculties
intact is to keep his future daily dose at the tolerable minimum.
Henceforth all his dreams of entire liberty must be relegated to
the world to come. He may be valuable as a monitor, but in the
executive uses of this mighty modern world henceforth he can
never share. Could the immortal soul find itself in a more
inextricable, a more grisly complication?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In publishing his case I am not violating that
Hippocratic vow which protects the relations of patient and
adviser; for, as I dropped my friend's wasted hand and stepped to
the threshold, he repeated a request he had often made to me,
saying:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;It is almost like Dives asking for a
messenger to his brethren; but tell them, tell all young men,
what it is, 'that they come not into this torment.'&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Already perhaps--by the mere statement of the
case--I might be considered to have fulfilled my promise. But
since monition often consists as much in enlightenment as
intimidation, let me be pardoned for briefly presenting a few
considerations regarding the action of opium upon the human
system while living, and the peculiar methods by which the drug
encompasses its death.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">What is Opium?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">It is the most complicated drug in the
Pharmacopeia. though apparently a simple gummy paste, it
possesses a constitution which analysis reveals to contain no
less than 25 elements, each one of them a compound by itself, and
many of them among the most complex compounds known to modern
chemistry. Let me concisely mention these by classes.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">First, at least three earthy salts--the
sulphates of lime, alumia, and potassa. Second, two organic and
one simpler acid--acetic (absolutely vinegar), meconic (one of
the most powerful irritants which can be applied to the
intestines through the bile), and sulfuric. All three exist
uncombined in the gum, and free to work their will on the mucous
tissues. A green extractive matter, which comes in all vegetal
bodies developed under sunlight, next deserves a place by itself,
because it is one of the few organic bodies of which no rational
analysis has ever been pretended. Though we cannot state the
constitution of this chlorophyll, we know that, except by turning
acid in the stomach, it remains inert on the human system, as one
might imagine would happen if he swallowed a bunch of green
grass. Lignin, with which it is always associated, is mere woody
fiber, and has no direct physical action. In no instance has any
stomach been found to digest it save an insect's-- some
naturalists thinking that certain beetles make their horny wing-
cases of that. I believe one man did think he had discovered a
solvent for it in the gastric juice of the beaver, but that view
is not widely entertained. So far as it exists in opium it can
only act as a foreign substance and a mechanical irritant to the
human bowels. Next come two inert, indigestible, and very similar
gummy bodies, mucilagin and bassorin. Sugar, are powerfully
active volatile principle, and a fixed oil (probably allied to
turpentine) are the only other invariable constituents of opium
belonging to the great organic group of the hydro- carbons.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">I now come to a group by far the most important
of all. Almost without exception the vegetable poisons belong to
what are called the &quot;nitrogenous alkaloids.&quot; Strychnia,
brucia, ignatia, calabarin, woovarin, atropine, digitalin, and
many others, including all whose effect is most tremendous upon
the human system, are in this group. Not without insight did the
early discoverers call nitrogen azote, &quot;the foe to
life.&quot; It so habitually exists in the things our body finds
most deadly that the tests for it are always the first which
occur to a chemist in the presence of any new organic poison. The
nitrogenous alkaloids owe the first part of their name to the
fact of containing this element; the second part to that of their
usually making neutral salts with acids, like an alkaline base.
The general reader may sometimes have asked himself why these
alkaloids are diversely written-- as, e.g., sometimes
&quot;morphia,&quot; and sometimes &quot;morphine.&quot; The
chemists who regard them as alkalies write them in the one way,
those who consider them neutrals, in the other. Of these
nitrogenous alkaloids, even the nuts of the tree, which furnishes
the most powerful, swift poison of the world, contains but
three--the above-named strychnia, brucia, and ignatia--principles
shared in common with its pathological congener, the St. Ignatius
bean. Opium may be found to contain twelve of them; but as one of
these (cotarnine) may be a product of distillation, and the other
(pseudo-morphia) seems only an occasional constituent, I treat
them as ten in number--rationally to be arranged under three
heads.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">First, those whose action is merely acrid--so
far as known expending themselves upon the mucous coasts.
(Pseudo-morphia when it occurs belongs to these.) So do
porphyroxin; narceine; probably papaverine also; while meconin,
whose acrid properties in contact with animal tissue are similar
to that of meconic acid, forms the last of the group.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The second head comprises but a single
alkaloid, variously called paramorphia or thebaine. (It may
interest amateur chemists to know that its difference from
strychnia consists only in having two less equivalents of
hydrogen and six of carbon--especially when they know how closely
its physical effects follow its atomic constitution.) A dose of
one grain has produced tetanic spasms. Its chief action appears
to be upon the spinal nerves, and there is reason to suppose it a
poison of the same kind as nux vomica without the concentration
of that agent. How singular it seems to find a poison of this
totally distinct class--bad enough to set up the reputation of
any one drug by itself--in company with the remaining principles
whose effect we usually associate with opium and see clearest in
the ruin of its victim!</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The remainder, five in number, are the opium
alkaloids, which act generally upon the whole system, but
particularly, in their immediate phenomena, upon the brain. I
mention them in the ascending order of their nervine power:
narcotine; codeine; opianin; metamorphia, and morphia.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The first of these the poppy shares in common
with many other narcotic plants--tobacco the most conspicuous
among the number. In its anti- periodic effects on the human
system it has been found similar to quinia, and it is an
undoubted narcotic poison acting on the nerves of organic life,
though, compared with its associates in the drug, comparatively
innocent.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The remaining four act very much like morphia,
differing only in the size of the dose in which they prove
efficient. Most perfectly fresh constitutions feel a grain of
morphia powerfully; metamorphia is soporific in half-gain doses
(American Journal of Pharmacy, September, 1861); opianin in its
physical effects closely approximates morphia; codeia is about
one-fifth as powerful; a new subject may not get sleep short of
six grains; its main action is expended on the sympathetic
system. It does not seem to congest the brain as morphia does;
but its action on the biliary system is probably little less
deadly than that of the more powerful narcotic.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Looking at the marvelous complexity of opium we
might be led to the a priori supposition that its versatility of
action on the human system must be equally marvelous.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Miserably for the opium-eater, fortunately for
the young person who may be dissuaded from following in his
footsteps, we are left in no doubt of this matter by the
conclusions of experience. In practical action opium affects as
large an area of nervous surface, attacks it with as much
intensity, and changes it in as many ways as its complexity would
lead us to expect. I have pointed out the existence in opium of a
convulsive poison congeneric with brucia. The other chief active
alkaloids, five in number, are those which specially possess the
cumulative property. Poisons of the strychnia and hydro-cyanic
acid classes (including this just mentioned opium alkaloid,
thebaine), are swifter agents; but this perilous opium quintette
signs to every sense a lulling song from which it may not awake
for years, but wakes a slave. Every day that a man uses opium
these cumulative alkaloids get a subtler hold on him. Even a
physician addicted to the practice has no conception how their
influence piles up.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">At length some terrible dawn rouses him out of
a bad sleep into a worse consciousness. Though the most
untechnical man, he must already know the disorder which has
taken place in his moral nature and his will. For a knowledge of
his physical condition he must resort to his medical man, and
what, when the case is ten years old, must a practitioner tell
the patient in any average case?</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;Sir, the chances are entirely against
you, and the possession of a powerfully enduring constitution, if
you have it, forms a decided offset in your favor.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">He then makes a thorough examination of him by
ear, touch, conversation. If enough constitution responds to the
call, he advises an immediate entrance upon the hard road of
abnegation.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">If the practitioner finds the case hopeless he
must tell the patient so, in something like these words:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;You have either suffered a
disorganization of irreproducible membranes, or you have
deposited so much improper material in your tissue that your life
is not consistent with the protracted pain of removing it.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;One by one you have paralyzed all the
excretory functions of the body. Opium, aiming at all those
functions for their death, first attacked the kidneys, and with
your experimental doses you experienced a slight access of
dysuria. As you went on, the same action, progressively paralytic
to organic life, involved the liver. Flatulence, distress at the
epigastrium, irregularity of bowels, indicated a spasmodic
performance of the liver's work, which showed it to be under high
nervous excitement. your mouth became dry through a cessation of
the salivary discharge. Your lachrymal duct was parched, and your
eye grew to have an arid look in addition to the dullness
produced by opiate contraction of the pupil.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">All this time you continued to absorb an agent
which directly acts for what by a paradox may be called fatal
conservation of the tissues. Whether through its complexity
combined nitrogen, carbon, or both, the drug has interposed
itself between your very personal substance and those oxidations
by which alone its life can be maintained. It has slowed the
fires of your whole system. It has not only interposed but in
part it has substituted itself; so that along with much effete
matter of the body stored away there always exists a certain
undecomposed quantity of the agent which sustains this morbid
conservation. **FN ----- ** (FN): I frequently use what
hydropaths call &quot;a pack&quot; to relieve opium distress, and
with great benefit. After an hour and a half of perspiration, the
patient being taken out of his swaddlings, I have found in the
water which was used to wash out his sheet enough opium to have
intoxicated a fresh subject. This patient had not used opium for
a fortnight. -----</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;When this combination became established,
you began losing your appetite because no substitution of fresh
matter was required by your body for tissue wrongly conserved.
The progressive derangement of your liver manifested itself in
increased sallowness of face and cornea; the organ was working on
an inadequate vital supply because the organic nervous system was
becoming paralyzed; the veins were not strained of that which is
the bowels' proper purgative and the blood's dire poison. You had
sealed up all but a single excretory passage--the pores of the
skin. Perhaps when you had opium first given you you were told
that its intent was the promotion of perspiration but did not
know the rationale. The only way in which opium promotes
perspiration is by shutting up all the other excretory processes
of the body, and throwing the entire labor of that function upon
the pores. (When the skin gives out the opium- eater is shut up
like an entirely choked chimney, and often dies in delirium of
blood-poisoning.)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;For a while--the first six years,
perhaps--your skin sustained the work which should have been
shared by the other organs--not in natural sweat, but violent
perspiration, which showed the excess of its action. Then your
palms became gradually hornier--your whole body yellower--at the
same time that your muscular system grew tremulous through
progressively failing nervous supply.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;About this time you may have had some
temporary gastric disturbance, accompanied with indescribable
distress, loathing at food, and nausea. This indicated that the
mucous lining of the stomach had been partially removed by the
corrosions of the drug, or that nervous power had suddenly come
to a standstill, which demanded an increase of stimulation.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;Since that time you have been taking your
daily dose only to preserve the status in quo. The condition both
of your nervous system and your stomach indicate that you must
always take some anodyne to avoid torture, and your only anodyne
is opium.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">&quot;The rest of your life must be spent in
keeping comfortable, not in being happy.:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Opium-eaters enjoy a strange immunity from
other disease. They are not liable to be attacked by miasma in
malarious countries; epidemics or contagions where they exist.
They almost always survive to die of their opium itself. And an
opium death is usually in one of these two manners:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The opium-eater either dies in collapse through
nervous exhaustion (with the blood poisoning and delirium
above-mentioned), sometimes after an overdose, but oftener
seeming to occur spontaneously; or in the midst of physical or
mental agony, as great and irrelievable, as men suffer in hopeful
abandonment of the drug, and with a colliquative diarrhea, by
which--in a continual, fiery, acrid discharge--the system
relieves itself during a final fortnight of the effete matters
which have been accumulating for years.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Either of these ends is terrible enough; let us
draw a curtain over their details.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Opium is a corrosion and paralysis of all the
noblest forms of life. The man who voluntarily addicts himself to
it would commit in cutting his throat a suicide only swifter and
less ignoble. The habit is gaining fearful ground among our
professional men, the operatives in our mills, our weary sewing
women, our fagged clerks, our disappointed wives, our former
liquor-drunkards, our very day-laborers, who a generation ago
took gin; all our classes, from the highest to the lowest, are
yearly increasing their consumption of the drug. The terrible
demands, especially in this country, made on modern brains by our
feverish competitive life, constitute hourly temptations to some
form of the sweet, deadly sedative. Many a professional man of my
acquaintance, who twenty years ago was content with his
tri-diurnal &quot;whiskey,&quot; ten years ago, drop by drop,
began taking stronger &quot;laudanum cocktails,&quot; until he
became what he is now--an habitual opium-eater. I have tried to
show what he will be. If this article shall deter any from an
imitation of his example, or excite an interest in the
question--&quot;What he shall do to be saved?&quot;--I am
content. </font></p>

<p><font size="3"> </font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>