
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-36</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B015-41</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/fax1994.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122121026 text/html 80160
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:10:12 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:14:11 GMT
Content-length: 79942
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>DRUGS AND CRIME FACTS, 1994</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<h2><center>DRUGS AND CRIME FACTS, 1994<br>
A summary of drug data published in 1994 by the Bureau of Justice
Statistics </center></h2>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="BOTTOM"> </p>

<p> Drug data produced by BJS 2 </p>

<p> Access to current drug data 4 </p>

<p> Drug use by offenders at the time of offense 5 </p>

<p> Prior drug use by offenders 8 </p>

<p> Drug-related crime 9 </p>

<p> Drug control budget 11 </p>

<p> Drug law enforcement 12 </p>

<p> Drug enforcement operations 14 </p>

<p> Pretrial release of drug defendants 18 </p>

<p> Prosecution and sentencing </p>

<p> of Federal drug law violators 20 </p>

<p> of drug law violators in State courts 22 </p>

<p> Drug offenders in correctional populations 24 </p>

<p> Drug enforcement in correctional facilities 26 </p>

<p> Recidivism of drug law violators 29 </p>

<p> Drugs and youth 31 </p>

<p> Gangs 34 </p>

<p> Drug use in the general population 35 </p>

<p> Public opinion about drugs 36 </p>

<p> ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse 38 </p>

<p> Source notes 40 </p>

<p> For more information call or write: </p>

<p> ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse </p>

<p> National Criminal Justice Reference Service </p>

<p> Box 6000 </p>

<p> Rockville, MD 20849-6000 </p>

<p> 1-800-666-3332 </p>

<p> U.S. Department of Justice </p>

<p> Office of Justice Programs </p>

<p> Bureau of Justice Statistics </p>

<p> Jan M. Chaiken, Ph.D. </p>

<p> Director </p>

<p> This report was prepared for the Bureau of Justice Statistics
(BJS) by the Office of National Drug Control Policy (ONDCP) Drugs
&amp; Crime Clearinghouse under Contract Number OJP-94-C-006. The
ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse is a component of the
National Criminal Justice Reference Service. At the ONDCP Drugs
&amp; Crime Clearinghouse, Anita Timrots prepared the report. In
BJS, Benjamin H. Renshaw III and Sue A. Lindgren directed the
project. </p>

<p> Single copies of any report cited here or any other BJS
publication can be ordered from the ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime
Clearinghouse, National Criminal Justice Reference Service, Box
6000, Rockville, MD 20849-6000, toll-free 800-666-3332. </p>

<p> Please order using NCJ numbers listed in the source notes,
pages 36-37. </p>

<p> Public-use tapes for BJS data sets and other criminal justice
data are available from the </p>

<p> National Archive of Criminal Justice Data, P.O. Box 1248, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106 (1-800-999-0960 or 1-313-763-5010). Please
specify the ICPSR number shown in the source notes, pages 36-37,
when ordering. </p>

<p> NCJ-154043 </p>

<p> June 1995 </p>

<p> DRUG DATA PRODUCED BY BJS </p>

<p> Many Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) programs produce data
on drug law enforcement, drug offenders, and drugs and crime. For
example -- * the BJS National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS)
asks victims of personal crimes if they believed the offenders
had been using drugs * the BJS Law Enforcement Management and
Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) program produces information on
drug-related programs of State and local police agencies </p>

<p> * the BJS National Pretrial Reporting Program (NPRP) examines
drug law violators' criminal histories and status at time of
arrest, pretrial release/detention status, trial appearance, and
disposition </p>

<p> * the BJS National Judicial Reporting Program (NJRP) compares
sentences given to drug offenders with those given to other
offenders </p>

<p> * BJS reports on Federal and State prisoners, jail inmates,
and incarcerated youth including data on their histories of drug
use and drug offenses </p>

<ul>
    <li>the BJS Federal Justice Statistics Program collects and
        publishes detailed data on drug law violators in the
        Federal justice system </li>
    <li>* the annual BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice
        statistics presents data on drug use in the general
        population and on public opinion toward drugs and
        enforcement of drug laws. </li>
</ul>

<p> Drugs and crime facts, 1994 presents the most current
information available relating to drugs and crime published by
BJS in over two dozen different reports through the end of
calendar 1994. This publication also highlights other drug data
sources frequently used by the Office of National Drug Control
Policy (ONDCP) Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse in responding to
requests. </p>

<p> Among other BJS reports published in calendar 1994 were the
following: </p>

<p> * Pretrial release of Federal felony defendants, 1990 (BJS
Special Report, February 1994) examines the likelihood of
pretrial release, type of release, and pretrial misconduct of
Federal defendants, including Federal drug offenders. </p>

<p> * Women in prison (BJS Special Report, March 1994) reports on
female inmates in State prisons in 1991 including prior drug and
alcohol use, needle sharing behaviors, treatment, and prior
physical or sexual abuse of drug offenders. </p>

<p> * Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991 (September
1994) describes the results of the first joint survey of
prisoners held in State and Federal prisons, including data on
the proportion of inmates incarcerated for a drug offense, prior
drug use, sentence length, prior treatment, use of a weapon, and
HIV infection. </p>

<p> * Felony sentences in the United States, 1990 (BJS Bulletin,
September 1994) compares sentencing statistics on State and
Federal courts, including the number of convictions for drug
offenses, type of sentence, sentence length, and estimated time
to be served. </p>

<p> * National Corrections Reporting Program, 1992 (October 1994)
is part of an annual series detailing the characteristics of
persons, including drug offenders, admitted to and released from
the prison and parole systems in the United States. </p>

<p> * Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1992 (BJS Bulletin,
November 1994) reports on criminal history, pretrial processing,
pretrial misconduct, adjudication, and sentencing of felony
defendants, including drug offenders, in State courts in large
urban counties. </p>

<p> * Federal law enforcement officers, 1993 (BJS Bulletin,
December 1994) reports on the number of Federal law enforcement
officers authorized to carry firearms and arrest offenders,
including Federal drug law violators. </p>

<ul>
    <li>Felony sentences in State courts, 1992 (BJS Bulletin,
        December 1994) reports on the number of felony drug
        convictions, sentence type and length, and case
        processing time for drug offenders. </li>
    <li>* Felony defendants in large urban counties, 1992
        (December 1994) describes demographic characteristics,
        criminal history, pretrial release information, and
        sentencing for felony offenders, including drug
        offenders, in the Nation's 75 most populous counties. </li>
</ul>

<p> ACCESS TO CURRENT DRUG DATA </p>

<p> This issue of Drugs and crime facts summarizes drug data
published by BJS in 1994 or earlier. For updated analyses of drug
data or more recently released reports, readers may contact the
ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse or send the order form at
the end of this report. </p>

<p> The Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse was established in 1987
by BJS, with funding from the Bureau of Justice Assistance, to
provide policymakers, criminal justice practitioners,
researchers, and the general public with ready access to
understandable information on drug law violations and
drug-related law enforcement. In October 1994, the Clearinghouse
became a component of the National Criminal Justice Reference
Service (NCJRS). ONDCP began funding the Clearinghouse in
November 1994. Clearinghouse products and services are described
in detail on pages 34-35. </p>

<p> The toll-free line is 1-800-666-3332. </p>

<p> Many of the reports cited in this publication are accessible
through the Internet or the NCJRS Electronic Bulletin Board
System (*BBS). </p>

<p> The NCJRS Gopher provides information from the Office of
Justice Programs agencies, as well as the Office of National Drug
Control Policy, and provides a direct link to the NCJRS*BBS. The
gopher address is: ncjrs.aspensys.com 71 Through the World Wide
Web, NCJRS provides a graphical interface to NCJRS information,
as well as to information from other criminal justice resources
around the world. The address for the NCJRS World Wide Web page
is: </p>

<p> http://ncjrs.aspensys.com:81/ncjrshome.html </p>

<p> First-time users of NCJRS can send an e-mail message to
receive a reply outlining the services of NCJRS to:
look@ncjrs.aspensys.com </p>

<p> For technical assistance or specific questions on drugs and
crime or other criminal or juvenile justice topics, please send
an e-mail to: </p>

<p> askncjrs@aspensys.com </p>

<p> To access the NCJRS*BBS through the Internet-- * telnet to:
ncjrsbbs.aspensys.com </p>

<p> or </p>

<p> * gopher to: ncjrs.aspensys.com 71 </p>

<p> To access the NCJRS*BBS directly, dial: (301) 738-8895.
Modems should be set up to 9600 baud at 8-N-1. </p>

<p> DRUG USE BY OFFENDERS AT THE TIME OF OFFENSE </p>

<p> The BJS National Crime Victimization Survey asks victims of
the violent crimes of rape, robbery, and assault about their
perceptions of the offender's use of alcohol and drugs. In 30% of
violent crime victimizations in 1992, victims reported that they
believed their assailants were under the influence of drugs or
alcohol. In half of violent crime victimizations, the victim did
not know whether the offender was under the influence. </p>

<p> Violent offenders under the influence of drugs or alcohol, as
perceived by victims, 1992 </p>

<p> Percent of violent crime victimizations where victim
perceived the offender to be: </p>

<p> Not known </p>

<p> Type of Not under if under </p>

<p> crime Total the influence the influence </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Crimes of 100% 20.8% 49.9% </p>

<p> violence </p>

<p> Rape 100 23.1* 38.3 </p>

<p> Robbery 100 15.2 59.9 </p>

<p> Aggravated </p>

<p> assault 100 12.7 55.9 </p>

<p> Simple </p>

<p> assault 100 27.2 41.8 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> (continued) </p>

<p> Percent of violent crime victimizations where victim
perceived the offender to be: </p>

<p> Under the influence </p>

<p> ________________________________________ </p>

<p> Not </p>

<p> Type of Alcohol Drugs sure which </p>

<p> crime Total only only Both substance </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Crimes of </p>

<p> violence 30.2% 18.0% 4.3% 6.1% 1.6% </p>

<p> Rape 38.6 18.2* 8.0* 12.4* 0.0* </p>

<p> Robbery 24.9 10.8 5.4 6.1 2.6* </p>

<p> Aggravated </p>

<p> assault 31.4 16.7 4.3 8.2 1.8* </p>

<p> Simple </p>

<p> assault 31.1 21.3 3.7 4.7 1.2 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Note: Percents may not total 100% because of rounding. </p>

<p> *Estimate is based on 10 or fewer sample cases </p>

<p> Source: Criminal victimization in the United States, 1992. </p>

<p> Data from BJS corrections surveys show that a quarter of
convicted jail inmates, a third of State prisoners, and
two-fifths of youths in long-term, State-operated facilities
admit that they were under the influence of an illegal drug at
the time of their offense. </p>

<p> Among jail inmates in 1989-- </p>

<p> * 44% used drugs in the month before the offense </p>

<p> * 30% used drugs daily in the month before the offense </p>

<p> * 27% used drugs at the time of the offense. </p>

<p> Jail inmates convicted of drug offenses most frequently
reported having been under the influence of drugs at the time of
their offense (39%), followed by convicted burglars (38%) and
robbers (36%). Jail inmates convicted of driving while
intoxicated (DWI) (12%), assault (14%), and homicide (18%) were
the least likely to report having been under the influence of
drugs at the time of the offense. </p>

<p> Reported drug use by convicted prison and jail inmates </p>

<p> Percent who used Percent who used drugs at the time drugs in
the month of the offense before the offense </p>

<p> 1989 1991 1989 1991 </p>

<p> Drug Type Jail Prison Jail Prison </p>

<p> inmates inmates inmates inmates </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Any drug 27% 31% 44% 50% </p>

<p> Marijuana 9 11 28 32 </p>

<p> Cocaine/crack 14 14 24 25 </p>

<p> Heroin/opiates 5 6 7 10 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Sources: Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Survey of State prison
inmates, 1991. </p>

<p> In 1991, 49% of all State prison inmates reported that they
were under the influence of drugs or alcohol or both at the time
they committed the offense for which they were currently
sentenced: 17% were under the influence of drugs only, and 14%
were under the influence of drugs and alcohol. </p>

<p> Half of the State prisoners said they had taken illegal drugs
during the month before committing the crime. </p>

<p> Among violent offenders in State prisons-- </p>

<p> * 61% said that they or their victims were under the
influence of drugs or alcohol at the time of the offense </p>

<p> * 50% reported being under the influence of alcohol or drugs
at the time of the offense </p>

<p> * 30% said their victims were under the influence of alcohol
or drugs. </p>

<p> Nearly 40% of the youth incarcerated in long-term,
State-operated facilities in 1987 said they were under the
influence of drugs at the time of their offense. </p>

<p> Data from the National Institute of Justice (NIJ) Drug Use
Forecasting (DUF) program revealed that of a sample of adult
males arrested in 23 U.S. cities in 1993, the percent testing
positive for any drug ranged from 54% in Omaha and San Jose to
81% in Chicago. Among the 20 cities reporting data on female
arrestees, the percent of females testing positive for any drug
ranged from 42% in San Antonio to 83% in Manhattan. </p>

<p> Sources: Criminal victimization in the United States, 1992.
Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. </p>

<p> Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Survey of youth in
custody, 1987. U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of
Justice, Drug Use Forecasting 1993 Annual Report on Adult
Arrestees. </p>

<p> PRIOR DRUG USE BY OFFENDERS </p>

<p> Data from BJS surveys show that 78% of jail inmates in 1989,
79% of State prisoners in 1991, 60% of Federal prisoners in 1991,
and 83% of youth in long-term public juvenile facilities in 1987
had used drugs at some point in their lives. </p>

<p> Although drug use by State prison inmates in the month before
the offense fell between 1986 and 1991, a higher proportion of
inmates reported use of cocaine or crack in 1991 than 1986. One
in three inmates who ever used drugs in the past used a needle to
inject drugs. Fifteen percent of inmates who had ever used drugs
had shared a needle at least once. </p>

<p> Prior drug use by State prison inmates </p>

<p> Percent of inmates who had ever used drugs </p>

<p> Type of drug 1986 1991 </p>

<p> Any drug 80% 79% </p>

<p> Marijuana 76 74 </p>

<p> Cocaine/crack 44 50 </p>

<p> Heroin/opiates 26 25 </p>

<p> Among 1989 jail inmates who used drugs, the median age at
which they began to use-- </p>

<p> * any drug was 16 </p>

<p> * a major drug (including heroin, crack, cocaine, PCP, LSD,
and methadone) was 18 </p>

<p> * a major drug regularly was 20. </p>

<p> Sixty percent of jail inmates who ever used any drug reported
they had done so more than a year before their first arrest. Of
inmates who reported using a major drug regularly, 55% had not
done so until after their first arrest. </p>

<p> Almost 83% of youth in long-term, State-operated juvenile
facilities in 1987 reported use of an illegal drug in the past,
and 63% had used an illegal drug on a regular basis. The most
commonly mentioned drugs were marijuana, cocaine, and
amphetamines. </p>

<p> Among drug-using youth in long-term, State- operated juvenile
facilities, 19% said they first used drugs before age 10; 38%
reported their first use was before age 12. </p>

<p> Sources: Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Survey of State prison
inmates, 1991. Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991.
Survey of youth in custody, 1987. </p>

<p> DRUG-RELATED CRIME </p>

<p> Overall, 10% of Federal prison inmates in 1991, 17% of State
prison inmates in 1991, and 13% of convicted jail inmates in 1989
said they committed their offense to obtain money for drugs.
Twenty percent of Hispanic State prison inmates said they
committed their offense to get money for drugs, compared to 15%
of white inmates and 17% of black inmates. Twenty-four percent of
female inmates said they committed their offense to get money to
buy drugs, compared to 16% of male inmates. </p>

<p> Inmates incarcerated for robbery, burglary, larceny, and drug
trafficking most often committed their crime to obtain money for
drugs. </p>

<p> Inmates who committed homicide, sexual assault, assault, and
public-order offenses were least likely to commit their offense
to obtain money for drugs. </p>

<p> Percent of inmates who committed their offense for money to
buy drugs </p>

<p> Most Federal State </p>

<p> serious prison prison Jail </p>

<p> current inmates inmates inmates </p>

<p> offense 1991 1991 1989 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> All offenses 10% 17% 13% </p>

<p> Violent offenses 18% 12% 12% </p>

<p> Homicide(a) 3 5 3 </p>

<p> Sexual assault(b) 0 2 2 </p>

<p> Robbery 27 27 32 </p>

<p> Assault 2 6 3 </p>

<p> Property offenses 9 26 24 </p>

<p> Burglary 32 30 31 </p>

<p> Larceny/theft 13 31 28 </p>

<p> Motor vehicle theft -- -- 7 </p>

<p> Drug offenses 9 22 14 </p>

<p> Possession 7 16 10 </p>

<p> Trafficking 10 25 19 </p>

<p> Public-order </p>

<p> offenses 6 5 3 </p>

<p> (a) Includes murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, </p>

<p> and negligent manslaughter. </p>

<p> (b) Includes rape. </p>

<p> -- Not reported </p>

<p> The Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR) of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) reported that in 1993, 5.5% of the
23,271 homicides in which circumstances were known were
narcotics- related. This includes only those murders that
occurred specifically during a narcotics felony, such as drug
trafficking or manufacturing. Those homicides that involved a
narcotics felony and a more serious felony, such as armed
robbery, were not tabulated as drug-related. </p>

<p> Drug-related homicides </p>

<p> Number Percent </p>

<p> Year of homicides drug-related </p>

<p> 1986 19,257 3.9% </p>

<p> 1987 17,963 4.9 </p>

<p> 1988 17,971 5.6 </p>

<p> 1989 18,954 7.4 </p>

<p> 1990 20,273 6.7 </p>

<p> 1991 21,676 6.2 </p>

<p> 1992 22,716 5.7 </p>

<p> 1993 23,271 5.5 </p>

<p> Note: Includes only those homicides where circumstances were
known. Table constructed by ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse
staff from Crime in the United States, 1991 through 1993 (FBI),
p. 21. </p>

<p> A study of murder cases disposed in the Nation's 75 most
populous counties in 1988 found that circumstances involving
illegal drugs, such as a drug scam or dispute over drugs,
accounted for 18% of the defendants and 16% of the victims. In 7%
of cases, victims and their killers were both at the murder scene
because of drugs. Of victims, 12% were involved with the killer
in a drug relationship. </p>

<p> Sources: Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991.
Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. Drugs and jail inmates,
1989. Women in jail 1989. Murder in large urban counties, 1988.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United States, 1991
through 1993. </p>

<p> DRUG CONTROL BUDGET </p>

<p> According to the Office of National Drug Control Policy
(ONDCP),the Federal drug control budget increased from $1.5
billion in fiscal 1981 to $13.2 billion in fiscal 1995. </p>

<p> Total Federal drug control budget </p>

<p> FY 1981 actual $ 1,531,800 </p>

<p> FY 1989 actual 6,663,700 </p>

<p> FY 1990 actual 9,758,900 </p>

<p> FY 1991 actual 10,957,600 </p>

<p> FY 1992 actual 11,910,100 </p>

<p> FY 1993 actual 12,265,300 </p>

<p> FY 1994 estimate 12,136,200 </p>

<p> FY 1995 requested 13,179,800 </p>

<p> Fiscal 1995 Federal drug control budget by function </p>

<p> Total $13,179,800 </p>

<p> Drug treatment $ 2,874,400 </p>

<p> Education, community action, and the workplace 2,050,700 </p>

<p> Criminal justice system 5,926,900 </p>

<p> International 427,800 </p>

<p> Interdiction 1,205,600 </p>

<p> Research 531,600 </p>

<p> Intelligence 162,800 </p>

<p> ONDCP also reported that State and local governments spent
$15.9 billion on drug control activities during fiscal 1991, a
13% increase over the $14.1 billion spent during fiscal 1990. </p>

<p> State and local spending for drug control, fiscal years 1990
and 1991 </p>

<p> FY FY </p>

<p> 1990 1991 </p>

<p> Total $14,075,000 $15,907,000 </p>

<p> Justice $11,525,000 $12,619,000 </p>

<p> Police protection 4,035,000 4,223,000 </p>

<p> Judicial and legal </p>

<p> services 1,346,000 1,449,000 </p>

<p> Corrections 6,045,000 6,827,000 </p>

<p> Other 100,000 120,000 </p>

<p> Health and hospitals $ 2,184,000 $ 2,784,000 </p>

<p> Education $ 366,000 $ 503,000 </p>

<p> Source: Office of National Drug Control Policy, as reported
in Fact sheet: Drug data summary. </p>

<p> DRUG LAW ENFORCEMENT </p>

<p> Federal, State, and local agencies share responsibility for
enforcing the Nation's drug laws, although most arrests are made
by State and local authorities. State and local police made an
estimated 1.1 million arrests for drug law violations in 1993,
according to the FBI. </p>

<p> Estimated number of arrests for drug violations reported by
State and local police, 1984-93 </p>

<p> Year Sale/manufacture Possession Total </p>

<p> 1984 155,848 552,552 708,400 </p>

<p> 1985 192,302 619,098 811,400 </p>

<p> 1986 206,849 617,251 824,100 </p>

<p> 1987 241,849 695,551 937,400 </p>

<p> 1988 316,525 838,675 1,155,200 </p>

<p> 1989 441,191 920,509 1,361,700 </p>

<p> 1990 344,282 745,218 1,089,500 </p>

<p> 1991 337,340 672,660 1,010,000 </p>

<p> 1992 338,049 728,351 1,066,400 </p>

<p> 1993 334,511 791,789 1,126,300 </p>

<p> Percent </p>

<p> change </p>

<p> 1984-93 114.6% 43.3% 59.0% </p>

<p> Note: Table constructed by ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime
Clearinghouse staff from Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime
in the United States, 1984 through 1993. </p>

<p> As reported in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice
statistics-- </p>

<p> * the Federal Government seized 6,605 clandestine drug
laboratories between fiscal years 1975 and 1993 </p>

<p> * in fiscal year 1993, of the 286 labs seized, 237 (83%)
manufactured methamphetamines </p>

<p> * in 1993 the Drug Enforcement Administration's (DEA) program
for eradicating domestic marijuana resulted in the destruction
of393 million plants in 64,132 plots, 12,397 arrests, 6,062
weapons seized, and assets seized valued at $52 million </p>

<p> * in fiscal year 1993 DEA confiscated 133,665 pounds of
cocaine, 1,590 pounds of heroin, 39 pounds of opium, 314,054
pounds of marijuana, 2.8 million dosage units of hallucinogens,
and 80.5 million dosage units of stimulants </p>

<p> * in fiscal year 1993 the DEA completed 16,690 asset seizures
valued at $680 million </p>

<p> * in fiscal year 1993 the U.S. Customs Service seized 507,249
pounds of marijuana, 175,318 pounds of cocaine, and 17.9 million
dosage units of drugs such as LSD and barbiturates </p>

<p> * in 1993 the U.S. Coast Guard confiscated 48,441 pounds of
marijuana and 32,313 pounds of cocaine </p>

<p> * in fiscal year 1993 the U.S. Postal Service made 2,193
arrests for mailing controlled </p>

<p> substances </p>

<p> * in 1992 State and Federal courts authorized wiretaps in 634
narcotics cases. </p>

<p> Drug seizure data from different Federal agencies should not
be added together because in many instances more than one agency
participated in the operations. The Federal-wide Drug Seizure
System (FDSS) reflects the combined drug seizure efforts of the
DEA, FBI, and the U.S. Customs Service within the jurisdiction of
the United States, as well as maritime seizures by the U.S. Coast
Guard. FDSS eliminates duplicate reporting of a seizure involving
more than one Federal agency. </p>

<p> Preliminary data indicate that the following amounts of drugs
were seized in fiscal 1993 by the Federal agencies participating
in FDSS: </p>

<p> Pounds </p>

<p> Drug seized </p>

<p> Heroin 3,345 </p>

<p> Cocaine 238,053 </p>

<p> Marijuana 752,114 </p>

<p> Hashish 26,080 </p>

<p> Sources: Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the United
States, 1984 through 1993. The Drug Enforcement Administration,
the U.S. Coast Guard, the U.S. Customs Service, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the U.S. Postal Service, and the
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts; all as reported in the
BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993. ONDCP Drugs
&amp; Crime Clearinghouse, Fact sheet: Drug data summary. </p>

<p> DRUG ENFORCEMENT OPERATIONS </p>

<p> As reported in Federal law enforcement officers, 1993, as of
December 1993, Federal agencies employed about 69,000 full-time
personnel authorized to make arrests and carry firearms. The DEA
employed 2,813 full-time agents. These officers investigate major
narcotics violators, enforce regulations governing the
manufacture and dispensing of controlled substances, and perform
a variety of other functions in support of drug trafficking
prevention and control. </p>

<p> The FBI employed 10,075 full-time agents. These agents
investigate more than 250 types of Federal crimes. The FBI has
concurrent jurisdiction with the DEA over drug offenses under the
Controlled Substances Act. </p>

<p> According to the BJS Law Enforcement Management and
Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) program, in 1990, about 9,300
local police departments, 2,500 sheriffs' departments, and 34
State police departments, employing over 500,000 full-time
officers, had primary responsibility for drug law enforcement. </p>

<p> Drug-related law enforcement activities include making
arrests and seizing drugs as well as laboratory testing of drugs,
drug education, and drug testing of arrestees and agency
employees. Most agencies serving 50,000 or more residents
operated a special drug enforcement unit, participated in a
multiagency task force, and received money or goods from an asset
forfeiture program: </p>

<p> * Special drug units focus on conducting investigations on
drug traffickers and drug-related activities in the community. </p>

<p> * To coordinate efforts with other law enforcement agencies
to accumulate evidence, most large agencies participate in a
multiagency task force. These task forces develop enforcement
strategies such as the use of informants, surveillance, and
undercover operations. </p>

<p> * Most States have laws that allow the government to seize
convicted drug traffickers' assets, such as cash, bank accounts,
planes, boats, cars, and homes. Many State laws require that all
forfeited assets go to the State and/or local treasury upon
payment of outstanding loans. In some States, law enforcement
agencies can keep all property, cash, and proceeds from sales of
what is forfeited. </p>

<p> Drug-related participation by agencies with primary drug
enforcement responsibilities, 1990 </p>

<p> Percent of agencies with primary responsibility for drug
enforcement that: </p>

<p> ________________________________ </p>

<p> Receive money </p>

<p> Type of Participate or goods from agency and Operate in a
drug asset population special multiagency forfeiture served drug
unit task force program </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> State police </p>

<p> departments 85% 91% 94% </p>

<p> Police </p>

<p> departments </p>

<p> All sizes 25% 51% 38% </p>

<p> 1,000,000 or </p>

<p> more 93 93 86 </p>

<p> 500,000-999,999 95 100 96 </p>

<p> 250,000-499,999 100 87 100 </p>

<p> 100,000-249,999 96 86 98 </p>

<p> 50,000-99,999 94 81 95 </p>

<p> 25,000-49,999 62 82 85 </p>

<p> 10,000-24,999 36 65 62 </p>

<p> 2,500-9,999 19 55 33 </p>

<p> Under 2,500 5 28 11 </p>

<p> Sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments </p>

<p> All sizes 39% 68% 51% </p>

<p> 1,000,000 or </p>

<p> more 92 95 95 </p>

<p> 500,000-999,999 90 97 97 </p>

<p> 250,000-499,999 86 91 94 </p>

<p> 100,000-249,999 77 86 88 </p>

<p> 50,000-99,999 75 72 81 </p>

<p> 25,000-49,999 44 80 53 </p>

<p> 10,000-24,999 28 66 42 </p>

<p> Under 10,000 11 49 27 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Note: Table includes only agencies with primary
responsibility for drug enforcement. Source: Drug enforcement by
police and sheriffs' departments, 1990. </p>

<p> In 1990-- </p>

<p> * 45% of State police agencies had primary responsibility for
laboratory testing of drugs, but only the largest municipal and
county agencies tended to have such responsibility </p>

<p> * 90% of municipal police departments with 100 or more
officers had special units for drug education in the schools,
while 60% operated special gang units </p>

<p> * 94% of State police departments, 38% of local police, and
51% of sheriffs' departments received money or goods from an
asset forfeiture program. More than 1 in 3 local police and
sheriffs' departments and 2 in 3 State police departments
reported that at least some of their arrestees were tested for
illegal drug use. </p>

<p> One of four local police and sheriffs' departments and 1 of 2
State police departments required applicants for sworn positions
to submit to a drug test. </p>

<p> Employees tested for drugs in a mandatory testing program in
State and local police and sheriffs' departments, by size of
population served, 1990 </p>

<p> Percent of agencies with a mandatory testing program for: </p>

<p> ____________________________________ </p>

<p> Type of </p>

<p> agency and Regular </p>

<p> population Probationary field </p>

<p> served Applicants* officers officers </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> State police </p>

<p> departments 55% 6% 4% </p>

<p> Police </p>

<p> departments </p>

<p> All sizes 26% 4% 2% </p>

<p> 1,000,000 or more 79 29 0 </p>

<p> 500,000-999,999 71 29 8 </p>

<p> 250,000-499,999 85 8 5 </p>

<p> 100,000-249,999 63 7 1 </p>

<p> 50,000-99,999 71 7 1 </p>

<p> 25,000-49,999 52 7 4 </p>

<p> 10,000-24,999 44 7 3 </p>

<p> 2,500-9,999 25 4 1 </p>

<p> Under 2,500 14 3 2 </p>

<p> Sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments </p>

<p> All sizes 23% 4% 3% </p>

<p> 1,000,000 or more 46 0 0 </p>

<p> 500,000-999,999 42 5 4 </p>

<p> 250,000-499,999 40 7 0 </p>

<p> 100,000-249,999 44 3 2 </p>

<p> 50,000-99,999 33 5 3 </p>

<p> 25,000-49,999 26 7 7 </p>

<p> 10,000-24,999 15 2 1 </p>

<p> Under 10,000 14 2 1 </p>

<p> ________________________________________________ </p>

<p> (continued) </p>

<p> Percent of agencies with a mandatory testing program for: </p>

<p> _______________________________ </p>

<p> Type of agency Candidates Officers in and population for
drug-related served promotion* positions </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> State police </p>

<p> departments 2% 10% </p>

<p> Police </p>

<p> departments </p>

<p> All sizes 2% 3% </p>

<p> 1,000,000 or more 21 43 </p>

<p> 500,000-999,999 18 25 </p>

<p> 250,000-499,999 14 13 </p>

<p> 100,000-249,999 7 10 </p>

<p> 50,000-99,999 9 14 </p>

<p> 25,000-49,999 6 6 </p>

<p> 10,000-24,999 2 5 </p>

<p> 2,500-9,999 1 2 </p>

<p> Under 2,500 1 1 </p>

<p> Sheriffs' </p>

<p> departments </p>

<p> All sizes 3% 4% </p>

<p> 1,000,000 or more 4 10 </p>

<p> 500,000-999,999 0 7 </p>

<p> 250,000-499,999 0 6 </p>

<p> 100,000-249,999 3 6 </p>

<p> 50,000-99,999 3 5 </p>

<p> 25,000-49,999 6 7 </p>

<p> 10,000-24,999 1 2 </p>

<p> Under 10,000 1 2 </p>

<p> ________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Note: Mandatory programs are those in which all are tested. </p>

<p> *Sworn positions only. </p>

<p> Sources: Federal law enforcement officers, 1993. </p>

<p> Drug enforcement by police and sheriffs' departments, 1990.
State and local police departments, 1990. Sheriffs' departments
1990. </p>

<p> PRETRIAL RELEASE OF DRUG DEFENDANTS </p>

<p> The National Pretrial Reporting Program (NPRP) revealed that
of persons charged with a felony drug offense in 1992 in the 75
most populous counties-- </p>

<p> * 68% were released prior to case disposition </p>

<p> * 27% were held with bail set </p>

<p> * 5% were held without bail. </p>

<p> The median amount of bail set for a person charged with a
drug offense was $5,000. Defendants charged with a drug offense
were more likely to secure release (29%) when bail was set at
$20,000 or more than those charged with a violent offense (17%),
public-order offense (18%), or a property offense (11%). </p>

<p> Of felony drug defendants released prior to the disposition
of their case, 51% were released within 1 day of their arrest,
79% within 1 week, and 93% within 1 month. </p>

<p> Of felony drug defendants released before case disposition,
27% failed to make a scheduled court appearance within 1 year.
Seventy percent of the defendants who failed to appear returned
to court by the end of the 1-year study period, while 30%
remained fugitives. </p>

<p> Sixteen percent of released drug defendants were known to
have been rearrested while on pretrial release. </p>

<p> Of all released defendants rearrested for a drug offense, 59%
were once again granted pretrial release. </p>

<p> Pretrial status of defendants charged with drug offenses,
1988-92 </p>

<p> Pretrial status and type of </p>

<p> release 1988 1990 1992 </p>

<p> Total 100% 100% 100% </p>

<p> Released 72% 65% 68% </p>

<p> Financial total 36% 28% 27% </p>

<p> Surety 19 18 15 </p>

<p> Full cash 10 7 7 </p>

<p> Deposit 6 3 5 </p>

<p> Other 1 1 1 </p>

<p> Nonfinancial total 36% 35% 39% </p>

<p> Detained 28% 35% 32% </p>

<p> Note: Detail may not add to total because of rounding. </p>

<p> Percent of felony defendants released before trial, by type
of offense, 1988-92 </p>

<p> Most serious felony Percent released prior arrest charge to
case disposition </p>

<p> 1988 1990 1992 </p>

<p> All offenses 66% 65% 63% </p>

<p> Murder 39 37 24 </p>

<p> Rape 55 54 48 </p>

<p> Robbery 52 51 50 </p>

<p> Assault 69 75 68 </p>

<p> Burglary 53 56 51 </p>

<p> Theft 64 67 67 </p>

<p> Drug offenses 72 65 68 </p>

<p> Sales/trafficking 69 61 66 </p>

<p> Other 75 70 71 </p>

<p> Public-order 70 69 65 </p>

<p> Data from the Federal Justice Statistics Program (FJSP)
showed that in 1990, 54% of Federal drug defendants were released
prior to case disposition. About half of these releases occurred
within 1 day of arrest, 76% within 1 week, and 89% within 1
month. </p>

<p> Pretrial status of Federal defendants charged with drug
offenses, 1990 </p>

<p> Pretrial status and type of release </p>

<p> Total 100% </p>

<p> Released 54% </p>

<p> Financial* 23 </p>

<p> Unsecured bond 23 </p>

<p> Recognizance 7 </p>

<p> Conditional 1 </p>

<p> Detained 46% </p>

<p> Held on bail 10 </p>

<p> Denied bail 37 </p>

<p> * Includes deposit bond, surety bond, and property </p>

<p> bond. </p>

<p> Of Federal drug defendants released prior to case
disposition, 18% committed pretrial misconduct-- </p>

<p> * 4% failed to appear in court as scheduled </p>

<ul>
    <li>4% were rearrested for a new offense </li>
    <li>11% committed a technical violation, including reporting
        violations and violations of conditions involving the use
        of illegal drugs. </li>
</ul>

<p> Sources: Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1992.
Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1990. Pretrial release of
felony defendants, 1988. Pretrial release of Federal felony
defendants, 1990 . </p>

<p> PROSECUTION AND SENTENCING OF FEDERAL DRUG LAW VIOLATORS </p>

<p> The number of suspects prosecuted for drug offenses increased
from 7,697 in 1981 to 25,663 in 1991. U.S. attorneys declined to
prosecute 22.3% (7,814) of suspected drug offenders who were
investigated in matters closed in 1991, a lower percentage than
for offenders suspected of violent offenses (29.5%), property
offenses (48.5%), and public-order offenses (36%). </p>

<p> The number of persons convicted of violating Federal drug
laws rose to 17,349 in 1991 from 5,981 in 1981. This 190%
increase exceeded the 53% growth in U.S. district court
convictions for all Federal offenses during the same years and
accounted for over 67% of the total increase in Federal
convictions. </p>

<p> The number of defendants convicted of drug possession
offenses increased from 498 in 1981 to 1,163 in 1991 -- a 134%
increase. Drug possession convictions were 7% of all drug
convictions in 1991. </p>

<p> Drug offenses accounted for 19% of all defendants convicted
in 1981 and 35% of all defendants convicted in 1991. Drug
trafficking offenses alone accounted for 33% of all defendants
convicted in 1991. The conviction rate for drug defendants
increased from 76% in 1981 to 84% in 1991. </p>

<p> The percentage of offenders convicted of drug offenses
sentenced to prison rose from 73% in 1981 to 87% in 1991. </p>

<p> The average prison sentence for persons charged with Federal
drug violations was longer than for all other offenses except
violent crimes in 1991. </p>

<p> Average sentence length for persons sentenced to Federal
prisons for drug and nondrug offenses, 1991 </p>

<p> All offenses 62 mos. </p>

<p> Violent offenses 91 </p>

<p> Property offenses 21 </p>

<p> Federal drug offenses 86 </p>

<p> Trafficking 87 </p>

<p> Possession 22 </p>

<p> Public-order offenses 38 </p>

<p> Drug offenders are receiving longer sentences and are serving
a larger percentage of their sentence than in the past. The
average Federal prison sentence for drug offenses rose from 62
months in 1986 to 86 months in 1991. The average percent of
sentence served until first release increased from 60% in 1985 to
68% in 1990. Contributing to these increases are the sentencing
guidelines that went into effect in 1987 and the 1986 and 1988
anti-drug abuse laws which prescribed stiffer sentences and
mandatory minimum incarceration terms for Federal offenders. </p>

<p> Sources: Federal drug case processing 1985-91: </p>

<p> With preliminary data for 1992. Federal criminal case
processing, 1982-91: With preliminary data for 1992. Federal
sentencing in transition, 1986-90. Federal criminal case
processing, 1980-1987. </p>

<p> PROSECUTION AND SENTENCING OF DRUG LAW VIOLATORS IN STATE
COURTS </p>

<p> In the United States in 1990 there were an estimated-- </p>

<p> * 324,235 adults arrested for drug trafficking </p>

<p> * 168,360 felony drug trafficking convictions </p>

<p> * 129,637 drug traffickers sentenced to incarceration </p>

<p> * 82,496 drug traffickers sentenced to State prison or 25 for
every 100 drug trafficking arrests. According to data from the
BJS National Prosecutor Survey Program, in 1992, 1 in 5 State
prosecutors' offices had a specialized narcotics unit. Based on
statutes enacted in the previous 3 years-- </p>

<p> * 23% of the offices prosecuted cases based on recently
enacted statutes addressing controlled substances, such as
anabolic steroids and precursor chemicals </p>

<p> * 21% prosecuted cases addressing illegal drugs in a school
zone </p>

<ul>
    <li>9% prosecuted cases for drug possession. </li>
    <li>The number of drug trafficking convictions in </li>
</ul>

<p> State courts more than doubled between 1986 and 1990. Of
persons convicted of drug trafficking in </p>

<p> State courts in 1990-- </p>

<p> * 85% were male </p>

<p> * 42% were white, 57% black, and 1% of other races </p>

<p> * the average age was 30 </p>

<p> * 50% were between ages 20 and 29. </p>

<p> Ninety percent of drug trafficking convictions in 1990
resulted from guilty pleas; 4% resulted from jury trials; and 4%
resulted from bench trials. </p>

<p> Drug offenders comprised a third of all persons convicted of
a felony in State courts in 1990. </p>

<p> Drug traffickers accounted for 20% of all convicted felons;
drug possessors also accounted for 13% of all convicted felons. </p>

<p> Seventy-seven percent of persons convicted of drug
trafficking in 1990 were sentenced to some kind of incarceration:
28% to jail and 49% to prison; 23% were sentenced to probation.
The average prison sentence for persons convicted of drug
trafficking was 6 years 2 months, of which the estimated time to
be served was 1 year 11 months. </p>

<p> Disposition of felony arrests in State courts In the United
States, 1990 </p>

<p> For 100 arrests: </p>

<p> ________________________________ </p>

<p> Sentenced to incarceration </p>

<p> ____________________ </p>

<p> Arrest State </p>

<p> offense Convicted Total Prison </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Murder* 55 52 50 </p>

<p> Rape 54 47 36 </p>

<p> Robbery 37 33 27 </p>

<p> Aggravated assault 13 10 6 </p>

<p> Burglary 38 28 20 </p>

<p> Drug trafficking 52 40 25 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> *Includes nonnegligent manslaughter. </p>

<p> Source: Felony sentences in State courts, 1990. </p>

<p> Of persons convicted of drug possession, 29% were sentenced
to jail, 35% to prison, and 36% to probation. The average prison
sentence was 4 years 1 month, of which the estimated time to be
served was 13 months. </p>

<p> Mean State prison sentence and estimated time to be served in
prison, 1990 </p>

<p> Most Mean </p>

<p> serious State Estimated </p>

<p> conviction prison time to be </p>

<p> offense sentence served(a) </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Murder(b) 243 mos. 104 mos. </p>

<p> Rape 160 62 </p>

<p> Robbery 115 45 </p>

<p> Aggravated assault 78 26 </p>

<p> Burglary 80 26 </p>

<p> Larceny(c) 49 13 </p>

<p> Drug offenses 66 19 </p>

<p> Trafficking 74 23 </p>

<p> Possession 49 13 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> (a)Derived by multiplying percentage of sentence actually
served by the mean sentence imposed. Percentage of sentence
actually served was estimated by the source from table 2-8,
National corrections reporting program, 1989 (NCJ-138222),
November, 1992. </p>

<p> (b)Includes nonnegligent manslaughter. </p>

<p> (c)Includes motor vehicle theft. </p>

<p> Source: Felony sentences in State courts, 1990. </p>

<p> The average (mean) time from arrest to sentencing was 223
days for a drug trafficking case resulting in a State court
conviction in 1990. The average time was 286 days for jury
trials, 219 days for bench trials, and 221 days for guilty pleas.
Of 27,052 drug offenders sentenced to probation in 1986 in 32
counties across 27 States-- </p>

<p> * 61% had a probation sentence combined with a jail term </p>

<p> * 20% were not recommended for probation by the probation
department </p>

<p> * 11% were assigned to intensive supervision </p>

<p> * 38% were required to participate in a drug treatment
program </p>

<p> * 48% were required to be tested for drug use. </p>

<p> According to probation records, among probationers with known
drug problems, 42% were not required to submit to drug testing or
participate in drug treatment. </p>

<p> Sources: Felony sentences in State courts, 1990. </p>

<p> Prosecutors in State courts, 1992. Recidivism of felons on
probation, 1986-89. </p>

<p> DRUG OFFENDERS IN CORRECTIONAL POPULATIONS </p>

<p> Drug law violators make up a growing share of the prison and
jail population: </p>

<p> * drug offenders accounted for 61% of sentenced inmates in
Federal prisons in 1993, up from 38% in 1986 and 25% in 1980 </p>

<p> * the proportion of drug offenders in State prisons increased
from 9% in 1986 to 21% in 1991 </p>

<p> * the proportion of drug offenders in local jails increased
from 9% in 1983 to 23% in 1989. </p>

<p> Of State prisoners in 1991: </p>

<p> * 8% were sentenced for drug possession and 13% were
sentenced for drug trafficking </p>

<p> * women were more likely to be incarcerated for a drug
offense than men (33% versus 21%) </p>

<p> * inmates serving time for drug trafficking accounted for 3%
of inmates sentenced to life or death </p>

<p> * blacks were more likely to be serving time for a drug
offense than whites (25% versus 12%), but less than Hispanic
inmates (33%). </p>

<p> ....... </p>

<p> *Obtained by ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse from
Bureau of Prisons Key Indicators Strategic Support System,
January 25, 1994. </p>

<p> In 1991, 10% of the 57,661 juveniles detained in public
juvenile facilities were committed for drug-related offenses,
according to the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention, as presented in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of Criminal
Justice Statistics. Juveniles held in facilities, by type of
offense, </p>

<p> 1991 </p>

<p> Juveniles detained </p>

<p> or committed for: Male Female </p>

<p> Delinquent offenses 97% 81% </p>

<p> Offenses against persons 33 20 </p>

<p> Property offenses 37 30 </p>

<p> Alcohol offenses 1 1 </p>

<p> Drug-related offenses 10 5 </p>

<p> Public-order offenses 4 5 </p>

<p> Other delinquent offenses 12 19 </p>

<p> Nondelinquent reasons 3 19 </p>

<p> The BJS 1990 Census of State and Federal Correctional
Facilities reported on drug treatment and intervention programs
for 1,024 correctional facilities. Prisons may offer many types
of drug intervention or treatment: detoxification, counseling,
education and or awareness programs, urine surveillance, and
treatment in special residential units within the facility-- </p>

<p> * Federal facilities reported they could test 33% of inmates
for drugs; State confinement facilities, 10%; and community-based
facilities, 57%. </p>

<p> * Counseling was available for 14% of inmates in Federal
facilities, 12% in State, and 48% in community-based facilities. </p>

<p> * Residential treatment program capacity was from 1% to 2% of
inmate population for all types of institutions. </p>

<p> Of all Federal inmates, 9% were enrolled in some form of drug
treatment on June 29, 1990. Among State prisoners, 14% in
confinement facilities were enrolled and 37% in community-based
facilities were enrolled. The two most common types of programs
for both Federal and State correctional facilities were education
and counseling. </p>

<p> According to data from the 1991 Survey of Inmates in State
Correctional Facilities, 43% of all inmates had participated in a
drug treatment program; 36% received their most recent treatment
while incarcerated. Group counseling was the most frequent type
of treatment program. </p>

<p> In 1991, about 57% of Federal drug offenders and 52% of drug
offenders in state prisons were tested for the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV). In Federal prisons, property (1.4%)
and violent (1.1%) offenders had higher positive HIV rates than
drug (0.6%) and public-order offenders (0.6%). In State prisons,
drug (3.2%) and property (2.7%) offenders had higher rates than
public-order (1.9%) and violent (1.4%) offenders. </p>

<p> Drug using offenders have a higher risk for infection with
AIDS-- </p>

<p> * 3.2% of Federal inmates and 4.9% of State inmates who used
a needle to inject drugs, tested positive </p>

<p> * 5.5% of Federal inmates and 7.1% of State inmates who
shared needles to inject drugs, tested positive. About 4% of drug
offenders in Federal prisons and 15% of drug offenders in State
prisons who had shared needles, were HIV positive. </p>

<p> Sources: Survey of State prison inmates, 1991. </p>

<p> Profile of State prison inmates, 1986. Profile of jail
inmates, 1989. Drugs and jail inmates, 1989. Office of Juvenile
Justice and Delinquency Prevention, as reported in the BJS
Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993. Drug enforcement
and treatment in prisons, 1990. Comparing Federal and State
prison inmates, 1991. </p>

<p> DRUG ENFORCEMENT IN CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES </p>

<p> Data from the BJS 1990 Census of State and </p>

<p> Federal Correctional Facilities describe the various methods
used to prevent illegal entry of drugs into prisons and to stop
the use of illegal drugs by those under correctional supervision.
These methods include drug testing, questioning, patdowns,
clothing exchanges, and body cavity searches. </p>

<p> Most prison facilities required new admissions and inmates
returning from temporary release to be patted down and required
them to exchange their clothing for prison-furnished clothing. </p>

<p> Drug interdiction activities for prison inmates/residents, by
type of facility, June 1990 Type of facility </p>

<p> Drug inter- ____________________________ </p>

<p> diction Federal State </p>

<p> activity, by confine- Confine- Community </p>

<p> inmate group ment ment based </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Inmates at </p>

<p> admission </p>

<p> Verbal questioning 83.8% 74.9% 79.2% </p>

<p> Patdown 87.5 77.7 71.2 </p>

<p> Clothing exchange 87.5 59.0 26.0 </p>

<p> Body cavity search 61.3 45.1 14.4 </p>

<p> Inmates returning </p>

<p> from temporary release </p>

<p> Verbal questioning 72.5% 66.5% 68.0% </p>

<p> Patdown 81.3 79.7 81.6 </p>

<p> Clothing exchange 72.5 54.5 29.2 </p>

<p> Body cavity search 63.8 47.6 20.4 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Source: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990. </p>

<p> Interdiction efforts were more stringent in maximum security
prisons than in medium or minimum security facilities. All
Federal maximum security prisons required clothing exchanges,
compared to 81% of Federal medium security prisons and 78% of
Federal minimum security facilities. Prison visitors are also
subjected to interdiction activities. Most visitors were
questioned verbally and were subjected to searches of their
belongings. Patdowns and body cavity searches were usually
conducted if visitors were suspected of carrying drugs or
paraphernalia. </p>

<p> Drug interdiction activities for prison visitors, by type of
facility, June 1990 </p>

<p> Type of facility </p>

<p> ______________________________ </p>

<p> Federal State </p>

<p> Interdiction confine- Confine- Community- </p>

<p> activity ment ment based </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Verbal questioning 97.5% 78.7% 82.4% </p>

<p> Patdown 51.3 69.4 39.6 </p>

<p> Belongings search 92.5 87.4 75.6 </p>

<p> Body cavity search 27.5 22.4 5.2 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Source: Drug enforcement and treatment in </p>

<p> prisons, 1990. </p>

<p> To prevent drugs from being brought into facilities, prison
staff are subjected to interdiction activities, particularly when
under suspicion of drug smuggling. Staff were questioned in 45%
of Federal facilities and 23% of State facilities upon suspicion
of drug involvement. Staff were patted down on suspicion in 19%
of Federal facilities and 14% of State facilities. </p>

<p> The 1990 Census revealed that 7 out of 8 institutions conduct
urine tests on inmates to detect drug use. Of the tests conducted
between July 1, 1989, and June 30, 1990, evidence of drug use
among State prison inmates was detected in about-- </p>

<p> * 1 in 16 tests for marijuana </p>

<p> * 1 in 28 tests for cocaine </p>

<p> * 1 in 50 tests for methamphetamines </p>

<p> * 1 in 75 tests for heroin. </p>

<p> Among tests conducted among Federal prison inmates, positive
test results were found in approximately-- </p>

<p> * 1 in 100 tests for marijuana </p>

<p> * 1 in 250 tests for cocaine </p>

<p> * 1 in 250 tests for heroin </p>

<p> * 1 in 1,000 tests for methamphetamines. </p>

<p> Most facilities conducted urine tests upon suspicion of drug
use. One in five facilities systematically conducted urine tests
on all inmates at least once during their confinement. </p>

<p> Percent of inmates tested for drug use, by criteria for
testing and type of facility, June </p>

<p> 1990 </p>

<p> Criteria for All Federal </p>

<p> inmate drug tests facilities confinement </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Total 87% 100% </p>

<p> Systematically on everyone at least </p>

<p> once during stay 20 31 </p>

<p> Randomly on samples 63 96 </p>

<p> On indication of </p>

<p> possible drug use 76 94 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> (continued) </p>

<p> Criteria for State State </p>

<p> inmate drug tests confinement community-based </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Total 83% 98% </p>

<p> Systematically on </p>

<p> everyone at least </p>

<p> once during stay 12 46 </p>

<p> Randomly on samples 57 76 </p>

<p> On indication of </p>

<p> possible drug use 74 76 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Source: Drug enforcement and treatment in </p>

<p> prisons, 1990. Jail inmates, 1992. </p>

<p> The 1992 Annual Survey of Jails revealed that 308 out of 503
large jail jurisdictions conducted urinalysis on inmates. Of the
308 jurisdictions testing for drug use, 219 reported testing
inmates upon suspicion of drug use, 159 conducted random tests,
153 tested inmates on return from the community, and 35 tested
all inmates at least once. </p>

<p> Sources: Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990.
Jail inmates, 1992. </p>

<p> RECIDIVISM OF DRUG LAW VIOLATORS </p>

<p> Of 27,000 drug offenders sentenced to probation in 32
counties across 17 States in 1986, 49% were rearrested for a
felony offense within 3 years of sentencing. </p>

<p> Percent of drug </p>

<p> Rearrest offense probationers rearrested </p>

<p> Total 48.9% </p>

<p> Violent offenses 7.4 </p>

<p> Property offenses 10.3 </p>

<p> Drug offenses 26.7 </p>

<p> Trafficking 14.9 </p>

<p> Possession 11.8 </p>

<p> Weapons offenses 1.0 </p>

<p> Other offenses 3.5 </p>

<p> Of all probationers rearrested within the 3-year period, 1
out of 3 were arrested for a drug </p>

<p> offense. </p>

<p> Drug abusers were more likely to be rearrested than
non-abusers: </p>

<p> Percent of probationers </p>

<p> Drug abuse rearrested within 3 years </p>

<p> Non-abuser 36% </p>

<p> Occasional abuser 44 </p>

<p> Frequent abuser 55 </p>

<p> Compliance with drug testing or drug treatment while on
probation indicates a lower likelihood of rearrest: </p>

<p> Percent of probationers rearrested </p>

<p> Did not </p>

<p> Special Satisfied satisfy </p>

<p> conditions Total condition condition </p>

<p> Testing or </p>

<p> treatment 51% 38% 66% </p>

<p> Testing and </p>

<p> treatment 51 36 65 </p>

<p> Testing only 53 34 67 </p>

<p> Treatment only 47 42 67 </p>

<p> No testing or </p>

<p> treatment 48 -- -- </p>

<p> -- Not applicable. </p>

<p> In a separate study, BJS gathered 3 years of criminal history
records for a sample of persons released from prison in 1983 in
11 States. The percentage of offenders rearrested within 3 years
was: </p>

<p> * 50.4% of drug offenders </p>

<p> * 54.6% of public-order offenders </p>

<p> * 59.6% of violent offenders </p>

<p> * 68.1% of property offenders. </p>

<p> Drug offenses accounted for 14% of new charges against all
those rearrested. Among drug violators released from prison,
24.8% were rearrested for a drug offense. </p>

<p> Percent of drug law violators released from prison in 1983
who within 3 years were </p>

<p> Rear- Recon- Reincar- </p>

<p> Offense rested victed cerated </p>

<p> Drug offenses 50.4% 35.3% 30.3% </p>

<p> Possession 62.8 40.2 36.7 </p>

<p> Trafficking 51.5 34.5 29.4 </p>

<p> Other drug </p>

<p> offenses 45.3 34.5 29.1 </p>

<p> Sources: Recidivism of felons on probation, </p>

<p> 1986-89. Recidivism of prisoners released in 1983. </p>

<p> DRUGS AND YOUTH </p>

<p> The National Institute on Drug Abuse has sponsored a survey
of high school seniors each year since 1975. As reported in the
1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, of 1993 high
school seniors-- </p>

<p> * 35.3% reported having ever used marijuana/hashish </p>

<p> * 6.1% reported having ever used cocaine </p>

<p> * 1.1% reported having ever used heroin. </p>

<p> 1993 High school seniors reporting they could obtain drugs
fairly easily or very easily </p>

<p> Marijuana 83.0% </p>

<p> Amphetamines 61.5 </p>

<p> LSD 49.2 </p>

<p> Cocaine powder 45.4 </p>

<p> Barbiturates 44.5 </p>

<p> Crack 43.6 </p>

<p> Tranquilizers 41.1 </p>

<p> Heroin 33.7 </p>

<p> PCP 31.7 </p>

<p> Crystal metham- </p>

<p> phetamine (ice) 26.6 </p>

<p> Amyl and butyl </p>

<p> nitrates 25.9 </p>

<p> In 1993, 26% of high school seniors reported use of marijuana
within the previous 12 months, up from 21.9% in 1992. Marijuana
use within the last 30 days increased from 11.9% in 1992 to 15.5%
in 1993. </p>

<p> Reported illegal drug use by high school seniors, </p>

<p> 1993 </p>

<p> Used within the last </p>

<p> Drugs 12 months(a) 30 days </p>

<p> Marijuana 26.0% 15.5% </p>

<p> Cocaine (other than crack) 2.9 1.2 </p>

<p> Crack 1.5 .7 </p>

<p> Hallucinogens 7.4 2.7 </p>

<p> Heroin .5 .2 </p>

<p> Other opiates(b) 3.6 1.3 </p>

<p> Inhalants 7.0 2.5 </p>

<p> Stimulants(b) 8.4 3.7 </p>

<p> Sedatives(b) 3.4 1.3 </p>

<p> Tranquilizers(b) 3.5 1.2 </p>

<p> Steroids 1.2 0.7 </p>

<p> (a)Including the last 30 days. </p>

<p> (b)Includes only drug use which was not under a </p>

<p> doctor's orders. </p>

<p> Cocaine use among high school seniors peaked in 1985: </p>

<p> Used cocaine within the last: </p>

<p> Year 12 months* 30 days </p>

<p> 1975 5.6% 1.9% </p>

<p> 1976 6.0 2.0 </p>

<p> 1977 7.2 2.9 </p>

<p> 1978 9.0 3.9 </p>

<p> 1979 12.0 5.7 </p>

<p> 1980 12.3 5.2 </p>

<p> 1981 12.4 5.8 </p>

<p> 1982 11.5 5.0 </p>

<p> 1983 11.4 4.9 </p>

<p> 1984 11.6 5.8 </p>

<p> 1985 13.1 6.7 </p>

<p> 1986 12.7 6.2 </p>

<p> 1987 10.3 4.3 </p>

<p> 1988 7.9 3.4 </p>

<p> 1989 6.5 2.8 </p>

<p> 1990 5.3 1.9 </p>

<p> 1991 3.5 1.4 </p>

<p> 1992 3.1 1.3 </p>

<p> 1993 3.3 1.3 </p>

<p> *Including the last 30 days. </p>

<p> Self-reports of drug use among high school seniors may
underrepresent drug use among youth of that age because high
school dropouts and truants are not included, and these groups
may have more involvement with drugs than those who stay in
school. </p>

<p> The 1993 high school seniors were asked, &quot;How much do
you think people risk harming themselves?&quot; </p>

<p> Those students answering &quot;great risk&quot; in regular
use accounted for the following percentages-- </p>

<p> * marijuana, 72.5%, up from a low of 34.9% in 1978, but down
from 76.5% in 1992 </p>

<p> * cocaine, 90%, up from a low of 68.2% in 1977 and 1978 </p>

<p> * heroin, 88.3%, virtually stable since 1975 </p>

<p> * LSD, 79.4%, following a low of 79.1% in 1977 and a high of
84.5% in 1990. </p>

<p> Data from the National Crime Victimization Survey </p>

<p> School Crime Supplement show that in the first half of 1989,
2 out of 3 students ages 12 to 19 reported availability of drugs
at their school. </p>

<p> Availability of drugs was reported more often by-- </p>

<p> * public school students (70%) than by private school
students (52%) </p>

<p> * students in grades 9 to 12, compared to students in grades
6 to 8. </p>

<p> Similar rates of drug availability were reported by-- </p>

<p> * white students (69%) and black students (67%) </p>

<p> * students residing in cities (66%), suburban areas (67%),
and nonmetropolitan areas (71%). </p>

<p> The survey also showed that most drugs, while available, were
difficult to obtain. </p>

<p> As reported in the 1991 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice
statistics, a 1990 national survey of fifth and sixth graders
found that-- </p>

<p> * 15% knew adults or older kids who tried or who use
marijuana; 5% knew kids their own age who tried or who use
marijuana </p>

<p> * 10% knew adults or older kids who tried or who use cocaine;
2% knew kids their own age who use cocaine or crack </p>

<p> * 90% agreed with the statement &quot;drugs bought on the
street are not safe to use&quot; </p>

<p> * 7% said they will probably have tried drugs by the time
they enter high school. </p>

<p> Sources: School crime. Lloyd D. Johnston, </p>

<p> Patrick M. O'Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman, </p>

<p> Smoking, drinking, and illicit drug use among American
secondary school students, college students, and young adults,
1975-1993 and NFO Research Inc., Final report, drug awareness and
attitude study as reported in BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice
statistics, various editions. </p>

<p> GANGS </p>

<p> About 6% of State prison inmates belonged to a gang prior to
incarceration, according to data from the 1991 Survey of Inmates
in State Correctional Facilities. </p>

<p> Among inmates who were gang members </p>

<p> . 81% reported past drug use </p>

<p> . 69% said they manufactured, imported, or sold drugs as a
group </p>

<p> . 92% reported their gang fought other groups. </p>

<p> Of inmates who reported belonging to a gang before entering
prison, 32% were still members at the time of incarceration. On
average, they had joined a gang at age 14. Half reported that
their gang had 60 or more members. </p>

<p> In 1991, among Federal offenders who had trafficked in,
grown, or manufactured illegal drugs or who had managed drug
money, 25% said they were a member of a group or organization
that engaged in illegal drug activities. About 11% were leaders
or middle men in a drug organization. About 9% belonged to
organizations with 11 or more members. </p>

<p> Fifteen percent of students ages 12 to 19 reported the
presence of street gangs at their school, according to 1989 data
from the National Crime Victimization Survey School Crime
Supplement. </p>

<p> Seventy-eight percent of students who reported gang presence
at their school said drugs were available compared to 66% of
students who reported gangs were not present. </p>

<p> Students at schools with gangs were more likely to fear an
attack both at school and on the way to school and were more
likely to avoid certain areas inside the school. </p>

<p> Sources: Survey of State prison inmates, </p>

<p> 1991. Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991.
School crime. </p>

<p> DRUG USE IN THE GENERAL POPULATION </p>

<p> According to data from the 1993 Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Administration (SAMHSA) National Household Survey on Drug
Abuse-- </p>

<p> * 77 million Americans age 12 or older (37% of the
population) reported use of an illicit drug at least once in
their lifetime </p>

<p> * 12% reported use of a drug within the past year </p>

<p> * 6% reported use of a drug within the past month. </p>

<p> Preliminary data from the 1993 survey show that marijuana and
cocaine use is most prevalent among those ages 18 to 34. </p>

<p> Age of respondent </p>

<p> Drug use 12-17 18-25 26-34 35+ </p>

<p> Marijuana </p>

<p> Last month 4.9% 1.1% 6.7% 1.9% </p>

<p> Last year 10.1 22.9 13.8 4.0 </p>

<p> Lifetime 11.6 47.4 59.2 26.6 </p>

<p> Cocaine </p>

<p> Last month .4% 1.5% 1.0% .4% </p>

<p> Last year 0.8 5.0 4.4 1.1 </p>

<p> Lifetime 1.1 12.5 25.6 8.5 </p>

<p> As reported in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice
statistics, rates of drug use by college students were among the
lowest during the past 10 years. </p>

<p> Marijuana and cocaine use among college students, </p>

<p> 1984-93 </p>

<p> Drug use 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Marijuana </p>

<p> Daily within </p>

<p> last month 3.6% 3.1% 2.1% 2.3% 1.8% </p>

<p> Last month 23.0 23.6 22.3 20.3 16.8 </p>

<p> Last year 40.7 41.7 40.9 37.0 34.6 </p>

<p> Cocaine </p>

<p> Daily within </p>

<p> last month .4% .1% .1% .1% .1% </p>

<p> Last month 7.6 6.9 7.0 4.6 4.2 </p>

<p> Last year 16.3 17.3 17.1 13.7 10.0 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> (continued) </p>

<p> Drug use 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Marijuana </p>

<p> Daily within </p>

<p> last month 2.6% 1.7% 1.8% 1.6% 1.9% </p>

<p> Last month 16.3 14.0 14.1 14.6 14.2 </p>

<p> Last year 33.6 29.4 26.5 27.7 27.9 </p>

<p> Cocaine </p>

<p> Daily within </p>

<p> last month 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% </p>

<p> Last month 2.8 1.2 1.0 1.0 0.7 </p>

<p> Last year 8.2 5.6 3.6 3.0 2.7 </p>

<p> __________________________________________________ </p>

<p> Source: Drug use among American high school seniors, college
students, and young adults as reported in the BJS Sourcebook of
criminal justice statistics, 1993. </p>

<p> Another measure of drug use in the general population is the
number of drug-related emergency room episodes and drug-related
deaths. </p>

<p> The SAMHSA Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) reported an
estimated 433,493 drug-related episodes in hospital emergency
rooms nationwide in 1992, an 10% increase from 393,968 in 1991. A
total of 7,532 deaths related to drug abuse were reported in 1992
by medical examiners in 38 metropolitan areas. </p>

<p> Sources: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, as
reported in ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse, Fact Sheet:
Drug data summary. Lloyd D. Johnston, Patrick M. O'Malley, and
Jerald G. Bachman, Smoking, drinking, and illicit drug use among
American secondary school students, college students, and young
adults, 1984-1993 as reported in the BJS Sourcebook of criminal
justicestatistics, 1993. Drug Abuse Warning Network, as reported
in Fact sheet: Drug data summary. </p>

<p> PUBLIC OPINION ABOUT DRUGS </p>

<p> As reported in the 1993 BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice
statistics, the percentage of Gallup Poll respondents describing
drug abuse as the single most important problem facing our
country peaked in 1989: </p>

<p> Drug abuse most serious </p>

<p> Date of poll problem </p>

<p> January 1985 2% </p>

<p> July 1986 8 </p>

<p> April 1987 11 </p>

<p> September 1988 11 </p>

<p> May 1989 27 </p>

<p> November 1989 38 </p>

<p> April 1990 30 </p>

<p> July 1990 18 </p>

<p> March 1991 11 </p>

<p> March 1992 8 </p>

<p> January 1993 6 </p>

<p> January 1994 9 </p>

<p> Among Gallup Poll respondents, the use of drugs was most
often mentioned as one of the biggest problems for schools in
their communities. Giving that response in 1993 were-- </p>

<p> * 14% of public school parents </p>

<p> * 9% of nonpublic school parents </p>

<p> * 17% of those with no children in school </p>

<p> * 16% of all surveyed. </p>

<p> When asked about spending for various social problems, 60% of
the respondents to a 1993 National Opinion Research Center (NORC)
Poll said this country is spending too little to deal with drug
addiction. </p>

<p> In 1990 Gallup Poll respondents were asked how best the
government should allocate its resources in its fight against
drugs: </p>

<p> * 40% said &quot;teaching young people about the dangers of
drugs&quot; </p>

<p> * 28% said &quot;working with foreign governments to stop the
export of drugs to this country&quot; </p>

<p> * 19% said &quot;arresting people in this country who sell
drugs&quot; </p>

<p> * 5% said &quot;helping drug users to overcome their
addiction to drugs&quot; </p>

<p> * 4% said &quot;arresting the people who use drugs.&quot; </p>

<p> Gallup Poll respondents were asked, &quot;What is the most
important thing that can be done to help reduce crime?&quot; In
1989, the most frequent response was to cut the drug supply
(25%), followed by harsher punishment (24%). In 1981, 3% of
respondents mentioned cutting the drug supply, while harsher
punishment was mentioned by 38% of respondents. </p>

<p> NORC has asked adults (age 18 or older) about legalization of
marijuana since 1973. In 1993, 22% believed that marijuana should
be made legal, down from a peak of 30% in 1978. </p>

<p> College freshmen have been surveyed by NORC since 1968. In
1993, 28.2% of those surveyed agreed strongly or somewhat that
marijuana should be legalized, down from a high of 52.9% in 1977
and up from a low of 16.7% in 1989. Of 1993 high school seniors--
</p>

<p> * 22.8% felt using marijuana should be legal, down from 32.9%
feeling that way in 1978 and up from a low of 14.9% in 1986 </p>

<p> * 75.5% reported worrying often or sometimes about drug
abuse, up from 65.5% in 1978 and down from 82.6% in 1990. </p>

<p> In 1990 a Gallup Poll asked what respondents felt would be
the effect of legalizing drugs: </p>

<p> Effect of legalization would increase: </p>

<p> Drug use in public schools 65% </p>

<p> The number of addicts 67 </p>

<p> The number of drug overdoses 63 </p>

<p> Drug-related crime 52 </p>

<p> Sources: The Gallup report; National Opinion Research Center
data made available through the Roper Center for Public Opinion
Research; Alexander W. Astin, et al., The American freshman:
Twenty year trends;Lloyd D. Johnston, Jerald G. Bachman, and
Patrick M. O'Malley, Monitoring the future 1975-1992; Lloyd D.
Johnston, Patrick M. O'Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman, Drug use,
drinking, and smoking: National survey results from high school,
college, and young adult populations, 1975-1988; all as reported
in the BJS Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993 and
earlier editions. </p>

<p> ONDCP DRUGS &amp; CRIME CLEARINGHOUSE </p>

<p> The ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse serves the
drugs-and-crime information needs of-- </p>

<ul>
    <li>Federal, State, and local policy-makers </li>
    <li>* criminal justice and public health practitioners </li>
</ul>

<p> * researchers and universities </p>

<p> * private corporations </p>

<p> * the media </p>

<p> * the public. </p>

<p> The Clearinghouse was established in 1987 to provide special
attention to the needs of State and local government agencies,
especially those seeking data to meet the statistical
requirements of the Anti-Drug Abuse Grant Program of the Bureau
of Justice Assistance (BJA). In 1994, the Clearinghouse became a
component of the National Criminal Justice Reference Service,
with funding from the Office of National Drug Control Policy. </p>

<p> The ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse responds to
requests for current data on-- </p>

<p> * illegal drugs </p>

<p> * drug-related crime </p>

<p> * drug law violations </p>

<p> * drug-using offenders in the criminal justice system </p>

<p> * drug treatment for offenders </p>

<p> * the impact of drugs on criminal justice administration. </p>

<p> The clearinghouse component-- </p>

<p> * disseminates ONDCP, BJS and other Department of Justice
publications relating to drugs and crime </p>

<p> * prepares and distributes fact sheets and selected
bibliographies on specific drugs-and- crime topics </p>

<p> * responds to information requests utilizing a bibliographic
database of statistical and research reports, books, and journal
articles on drugs and crime </p>

<p> * searches the bibliographic database to fill requests for
data on specific topics </p>

<p> * advises requesters on data availability and usefulness and
on data sources that may meet their needs </p>

<p> * provides statistics and bibliographic citations by mail or
telephone </p>

<p> * maintains a reading room where visitors can use the
clearinghouse collection of library documents and vertical file
items on drugs and crime </p>

<p> * coordinates with Federal, State, and local agencies in
identifying other data resources and makes referrals. </p>

<p> During 1994 the Clearinghouse-- </p>

<p> * handled nearly 10,000 requests for information </p>

<p> * expanded the bibliographic database to about 4,500
documents and total library holdings to about 13,000 items </p>

<p> * distributed about 75,000 drugs-and-crime documents, 33% of
which were Clearinghouse products, 12% were BJS publications, and
7% were other Office of Justice Programs publications </p>

<p> * attended seven conferences </p>

<p> * distributed nine publications of the Office of National
Drug Control Policy including the 1994 National Drug Control
Strategy, Pulse Check, and Marijuana Situation Assessment </p>

<ul>
    <li>prepared Drugs and crime facts, 1993 (August 1994), which
        presents existing BJS data on the subject from diverse
        BJS reports </li>
    <li>* prepared State drug resources: 1994 National directory
        (September 1994), a guide to State and Federal agencies
        that address drug abuse concerns. </li>
</ul>

<p> * prepared the fact sheets Drug-Related Crime, </p>

<p> Drug Data Summary, and Drug Use Trends, summarizing
up-to-date statistics on the relationship between drugs and
crime. The toll-free line for the ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime
Clearinghouse is 1-800-666-3332. The clearinghouse is located at
Aspen Systems Corporation, 1600 Research Boulevard, Rockville,
MD, 20850. </p>

<p> SOURCE NOTES </p>

<p> Single copies of any report with an NCJ number can be
obtained from the ONDCP Drugs &amp; Crime Clearinghouse, 1600
Research Blvd., Rockville, MD 20850; 800-666-3332. Most titles
are free of charge. </p>

<p> Sources with an ICPSR number have a data set available on
data tape, CD-ROM, or diskette. For more information, contact the
National Archive of Criminal Justice Data at the University of
Michigan, P.O. Box 1248, Ann Arbor, MI 48106, 1-800-999-0960. </p>

<p> Comparing Federal and State prison inmates, 1991, September,
1994, NCJ-145864 </p>

<p> Crime in the United States, 1993, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, December 1994 </p>

<p> Criminal victimization in the United States, 1992, April
1994, NCJ-145125, ICPSR 8864 </p>

<p> Drug enforcement and treatment in prisons, 1990 </p>

<p> (BJS Special Report), July 1992, NCJ-134724 </p>

<p> Drug enforcement by police and sheriffs' departments, 1990
(BJS Special Report), May 1992, NCJ-134505, ICPSR 9749 </p>

<p> Drug Use Forecasting 1993 annual report on adult arrestees,
National Institute of Justice, November, 1994, NCJ-147411 </p>

<p> Drugs and jail inmates, 1989 (BJS Special Report), August
1991, NCJ-130836, ICPSR 9419 </p>

<p> Fact sheet: Drug data summary, Drugs &amp; Crime Data Center
&amp; Clearinghouse, July 1994, NCJ-148213 </p>

<p> Federal criminal case processing, 1982-1991: With preliminary
data for 1992, November 1993, NCJ-144526, ICPSR 9296 </p>

<p> Federal criminal case processing, 1980-1987, May 1990,
NCJ-120069, ICPSR 9296 </p>

<p> Federal drug case processing, 1985-91: With preliminary data
for 1992, March 1994, NCJ-144392 </p>

<p> Federal law enforcement officers, 1993 (BJS Bulletin),
December 1994, NCJ-151166 </p>

<p> Federal sentencing in transition, 1986-90 (BJS Special
Report), June 1992, NCJ-134727 </p>

<p> Felony sentences in State courts, 1990 (BJS Bulletin), March
1993, ICPSR 6038 </p>

<p> Jail inmates 1992 (BJS Bulletin), August 1993, NCJ-143284 </p>

<p> Murder in large urban counties, 1988 (BJS Special Report),
May 1993, NCJ-140614, ICPSR 9907 </p>

<p> National Corrections Reporting Program, 1989, November 1992,
NCJ-138222, ICPSR 9849 </p>

<p> National Household Survey on Drug Abuse: Population estimates
1992, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, October 1993 </p>

<p> Pretrial release of Federal felony defendants (BJS Special
Report), February 1994, NCJ-145322 </p>

<p> Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1988 (BJS Bulletin),
February 1991, NCJ-127202, ICPSR 9508 </p>

<p> Pretrial release of felony defendants, 1992 (BJS Bulletin),
November 1994, NCJ-148818, ICPSR 9508 </p>

<p> Profile of jail inmates, 1989 (BJS Special Report), April
1991, NCJ-129097, ICPSR 9419 </p>

<p> Profile of State prison inmates, 1986 (BJS Special Report),
January 1988, NCJ-109926, ICPSR 8711 </p>

<p> Prosecutors in State courts, 1992 (BJS Bulletin), December
1993,NCJ-145319, ICPSR 6273 </p>

<p> Recidivism of felons on probation, 1986-89 (BJS Special
Report), February 1992, NCJ-134177, ICPSR 9574. </p>

<p> Recidivism of prisoners released in 1983 (BJS Special
Report), April 1989, NCJ-116261, ICPSR 8875 </p>

<p> School crime, September 1991, NCJ-131645, ICPSR 9394 </p>

<p> Sheriffs' departments 1990 (BJS Bulletin), February 1992,
NCJ-133283, ICPSR 9749 </p>

<p> Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1993, September
1994,NCJ-148211 </p>

<p> Sourcebook of criminal justice statistics, 1991, September
1992, NCJ-137369 </p>

<p> State and local police departments, 1990 (BJS Bulletin),
February 1992, NCJ-133284, ICPSR 9749 </p>

<p> Survey of State prison inmates, 1991, March 1993, NCJ-136949,
ICPSR 6068 </p>

<p> Survey of youth in custody, 1987 (BJS Special Report),
September 1988, NCJ-113365, ICPSR 8992 </p>

<p> Women in jail 1989 (BJS Special Report), March 1992,
NCJ-134732, ICPSR 9419 <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>