
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B39-58</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B046-288</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/guns1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122115208 text/html 23034
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:51:53 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:16:36 GMT
Content-length: 22816
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>A Brief History of Federal Firearms Enforcement</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_govpub_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications </a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61753" -->

<h1>A BRIEF HISTORY OF FEDERAL FIREARMS ENFORCEMENT </h1>

<p><b>Frederick S. Calhoun. Ph.D.</b> </p>

<p>Historian </p>

<p>Federal Law Enforcement Training Center </p>

<p>This is Appendix G from the David Koresh Investigation. It is
included because it contains interesting information on the
background of Federal law enforcement. </p>

<hr>

<p>The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) is a
relatively young law enforcement organization, having been
created formally in 1972. Yet, measured by the federal laws
related to the regulation and taxing of alcohol, tobacco, and
firearms-the laws ATF now enforces-the history of the bureau's
duties and responsibilities stretches across the full two
centuries of American history. As early as 1791, revenue acts
taxed both alcohol and tobacco and created the offices of tax
inspector, collector, and supervisor. During the next century,
the offices changed names as frequently as the tax rates changed,
but the federal interest in raising revenues from alcohol and
tobacco remained strong. Indeed, the formal organization of an
independent bureau within the Department of Treasury specializing
in alcohol, tobacco, and firearms law enforcement belatedly
recognized the distinct need for such an agency. </p>

<p>After the Civil War, revenue agents battled moonshiners
throughout the South in some of the bloodiest opposition ever to
federal law enforcement. Revenue agents and deputy U.S. marshals
by the score were killed as they roamed the hills and hollows
searching out illicit stills. Prohibition changed the
government's focus from taxing whiskey to banning it, yet the
revenue agent's job remained as dangerous. After experimenting in
social adjustment a dozen years, Prohibition was rescinded.
Spawned by the 1933 repeal of Prohibition, the Alcohol Tax Unit
was established as a tax-collecting branch within the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS). Continued concern over the violent,
organized mobs that plagued the major cities compelled the
federal government to try to curb the gangsters' ability to arm
themselves. Rather than ban outright the purchase of machine guns
and sawed-off shotguns-the weapons of choice for the
mobsters-Congress in 1934 simply imposed a tax those weapons.
Paying the tax required registering the weapon. The registration
requirement was intended to discourage ownership of such weapons
without outlawing them. No self-respecting gangster would want to
register, much less pay the tax, on his Tommygun. Their evasion
of the tax gave the government another legal tool to use in
arresting the gangsters and breaking up the mobs. </p>

<p>Because it was a tax rather than a prohibition, it fell to
Treasury to enforce the law as part of Treasury's role in
collecting all funds due the government. Within Treasury, the
Alcohol Tax Unit seemed the logical branch to enforce the new
law. Registering and taxing stills required many of the same
procedures and investigatory talents that would be needed to
register and tax weapons. In the end, the new assignment proved
comparatively easy. The unit was not overwhelmed with
registrations nor by the 1940s were the investigations into
evasions of the tax very time-consuming. As the gangsters
declined in number and power, so did their use of machine guns
and sawed-off shotguns. Enforcing the alcohol taxes again
occupied most of the unit's attention. </p>

<p>In 1951, the Alcohol Tax Unit began enforcing federal taxes on
tobacco, thus prompting a name change in 1952 to the Alcohol and
Tobacco Tax Division. Once again, the logic seemed to be that
collecting the tax on tobacco closely resembled the work
necessary to collect the tax on alcohol, machine guns, and
sawed-off shotguns. The 1968 passage of the Omnibus Crime Control
and Safe Streets Act and the Gun Control Act expanded the IRS
unit's jurisdiction to the criminal use of explosives and bombs.
The new laws also defined specific federal offenses involving
firearms, including transportation across state lines and use in
organized crimes. In recognition of this new enforcement
responsibility, the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division changed its
name to the Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms Division (ATFD). Two
years later, Congress passed the Explosives Control Act defining
certain bombings and acts of arson as federal crimes. It assigned
jurisdiction for enforcing this new law to ATFD. With these
expanded responsibilities. the Treasury Department on July 1,
1972 created the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms under
the general oversight of the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury
for Enforcement, Tariffs and Trade, and Operations. For the past
twenty-one years, ATF has enforced the collection of federal
taxes on alcohol and tobacco and the federal controls and
regulations on firearms, with particular attention to their use
by criminals. </p>

<p>Although on its face the bureau seems a discordant collection
of separate duties, the techniques for enforcing the taxes and
ferreting out the illicit products, whether cases of whiskey,
cartons of cigarettes, crates of automatic weapons, or containers
of bombs, are strikingly similar. </p>

<p>Subsequent laws have expanded ATF's jurisdiction. The 1976
Arms Export Control Act focused the Bureau's attention on
international gun smuggling. The 1982 Anti-Arson Act gave ATF
authority to investigate the destruction of property by fire as
well as by explosives. Increased taxes on cigarettes and alcohol,
and enhanced regulatory measures such as the 1978 Contraband
Cigarette Act, have also enhanced the bureau's responsibility to
ensure the government receives its lawful taxes. </p>

<p>The bureau has been an effective force in law enforcement.
Supplies of illicit alcohol and smuggled tobacco have steadily
decreased, and tax revenues have risen. During 1991, for example,
ATF collected $7.7 billion in alcohol taxes and $4.8 billion in
tobacco taxes. ATF agents have also focused on tracking down
armed career criminals and criminal gang members. Investigations
in Florida resulted in the arrest of 45 Warlock motorcycle gang
members in 1991. Members of the Gullymen Posse, a gang of
Jamaican drug dealers known for its propensity to commit murder,
were arrested in New York by ATF agents in January 1991.
Similarly, an ATF investigation into the activities of the Born
to Kill gang culminated in the arrest of a dozen gang members in
August 1991. Sixteen members of the San Diego chapter of the
Hells Angels were convicted in 1992. As a result of these and
similar investigations, ATF has become the nation's principal
repository for gang-related information and intelligence. </p>

<p>The bureau has also earned an excellent reputation for working
well with federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies. ATF
agents also specialize in identifying anonymous bombers by their
&quot;signature&quot; habits in making bombs. For example, in
1990, the assassin of Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals Judge
Robert Vance was ultimately identified by ATF agents who
recognized the way the bomb was constructed. Similarly, in the
midst of the tragedy in Waco, Texas, ATF agents investigating the
World Trade Center bombing helped to identify the van that was
used to hold the bomb. This early identification led FBI agents
to the rental car company and thereafter to arrests of the
terrorists before they could escape the country. </p>

<p>The bureau has developed considerable expertise in arson
investigations. At the request of the National Fire Protection
Agency, ATF began developing nationwide standards for fire
investigators. The State Department's Diplomatic Security Service
invited ATF to develop a protocol establishing an International
Response Team of investigators trained to search blast scenes
involving U.S. property abroad. Despite a rather eclectic array
of duties, ATF has succeeded in developing considerable expertise
in each area of its enforcement responsibilities. </p>

<p>The raid by ATF agents on the Branch Davidian compound
resulted from its enforcement of contemporary federal firearms
laws. In a larger sense, however, the raid fit within an
historic, well-established and well-defended government interest
in prohibiting and breaking up all organized groups that sought
to arm or fortify themselves. The 1934 law taxing weapons was
only the first time the federal government addressed private
ownership of weapons; it was not the first federal effort to
control firearms. From its earliest formation, the federal
government has actively suppressed any effort by disgruntled or
rebellious citizens to coalesce into an armed group, however
small the group, petty its complaint, or grandiose its ambition.
The collection of large arsenals by organized groups lent itself,
ultimately, to the violent use of those weapons against the
government itself or portions of its citizenry. Indeed, federal
agents who tried to disband the groups frequently became the
targets. </p>

<p>The discomfort over armed organizations predated the
Constitution. </p>

<p>The outbreak of what became known as Shays' Rebellion in 1786
gave added urgency to the establishment of a strong national
government. During the rebellion, hundreds of angry Massachusetts
farmers, most veterans of the Revolution and facing foreclosures
on their farms, banded together to keep the courts from issuing
any executions. Calling themselves Regulators, the farmers
quickly organized into a small army. Significantly, their first
foray was to capture the arsenal at Springfield. Although the
Regulators failed, the specter survived. Five months, delegates
from each of the thirteen states met in Philadelphia to design a
new experiment in government. </p>

<p>The lesson of Shays' Rebellion was not forgotten, even after
the new government was formed. In 1792, Congress passed a law
empowering the president to call out the state militias to
suppress insurrections if either an associate justice of the
Supreme Court or a local district court judge certified that
opposition to the laws was beyond the powers of the civil
authority to suppress. Ironically, the first occasion to resort
to that law grew out of the violent, organized, and armed
resistance to the federal government's whiskey tax. Thus, two of
the duties that ATF would later inherent-enforcing alcohol taxes
and controlling firearms-combusted in 1794 into the Whiskey
Rebellion, the first violent opposition to the new federal
government.[1] </p>

<p>Across the next century, succeeding presidents had sporadic,
though no less fearsome, occasion to dispatch the Army and the
state militias to suppress various outbreaks of armed opposition
to federal laws, taxes. and interests. In 1799, Fries Rebellion
against a federal tax on houses forced President John Adams to
muster the militia. Fugitive slave rescues during the 1850s
prompted the government to call out the military. Organized
resistance in Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, New York, Ohio, and
Wisconsin raised a troublesome specter. &quot;The main
opposition,&quot; President Millard Fillmore warned Congress in
December 1851, &quot;is aimed against the Constitution
itself.&quot; At the end of the decade, John Brown's ill-fated
raid on Harper's Ferry,. Virginia, sparked the government to
decisive action. Brown chose Harper's Ferry because of the
federal arsenal there. His intent was to distribute the weapons
among Southern slaves and lead them in revolt for their freedom.
Federal troops, however, thwarted the plan.[2] </p>

<p>After the Civil War, the federal government battled
unrepentant Southerners to protect the rights of the freedmen.
Nonetheless. federal officials acted only after the innumerable
Klan-style attacks were finally perceived as organized.
&quot;Outrages of various descriptions.&quot; Attorney General
George Williams advised southern U.S. Attorneys and Marshals in
1874. &quot;and in some cases atrocious murders have been
committed in your district by bodies of armed men. sometimes in
disguise and with the view it is believed of overawing and
intimidating peaceable and law abiding citizens and depriving
them of the rights guaranteed to them by the Constitution and
laws of the United States.&quot; The attorney general ordered his
attorneys and marshals &quot;to detect, expose. arrest, and
punish the perpetrators of these crimes.&quot;[3] </p>

<p>Throughout the western territories and along the Mexican
border, the federal government found occasional need to suppress
armed bands of outlaws, ganged together to steal cattle or rob
the mails. General William Tecumseh Sherman. sent to the Arizona
border in April 1882 to investigate the outlaw troubles there,
advised President Chester A. Arthur that &quot;the Civil Officers
have not sufficient forces to make arrests, to hold prisoners for
trial or punish when convicted.&quot; The President promptly
proclaimed on May 31 that the areas plagued by the outlaws were
in a state of rebellion.[4] </p>

<p>The federal government looked no more kindly on the labor
strikes that broke out in the closing years of the nineteenth
century and the opening years of the twentieth. What seemed so
dangerous about events such as the 1894 Pullman strike was not
just the disruption of he mails, which was the legal basis on
which the government relied to break the strike, but the fact
that the mails were being violently disrupted by organized
groups. &quot;We have been brought to the ragged edge of
anarchy,&quot; Attorney General Richard Olney frantically
explained when he ordered that the trains be kept running.
Eventually, Eugene Debs and his colleagues in the American
Railway Union, which took the lead in the strike, were indicted
and convicted. Once again, it was the volatile mixture of
violence and organization-combinations determined difficult to
suppress-that evoked the full power of the federal government.[5]
</p>

<p>The passage of the National Firearms Act of 1934, the first
federal effort to control private ownership of firearms, grew out
of this historic fear of armed organizations. The various
collections of gangsters that proliferated during Prohibition
were the true targets of the law, which required a tax and
registration on the sale of their weapons of choice-machine guns
and sawed-off shotguns. Subsequent federal firearms laws have
been of a piece. Oher than the 1968 ban on mail-order sales,
which was in direct, though delayed, response to the
assassination of President Kennedy, federal gun laws have
typically been concerned with the weapons of considerable
destructive power generally preferred by organized groups-bombs,
machine guns, and automatic weapons. </p>

<p>In recent times, the federal government has shown itself even
less patient with armed groups than it had historically. Radical
extremists of both the Right and the Left have been pursued
aggressively once they began breaking the law. For instance,
after the Symbionese Liberation Army (SLA) launched its
self-styled &quot;people's war&quot; by kidnapping newspaper
heiress Patty Hearst and committing a number of daring bank
robberies, the federal government dedicated its full resources to
tracking the group down. Within approximately three months, FBI
agents and Los Angeles police closed in on the group at a house
just outside what was then known as Watts. During an intense gun
battle and fire, every member of the SLA in the house was
killed.[6] </p>

<p>Gordon Kahl, who stood at the opposite end of the political
spectrum from the SLA, met a similar end. Kahl belonged to the
Posse Comitatus which refused to recognize the authority of any
government above the county level. Accordingly, Kahl consistently
refused to pay his federal taxes, even after he served time in
prison for not doing so. When U.S. Marshals attempted to arrest
him for violating the terms of his probation, Kahl killed two of
them. For the next five months, Kahl hid among his friends and
sympathizers until FBI agents located him in a farmhouse just
outside Smithville, Arkansas. After refusing to surrender, Kahl
was killed, and the farmhouse was burned down.[7] </p>

<p>Robert Matthews, the head of a group of right-wing fanatics
known as the Order, embraced many of Kahl's beliefs. Unlike Kahl,
whose resistance was essentially passive until the marshals tried
to arrest him, Matthews and the Order launched an aggressive
private war against the country. Like the SLA, the Order
committed a series of bank and armored car robberies, netting
$3.6 million in one heist alone. The Order also assassinated Alan
Berg, a radio talk show host in Denver, Colorado. </p>

<p>The FBI began an equally aggressive pursuit. After a brief,
violent skirmish in Idaho and another in Portland, Oregon, FBI
agents finally closed in on Matthews hiding out among three
adjoining houses on Whidbey Island, some fifty miles north of
Seattle. After ngotiating his surrender for two days, Matthews
began firing on an FBI Hostage Response Team that attempted to
enter the house. Protected by a full suit( of body armor,
Matthews ran from the first floor to the second floor firing
automatic weapons. The FBI dropped a magnesium flare from a
helicopter. The flare landed on the roof of the house and burned
through it to the room where Matthews had stored his ammunition
and explosives. These ignited, setting off a roaring, exploding
fire that consumed Matthews.[8] </p>

<p>A year later, in the spring of 1985. ATF collected
considerable evidence that an 80-member group styling itself the
Covenant of the Sword and the Arm of the Lord (CSA) had
stockpiled a large arsenal at its fortified compound in Arkansas.
The group had collected over 150 firearms, (including 35 machine
guns), two anti-personnel mines, three anti-aircraft rockets, 50
pounds of military plastic explosives, 300 blasting caps, 2,000
feet of detonating cord, and around 100 explosive devices. CSA
had also stockpiled food, water, and supplies. TF led the assault
on the CSA compound on April 20, 1985. CSA members retreated
farther into the compound, barricading themselves behind their
defenses. The agents set up a siege perimeter and settled in to
wait. The group used the wait to destroy many of the weapons (and
hence evidence) illegally obtained. Negotiators from the FBI
arrived and began the tedious, frustrating process of talking the
group out. Three days later, on April 22, 1985, James D. Ellison
and the 75 members of the CSA surrendered.[9] </p>

<p>As both history and recent events clearly show, the United
States has never tolerated armed groups residing within its
borders. The intent of the particular organization, whether
ideological or criminal, mattered little. If the group was
building an illegal arsenal, the group was subject to a federal
enforcement action. To this day, ATF's enforcement focus retains
the flavor of that historic concern with armed organizations. The
agency has developed considerable expertise and success in
investigating the activities of motorcycle, street, and drug
gangs, all of which share in common a proclivity to amass large
arsenals of powerful weapons. The raid on the Branch Davidian
compound occurred in the context of that historical background. </p>

<p>[1] Bowen, Miracle at Philadelphia, p. 287; Frederick S.
Calhoun, The Lawmen: United Slates Marshals and Their Deputies,
1789-1989, (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press,
1990), p. 32. </p>

<p>[2] Fillmore quoted in W.U. Hensel, The Christiana Rio and the
Treason Trials of 1851: An Historical Sketch. (New York: Negro
Universities Press, 1911), pp. 92-3; Calhoun, The Lawmen. pp.
82-93. </p>

<p>[3] Attorney General George Williams, circular letter to U.S.
Attorneys and Marshals, September 3, 1874, Attorney General
Instruction Book E, Record Group 60, Records of the Department of
Justice, National Archives. </p>

<p>[4] General William Tecumseh Sherman to Attorney General
Benjamin Brewster, April 12, 1882, Source-Chronological Files,
Record Group 60, National Archives; Calhoun, The Lawmen, p. 196;
Larry Ball, United States Marshals of Arizona and New Mexico,
1846-1912. (Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico Press,
1978), pp. 125-6. </p>

<p>[5] Almont Lindsey, The Pullman Strike, (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1967), p. 245, 274-92; Calhoun, The Lawmen,
209, 214. </p>

<p>[6] Los Angeles Times, May 18, 1974. </p>

<p>[7] James Corcoran, Bitter Harvest Gordon Kahl and the Posse
Comitatus: Murder in The Heartland. (New York: Viking Press,
1990). </p>

<p>[8] James Coates, Armed and Dangerous: The Rise of the
Survivalist Right, (New York: Hill and Wang, 1987), pp. 41-76. </p>

<p>[9] James Coates, Armed and Dangerous: The Rise of the
Survivalist Right, (New York: Hill and Wang, 1987), pp. 1424. </p>

<p>(Scanned in from: *US Government Printing Office:
1993-358-365) <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_govpub_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications </a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="61753" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>