
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B25-39</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B021-179</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc1b.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122123305 text/html 25027
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:32:56 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:58:41 GMT
Content-length: 24809
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marijuana -- History of the Intoxicant Use</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>National Commission on Marihuana And Drug Abuse</b> </p>

<p><b>Marihuana: A Signal of Misunderstanding</b> </p>

<h1>History of the Intoxicant Use<br>
</h1>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<p>The preceding history of the medical use of marihuana has
provided an outline of how marihuana has been alleged to care
diseases and relieve pain. This section discusses the non-medical
use of cannabis. The survey includes a discussion of marihuana
use in India, the rest of Asia, Africa, Europe, and the United
States; and a concluding analysis of the intoxicant use in
contemporary times. </p>

<p>Assessing marihuana's use as an intoxicant is difficult
because for many people around the world, its importance as an
intoxicant has been secondary to its use as a folk medicine or a
ceremonial adjunct (Grinspoon, 1971: 173-174). Caffeine and
nicotine apart, cannabis is second in worldwide popularity only
to alcohol. </p>

<p><b>India</b> </p>

<p>Marihuana was probably first used as an intoxicant in India
around 1000 B.C., and soon became an integral part of Hindu
culture (Snyder, 1970: 125). In China, where the marihuana plant
had been used to make cloth and certain medicines for centuries,
it was not recorded as an intoxicant. Explanations are unclear as
to why marihuana was used as an intoxicant in India but not in
China. </p>

<p>Marihuana was also used as an intoxicant in other parts of the
world prior to 500 A.D. but was not as well documented as the use
of opium. The drug &quot;nepenthe&quot; in Homer's Odyssey is
believed by a number of scholars to have been a brew in which the
most active ingredient was hemp (Brotteaux, 1967: 10). Galen
wrote in the second century that it was customary to promote
hilarity and happiness at banquets by giving the guests hemp
(Reininger, 1967: 14-15). </p>

<p>Cannabis is used in three different preparations in India
(Snyder, 1970: 27). The first is called bhang, comparable in
potency to marihuana in the United States. It is made from the
leaves and stems of uncultivated plants and blended into a
pleasant tasting liquid concoction. The second is ganja, more
potent than bhang, made from the tops of cultivated plants. The
third and most potent preparation, charas, is similar to hashish
or &quot;hash&quot; and is obtained by scraping the resin from
the leaves of the cultivated plants. Hard blocks are pressed from
this material which are converted for smoking. </p>

<p>High-caste Hindus are not permitted to use alcohol. But they
are allowed bhang at religious ceremonials, and also employ it as
an intoxicant at marriage ceremonies and family festivals. Bhang
is used by laborers in India in much the same way as beer is used
in the United States (Barber, 1970: 80). </p>

<p>The lower classes of India use either a few pulls at a ganja
pipe or sip a glass of bhang at the end of the day to relieve
fatigue (Grinspoon, 1971: 173), to obtain a sense of well-being,
to stimulate appetite, and to enable them to bear more cheerfully
the &quot;strain and monotony of . . . daily routines&quot;
(Geller and Boas, 1969: 5). These types of users and objectives
are frequently the reverse of those in the United States where
marihuana users consider themselves an exclusive and advanced
&quot;in-group&quot; (Andrews and Vinkenoog, 1967: iii). A major
intoxicant use in India is for religious purposes. </p>

<p><b>Asia and the Middle East</b> </p>

<p>Cannabis spread from India to other parts of Asia, to the
Middle East and then to Africa and South America, although some
believe it may have originated independently in the latter two
continents (Fort, 1969: 15). Cultural values may have played a
part in determining its use. Opium and cannabis were equally
available in pre-Communist China; but cannabis had no vogue as an
intoxicant (Barber, 1970: 80). The Chinese spoke of the plant as
the &quot;Liberator of Sin.&quot; In India, it was called. the
&quot;Giver of Life&quot; (Fort, 1970: 15). One author proposed
that temperament may have also played a role in this
determination, suggesting that perhaps the placid, practical
Chinese did not appreciate the euphoria produced by cannabis
(Snyder, 1070: 125). </p>

<p>Additional evidence of mid-Asian use comes from cuneiform
tablet interpretations that ascribe use in Persia circa 700-600
B.C. and of the time of Ashurbanipal's Assyrian reign, 669-626
B.C. (Blum. and Associates, 1969, 1: 62). </p>

<p>The drug's popularity as an intoxicant spread to the Middle
East and thoroughly permeated Islamic culture within a few
centuries (Geller and Boas, 1969: 5). Because alcohol was
prohibited to the followers of Mohammed, cannabis was accepted as
a substitute. <br>
</p>

<p><b>The Myth of the Assassins</b> </p>

<p>Two Muslim myths, one from the 10th century A.D. and the other
from the 13th century A.D., have been the sources of some of the
contemporary attitudes about the drug. The first myth deals with
hashish as a magical eastern drug brought by the Arabs into Spain
in the 10th century. These invaders confined its use primarily to
themselves, taking it back to Africa when they left Spain.
Although it did not become a European habit, some beliefs about
the drug were left behind. </p>

<p>The existence of this &quot;magical eastern drug&quot; was
probably known to Marco Polo, the Venetian traveler of the 13th
century A.D. before he left on his journey to the East. Marco
Polo returned to Europe with his own tale of cannabis which, in
the potent form of hashish, was said to be used as an intoxicant
by Hasan-I-Sabbah to send his ruthless followers on missions of
murder. The word &quot;assassin&quot; was said to be derived from
the word &quot;hashish,&quot; or from Hasan (Geller and Boas,
1969: 6). Marco Polo had written about how this &quot;Old Man of
the Mountain&quot; sent his men out on their missions with all
the color and pageantry that Europeans associated with the East.
As Marco Polo described: </p>

<p><i>In the territory of the Assassins there were delicious
walled gardens in which one can find everything that can satisfy
the needs of the body and the caprices of the most exacting
sensuality. Great banks of gorgeous flowers and bushes covered
with fruit stand amongst crystal rivers of living water....
Trellises of roses and fragrant vines cover with their foliage
pavilions of jade and porcelain furnished with Persian carpets
and Grecian embroideries.</i> </p>

<p><i>Delicious drinks in vessels of gold or crystal are served
by young boys or girls, whose dark unfathomable eyes cause them
to resemble the Houris, divinities of that Paradise which the
Prophet promised to believers. The sound of harps mingles with
the cooing of doves, the murmur of soft voices blends with the
sighing of the reeds. All is joy, pleasure, voluptuousness and
enchantment.</i> </p>

<p><i>The Grand Master of the Assassins, whenever he discovers a
young man resolute enough to belong to his murderous legions . .
. invites the youth to his table and intoxicates him with the
plant &quot;hashish.&quot; Having been secretly transported to
the pleasure gardens the young man imagines that he has entered
the Paradise of Mahomet. The girls, lovely as Houris, contribute
to the illusion. After he has enjoyed to satiety all the joys
promised by the-Prophet to his elect, he falls back to the
presence of the Grand Master. Here he is informed that he can
enjoy perpetually the delights he has just tasted If he will take
part in the war of the Infidel as commanded by the Prophet </i>(Geller
and Boas, 1969: 6).<br>
</p>

<p>Another translation (Kitti, 1967: 24) begins the tale this
way: </p>

<p>Now no man was allowed to enter the Garden save those whom he
intended to be his ASHISHIN. </p>

<p>In reality, this was a religious situation and scholars have
long since exposed Marco Polo's tale as being a myth, at best an
imaginative embellishment of tales he had heard.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Africa</b> </p>

<p>Use of cannabis in most parts of Africa developed slowly, most
of it during the past 100 years (Blum and Associates, 1969, I:
73). A report from Africa in 1891 (Reininger, 1966: 141-142),
dealt with a tribe that used hemp as an intoxicant in their newly
formed religion and in preparation for battle. A similar use is
described in the Congo, when Simba warriors in 1964 were said to
use a cannabis-alcohol mixture in preparation for battle, to
rouse themselves for the battle and to magically guarantee
immunity from harm. </p>

<p>In Morocco, marihuana, called kif, has been used as an
intoxicant by adult males for centuries; that custom continues
today even though the drug is illegal (Mikuriya, 1970: 122-123). </p>

<p>Although moderate use appears to be tolerated in the areas of
India, North Africa and the Middle East, excessive use is
generally viewed as indicative of serious personality problems
(Geller and Boas, 1969: 7).<br>
</p>

<p><b>Europe</b> </p>

<p>One of the more suggestive parallels between 19th century
France and the United States today is the fact that the French
interest in cannabis at that time was aroused by the returning
French soldiers and scientists of Napoleon's army in Egypt, a
source of the drug. A similar interest occurred in the United
States after the Korean conflict, and has intensified since
Vietnam (Geller and Boas, 1969: 7). </p>

<p>During the 19th century, European interest in the drug was
aided by two scientific reports, the first by W. B. O'Shaughnessy
in 1839, and the second report by Queen Victoria's physician,
Russell Reynolds. Both men recommended its medical use for a
variety of ailments and as a mild euphoriant (Grinspoon, 1971:
56). Cannabis received highly laudatory testimonials from the
medical profession of that day and was readily available without
prescription (Snyder, 1970: 121). </p>

<p>Interest in cannabis was further kindled by popular writers
who used and spoke of hashish enthusiastically, including Charles
Baudelaire, Arthur Rimbaud, and Pierre Gautier. Gautier and
Baudelaire, in fact, were members of the Club des Hachischins, in
which a number of writers and intellectuals gathered and
experimented with hashish (Geller and Boas, 1969: 13). </p>

<p>Although the public delighted to read of the French writers'
drug experiences, the public did not care to engage in the same
kind of activity; to them the experiences were frightening and
repugnant. &quot;As a result, the smoking of hashish remained the
sub-rosa province of a few European artists until the recent
trans-Atlantic phenomenon of the American drug culture&quot;
(Geller and Boas, 1969: 8).<br>
</p>

<p><b>United States </b></p>

<p>The, events surrounding the introduction of cannabis use to
the New World are entirely unclear. Some historians say the
Spaniards brought the plant with them in the 16th century, other
say marihuana smoking came in with the slave trade or with the
Asian Indian migration of the late 18th century. </p>

<p>The hemp plant was cultivated in the United States for
centuries, apparently without general knowledge of its
intoxicating properties (Grinspoon, 1971: 10). Cannabis was an
often used medicine in the United States in the 19th century. It
was easily available without a prescription and was also widely
prescribed by physicians (Snyder, 1970: 26). Hemp was used by the
pioneers to cover their wagons. The plant was a major crop in
Kentucky, Virginia, Wisconsin and Indiana, and was one of the
more important southern agricultural products, after cotton.. It
is still used to make rope, twine and textiles, while the seed is
used as bird food (Geller and Boas, 1969: 16). </p>

<p>Marihuana use as an intoxicant in the United States began
slowly in the early part of this century. Puerto Rican soldiers,
and then Americans who were stationed in the Panama Canal Zone,
are reported to have been using it by 1916. American soldiers
fighting Pancho Villa circa 1916 also learned to use it. This
follows the first reported use in Mexico in the 1880's (Blum and
Associates, 1969, 1: 69-70). Intoxicant use in the United States
is also traced to the large influx of Mexican laborers in the
1910's and 1920's (Geller and Boas, 1969: 14). </p>

<p>The 1933 Report of the &quot;Military Surgeon&quot; stated,
regarding marihuana use among the soldiers in the Canal Zone,
that: </p>

<p><i>Marihuana as grown and used on the Isthmus of Panama is a
mild stimulant and intoxicant. It is not a &quot;habit
forming&quot; drug in the sense that the derivatives of opium,
cocaine, and such drugs, are as there are no symptoms of
deprivation following its withdrawal.</i> </p>

<p><i>Delinquencies due to marihuana smoking which result in
trial by military court are negligible in number when compared
with delinquencies resulting from the use of alcohol drinks,
which is also classed as a stimulant and intoxicant </i>(Geller
and Boas, 1969: 147).<br>
</p>

<p>The report went on to say that marihuana presented no threat
to military discipline, and &quot;that no recommendations to
prevent the sale or use of marihuana are deemed advisable.&quot; </p>

<p>Cannabis has been rejected in various societies on ascetic
grounds. In such puritanical societies such as the Wahabil of
Arabis and the Senussis of Libya, no smoking of any kind was
tolerated, nor was coffee. In North Africa, social rank dictated
use: the aristocratic Moors scorned both hemp and tobacco
smoking, preferring instead, as compatible with high status,
opium eating (Blum and Associates, 1969, 1: 73). </p>

<p>One statement highlighting this kind of value conflict comes
from a Nigerian journalist (Davies, 1966: 299-300) attempting to
explain the 15-year prison sentences of foreign tourists for
growing and smoking marihuana: </p>

<p><i>There is a growing trend in the more economically advanced
countries to indulge at leisure in the exploration of the
personality. At a certain stage of development, there is less
need to produce and more time to spend consuming. This is
healthy. If used properly, marihuana could be helpful at this
stage of development. However, countries which are only beginning
to develop a more complex economic structure must channel all
their energies into creating a new system. This means that they
must sacrifice more of their pleasure. People who smoke hemp seem
on the whole to be less aggressive than people who drink alcohol.
Hemp smoking may have a positive value for certain social
functions....</i> </p>

<p><i>One of the first acts of the Military Government was to
issue a decree making it punishable by death to grow marihuana,
and by up to twenty years of prison for merely being in
possession of it . . . meantime, we Nigerian have to stop getting
high for a while and develop our country.<br>
</i></p>

<p>In the United States, the decade of the 1960's has seen a
spectacular and unprecedented spread of the use of marihuana,
chiefly among the youth. An estimated 24 million persons have
used marihuana and approximately 3.4 million are current users.
The numbers involved and the fact that use spans all age groups
and social classes in American life has produced marked public
reaction and a need for more information on the drug.<br>
</p>

<h2>References<br>
</h2>

<p>Adams, P.: &quot;Marihuana,&quot; Bulletin of the New York
Academy of Medicine (1942). </p>

<p>Allentuck, S. and Bowman, K. M.: &quot;The Psychiatric Aspects
of Marihuana Intoxication,&quot; American Journal of Psychiatry,
99(2) (September 1942). </p>

<p>Andrews, G. and Vinkenoog, S. (eds.) : The Book of Grass: An
Anthology on Indian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). </p>

<p>Barber, T. X.: LSD, Marihuana, Yoga, and Hypnosis, Chicago:
Aldine Publishing Company (1970). </p>

<p>Bloomquist, E. R.: Marijuana, Beverly Hills: Glencoe Press
(1968). </p>

<p>Blum, R. H. and Associates: Drugs I: Society and Drugs: Social
and Cultural Observations, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass Inc.
(1969). </p>

<p>Blum, R. H. and Associates: Drugs II: Students and Drugs:
College and High School Observations, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Inc. (1969). </p>

<p>&quot;The Cannabis Problem: A Note On The Problem and The
History of International Action,&quot; Bulletin on
Narcotics,14(4) (1962). </p>

<p>&quot;Cardiac Glycocides Found Cytotoxic,&quot; Medical News
(London) March 26 (1965). </p>

<p>Chopra, 1. C. and Chopra, R. N.: &quot;The Use of the Cannabis
Drugs in India,&quot; Bulletin on Narcotics, 9(l) (1957). </p>

<p>Chopra, R. N.: &quot;Use of Hemp Drugs in India,&quot; The
Indian Medical Gazette, (June 1940). </p>

<p>Commission of Inquiry into the Non-Medical Use of Drugs:
Interim Report, Ottawa (1970). </p>

<p>David, J. P. and Ramsey, H. H.: &quot;Antiepileptic Action of
Marihuana-active Substances,&quot; Federation Procedures, 8
(1949). </p>

<p>Davies, A.: &quot;Nigeria Whispers,&quot; Andrews, G. and
Vinkenoog, S. (ed&amp;) : The Book of Grass: An Anthology on
Indian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). </p>

<p>Department of Health, Education and Welfare: Marihuana and
Health, A Report to the Congress from the Secretary, Department
of Health, Education and Welfare (March 1971). </p>

<p>Efron, D. H. (ed.) : Psychotomimetic Drugs, New York: Raven
Press (1969). </p>

<p>Feinglass, S. J.: &quot;Marijuana: Standardization,
Characterization and Potential Therapeutic Uses,&quot; Journal of
Secondary Education, 43 (May 1968). </p>

<p>Fort, J.: The Pleasure Seekers: The Drug Crisis, Youth and
Society, New York: Grove Press, Inc. (1969). </p>

<p>Frank, Ira, University of California, Los Angeles, School of
Medicine, Personal Communication, September 1971. </p>

<p>Geller, A. and Boas, M.: The Drug Beat, New York: Cowles Book
Company, Inc. (1969). </p>

<p>Goode, E.: Marijuana, Chicago: Atherton Press (1969).
Grinspoon, L.: &quot;Marihuana,&quot; Scientific American, 221(6)
(December 1969). </p>

<p>Grinspoon, L.: Marihuana Reconsidered, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press (1971). </p>

<p>Hearings before the Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of
Representatives, Taxation of Marihuana, 75th Congress, 1st
Session on H.R. 6385 (1937). </p>

<p>Himmelsbach, C. J.: &quot;Treatment of the Morphine Abstinence
Syndrome with a Synthetic Cannabis-Like Compound,&quot; Southern
Medical Journal, 37 (January 1944). Hollister, L. E.:
&quot;Marihuana in Man: Three Years Later.&quot; Science, 172
(April 2, 1971). </p>

<p>Indian Hemp Drugs Commission: Marijuana, Report of the Indian
Hemp Drugs Commission, Government Central Printing Office, Simla
(1894). </p>

<p>Kabelik, J.: &quot;Hemp (Cannabis sativa)-Antibiotic
Drug,&quot; Pharmazie, 121 (1957). </p>

<p>Kabelik, J., Krejci, Z., and Santavy, F.: &quot;Cannabis as a
Medicant,&quot; Bulletin on Narcotics, 12(3) (July-September
1960). </p>

<p>Kabelikovi, J.: &quot;Antibacterial Action of Cannabis
Indica,&quot; Lekarske Listy, 15 (7) (1952). </p>

<p>Kitti, Phillip K.: &quot;The Assassins,&quot; Andrews, G. and
Vinkenoog, S. (eds.) : The Book of Grass: An Anthology of Indian
Hemp, New York: Grove Press, Inc. (1967). Krejci, Z.: &quot;On
the Problem of Substances with Antibacterial and Hashish Action
in Hemp (Cannabis Sativa L.),&quot; Casopis8 Lekaru Ceskych
(1961). </p>

<p>Krejci, Z., Horak, M., and Santavy, F.: &quot;Hemp (Cannabis
sativa)-Antibiotic Drug, 3rd Report,&quot; Pharmazie, 14 (1959). </p>

<p>Loewe, S. and Goodman, L. S.: &quot;Anticonvulsant Action of
Marihuana-Active Substances,&quot; Federation Procedures, 6
(1947). </p>

<p>Mikuriya, T. H.: &quot;Cannabis Substitution. An Adjunctive
Therapeutic Toot in the Treatment of Alcoholism,&quot; Medical
Times, 98 (4) (April 1970). </p>

<p>Mikuriya, T. H.: &quot;Marihuana in Morocco,&quot; Aaronson,
B. &amp; Osmond, H. (eds.) : Psychedelics, The Uses and
Implications of Hallucinogenic Drugs, Garden City: Doubleday
&amp; Company, Inc. (1970). </p>

<p>Mikuriya, T. H.: &quot;Marihuana In Medicine: Past, Present
and Future,&quot; California Medicine, 110 (January 1969).
Murphy, H. B. M.: &quot;The Cannabis Habit: A Review of Recent
Psychiatric Literature,&quot; Bulletin on Narcotics, 15(l)
(1.963). </p>

<p>McMeens, R. R.: &quot;Report of the Committee on Cannabis
Indica,&quot; Transactions of the Fifteenth Annual Meeting of the
Ohio State Medical Society, Columbus, Ohio: Follett, Foster and
Co. (1860). </p>

<p>New York City Mayor LaGuardia's Committee on Marihuana, The
Marihuana Problem in the City of New York: Sociological, Medical,
Psychological and Pharmacological Studies, Lancaster,
Pennsylvania: The Jaques Cattell Press (1944). </p>

<p>O'Shaughnessy, W. B.: &quot;On the Preparations of the Indian
Hemp, or Gunjah,&quot; Trans. Med. and Psy. SOC., Bengal (1838-40
and 1842). </p>

<p>Parker, C. S. and Wrigley, F. &quot;Synthetic Cannabis
Preparations in Psychiatry: (I) Synhexyl,&quot; Journal of Mental
Sciences, 96 (1950). </p>

<p>Reininger, W.: &quot;Historical Notes,&quot; Solomon, D. (ed.)
The Marihuana Papers, New York: The New American Library, Signet
Books (1966). </p>

<p>Reininger, W.: &quot;Remnants From Historic Times,&quot;
Andrews G. and Vinkenoog, S., (eds.) The Book of Grass: An
Anthology on Indian Hemp, London: Peter Owen Limited (1967). </p>

<p>Robinson, V.: &quot;Concerning Cannabis Indica &quot;I Ciba
Symposia, 8 (Augus-September, 1946). </p>

<p>Snyder, S.: Uses of Marijuana, New York: Oxford University
Press (1970).<br>
<br>
Snyder, S.: &quot;What We Have Forgotten About Pot-A
Pharmacologist's History,&quot; New York Times Magazine, (New
York, New York) (December 13, 1970). </p>

<p>Solomon, D. (ed.) : The Marihuana Papers, New York: New
American Library (1968). </p>

<p>Stockings, G. T.: &quot;A New Euphoriant for Depressive Mental
States,&quot; British Medical Journal, 1 (10,47). </p>

<p>Thompson, L. J. and Proctor, R. C.: &quot;The Use of Pyrahexyl
in the Treatment of Alcoholic and Drug Withdrawal
Conditions,&quot; North Carolina Medical Journal, 14 (October,
1953). </p>

<p>Veliky, I. A. and Genest, K.: &quot;Suspension Culture of
Cannabis Sativa,&quot; Lloydia, 33(4) (December, 1970). </p>

<p>Walton, R. P.: Marihuana: America's New Drug Problem,
Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott (1938). </p>

<p>Watt, J. M.: &quot;Dagga in South Africa,&quot; Bulletin on
Narcotics, 13(3) (1961). </p>

<p>Watt, J. M. and Breyer-Brandwijk, M. G.: The Medicinal and
Poisonous Plants of Southern and Eastern Africa, 2nd edition,
Edinburgh and London: E. and S. Livingstone, Ltd. (1962).<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>