
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-48</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B035-120</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/child2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064312 text/html 12675
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:42:55 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:29:27 GMT
Content-length: 12456
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>LSD, My Problem Child · LSD in Animal Experiments and
Biological Research </title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="Albert Hofmann">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<hr>
<center>

<h3>2. LSD in Animal Experiments and Biological Research </h3>
</center>

<hr>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; After the discovery of its extraordinary psychic
effects, the substance LSD-25, which five years earlier had been
excluded from further investigation after the first trials on
animals, was again admitted into the series of experimental
preparations. Most of the fundamental studies on animals were
carried out by Dr. Aurelio Cerletti in the Sandoz pharmacological
department, headed by Professor Rothlin. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Before a new active substance can be investigated
in systematic clinical trials with human subjects, extensive data
on its effects and side effects must be determined in
pharmacological tests on animals. These experiments must assay
the assimilation and elimination of the particular substance in
organisms, and above all its tolerance and relative toxicity.
Only the most important reports on animal experiments with LSD,
and those intelligible to the layperson, will be reviewed here.
It would greatly exceed the scope of this book if I attempted to
mention all the results of several hundred pharmacological
investigations, which have been conducted all over the world in
connection with the fundamental work on LSD in the Sandoz
laboratories. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Animal experiments reveal little about the mental
alterations caused by LSD because psychic effects are scarcely
determinable in lower animals, and even in the more highly
developed, they can be established only to a limited extent. LSD
produces its effects above all in the sphere of the higher and
highest psychic and intellectual functions. It is therefore
understandable that specific reactions to LSD can be expected
only in higher animals. Subtle psychic changes cannot be
established in animals because, even if they should be occurring,
the animal could not give them expression. Thus, only relatively
heavy psychic disturbances, expressing themselves in the altered
behavior of research animals, become discernible. Quantities that
are substantially higher than the effective dose of LSD in human
beings are therefore necessary, even in higher animals like cats,
dogs, and apes. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; While the mouse under LSD shows only motor
disturbances and alterations in licking behavior, in the cat we
see, besides vegetative symptoms like bristling of the hair
(piloerection) and salivation, indications that point to the
existence of hallucinations. The animals stare anxiously in the
air, and instead of attacking the mouse, the cat leaves it alone
or will even stand in fear before the mouse. One could also
conclude that the behavior of dogs that are under the influence
of LSD involves hallucinations. A caged community of chimpanzees
reacts very sensitively if a member of the tribe has received
LSD. Even though no changes appear in this single animal, the
whole cage gets in an uproar because the LSD chimpanzee no longer
observes the laws of its finely coordinated hierarchic tribal
order. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Of the remaining animal species on which LSD was
tested, only aquarium fish and spiders need be mentioned here. In
the fish, unusual swimming postures were observed, and in the
spiders, alterations in web building were apparently produced by
LSD. At very low optimum doses the webs were even better
proportioned and more exactly built than normally: however, with
higher doses, the webs were badly and rudimentarily made.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>How Toxic Is LSD? </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; The toxicity of LSD has been determined in
various animal species. A standard for the toxicity of a
substance is the LD<sub>50</sub>, or the median lethal dose, that
is, the dose with which 50 percent of the treated animals die. In
general it fluctuates broadly, according to the animal species,
and so it is with LSD. The LD<sub>50</sub> for the mouse amounts
to 50-60 mg/kg. i.v. (that is, 50 to 60 thousandths of a gram of
LSD per kilogram of animal weight upon injection of an LSD
solution into the veins). In the rat the LD<sub>50</sub> drops to
16.5 mg/kg, and in rabbits to 0.3 mg/kg. One elephant given 0.297
g of LSD died after a few minutes. The weight of this animal was
determined to be 5,000 kg, which corresponds to a lethal dose of
0.06 mg/kg (0.06 thousandths of a gram per kilogram of body
weight). Because this involves only a single case, this value
cannot be generalized, but we can at least deduce from it that
the largest land animal reacts proportionally very sensitively to
LSD, since the lethal dose in elephants must be some 1,000 times
lower than in the mouse. Most animals die from a lethal dose of
LSD by respiratory arrest. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The minute doses that cause death in animal
experiments may give the impression that LSD is a very toxic
substance. However, if one compares the lethal dose in animals
with the effective dose in human beings, which is 0.0003-0.001
mg/kg (0.0003 to 0.001 thousandths of a gram per kilogram of body
weight), this shows an extraordinarily low toxicity for LSD. Only
a 300- to 600-fold overdose of LSD, compared to the lethal dose
in rabbits, or fully a 50,000- to 100,000fold overdose, in
comparison to the toxicity in the mouse, would have fatal results
in human beings. These comparisons of relative toxicity are, to
be sure, only understandable as estimates of orders of magnitude,
for the determination of the therapeutic index (that is, the
ratio between the effective and the lethal dose) is only
meaningful within a given species. Such a procedure is not
possible in this case because the lethal dose of LSD for humans
is not known. To my knowledge, there have not as yet occurred any
casualties that are a direct consequence of LSD poisoning.
Numerous episodes of fatal consequences attributed to LSD
ingestion have indeed been recorded, but these were accidents,
even suicides, that may be attributed to the mentally disoriented
condition of LSD intoxication. The danger of LSD lies not in its
toxicity, but rather in the unpredictability of its psychic
effects. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Some years ago reports appeared in the scientific
literature and also in the lay press, alleging that damage to
chromosomes or the genetic material had been caused by LSD. These
effects, however, have been observed in only a few individual
cases. Subsequent comprehensive investigations of a large,
statistically significant number of cases, however, showed that
there was no connection between chromosome anomalies and LSD
medication. The same applies to reports about fetal deformities
that had allegedly been produced by LSD. In animal experiments,
it is indeed possible to induce fetal deformities through
extremely high doses of LSD, which lie well above the doses used
in human beings. But under these conditions, even harmless
substances produce such damage. Examination of reported
individual cases of human fetal deformities reveals, again, no
connection between LSD use and such injury. If there had been any
such connection, it would long since have attracted attention,
for several million people by now have taken LSD.</p>

<p>&nbsp; </p>

<h4>Pharmacological Properties of LSD </h4>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; LSD is absorbed easily and completely through
the gastrointestinal tract. It is therefore unnecessary to inject
LSD, except for special purposes. Experiments on mice with
radioactively labeled LSD have established that intravenously
injected LSD disappeared down to a small vestige, very rapidly
from the bloodstream and was distributed throughout the organism.
Unexpectedly, the lowest concentration is found in the brain. It
is concentrated here in certain centers of the midbrain that play
a role in the regulation of emotion. Such findings give
indications as to the localization of certain psychic functions
in the brain. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The concentration of LSD in the various organs
attains maximum values 10 to 15 minutes after injection, then
falls off again swiftly. The small intestine, in which the
concentration attains the maximum within two hours, constitutes
an exception. The elimination of LSD is conducted for the most
part (up to some 80 percent) through the intestine via liver and
bile. Only 1 to 10 percent of the elimination product exists as
unaltered LSD; the remainder is made up of various transformation
products. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As the psychic effects of LSD persist even after it
can no longer be detected in the organism, we must assume that
LSD is not active as such, but that it rather triggers certain
biochemical, neurophysiological, and psychic mechanisms that
provoke the inebriated condition and continue in the absence of
the active principle. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; LSD stimulates centers of the sympathetic nervous
system in the midbrain, which leads to pupillary dilatation,
increase in body temperature, and rise in the blood-sugar level.
The uterine-constricting activity of LSD has already been
mentioned. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; An especially interesting pharmacological property
of LSD, discovered by J. H. Gaddum in England, is its
serotonin-blocking effect. Serotonin is a hormone-like substance,
occurring naturally in various organs of warm-blooded animals.
Concentrated in the midbrain, it plays an important role in the
propagation of impulses in certain nerves and therefore in the
biochemistry of psychic functions. The disruption of natural
functioning of serotonin by LSD was for some time regarded as an
explanation of its psychic effects. However, it was soon shown
that even certain derivatives of LSD (compounds in which the
chemical structure of LSD is slightly modified) that exhibit no
hallucinogenic properties, inhibit the effects of serotonin just
as strongly, or yet more strongly, than unaltered LSD. The
serotonin-blocking effect of LSD thus does not suffice to explain
its hallucinogenic properties. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; LSD also influences neurophysiological functions
that are connected with dopamine, which is, like serotonin, a
naturally occurring hormone-like substance. Most of the brain
centers receptive to dopamine become activated by LSD, while the
others are depressed. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As yet we do not know the biochemical mechanisms
through which LSD exerts its psychic effects. Investigations of
the interactions of LSD with brain factors like serotonin and
dopamine, however, are examples of how LSD can serve as a tool in
brain research, in the study of the biochemical processes that
underlie the psychic functions. </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <a href="child3.html"><p>Chapter 3</a> <!--webbot
    bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
    tag="BODY" startspan --><p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a>
    | <a href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
    href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>
    <p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
    href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
    href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
    <!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="63531" --> </p>
</blockquote>
</body>
<!--
 This file is transmitted under the "Fair Use" rulings regarding the 1976 Copyright Act for NON-profit academic and general information purposes. -->
</html>
</DOC>