
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B019-266</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/mhc2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122045126 text/html 19562
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:51:18 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:52:52 GMT
Content-length: 19344
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Marihuana Conference of 1938 -- Part 2</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->

<h3 align="center">Marihuana Conference </h3>

<p><b>HELD DECEMBER 5, 1938 <br>
in the UNITED STATES Bureau of Internal Revenue Building (Room
3003)<br>
Washington D. C.<br>
Part 2</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p><b>Commissioner Anslinger:<br>
</b>I assume the press will be after us. The Treasury Department
has not as yet publicly announced this meeting. The Department
will do this subsequently. I hope therefore, that none of you
will be drawn into discussions with reporters until the meeting
is concluded. The Treasury Department will issue a statement on
the meeting. I want all of you to freely express your opinions on
every phase of the subject under discussion; and if you differ on
any point, we hope you will not hesitate to present your side of
the picture.<br>
I want to give you a brief review of what took place at Geneva,
Switzerland, last spring at a meeting of the Sub-Committee on
Cannabis, of the Advisory Committee on traffic in opium and other
dangerous drugs of the League of Nations. I think this a fitting
way to open the Conference. It will illustrate the international
significance of the Cannabis problem and show the current status
of some of the excellent work that is being done by other nations
on the question.<br>
This work I think was very important, and I want to give you the
reports of the experts of the various countries which will give
you an idea as to the points on which the authorities still
remain in doubt. </p>

<p>The Secretariat of the League referred to various points
submitted to the Experts in a questionnaire drawn up for their
use in January, l936, and used as a basis for the Sub-Committees
work. He described the research work being undertaken. The
Sub-Committee endeavored to indicate on what phases of the
Marihuana problem agreement exists, and on what points there is a
divergence of views which has formed the subject of exchange of
information between the Experts whether on chemical and
agricultural questions, or on the medical and pathological
questions. </p>

<p>Since the Advisory Committee's last session, Mr. J. V.
Collins, Government Analyst, Ceylon, on January 12, l938,
notified the Committee of his acceptance of the Advisory
Committee's invitation to act as an Expert on Cannabis in place
of the late Dr. Symons. The Committee received important
documents from two of its Experts, Dr. Bouquet and Dr. de
Myttenaere.Dr. Bouquet has for many years done a vast amount of
work on Cannabis. He is the Inspector of Pharmacies in Tunis. </p>

<p>Dr. Bouquet submitted reports on the following points: </p>

<p>I Vegetable products wrongly designated as hemp. </p>

<p>II Microscopic examination of samples of Cannabis. </p>

<p>III Physiologically active resin in the staminate Cannabis
plant. </p>

<p>IV New variety of Cannabis. </p>

<p>V Influence of drought on the growth of Cannabis. </p>

<p>VI Medical uses of Cannabis and drugs with a Cannabis base. </p>

<p>VII Use of animal charcoal. </p>

<p>VIII Dr. James C. Munch's Reaction. </p>

<p>IX Is light petroleum the only solvent of the active element
of Cannabis and its preparations? </p>

<p>X Addiction by certain solanaceae. </p>

<p>Then the report is supplemented by Dr. Bouquet regarding the
following points: </p>

<p>I Are the light petroleum extracts of Cannabis the only ones
that are physiologically active? </p>

<p>II Observations on document O.C.1542 (z) (Report on the
research conducted by the Treasury Department of the United
States of America, in cooperation with the Department of
Agriculture, in connection with studies on the chemical
identification of Cannabis Indica (Cannabis Sativa). </p>

<p>III Identification test for Cannabis resin, proposed by Dr. de
Myttenaere.<br>
</p>

<p>IV Method of identifying resin, proposed by Dr. H. J. Wollner.
</p>

<p>V Procedure for experiments. </p>

<p>VI Observations on the causes of Cannabis addiction in North
Africa. </p>

<p>Dr. de Myttenaere submitted to the Secretariat a supplement to
the third note on Indian hemp, and a fourth note on Indian hemp,
including a study of the published work which has appeared since
May, 1937, giving observations of Mr. Wollner's experiments in
the United States. Apart from these contributions from Experts of
the Sub-Committee on Cannabis, the Secretariat received a ÒStudy
of the Chemical Identification of Marihuana (Cannabis
Indica)&quot; by Dr. Rafael Plasencia, Government Chemist of
Cuba, and a reply concerning the same subject from the United
Kingdon Representative. It also received information regarding
experiments on the chemical identification of Cannabis indica
communicated by the United States Government. This is the report
covering the investigation conducted by the Treasury Department
in cooperation with the Department's Agriculture. </p>

<p>The United Kingdom also submitted to the Secretariat a
communication concerning the question as to whether Cannabis
stalks used commercially for the production of fibre still
contained resin. That point was also discussed. </p>

<p>As to the American documents, we usually summarize all work
that has been done on Cannabis, incorporate it into one document
and submit it to the League of Nations. </p>

<p>As to Dr. Plasencia's experiment; he has followed up Beam's
experiments and elaborated a new method which he states is
absolutely and specifically suitable for Cannabis and constant
for all the varieties tested, even Merck's extract of Cannabis
indica with which Beam's reaction gave no result. </p>

<p>Our Government has submitted observations on this paper. </p>

<p>The United Kingdom Representative also transmitted an opinion
by the Government Chemist who suggests certain modifications in
this method. These modifications consist of an attempt to
separate the substances responsible for the characteristic color
in Beam's test on the assumption that it is a phenol. </p>

<p>All of these documents are available in the United States
Treasury Department for anyone who would like to study them. It
would seem that Dr. de Myttenaere and Mr. Wollner have different
opinions on the point as to whether light petroleum is the best
solvent for Cannabis. Dr. de Myttenaere considers that so far as
is known at present, light petroleum is the best solvent for the
extraction of the active principles of Cannabis, and hence the
only one suitable for Beam's test; and he has carried out
experiments as to whether ethyl acetate should be substituted, or
is preferable as a solvent for petroleum ether. </p>

<p>In the report there is also given the list of vegetable
products wrongfully designated as hemp, We have a little trouble
with that in this country, as it is frequently designated as
Cannabis, New Zealand hemp, hemp of the Americas, Bombay hemp,
African hemp, etc. </p>

<p>It has been found that these were all wrong designators used
by various persons interested in the problem. </p>

<p>NOTE.--Until very recently. the definition of Cannabis sativa
(marihuana) was based upon the traditional conception that the
active principle of the drug, technically known as cannabinol or
cannabinone, is present only in the female or pistillate plant
and present there only in the flowering tops. Since the
development of more refined chemical tests, it has been
discovered that the active principle is contained in the leaves
of the pistillate plant as well as the leaves of the staminate
plant. This brought about the advisability of makihg the
definition all inclusive in laws for control of the drug found in
the male as well as the female plant. It will therefore be
necessary to change the definition in the League of Nations
Treaty of 1925. </p>

<p>Dr. Bouquet, while investigating this question, found that it
always has been acknowledged that intoxicating resin could be
obtained from male Cannabis plants but in such small quantities
that for practical purposes this source of production is not
utilized at present. He realized, however, that it might become
worthwhile for traffickers to turn their attention to it, and
recommended that the free handling of the vegetative parts of
both male and female Cannabis plants should be prohibited. That
work was started in America by the laboratory of Parke-Davis some
years ago. </p>

<p>Then the question of the production of the fibre, the
condition of development, depending on the meterological factors
of the crop area was discussed. In this respect differences have
been noted between the height of the plant, and the length,
consistency and toughness of the textile fibres. </p>

<p>The growing conditions of the plant also affect the output of
its resin, which depends directly on the degree of temperature;
on the dryness of the soil; and probably on the amount of
sunshine encountered. In the annual report for Turkey for 1937,
there is brought to the attention of the Committee data
concerning a variety of Cannabis sativa having long stalks. It is
grown for industrial purposes in various parts of Anatolia; the
fibre is used for manufacturing ropes and sacks; and its resin
content is so slight it could not be used for the extraction of a
narcotic drug. </p>

<p>That seems to be the answer to our prayers, if true. As to the
psychical and psychopathic effects of Cannabis, the literature on
this phase of the subject tends to confirm the analysis as to the
psychic effects of hashish made as long ago as 1845 by Dr. Moreau
de Tours in his book, which incidentally is still the standard
work on the subject. Also, Dr. Brottaux in his book on Hashish
published in 1934, which I think is considered a veritable
&quot;bible&quot; on the subject today, has followed up and in
the main confirmed Dr. Moreau's analysis. </p>

<p>Then there was discussed the relation between Cannabis and
insanity. There was reference to the work of Dhunsiboy, the
Director of one of the Hospitals for Insane in India in which he
points out that the prolonged use of Indian hemp leads to
insanity. </p>

<p>The work of Dr. Bouquet was discussed; and also the work of
the British Indian hemp Commission which carried out an inquiry
in 1893 and 1894 into the relationship of Indian hemp and lunacy.
Colonel Chopra did some work in India which was discussed. He
found that in India a special form of mental disease classed as
toxic insanity had direct relation to the excessive use of hemp
drugs. All of these experts laid stress on &quot;excessive
use.&quot; </p>

<p>Then there was a proposal discussed to authorize the sale of
ganja to the Indian population in Burma.As you probably know, in
India. the Government maintains a Monopoly, and various narcotic
products are sold across the counter tax-paid. The League of
Nations wanted to point out to the Committee the various points
that were raised in connection with the proposal to sell hemp. </p>

<p>To meet the allegation concerning the increase in insanity due
to the use of ganja, a table prepared by the Inspector General of
Civil Hospitals in Burma has been added showing that as far as
the mental hospital at Tagadale was concerned, the percentage of
mental cases attributable to the use of ganja and its derivatives
varied during the years between 1928 and 1937 from 0.87 to 4.35;
and that in 1936, out of a total of 296 admissions there were ten
such cases, the corresponding figures for 1937 being 356 and ten
respectively. </p>

<p>The Sub-Committee was urged to examine the still-controversial
question of the relationship between addiction to hemp drugs and
the spread of insanity. </p>

<p>The work of Dr. Stringaris on Hashish was discussed. He is an
authority on insanity due to the use of Hashish in Russia. He
maintains that a further increase can be expected in the ravages
caused by Hashish in Asiatic Russia. </p>

<p>Then the question of the relationship between the abuse of
narcotic drugs and alcoholism arose. It is still a mixed
question, and considerable recommendations were furnished.In
Algeria, Dr. Bouquet has noted that Heroin addicts were recruited
from the Hashish addicts, and Dr. Stringaris in Asiatic Russia
has found that to be the case there also. </p>

<p>In conclusion the Secretariat pointed out that, as a result of
concurrent investigations, progress has been made on chemical
studies and research, while fresh information has been gathered
in other spheres; at the same time, certain points still require
clarification, especially in connection with the physiological,
psychological, and psychopathic effects of Cannabis and with the
relationships between Hashish-addiction and insanity, and between
Cannabis-addiction and crime. </p>

<p>After considering all of the recommendations furnished by the
League of Nations, the Sub-Committee then made the following
report, which is very pertinent in the light of the points we
want to discuss here. </p>

<p>&quot;In discussion of the matter before it, the Sub-Committee
divided consideration of the subject as follows: </p>

<ol>
    <li>Commercial uses of Cannabis </li>
    <li>Medical uses of Cannabis </li>
    <li>Effects of the abuse of Cannabis </li>
    <li>Methods of detecting the presence of Cannabis </li>
    <li>Legal definition of the term &quot;Cannabis.&quot; </li>
</ol>

<ol>
    <li>The discussions developed the fact that the Committee
        still lacks complete information concerning the
        commercial uses of Cannabis. The Sub-Committee would
        welcome further information concerning the physiological,
        psychological and psychopathic effects of abusive use of
        Cannabis and the relation between Cannabis-addiction and
        crime. </li>
    <li>Dr. Bouquet pointed out that percentages of resin content
        in the hemp plant raised in different countries should be
        ascertained with a view to deciding whether it is
        necessary to prohibit or merely to control the
        cultivation of Cannabis for industrial purposes. The
        value of the Beam test for detecting the presence of
        Cannabis appears to have been confirmed by a further
        series of experiments, the results of which are before
        the Committee, including those attained by the employment
        of several different modifications of that text. Dr. de
        Myttenaere said that his experience enabled him to state
        that the Beam alkaline reaction and its modifications
        indicated the chief element in the various components of
        Cannabis resin which was the cause of Hashish addiction,
        i.e.the alcoholic group. Dr. Bouquet informed the
        Sub-Committee that a test based upon new principles had
        recently been devised which will form the subject of a
        thesis to be presented by Messrs. Duquenois and Hassan
        Negm Mustapha at the University of Strasbourg in July,
        1938, a brief description of which will be circulated to
        the Opium Advisory Committee. </li>
    <li>The question of modifying the incomplete definition of
        Indian hemp in the Geneva Convention of 1925 was
        discussed, but no definite conclusion was arrived at. It
        appeared upon examination that such modification would
        affect not only Article 1 of the Convention, but also
        Articles 4 and 11 and would necessarily involve
        complicated adjustments in the Convention itself. It was
        therefore decided to postpone further consideration of
        this matter until the next session of this Sub-Committee
        when it is hoped that more time will be available for the
        work. </li>
    <li>Up to the present time, the work of the Sub-Committee has
        consisted almost entirely of collecting information in
        regard to the various phases of the Cannabis problem,
        and, until the Sub-Committee has before it more data than
        it has at present, it would scarcely be considered
        advisable to undertake definite recommendations.&quot; </li>
    <li>We would like to take inventory of our research and see
        what is needed. </li>
    <li>The Federal Government did not get into this picture
        until after all 48 states had adopted legislation
        controlling Marihuana in greater or less degree. The
        Marihuana Tax Act went into effect a little over a year
        ago, and since that time we have destroyed some 16,000
        acres of the plant throughout the various States; most of
        it in the Middle West. About l,000 violators have been
        arrested by the Federal Government. </li>
    <li>I am not trying to sell this book, but I want to call
        your attention to the work on &quot;Marihuana'a written
        by Dr. Robert P. Walton, Professor of Chemistry,
        University of Mississippi, with a foreword by Dr. Geller
        who is a distinguished pharmacologist connected with the
        University of Chicago.I would like to start with the
        agricultural phases of this problem, which will also
        include the industrial and economic phases.I am therefore
        going to call on Dr. Wright of the University of
        Wisconsin and ask him to discuss some of the questions
        that seem to be troubling us. <br>
    </li>
</ol>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>