
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-64</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B017-125</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hempref2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043818 text/html 37368
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:38:07 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:50:55 GMT
Content-length: 37150
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Historical and Literary References to Hemp - Part 2</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<h1>Historical and Literary References to Hemp </h1>

<p><b>A sampling of references to hemp (marijuana) throughout the
ages.</b> </p>

<p><b>Part 2</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>The Gilded Age </p>

<p>Volume I </p>

<p>Chapter XVII: Stone's Landing Becomes City Of Napoleon - On
Paper </p>

<p>Twain, Mark; Warner, Charles Dudley , 1873 </p>

<p>About the chief cabin, which was the store and grocery of this
mart of trade, the mud was more liquid than elsewhere, and the
rude platform in front of it and the dry-goods boxes mounted
thereon were places of refuge for all the loafers of the place.
Down by the stream was a dilapidated building which served for a <b>hemp</b>
warehouse, and a shaky wharf extended out from it into the water.
In fact, a flat-boat was there moored by it, its setting poles
lying across the gunwales. Above the town the stream was crossed
by a crazy wooden bridge, the supports of which leaned all ways
in the soggy soil; the absence of a plank here and there in the
flooring made the crossing of the bridge faster than a walk an
offense not necessary to be prohibited by law. </p>

<p>&quot;This, gentlemen,&quot; said Jeff, &quot;is Columbus
River, alias Goose Run. If it was widened, and deepened, and
straightened, and made long enough, it would be one of the finest
rivers in the Western country.&quot; </p>

<p>&#133;&#133;&#133;&#133;&#133;. </p>

<p>When the conveyance at length drew up to Mr. Thompson's door,
the gentleman descended with great deliberation, straightened
himself up, rubbed his hands, and, beaming satisfaction from
every part of his radiant frame, advanced to the group that was
gathered to welcome him, and which had saluted him by name as
soon as he came within hearing. </p>

<p>&quot;Welcome to Napoleon, gentlemen, welcome. I am proud to
see you here Mr. Thompson. You are looking well Mr. Sterling.
This is the country, sir. Right glad to see you Mr. Brierly. You
got that basket of champagne? No? Those blasted river thieves!
I'll never send anything more by 'em. The best brand, Roederer.
The last I had in my cellar, from a lot sent me by Sir George
Gore - took him out on a buffalo hunt, when he visited our
country. Is always sending me some trifle. You haven't looked
about any yet, gentlemen? It's in the rough yet, in the rough.
Those buildings will all have to come down. That's the place for
the public square, court- house, hotels, churches, jail - all
that sort of thing. About where we stand, the deepo. How does
that strike your engineering eye, Mr. Thompson? Down yonder the
business streets, running to the wharves. The University up
there, on rising ground, sightly place, see the river for miles.
That's Columbus River, only forty-nine miles to the Missouri. You
see what it is, placid, steady, no current to interfere with
navigation, wants widening in places and dredging, dredge out the
harbor and raise a levee in front of the town; made by nature on
purpose for a mart. Look at all this country, not another
building within ten miles, no other navigable stream, lay of the
land points right here; <b>hemp</b>, tobacco, corn, must come
here. The railroad will do it, Napoleon won't know itself in a
year.&quot; </p>

<p>The Gilded Age </p>

<p>Volume I </p>

<p>Chapter XVI: Model Railroad Engineer. Survey To Stone's
Landing </p>

<p>The Colonel hitched up his chair close to Harry, laid his hand
on his knee, and, first looking about him, said in a low voice,
&quot;The Salt Lick Pacific Extension is going to run through
Stone's Landing! The Almighty never laid out a cleaner piece of
level prairie for a city; and it's the natural center of all that
region of <b>hemp</b> and tobacco.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>A Tramp Abroad </p>

<p>Volume I </p>

<p>Chapter XXII: The Black Forest </p>

<p>Author: Twain, Mark, 1879 </p>

<p>We found the Black Forest farmhouses and villages all that the
Black Forest stories have pictured them. The first genuine
specimen which we came upon was the mansion of a rich farmer and
member of the Common Council of the parish or district. He was an
important personage in the land and so was his wife also, of
course. His daughter was the &quot;catch&quot; of the region, and
she may be already entering into immortality as the heroine of
one of Auerbach's novels, for all I know. We shall see, for if he
puts her in I shall recognize her by her Black Forest clothes,
and her burned complexion, her plump figure, her fat hands, her
dull expression, her gentle spirit, her generous feet, her
bonnetless head, and the plaited tails of <b>hemp</b>-colored
hair hanging down her back. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Roughing It </p>

<p>Volume II </p>

<p>Chapter XXVII: The End Of Great Kamehameha </p>

<p>Twain, Mark, 1871 </p>

<p>He was dressed entirely in black - dress-coat and silk hat -
and looked rather democratic in the midst of the showy uniforms
about him. On his breast he wore a large gold star, which was
half hidden by the lapel of his coat. He remained at the door a
half-hour, and occasionally gave an order to the men who were
erecting the kahilis before the tomb. He had the good taste to
make one of them substitute black crape for the ordinary <b>hempen</b>
rope he was about to tie one of them to the framework with.
Finally he entered his carriage and drove away, and the populace
shortly began to drop into his wake. While he was in view there
was but one man who attracted more attention than himself, and
that was Harris (the Yankee Prime Minister). This feeble
personage had crape enough around his hat to express the grief of
an entire nation, and as usual he neglected no opportunity of
making himself conspicuous and exciting the admiration of the
simple Kanakas. Oh! noble ambition of this modern Richelieu! </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: I Promessi Sposi Or The Betrothed </p>

<p>Book: Chapter XXIII </p>

<p>Author: Manzoni, Alessandro </p>

<p>Date: 1826 </p>

<p>Lucia replied with a look which expressed assent as clearly as
words could have done, and with a sweetness which words could not
have conveyed. </p>

<p>'Noble girl!' rejoined the woman. 'And your Curate, too, being
at our village, (for there are numbers assembled from all the
country round to elect four public officers,) the Signor Cardinal
thought it better to send him with us; but he has been of little
use: I had before heard that he was a poor - spirited creature;
but, on this occasion, I couldn't help seeing that he was as
frightened as a chicken in a bundle of <b>hemp</b>.' </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Samuel Pepys </p>

<p>Author: Stevenson, Robert Louis </p>

<p>Date: c1886 </p>

<p>A Liberal Genius </p>

<p>The whole world, town or country, was to Pepys a garden of
Armida. Wherever he went, his steps were winged with the most
eager expectation; whatever he did, it was done with the most
lively pleasure. An insatiable curiosity in all the shows of the
world and all the secrets of knowledge, filled him brimful of the
longing to travel, and supported him in the toils of study. Rome
was the dream of his life; he was never happier than when he read
or talked of the Eternal City. When he was in Holland, he was
&quot;with child&quot; to see any strange thing. Meeting some
friends and singing with them in a palace near The Hague, his pen
fails him to express his passion of delight, &quot;the more so
because in a heaven of pleasure and in a strange country.&quot;
He must go to see all famous executions. He must needs visit the
body of a murdered man, defaced &quot;with a broad wound,&quot;
he says, &quot;that makes my hand now shake to write of it.&quot;
He learned to dance, and was &quot;like to make a dancer.&quot;
(He learned to sing, and walked about Gray's Inn Fields
&quot;humming to myself (which is now my constant practice) the
trillo.&quot; He learned to play the lute, the flute, the
flageolet, and the theorbo, and it was not the fault of his
intention if he did not learn the harpsichord or the spinet. He
learned to compose songs, and burned to give forth&quot; a scheme
and theory of music not yet ever made in the world.&quot; When he
heard &quot;a fellow whistle like a bird exceeding all,&quot; he
promised to return another day and give an angel for a lesson in
the art. Once, he writes, &quot;I took the Bezan back with me,
and with a brave gale and tide reached up that night to the Hope,
taking great pleasure in learning the seamen's manner of singing
when they sound the depths.&quot; If he found himself rusty in
his Latin grammar, he must fall to it like a schoolboy. He was a
member of Harrington's Club till its dissolution, and of the
Royal Society before it had received the name. Boyle's
Hydrostatics was &quot;of infinite delight&quot; to him, walking
in Barnes Elms. We find him comparing Bible concordances, a
captious judge of sermons, deep in Descartes and Aristotle. We
find him, in a single year, studying timber and the measurement
of timber; tar and oil, <b>hemp</b>, and the process of preparing
cordage; mathematics and accounting; the hull and the rigging of
ships from a model; and &quot;looking and improving himself of
the (naval) stores with&quot; - hark to the fellow! - &quot;great
delight.&quot; His familiar spirit of delight was not the same
with Shelley's; but how true it was to him through life! He is
only copying something, and behold, he &quot;takes great pleasure
to rule the lines, and have the capital words wrote with red
ink&quot;; he has only had his coal - cellar emptied and cleaned,
and behold, &quot;it do please him exceedingly.&quot; A hog's
harslett is &quot;a piece of meat he loves.&quot; He cannot ride
home in my Lord Sandwich's coach, but he must exclaim, with
breathless gusto, &quot;his noble, rich coach.&quot; When he is
bound for a supper party, he anticipates a &quot;glut of
pleasure.&quot; When he has a new watch, &quot;to see my
childishness,&quot; says he, &quot;I could not forbear carrying
it in my hand and seeing what o'clock it was an hundred
times.&quot; To go to Vauxhall, he says, and &quot;to hear the
nightingales and other birds, hear fiddles, and there a harp and
here a Jew's trump, and here laughing, and there fine people
walking, is mighty divertising.&quot; And the nightingales, I
take it, were particularly dear to him; and it was again
&quot;with great pleasure&quot; that he paused to hear them as he
walked to Woolwich, while the fog was rising and the April sun
broke through. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Sir Humphrey Gilbert's Voyage To Newfoundland </p>

<p>Author: Haies, Edward </p>

<p>Date: 1583 </p>

<p>Part II. </p>

<p>Concerning the inland commodities, as well to be drawn from
this land, as from the exceeding large countries adjoining, there
is nothing which our east and northerly countries of Europe do
yield, but the like also may be made in them as plentifully, by
time and industry; namely, resin, pitch, tar, soap-ashes,
deal-board, masts for ships, hides, furs, flax, <b>hemp</b>,
corn, cables, cordage, linen cloth, metals, and many more. All
which the countries will afford, and the soil is apt to yield. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Study Of Poetry </p>

<p>Author: Arnold, Matthew </p>

<p>Date: 1880 </p>

<p>The Study Of Poetry, Part II. </p>

<p>'Thus amongst ourselves we regret the good time, poor silly
old things, low - seated on our heels, all in a heap like so many
balls; by a little fire of <b>hemp</b> - stalks, soon lighted,
soon spent. And once we were such darlings! So fares it with many
and many a one.'] </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Thousand And One Nights </p>

<p>Book: Story Of The Young King Of The Black Islands </p>

<p>Author: Traditional </p>

<p>Date: c1200 </p>

<p>Translation: Lane, Edward William </p>

<p>My father was king of the city which was here situate: his
name was Mahmud, and he was lord of the Black Islands, and of the
four mountains. After a reign of seventy years, he died, and I
succeeded to his throne; whereupon I took as my wife the daughter
of my uncle; and she loved me excessively, so that when I
absented myself from her, she would neither eat nor drink till
she saw me again. She remaine under my protection five years.
After this, she went one day to the bath; and I had commanded the
cook to prepare the supper, and entered this palace, and slept in
my usual place. I had ordered two maids to fan me; and one of
them sat at my head, and the other at my feet; but I was
restless, because my wife was not with me; and I could not sleep.
My eyes were closed, but my spirit was awake; and I heard the
maid at my head say to her at my feet, O Mes'udeh, verily our
lord is unfortunate in his youth, and what a pity is it that it
should be passed with our depraved, wicked mistress! - Perdition
to unfaithful wives! replied the other: but (added she) such a
person as our lord, so endowed by nature, is not suited to this
profligate woman, who passes every night absent from his bed. -
Verily, rejoined she at my head, our lord is careless in not
making any inquiry respecting her. - Woe to thee! said the other:
hath our lord any knowledge of her conduct, or doth she leave him
to his choice? Nay, on the contrary, she contriveth to defraud
him by means of the cup of wine which he drinketh every night
before he sleepeth, putting bhang (<b>hemp</b>) into it; in
consequence of which he sleepeth so soundly that he knoweth not
what happeneth, nor whither she goeth, nor what she doeth; for,
after she hath given him the wine to drink, she dresseth herself,
and goeth out from him, and is absent until daybreak, when she
returneth to him, and burneth a perfume under his nose, upon
which he awaketh from his sleep. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Life Of King Henry The Fifth, The </p>

<p>Book: Act III. </p>

<p>Author: Shakespeare, William </p>

<p>Date: 1599 </p>

<p>Chor. Thus with imagined wing our swift Scene flies </p>

<p>In motion of no less celerity </p>

<p>Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen </p>

<p>The well-appointed king of Hampton pier </p>

<p>Embark his royalty; and his brave fleet </p>

<p>With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning; </p>

<p>Play with your fancies, and in them behold </p>

<p>Upon the <b>hemp</b>en tackle ship-boys climbing; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Burning Of Rome Under Nero </p>

<p>Book: By Henry Sienkiewicz </p>

<p>Author: Sienkiewicz, Henryk </p>

<p>By Henry Sienkiewicz </p>

<p>A.D. 64 </p>

<p>Introduction </p>

<p>The destruction seemed as irresistible, perfect, and pitiless
as Predestination itself. Around Pompey's Amphitheatre stores of <b>hemp</b>
caught fire, and ropes used in circuses, arenas, and every kind
of machine at the games, and with them the adjoining buildings
containing barrels of pitch with which ropes were smeared. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: King Henry the Sixth, Part 2 </p>

<p>Book: Act IV. </p>

<p>Author: Shakespeare, William </p>

<p>Date: 1591 </p>

<p>Scene VII. The Same. Smithfield. </p>

<p>Say. Those cheeks are pale for watching for your good. </p>

<p>Cade. Give him a box o' the ear, and that will make em red
again. </p>

<p>Say. Long sitting, to determine poor men's causes, </p>

<p>Hath made me full of sickness and diseases. </p>

<p>Cade. Ye shall have a <b>hemp</b>en caudle then, and the help
of hatchet. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: (A) Midsummer-Night's Dream </p>

<p>Book: Act III </p>

<p>Author: Shakespeare, William </p>

<p>Date: 1596 </p>

<p>Scene I. The Wood. Titania lying asleep. </p>

<p>Enter Puck behind. </p>

<p>Puck. What <b>hemp</b>en home-spuns have we swaggering here, </p>

<p>So near the cradle of the fairy queen? </p>

<p>What! a play toward; I'll be an auditor; </p>

<p>An actor too perhaps, if I see cause. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: New Way To Pay Old Debts </p>

<p>Book: Act V </p>

<p>Author: Massinger, Philip </p>

<p>Date: 1625 </p>

<p>Scene I. [A room in Lady Allworth's house] </p>

<p>Over. I am o'erwhelm'd with wonder! </p>

<p>What prodigy is this? What subtle devil </p>

<p>Hath raz'd out the inscription, the wax </p>

<p>Turned into dust? The rest of my deeds whole </p>

<p>As when they were deliver'd, and this only </p>

<p>Made nothing! Do you deal with witches, rascal? </p>

<p>There is a statute^6 for you, which will bring </p>

<p>Your neck in an <b>hemp</b>en circle; yes, there is; </p>

<p>And now 'tis better thought for, cheater, know </p>

<p>This juggling shall not save you. </p>

<p>[Footnote 6: The law against witchcraft.] </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: William Tell </p>

<p>Book: Act II </p>

<p>Author: Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich Von </p>

<p>Date: 1804 </p>

<p>Scene II. </p>

<p>Melch. The Rossberg I will undertake to scale. </p>

<p>I have a sweetheart in the garrison, </p>

<p>Whom with some tender words I could persuade </p>

<p>To lower me at night a <b>hemp</b>en ladder. </p>

<p>Once up, my friends will not be long behind. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Civilizations Past And Present </p>

<p>Book: Chapter 33: Asia And Africa In The Interwar World </p>

<p>Author: Wallbank;Taylor;Bailkey;Jewsbury;Lewis;Hackett </p>

<p>Date: 1992 </p>

<p>Nationalism In Southeast Asia </p>

<p>Economic developments, however, constricted Philippine
independence at the same time that the islands were being
prepared for self-rule. Before the outbreak of World War II,
four-fifths of Philippine exports went to the United States and
three-fifths of its imports came from America. Like most
underdeveloped economies, the export trade was dominated by a
very few products: <b>hemp</b>, sugar, coconuts, and tobacco.
Independence, with its accompanying imposition of tariffs would
have been economically difficult. The United States had prevented
the development of a colonial-type plantation economy by
forbidding non-Filipinos to own plantation lands, but native
landlordism was rampant, and the oppressed peasants launched a
brief uprising in the mid-1930s. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Japan </p>

<p>Book: Japan, A Country Study </p>

<p>Author: Jane T. Griffin </p>

<p>Affiliation: HQ, Department of the Army </p>

<p>Date: 1981 </p>

<p>Chapter 3D. Visual Arts </p>

<p>The many and varied traditional handicrafts of Japan enjoyed
official recognition and protection and, owing to the folk art
movement, were much in demand. Each craft carried a group of
specialized skills with it. Textiles, for example, included
weaving silk, <b>hemp</b>, or cotton following the spinning and
dyeing process in a range from timeless folk designs to complex
court patterns. Village crafts evolving from ancient folk
traditions also survived in weaving and indigo dyeing by remote
farming families in northern Japan and in Hokkaido by the Ainu
peoples, whose distinctive designs had prehistoric prototypes.
Silk weaving families can be traced to the fifteenth century in
the famous Nishijin weaving center of Kyoto where they produced
the elegant fabrics worn by the emperor and the aristocracy. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Romania </p>

<p>Book: Romania, A Country Study </p>

<p>Author: Eugene K. Keefe </p>

<p>Affiliation: HQ, Department of the Army </p>

<p>Date: 1972 </p>

<p>Chapter 6A. Artistic and Intellectual Expression </p>

<p>Particularly well known outside the country are the woven
rugs, tablecloths, and tapestries that decorate all rural homes
and many urban ones. Designs are mostly geometric, and particular
designs and color combinations are associated with particular
regions. Well known for their unusual design and warm colors are
Oltenian textiles in which a central animal, human, or floral
design is surrounded by several frames of different colors.
Muntenian textiles, on the other hand, have small geometric
designs spread over the whole surface. Moldavian and
Transylvanian textiles vary a great deal from one location to
another and include both geometric and figurative designs. At one
time, wool was used exclusively for weaving rugs and tapestries,
but since the mid-nineteenth century cotton or <b>hemp</b> warp
has been used in combination with wool. All-cotton and all-<b>hemp</b>
rugs and wall hangings are also produced. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Romania </p>

<p>Book: Doing Business with the New Romania </p>

<p>Author: Donald E. deKieffer </p>

<p>Affiliation: Embassy of Romania, Washington DC </p>

<p>Date: 1990 </p>

<p>Chapter 2A. Economic Scene </p>

<p>ECONOMY </p>

<p>Vegetables </p>

<p>Vegetables are grown in a relatively small area (some 632,000
acres). Peas are the predominant crop; capable of an early
harvest, they allow a second crop, usually of fodder plants, to
be grown on the same ground. Vegetable cultivation is
particularly marked around Bucharest; there is specialization in
the production of early potatoes, tomatoes, onions, cabbages and
green peppers. Similar peripheral areas are found around
Timisoara, Arad, Craiova, Galati, Braila and other cities. The
most important potato-growing area in the country is found in the
Brasov, Sibiu, Harghita and Mures districts. Other related crops
include sugar beets (475,000 acres) and sunflowers (10,300,000
acres), mostly on the Danube, Tisa and Jijia plains. <b>Hemp</b>,
flax, rapeseed, soybeans and tobacco are also grown. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Title: Discovery Of America </p>

<p>Book: Chapter II: Pre-Columbian Voyages </p>

<p>Author: Fiske, John </p>

<p>Date: 1892 </p>

<p>Part II </p>

<p>The ship preserved at Christiania is described as having had
but a single mast, set into a block of wood so large that it is
said no such block could now be cut in Norway. Probably the sail
was much like those still carried by large open boats in that
country, - a single square on a mast forty feet long. ^1 These
masts have no standing rigging, and are taken down when not in
use; and this was probably the practice of the Vikings.&quot; </p>

<p>[Footnote 1: Perhaps it may have been a square-headed lug,
like those of the Deal galley-punts; see Leslie's Old Sea Wings,
Ways, and Words, in the Days of Oak and <b>Hemp</b>, London,
1890, p. 21.] </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: Patent and Trademark Office </p>

<p>Author: Verity, C. William </p>

<p>Affiliation: US Department Commerce </p>

<p>Date: 1988 </p>

<p>The Story of the Patent and Trademark Office - Before 1900 </p>

<p>Although he never took out a patent, Thomas Jefferson made a
number of inventions, one of which - an improvement in the mold
board of the plough - had a significant effect on the
agricultural development of this country and earned him a
decoration from the French Institute. He also invented a
revolving chair which his enemies accused him of designing
&quot;so as to look all ways at once,&quot; a folding chair or
stool which could be used as a walking stick, a machine for
treating <b>hemp</b>, and a pedometer. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: Our Country: Volume 1 </p>

<p>Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. </p>

<p>Volume: Vol. 1 </p>

<p>Date: 1905 </p>

<p>Chapter III </p>

<p>(speaking of Native Americans) </p>

<p>In the colder weather of the winter, the common men wore a
mantle made of a sort of cloth manufactured of the soft inner
bark of trees interwoven with <b>hemp</b> or a species of flax.
This was thrown gracefully over the shoulder, leaving the right
arm exposed. </p>

<p>. . . .. </p>

<p>Hunting, fishing and the cultivation of the rich land were the
chief employments of these people. The cotton plant was unknown
to them, but <b>hemp</b> and flax were quite abundant. The women
assisted the men in the fields, in the cultivation of corn,
beans, peas, squashes, and pumpkins, which yielded enormous
returns for the little labor bestowed. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: Our Country: Volume 1 </p>

<p>Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. </p>

<p>Volume: Vol. 1 </p>

<p>Date: 1905 </p>

<p>Chapter IX </p>

<p>Verazzani then went further up the coast, probably as far as
the vicinity of Albemarle Sound, where he landed, with twenty
men. A short distance from the sea, the land was covered with
large trees, among which were noble cypresses. From these forest
trees trailed luxuriant vines which were clustered with delicious
grapes, the natives said, in early autumn. The people fled in
fear to the woods. They were fairer than those further south, and
were covered with a light drapery made of &quot;certain plants
which hung down from the branches&quot; - Spanish moss - tied by
threads of wild <b>hemp</b>. Their heads were uncovered. They
lived in huts made of saplings and shrubbery, and navigated
canoes dug out of a single log without any iron instrument
whatever. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: Our Country: Volume 2 </p>

<p>Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. </p>

<p>Volume: Vol. 2 </p>

<p>Date: 1905 </p>

<p>Chapter XXXIX </p>

<p>In 1719, the House of Commons declared that erecting any
manufactories in the colonies tended to lessen their dependence
on Great Britain, and they were discouraged. A little earlier a
British author had written &quot;There be fine iron works which
cast no guns no house in New England has above twenty rooms; not
twenty in Boston have ten rooms each; a dancing-school was set up
here but put down; a fencing-school is allowed. There be no
musicians by trade. All cordage, sail-cloth and mats, come from
England; no cloth made there worth four shillings per yard; no
alum, no salt made by their sun. </p>

<p>Later, woolen-goods, paper and <b>hemp</b> were manufactured
in New England, and almost every family made coarse cloth for
domestic use. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: Our Country: Volume 6 </p>

<p>Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. </p>

<p>Volume: Vol. 6 </p>

<p>Date: 1905 </p>

<p>Chapter CXXXVIII </p>

<p>In 1776, almost the whole agricultural products of our
country, including live-stock, were used for the support of the
million and a half inhabitants; 1876 42,000,000 were fed and
largely clothed from the products of our soil, while a vast
surplus of our cereal and fibrous productions were sent to other
countries. In 1870, there were 189,000,000 acres of improved farm
land in our country, which produced in cereals (in round numbers)
wheat, 288,000,000 bushels rye, 17,000,000 Indian corn,
761,000,000; oats, 282,000,000; barley, 30,000,000; buckwheat,
10,000,000 bushels; and rice, 74,000,000 pounds. Of the common
potato, there were raised 143,000,000 bushels, and of the sweet
potato, 22,000,000 bushels. The hay crop amounted to 28,000,000
tons, and the tobacco crop to 363,000,000 pounds. Of the
principal fibrous products there were raised that year over
1,200,000,000 pounds of cotton. The average annual product, as we
have observed, is now greater. The amount of flax raised was
27,000,000 pounds; wool, 100,000,000 pounds; silk cocoons about
4,000 pounds, and 13,000 tons of <b>hemp</b>. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: Our Country: Volume 7 </p>

<p>Author: Lossing, Benson J., LL.D. </p>

<p>Volume: Vol. 7 </p>

<p>Date: 1905 </p>

<p>Chapter CL </p>

<p>. The Philippines have a fine, though tropical, climate, while
the soil is very fertile, but lacks labor for its proper
cultivation. The chief article of commerce is <b>hemp</b>, of
which $21,800,000 worth was exported in 1904; the other principal
exports are sugar, tobacco, oil-nuts, and copra. </p>

<p>. . . . </p>

<p>Gratifying as are these statistics representing the trade
expansion of the Philippine Islands within the brief period of
American possession of them, there are indications that the
economic situation will be vastly improved in the next few years.
</p>

<p>The justification for this surmise arises from the known
wealth of the Islands, not only in valuable forest timber, gum,
and dye woods, but in lignite coal of the best grade, iron ore,
and other minerals, which, like agriculture, are hardly as yet
developed. It is also justified by what is reported of the
efforts being made by the local bureaus, agricultural and
forestry, in establishing experimental farms and distributing for
general cultivation improved quantities of plants, seeds, roots,
etc.; while giving instruction in combating destructive insects,
in raising the grade of live stock, and in suggesting more
scientific methods of curing tobacco and producing a better
quality of <b>hemp</b>. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: At Home in the Smokies </p>

<p>Author: US Department of the Interior </p>

<p>Affiliation: National Park Service </p>

<p>Volume: Handbook 125 </p>

<p>Date: 1984 </p>

<p>Chapter 2 Highland Homeland </p>

<p>Homecoming </p>

<p>The tepee of Indian lore did not exist here. The Cherokee
house was a rough log structure with one door and no windows. A
small hole in the bark roof allowed smoke from a central fire to
escape. Furniture and decorations included cane seats and painted
<b>hemp</b> rugs. A good-sized village might number 40 or 50
houses. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: United States Army in the Korean War - The Medics' War </p>

<p>Author: Cowdrey, Albert E. </p>

<p>Affiliation: US Army </p>

<p>Date: 1987 </p>

<p>Chapter 10 Victims of War </p>

<p>Under these stresses American soldiers often did not show up
well by comparison with marines, or with men from the
professional military units sent to Korea by other U.N. nations.
Many soldiers had become POWs shortly after their arrival. Almost
none had strong feelings of belonging to any unit. The enemy's
practice of shuffling men back and forth from camp to camp and
his deliberate policy of breaking down structures of loyalty and
command among the prisoners increased each man's isolation.
Escape from intolerable conditions through fantasy was common,
aided by the widespread smoking of <b>hemp</b> (Cannabis). So was
apathy. Cases were seen of men who apparently willed themselves
to die. &quot;The people who died,&quot; recalled a doctor,
&quot;would first become despondent, then would lie down or cover
their heads with their blankets, then wanted ice water to drink
with their food, eventually no food only water and eventually -
death.&quot; </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: The American Home Front </p>

<p>Author: Abrahamson, James L. </p>

<p>Affiliation: National Defense Univ. </p>

<p>Date: 1984 </p>

<p>The Revolutionary War Economy </p>

<p>Because 90 percent of all Americans engaged in farming, the
war's impact on agriculture produced the most widespread results.
Nowhere was that more dramatically true than in the Southern
colonies. The prewar boycotts and the outbreak of hostilities
caused a precipitous drop in Southern exports to England and
Scotland by 1778. As military operations shifted to the Southern
States after 1778, agriculture there suffered further from
capital destruction and the loss of slaves. The profitability of
indigo production collapsed with the termination of the British
bounty, and rice growers, who had much of their capital sunk in
paddy systems, found it difficult to convert to raising sheep, <b>hemp</b>,
or flax - for which there was a great wartime demand. In the
upper South, however, the war stimulated the prewar trend toward
converting from tobacco to grain and livestock (for which the war
increased the domestic demand), and the remaining tobacco crop
soon found ways around the British blockade to profitable
overseas markets. While the lower South therefore suffered
modestly, the Chesapeake area adjusted to new wartime demands and
reestablished good overseas markets. </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/goldline.gif" align="bottom" width="562"
height="19"> </p>

<p>Book: Presidential Proclamations &amp; Executive Orders </p>

<p>Author: National Archives and Records Administration </p>

<p>Affiliation: National Archives </p>

<p>Date: 1989 </p>

<p>Chapter 15A Commerce and Foreign Trade </p>

<p>(b). For the purposes of this order, the term
&quot;agricultural commodities&quot; means all commodities and
products, simple, mixed, or compound, or complements to such
commodities or products that are or may be eaten or drunk by
human beings or animals, irrespective of other uses to which such
commodities or products may be put, and at all stages of
processing from the raw commodity, to the product thereof in a
vendible form for immediate human or animal consumption, but
exclusive of such commodities and products as the Secretary of
Agriculture shall determine. For the purposes of this order, the
term &quot;agricultural commodities&quot; shall also include all
starches, sugars, fats and oils of animal, vegetable, or marine
origin (including oil seeds and other oil bearing materials,
fatty acids, soap and soap powder), cotton, tobacco, wool, <b>hemp</b>,
flax fiber, and alcohol, and also such other commodities and
products as the President may designate. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history/history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="51534" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>