
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-70</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B006-187</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/knapp1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035443 text/html 13147
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:54:35 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:16:22 GMT
Content-length: 12929
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Dethrone the Drug Czar by Judge Whitman Knapp</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h2>DETHRONE THE DRUG CZAR </h2>

<p><b>by Whitman Knapp</b> </p>

<p><b>This is from the Sunday, May 9, New York Times OP-ED page.</b>
</p>

<p><b>Whitman Knapp is a Senior United States District Judge for
the</b> </p>

<p><b>Southern District of New York.</b> </p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>The nation was fortunate in President Clinton's selection of
Lee Brown as Director of the Office of National Drug Control. </p>

<p>Having been police commissioner in Atlanta, Houston and New
York, Mr. Brown has been in key positions to observe that a
half-century of the Federal war against drugs has had a simple
result: Each year, the Government has spent more on enforcing
drug laws than it did the year before. Each year, more people
have gone to jail for drug offenses. </p>

<p>Yet each year there have been more drugs on the streets. </p>

<p>Surely, Mr. Brown can have no interest in simply spending more
money and filling more prisons. Indeed, he might well conclude
that his mission is to find out how to eliminate his new job. </p>

<p>Milton Friedman, the Nobel laureate economist, has a simple
explanation of the upward spiral with which Mr. Brown must
contend. Law enforcement temporarily reduces the drug supply and
thus causes prices to rise. Higher prices draw new sources of
supply and even new drugs into the market, resulting in more
drugs on the street. The increased availability of drugs creates
more addicts. The Government reacts with more vigorous
enforcement, and the cycle starts anew. </p>

<p>Mr. Friedman and those who share his views propose a
straightforward way out of this discouraging spiral:
Decriminalize drugs, thus eliminating the pressure on supply that
creates an ever-bigger market. </p>

<p>This, they contend, will reduce demand and reverse the cycle,
much as a similar approach has cut into alcohol addiction. </p>

<p>I do not claim competence to evaluate this theory. But after
20 years on the bench, I have concluded that Federal drug laws
are a disaster. It is time to get the Government out of drug
enforcement. As long as we indulged the fantasy that the problem
could be solved by making America drug free, it was appropriate
that the Government assume the burden. But that ambition has been
shown to be absurd. </p>

<p>Attorney General Janet Reno's statement on Friday that she
hopes to refocus the drug war on treatment show's admirable
determination that the drug problem is primarily a local issue,
more properly the concern and responsibility of state and city
governments. </p>

<p>If the possession or distribution of drugs were no longer a
Federal crime, other levels of government would face the choice
of enforcement or trying out Milton Friedman's theory and
decriminalizing. If they chose the second route, they would have
to decide whether to license drug retailers, distribute drugs
through state agencies or perhaps allow drugs only to be
purchased with a physician's prescription. </p>

<p>The variety, complexity and importance of these questions make
it exceedingly clear that the Federal Government has no business
being involved in any of them. What might be a hopeful solution
in New York could be a disaster in Idaho, and only state
legislatures and city governments, not Congress, can pass laws
tailored to local needs. </p>

<p>What did the nation do when it decided to rid itself of the
catastrophes spawned by Prohibition? It adopted the 21st
Amendment, which excluded the Government from any role in
regulation of alcoholic beverages and strengthened the powers of
the states to deal with such matters. </p>

<p>That is precisely what the Congress should do with respect to
drugs. It should repeal all Federal laws that prohibit or
regulate their distribution or use and devise methods for helping
the states to exercise their respective powers in those areas. </p>

<p>But having created the problem by decades of ill-considered
legislation, congress can't just throw it back to the states
without helping finance the efforts. That raises a host of
complex problems, including apportionment of Federal monies among
the states, restrictions on how the monies may be used, the ratio
of Federal dollars for enforcement to those spent on treatment
and the role of nongovernmental organizations that treat addicts.
</p>

<p>Such problems will not lend themselves to easy resolution.
After all, Prohibition was allowed to wreak havoc for a mere 14
years, while the drug warriors have been at it for many decades.
Under Lee Brown's leadership, we may hope for a return to sanity.
</p>

<p>---------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>These three &quot;Letters to the Editor&quot; appeared in the
May 24 NYT. </p>

<p>comments follow each one. </p>

<p>DECRIMINALIZATION WOULD JUST BOOST DRUG USE </p>

<p>To the Editor: </p>

<p>&quot;Dethrone the Drug Czar&quot; (Op-Ed May 9), in which
Whitman Knapp calls for decriminalizing drugs, proved poignant
for me. I read it soon after coming off an emergency room shift
where I saw two cocaine-induced abortions and got to resuscitate
a 15-year-old who suffered a massive cerebral hemorrhage due to
cocaine use. &quot;Resuscitate&quot; may be too strong a word.
What I actually did was hook up a brain-dead boy to life support,
drill a hole in his head and try to comfort his hysterical mom
while I negotiated him into our last remaining intensive care
unit bed. </p>

<p>Judge Knapp doesn't seem to understand that the consumption of
illegal drugs, not the commerce surrounding them, causes most of
the drug-related misery and death. This tragedy is visited not
only upon the drug users, but also upon those who get in the way
of their fists, knives, guns and cars. Justice Department studies
have shown that a majority of violent crimes are committed by
people already intoxicated -- not by those seeking drugs. </p>

<p>Those who learn their history from historians, rather than
from old re-runs of the &quot;Untouchables&quot;,&quot; know that
Prohibition resulted in a major reduction in child abuse,
domestic violence, murders, disease and absenteeism. The
subsequent decriminalization of alcohol did not &quot;cut into
alcohol addiction&quot; -- it facilitated and encouraged it. </p>

<p>For many people and for society as a whole, alcohol and
illicit drugs are agents of disease. Decriminalizing illegal
drugs will remove yet another barrier to their consumption and
end up increasing their use. This may put the drug czar out of
business, but it's sure to keep me spending more of your health
care dollars for years to come. </p>

<p>Daniel Brookoff, M.D. </p>

<p>Assistant Professor of Medicine </p>

<p>University of Tennessee </p>

<p>Memphis, May 10, 1993 </p>

<p>---------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>MANY GOOD RESULTS </p>

<p>To the Editor: </p>

<p>We can no longer ignore calls like Judge Whitman Knapp's in
&quot;Dethrone the Drug Czar&quot; to decriminalize drugs. When
most of our jails are filled with drug-related convicted
criminals; when the criminal justice system is crippled by
drug-related cases; when drugs cost us billions of dollars in
police, judges, prosecutors and lawyers; when our streets,
schools, subways, parks, homes and we are not safe from
drug-related shootings, burglaries and muggings, our politicians
can at least debate decriminalization honestly. </p>

<p>What are we afraid of? That it would become too easy to obtain
drugs? How difficult is it now? Are we afraid that more
youngsters will use drugs? Do we really believe that the fear of
criminal punishment deters drug use? If so, where is the proof of
such deterrence? These questions should be debated. </p>

<p>If drugs were decriminalized and made available without the
fear of long-term jail terms for sellers and user,s it stands to
reason that prices would be reduced drastically. The drug user
who now steals, mugs and burglarizes to support his habit may not
commit such crimes if he could obtain the drugs at a lower price.
The billions of dollars now spent to enforce drug laws could be
spent to educate youngsters against the use of drugs and to treat
drug users. Decriminalizing drugs does not mean encouragement of
their use. </p>

<p>On the positive side, decriminalizing drugs could reduce
crime, unclog our judicial system and free billions of dollars
for other purposes, including drug treatment facilities. What is
the negative side of decriminalizing drugs? Can we afford more of
the same? </p>

<p>Demetrios Coritsidis </p>

<p>Long Island City, Queens, May 12, 1993 </p>

<p>_The writer is a lawyer._ </p>

<p>---------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>Third letter: </p>

<p>---------------------------------------------------------------------
</p>

<p>CALI CARTEL'S THREAT </p>

<p>To the Editor: </p>

<p>Over the last few years we have lost our focus on illegal
drugs as a national security threat. Editorials increasingly
demand a United States counternarcotics policy that attempts to
solve the drug problem solely through domestic actions. Increased
resources for drug prevention and treatment can pay big
dividends, and should be pursued. </p>

<p>But we also need a focused foreign policy. The news that
Gilberto Rodriguez-Orjuela, the Cali cartel drug kingpin, ordered
the killing in New York City of Manuel de Dios Unanue to silence
his writings about the cartel (front page, May 11) should serve
as a wake-up call to all Americans that an isolationist
counternarcotics strategy would be a tragic mistake. </p>

<p>Although the Medellin cartel has been badly damaged, the
Colombian cocaine cartel headquartered in Cali is more powerful
than ever. Through corruption, intimidation and murder, it exerts
a powerful influence over Colombian Government institutions. Its
influence has spread. </p>

<p>In Bolivia, trafficking networks of native Colombians have
replaced native Bolivians, while in Guatemala Cali traffickers
have bought up ranches to use as staging locations for aerial
smuggling. Wherever they go, the curruption of democratic
institutions follows. And now the first murder by the Cali cartel
of an American journalist on American soil has been charged. </p>

<p>So long as the Cali cartel is allowed to flourish unchecked,
it will export death and violence to America. It has the most
effective clandestine distribution system in America for
contraband and weapons. When American weans itself away from
widespread cocaine addiction, the cartel will have shifted to
heroin. The cartel is financing a massive opium cultivation
program in Colombia that has in less than two years catapulted
Columbia to the world's No. 3 heroin producer. </p>

<p>A global drug cartel like Cali can only be weakened and
incapacitated by global-law enforcement action. If we leave these
global mafias for our children to deal with, it may be too late. </p>

<p>Robert C. Bonner </p>

<p>Drug Enforcement Administrator </p>

<p>Washington, May 14, 1993 <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>