
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-41</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B010-183</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Other/wisotsky.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040855 text/html 82190
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:08:37 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:02:08 GMT
Content-length: 81974
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Prepared Statment of Steven Wisotsky, Professor of Law, </title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_other_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="other.htm">Other Publications related to drug policy</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="25252" -->

<h1>Prepared Statement of Steven Wisotsky, Professor of Law, </h1>

<p><font size="2">Nova University Law Center, before the select
committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of
Representatives, Concerning: A New Beginning in U.S. Drug Policy,
September 29th, 1988, pp.410-454. <br>
</font></p>

<hr>

<p><font size="2"></font>&nbsp;</p>

<p>[T]he history of the narcotics legislation in the country
&quot;reveals the determination of congress to turn the screw of
the criminal machinery -- detection, prosecution and punishment
-- tighter and tighter.&quot; </p>

<p>The U.S. Supreme Court in _Albernaz v. United States_, 450
U.S. 333, 343 (1981)<br>
</p>

<p>The chief cause of problems is solutions -- Eric Sevareid<br>
</p>

<p>Mr. Chairman, I would like to express my appreciation to the
Committee for inviting me to participate in this important
hearing on U.S. Drug Policy. This hearing could be and should be
the start of a new beginning in the conception and execution of
our drug laws. Indeed, if there is one over-riding theme in my
prepared statement, it is just that: more than anything else --
more than revised laws or the commitment of new resources -- we
need a careful, comprehensive study of the costs and benefits of
present drug policy, followed by a clear articulation of the
fundamental goals sought to be achieved by our drug policy. </p>

<p>First, let me identify myself for the record. I am both a
lawyer and a law professor. I have been a full-time member of the
law faculty of the Nova University Law Center since 1975. </p>

<p>One of my primary areas of specialization is the criminal
justice system. Since the late 1970s, I have followed
developments in U.S. drug law. With the aid of a grant from the
Nova Law Center in 1982, I published what is to my knowledge the
first critique of the U.S. War on Drugs, the substance of which
is clearly indicated by its title, 'Exposing the War on Cocaine:
The Futility and Destructiveness of Prohibition', 1983 _Wisconsin
Law Review_ 1305. (1) </p>

<p>My published work in this field has been cited widely by the
press, being summarized, for example, in the _Atlantic Monthly_
cover story on cocaine, of January 1986. I am most widely known
as the author of _Breaking the Impasse in the War on Drugs_,
reviewed in the _New York Times_ Book Review Section in December
1986. I have spoken on drug law and policy at many panels and
conferences in the United States and in Europe. </p>

<p>My prepared statement for this hearing addresses three
fundamental questions. What is the state of the War on Drugs? How
did we get there? Where should we go from here? </p>

<p>The current 'War on Drugs' began on October 2nd, 1982, with a
radio address by President Reagan to the Nation: &quot;The mood
towards drugs is changing in this country and the momentum is
with us. We are making no excuses for drugs hard, soft, or
otherwise. Drugs are bad and we are going after them&quot;.(2)
Twelve days later, in a speech delivered at the Department of
Justice, the President followed with an &quot;unshakable&quot;
commitment &quot;to do what is necessary to end the drug
menace&quot; and &quot;to cripple the power of the mob in
America.&quot;(3) He cited the &quot;unqualified success&quot; of
the Miami Task Force on Crime and Drugs as a model to build
on.(4) It is important to note that President Reagan was not the
first to declare war on drugs. President Nixon had done the same
in 1971. In a message to Congress he had described drug abuse as
a &quot;national emergency&quot;, denounced drugs as &quot;public
enemy number one&quot; and called for a &quot;total
offensive&quot;.(5) First Drug War or not, the President's
statement about the mood of the country seemed accurate. At the
time of his October 1982 speeches, some 3,000 parents groups had
already organized nationwide under the umbrella of the National
Federation of Parents for Drug Free Youth.(6) Within the
government, the House Select Committee(7) and the attorney
general's Task Force on Violent Crime(8) had urged the President
to declare War on Drugs. </p>

<p>The President's October 14th speech called for and got more of
nearly everything:(9) 1.more personnel -- 1,020 law enforcement
agents for the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA), Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), and other agencies, 200 Assistant United
States Attorneys, and 340 clerical staff; 2.more aggressive law
enforcement -- creating 12 (later 13) regional prosecutorial task
forces across the nation &quot;to identify, investigate, and
prosecute members of high-level drug trafficking enterprises, and
to destroy the operations of those organizations&quot;; 3.more
money -- $127.5 million in additional funding and a substantial
reallocation of the existing budget from prevention, treatment,
and research programs to law enforcement programs; 4.more prison
bed space -- the addition of 1,260 beds at eleven federal prisons
to accommodate the increase in drug offenders to be incarcerated;
5.more stringent laws -- a &quot;legislative offensive designed
to win approval of reforms&quot; with respect to bail,
sentencing, criminal forfeiture, and the exclusionary rule;
6.better interagency coordination -- bringing together all
federal law enforcement agencies in &quot;a comprehensive attack
on drug trafficking and organized crime&quot; under a
Cabinet-level committee chaired by the attorney general; and
7.improved federal-state co-ordination, including federal
assistance to state agencies by training their agents. </p>

<p>Energized by the hardening attitude toward illegal drugs, the
administration acted aggressively, mobilizing an impressive array
of federal bureaucracies and resources in a co-ordinated,
although largely futile, attack on the supply of illegal drugs --
principally cocaine, marijuana, and heroin. The administration
hired hundreds of drug agents and cut through bureaucratic
rivalries with greater vigor than any administration before it.
It acted to streamline operations and compel more co-operation
among enforcement agencies. It placed the FBI in charge of DEA
and gave it major drug enforcement responsibility for the first
time in its history.(10) And, as the centerpiece of its
prosecutorial strategy, it fielded a network of Organized Crime
Drug Enforcement Task Forces in 13 'core' cities across the
nation.(11) </p>

<p>To stop drugs from entering the country, the Administration
attempted to erect a contemporary anti-drug version of the
Maginot Line: the National Narcotics Border Interdiction System
(NNBIS), an intelligence network designed to co-ordinate radar
surveillance and interdiction efforts along the entire
96,000-mile border of the United States. As part of that
initiative, NNBIS floated radar balloons in the skies over Miami,
the Florida Keys, and even the Bahamas to protect the nation's
perimeter against drug-smuggling incursions.(12) </p>

<p>The CIA joined the war effort by supplying intelligence about
foreign drug sources, and NASA assisted with satellite-based
surveillance of coca and marijuana crops under cultivation.(13) </p>

<p>The administration also initiated financial investigations,
aided by computerized data banks and staffed by Treasury agents
specially trained to trace money-laundering operations.(14) The
State Department pressured foreign governments to eradicate
illegal coca and marijuana plants and financed pilot programs to
provide peasant farmers with alternative cash crops.(15) It also
negotiated Mutual Assistance Treaties to expose 'dirty' money
secreted in tax-haven nations and to extradite defendants accused
of drug conspiracies against the laws of the United States.(16) </p>

<p>The government also literally militarized what had previously
been only a rhetorical war, deploying the armed forces of the
United States to &quot;assist&quot; drug enforcement operations.
The Department of Defense provided pursuit planes, helicopters,
and other equipment to federal civilian enforcement agencies,
while Navy E-2C 'Hawkeye' radar planes patrolled the coastal
skies in search of smuggling aircraft and ships.(17) The Coast
Guard, receiving new cutters and more personnel, intensified its
customary task of interdicting drug-carrying vessels at sea. </p>

<p>1981 amendments to the Posse Comitatus Act relaxed the
century-old ban on military enforcement of criminal laws and
permitted Coast Guard boarding parties to sail on Naval warships
serving as 'platforms' for Coast Guard interdictions.(18)
Finally, for the first time in American history, Navy vessels,
including a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, began directly to
interdict -- and in one case fired upon -- drug smuggling ships
in international waters.(19) On a purely technical level, the
Administration could rightly claim some success in focusing the
resources of the federal government in a historically large and
single-minded attack on the drug supply. </p>

<p>What were the results of this extraordinary enforcement
program? It set new records in every category of measurement --
drug seizures, investigations, indictments, arrests, convictions,
and asset forfeitures. For example, DEA, FBI and Customs seized
nearly one-half billion dollars in drug-related assets in
1986.(20) DEA arrested twice as many drug offenders in 1986
(12,819) as in 1982, and the percentage of arrestees constituting
high-level traffickers also rose from roughly one-third to
one-half.(21) DEA, FBI, and other federal agencies seized over
100,000 lbs. Of cocaine in 1986.(22) From the end of 1980 to June
30, 1987, the prison population (counting felonies only) soared
from 329,021 to 570,519. Roughly 40 percent of new prison inmates
now go in for drug offenses. In recognition of this boom, the
1989 budget submission of the President seeks a 48 percent
increase for the U.S. Bureau of Prisons in order to accommodate
an anticipated increase in prisoners from 44,000 today to 72,000
by 1995. Despite the Administration's accumulation of impressive
statistics, domestic marijuana cultivation took off and the black
market in cocaine grew to record size. In 1980, the supply of
cocaine to the U.S. was estimated at 40 metric tons; by 1986 it
had risen to 140 tons. As a result of this abundant supply and a
more-or-less stable pool of buyers, prices fell dramatically. In
1980, a kilo of cocaine cost $50,000 - $55,000 delivered in
Miami; by 1986, it had fallen to the range of $12,000 - $20,000;
$14,000 was typical for much of 1988. In 1980-81, a gram of
cocaine cost $ 100 and averaged 12 percent purity at street
level. By 1986, the price had fallen to as low as $80 ($50 in
Miami), and the purity had risen to more than 50 percent.(23)
Around the nation, crack was marketed in $5 and $10 vials to
reach the youth and low-income markets.(24) More than 22 million
Americans report having tried cocaine; and roughly 5.8 million
report having used it during the month preceding the 1985
National Household Survey.(25) Cocaine-related hospital
emergencies rose from 4,277 in 1982 to 9,946 in 1985, and then to
more than 26,000 in 987.(26) </p>

<p>As if to mock the aggressive efforts of the War on Drugs, this
rapid market growth occurred in the face of President Reagan's
doubling and redoubling of the federal anti-drug enforcement
budget from $645 million in fiscal year 1981 to over $4 billion
in fiscal year 1987.(27) Resources specifically devoted to
interdiction rose from $399 million to $ 1.3 billion, one third
of the current budget; and military assistance rose from $5
million to $405 million,(28) including the provision of (the
services of) Air Force AWAC'S and Navy E-2C radar planes; Army
Black Hawk helicopters used in Customs pursuit missions; and the
Customs Service's own purchases of P-3 radar planes, Citation jet
interceptors, and Blue Thunder interceptor boats. DEA personnel
rose from 1,940 in 1981 to 2,875 special agents in 1988, with
more on request for 1989, along with a 47-position air wing for
DEA. </p>

<p>This budgetary expansion seems all the more remarkable when
compared to the 1969 anti-drug budget of $73.5 million.(29)
Commenting specifically upon the interdiction budget, the Office
of Technology Assessment concluded: </p>

<p>Despite a doubling of Federal expenditures on interdiction
over the past five years, the quantity of drugs smuggled into the
United States is greater than ever.... There is no clear
correlation between the level of expenditures or effort devoted
to interdiction and the long- term availability of
illegally-imported drugs in the domestic market.(30) </p>

<p>The social 'return' on the extra billions spent during that
time has been a drug abuse problem of historic magnitude,
accompanied by a drug trafficking parasite of international
dimensions. </p>

<p>This latter point is crucial. It is not simply that the War on
Drugs has failed to work; it has in many respects made things
worse. It has spun a spider's web of black market pathologies,
including roughly 25 percent of all urban homicides, widespread
corruption of police and other public officials, street crime by
addicts, and subversive 'narcoterrorist' alliances between Latin
American guerrillas and drug traffickers.(31) In the streets of
the nation's major cities, violent gangs of young drug thugs
engage in turf wars and open shoot-outs with automatic
rifles.(32) Innocent bystanders are often shot. Corruption
pervades local police departments and foreign governments. Some
Latin American and Caribbean nations have been effectively
captured by drug traffickers.(33 ) Where capture is incomplete,
intimidation reigns: one third of the Clombian supreme court was
assassinated in a (suspected) narco-terrorist raid. An estimated
60 Colombian justices have been murdered in a recent five-year
period.(34) </p>

<p>Of course, these pathologies were foreseeable. They are a
function of money. Drug law yields to a higher law: the law of
the marketplace, the law of supply and demand. The naive attack
on the drug supply through an aggressive program of enforcement
at each step -- interdiction, arrest, prosecution, and punishment
-- results in what Stanford Law School Professor Herbert Packer
has called a &quot;crime tariff'.(35) The crime tariff is what
the seller must charge the buyer in order to monetize the risk he
takes in breaking the law. It is in short a premium for taking
risks. The criminal law thereby maintains hyper-inflated prices
for illegal drugs in the black market. </p>

<p>For example, an ounce of pure pharmaceutical cocaine at
roughly $80, just under $3.00 per gram, becomes worth about
$4,480 if sold in the black market at $80 per diluted gram (at
50% purity). The crime tariff is thus $4,400 per ounce. This type
of law enforcement succeeds to some unknown extent in making
drugs less available -- to the extent (probably slight) that
demand is elastic or sensitive to price. But because the crime
tariff is paid to lawbreakers rather than the Government, it
pumps vast sums of money into the black market, more than $100
billion per year by government estimate.(36) The flow of these
illegal billions through the underground economy finances or
supplies the incentives for the pathologies described above:
homicides, street crime, public corruption and international
narcoterrorism. If these phenomena were properly costed out, one
might well conclude that the War on Drugs makes a net negative
contribution to the safety, well-being and national security
interests of the American people. </p>

<p>Confronted by these threatening developments, both the public
and the politicians predictably react in fear and anger. The
specter of uncontrolled and seemingly uncontrollable drug abuse
and black marketeering leads to frustrated reaction against the
drug trade. The zeal to &quot;turn the screw of the criminal
machinery -- detection, prosecution, and punishment -- tighter
and tighter&quot;(37) leads directly to the adoption of
repressive and punitive measures that aggrandize governmental
powers at the expense of individual rights. </p>

<p>This reactive, almost reflexive growth of governmental power
and the correlative squelching of personal liberty occur as two
closely related, if not inseparable, phenomena: 1.the
government's sustained attack, motivated by the perceived
imperatives of drug enforcement, on traditional protections
afforded to criminal defendants under the Bill of Rights, and
2.the gradual but perceptible rise of 'Big Brotherism' against
the public at large in the form of drug testing, investigative
detention, eavesdropping, surveillance, monitoring, and other
intrusive enforcement methods. </p>

<p>It may be difficult for those not familiar with criminal law
and procedure to understand the degree to which the War on Drugs
has disempowered the criminal defendant, especially in drug
cases. Perhaps by focusing on a few of the most important of the
many restrictions that have been imposed, one may begin to
appreciate the severity of the crackdown on the rights of those
accused of crime. </p>

<p>First, let us consider pre-trial detention. It is important to
understand that in the U.S. the law has always favored pre-trial
release to reinforce the presumption of innocence and to allow a
defendant to aid counsel in his defense. The Eighth Amendment to
the United States Constitution prohibits excessive bail; and
while the cases do not establish a 'right' to bail, the law has
evolved as if there were a presumptive right to pre-trial release
on bail (or other conditions) except in capital cases where
&quot;the proof is evident or the presumption great&quot;. This
was changed radically by the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of
1984,(38) which not only authorized pre-trial detention but
created a statutory _presumption_ in favor of it in any case in
which, _inter alia_, the defendant is charged with a drug offense
punishable by ten years or more in prison.(39) Although the
presumption is rebuttable, in the first seven months under the
act, the government won 704 motions for pre-trial detention while
defendants won only 185.(40) Pre-trial detention is a severe blow
to the morale of a defendant and to his ability to assist in the
preparation of his defense.(41) </p>

<p>Another major erosion in the rights of defendants is the more
permissive use of illegally seized evidence. Since 1914, the
Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution has been interpreted to
exclude from use in court evidence obtained by federal law
enforcement authorities in an illegal search and seizure.(42)
Many states voluntarily adhered to that ruling, and in 1961 the
remaining states were required to do so by the decision of the
Supreme Court in _Mapp v. Ohio_.(43) But under the relentless
pressure of drug prosecutions and the frequent attempts of
Congress to repeal or restrict the exclusionary rule, the Courts
have whittled away at the protections afforded to individual
privacy. </p>

<p>Notwithstanding the independence of the judicial branch, the
Courts have in effect joined the war on drugs. Most notably, the
U.S. Supreme Court gave its approval to just about every
challenged drug enforcement technique. For example, the Court
upheld the power of drug agents to use the airport drug courier
profile to stop, detain and question citizens without probable
cause;(44) to subject a traveller's luggage to a sniffing
examination by drug-detector dogs without probable cause;(45) to
make warrantless searches of automobiles and closed containers
therein;(46) to conduct surveillance of suspects by placing
transmitters or beepers in containers in vehicles;(47) to search
at will without cause ships in inland waterways;(48) and to
obtain a search warrant based on an undisclosed informant's
tip.(49) The Supreme Court also adopted a 'good-faith exception'
to the exclusionary rule for evidence seized in searches made
pursuant to defective warrants.(50) It authorized warrantless
searches of open fields and barns adjacent to a residence.(51) It
significantly enlarged the powers of police to stop, question,
and detain drivers of vehicles on the highways on suspicion less
than probable cause(52) or with no suspicion at all at fixed
checkpoints or road blocks.(53) The Court also validated
warrantless aerial surveillance, that is airplane overflights of
private property,(54) the warrantless search of a motor home
occupied as a residence,(55) and the warrantless search of the
purse of a public school student.(56) In the realm of search and
seizure, there is hardly a drug case that the government failed
to win. Indeed, the Supreme Court in _Albernaz_ apparently placed
its imprimatur on the turn-the-screw approach of the U.S.
Congress. Thus, the crackdown mentality prevails not only in the
political realm but, to use Madison's phrase, in &quot;the least
dangerous branch&quot; as well. </p>

<p>One further example of the crackdown atmosphere prevailing in
the U.S. comes from the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986,(57) in which
Congress not only created new crimes but added to the penalties
which already existed. The effect of the Act is that drug crimes
now rank among the most seriously punished offenses in the United
States Criminal Code. For example, the Act provides mandatory
minimum penalties of five and ten years in prison depending upon
drug and weight involved; in the case of possession with intent
to distribute five kilograms of cocaine, the penalty is a minimum
of ten years up to a maximum of life imprisonment. Even as little
as five grams of cocaine base require not less than five years in
prison and a maximum of 40 years. In both cases, the range of
penalties rises to a minimum of 20 years and a maximum of life if
death or serious bodily injury results from the use of such
substances. It should be emphasized that these penalties apply to
_first-time_ drug offenders; those with a prior state or federal
drug conviction must receive a _mandatory life term_ under these
circumstances. </p>

<p>The fact that these penalties are so severe, more stringent in
fact than sentences typically meted out to robbers or
rapists,(58) illustrates one of the themes of this statement:
people in the U.S. are so fearful and angry about their inability
to contain drug trafficking that they are resorting to extremist,
desperation measures. More than one public official has proposed
simply shooting suspected drug-carrying planes out of the sky.
The atmosphere is perhaps best conveyed by the judicial opinion
of a respected federal judge in Miami who, in an order denying
bail pending appeal, condemned drug dealers as &quot;merchants of
misery, destruction, and death&quot; whose greed has wrought
&quot;hideous evil&quot; and &quot;unimaginable sorrow&quot; upon
the nation. </p>

<p>Their crimes, he wrote, are &quot;unforgivable&quot;.(59) And
if drug crimes are literally &quot;unforgivable&quot;,
traditional constitutional and statutory protections for
individual rights can be discounted or discarded. One congressman
in fact complained about the extent to which legal protections
interfered with the prosecution of drug cases: &quot;[I]n the War
on Narcotics we have met the enemy and he is the U.S. code. I
have never seen such a maze of laws and hangups...&quot;(60) In
that spirit, and in the spirit of the angry judge just quoted,
the punitive measures I have described, along with dozens of
others, such as forfeiture of defense attorney's fees,(61) have
become 'logical' measures in an endless cycle of crackdowns and
failures. </p>

<p>Perhaps if these repressive laws applied only to drug
defendants, who could be dismissed as an alien 'them', few would
care and fewer still would protest. But this kind of reactionary
force cannot be contained, cannot apply only to those accused of
drug crime. In fact, the tentacles of drug enforcement have
already spread out to reach into the lives of ordinary people,
not just to those involved in the drug underworld. These
intrusions into the lives of civilian society take many forms.
One of the most obvious is the rapid proliferation of mandatory
drug testing of employees and job applicants in the U.S. Civil
Service,(62) state and local civil services, and in the private
sector as well. Some 40 percent of Fortune 500 companies now
subject their applicants or employees to urinalysis.(63)
Government surveillance is on the increase in the form of
wiretaps and the maintenance of 1.5 million or more names in
NADDIS, a drug investigative data bank. On a more prosaic level,
the War on Drugs hampers the mobility of travellers, who are
subjected to road blocks, detained for questioning at airports,
and whose luggage can be diverted for sniffing by drug-detector
dogs. </p>

<p>One of the latest repressive anti-drug initiatives to emerge
from Washington is called 'zero tolerance', begun by the Customs
Service on March 21st. It means, in a nutshell, punishing drug
users to promote 'user accountability' and to reduce 'the demand
side of the equation'. One manifestation of this policy occurs in
the effort to promote federal criminal prosecution of persons
found in possession of small amounts of drugs for which they
formerly would have escaped prosecution or been referred to local
authorities for prosecution. On March 30th, 1988 Attorney General
Meese sent a memorandum to all United States Attorneys
encouraging the selective prosecution of &quot;middle and upper
class users&quot; in order to &quot;send the message that there
is no such thing as 'recreational' drug use...&quot; </p>

<p>More widely known is the seizure and forfeiture of cars,
planes, or boats of persons found in possession of even trace
amounts of illegal drugs; these forfeited assets in effect impose
massive fines far greater than would ordinarily be imposed upon a
criminal conviction for drug possession; but as civil forfeiture
is in _rem_, no conviction or prosecution is required at all. </p>

<p>Some examples: On April 30th, the Coast Guard boarded and
seized the motor yacht _Ark Royal_, valued at $25 million,
because 10 marijuana _seeds_ and two stems were found aboard.
Public criticism prompted a return of the boat upon payment of $
1,600 in fines and fees by the owner. The 52-foot _Mindy_ was
impounded for a week because of cocaine dust in a rolled-up
dollar bill. The $80 million oceanographic research vessel
_Atlantis II_ was seized in San Diego whent he Coast Guard found
0.01 ounce of marijuana in a crewman's shaving kit. It was
returned also. But a Michigan couple returning from a Canadian
vacation lost the wife's 1987 Cougar when Customs agents found
two marijuana cigarettes in the pocket of her husband. No charges
were filed, but the car was kept by the government. In Key West,
Florida, David Phelps, a shrimp fisherman, lost his 73-foot
shrimper to the coast guard who found three grams of cannabis
seeds and stems aboard. Under the law, the boat is forfeitable
whether or not Phelps had any responsibility for the drugs. Three
weeks later, the boat had not been returned. There are many other
ways, too numerous to mention in this statement, that the War on
Drugs has choked off civil liberties in the U.S. </p>

<p>In 1987, the United States celebrated the bicentennial of its
Constitution. The framers of the Constitution were animated by
the spirit of William Pitt's dictum that &quot;unlimited power is
apt to corrupt the minds of those who possess it.&quot;(64) They
therefore created a constitutional structure in which
governmental power was limited in the first instance and
constrained in the second by the system of checks and balances.
The Bill of Rights, the first 10 amendments to the Constitution,
were added in 1791 to further secure personal freedom from
governmental oppression. </p>

<p>The War on Drugs has substantially undermined the American
tradition of limited government and personal autonomy. Since the
early 1980s, the prevailing attitude, both within Government and
in the broader society, has been that the crackdown on drugs is
so imperative that extraordinary measures are justified. The end
has come to justify the means. The result is that Americans have
significantly less freedom than they did only five or six years
ago.<br>
</p>

<p>DEVELOPMENTS IN 1988: POLARIZATION<br>
</p>

<p>Election year politics continues to ratchet the War on Drugs
machinery tighter and tighter. In June the Administration
declared its goal of a &quot;drug-free America&quot;.(65) During
the month of April, the Senate voted 93 to 0 to adopt the
Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, creating a $2.6 billion special
reserve fund for anti-drug programs over and above the regular
annual budget of three-plus billion dollars. (As noted above, the
regular budget represents a manifold increase in the level of
funding that prevailed when the war on drugs was declared.) The
frustration of Congress with drug-producing nations of Latin
America, crystallized by the stalemate with General Noriega in
Panama, has produced a number of controversial proposals
involving the threat of sanctions(66) and the use of military
force to destroy coca crops or to capture fugitives from U.S.
drug charges. Secretary Carlucci's opposition to arrest powers
for the military services may tone down the final bill, but an
expanded military surveillance role seems likely. At the state
level, the National Guard has already been deployed on anti-drug
search and destroy missions. </p>

<p>The President on April 19th &quot;call[ed] upon the House and
Senate to vote promptly on my bill providing for capital
punishment when a death results from drug dealing, and when a...
law enforcement officer is murdered.&quot; In the latest piece of
fundamentalist-style anti-drug zealotry, the House on September
22nd voted 375-30 to adopt capital punishment, for a drug
exception to the exclusionary rule, to deny college student loans
to anyone convicted of possessing drugs, to impose without trial
up to $10,000 in &quot;civil fines&quot; for a person caught in
possession of drugs, and to impose a mandatory five-year prison
sentence on anyone convicted of possession of crack cocaine.
Other &quot;zero tolerance&quot; style bills abound. A House
Republican Task force has introduced a bill calling for
confiscation of 25 percent of the adjusted gross income and net
assets of anyone caught possessing illegal substances. It would
also cut off federal highway funds to states that do not suspend
drivers' licenses of persons convicted of using drugs.(67) As we
get closer to the November election, one can predict with
confidence that more of these proposals will surface and that
their extremist nature will increase. </p>

<p>But at the same time there is movement in the opposite
direction. Respected journalists and other opinion leaders have
begun to break ranks with the War on Drugs, in some cases
suggesting that it be abandoned altogether. Here are some notable
examples. David Boaz, Vice President for public policy at
libertarian-oriented Cato Institute, wrote an op-ed piece for the
_New York Times_ (March 17th) &quot;Let's Quit the Drug
War&quot;. In it he denounced the war on drugs as
&quot;unwinnable&quot; and destructive to other values such as
civil liberties and advocated a &quot;withdrawal&quot; from the
war. Edwin M. Yoder Jr. of the _Washington Post_ Writers Group
called the war on drugs &quot;dumb&quot; and compared it to the
prohibition of alcohol for &quot;encouraging and enriching
mobsters&quot; (March 4th, 1988). On March 10th, 1988, Richard
Cohen of the _Los Angeles Times_ Syndicate published a piece
endorsing the idea of a plan for the government distribution of
drugs in order to &quot;recognize the drug problem is with us to
stay -- a social and medical problem, but not necessarily a
law-enforcement one. We've been making war on drugs long enough.
It's time we started making sense instead.&quot; By May and June,
articles of this type became a staple item in newspapers all over
the country as editors hopped aboard the &quot;legalization&quot;
bandwagon. </p>

<p>This sample of articles shows the emergence of a significant
body of opinion opposed to the war on drugs. What is perhaps even
more significant is that the opposition transcends the
liberal/conservative split. Traditionally, conservatives have
advocated strict law enforcement and liberals have been
identified with a permissive approach to the drug issue. Now
highly respected conservative spokesmen have also begun to
dissent from the War on Drugs. </p>

<p>Even before the recent spate of articles described above,
prominent conservative columnist William F . Buckley Jr. had
reversed his position and advocated the legalization of drugs as
the only effective course of governmental action. Nobel
Prize-winning economist Milton Friedman has made public
statements advocating more market-oriented approaches to the
regulation of drugs. _National Review_, the most prominent organ
of conservative opinion, through its editor Richard Vigilante,
published a piece (December 5th, 1986) exposing the Anti Drug
Abuse Act of 1986 as a manifestation of public panic and
criticizing the intrusiveness of drug testing and other
enforcement measures. He also rejected the war on drugs as
intolerant and politically unwise: &quot;Embracing the drug
hysteria requires a rejection of essential conservative
principles.&quot; In the same issue of NR is an article by
Richard C. Cowan, entitled 'How the Narcs Created Crack', arguing
as follows: &quot;Any realistic approach to the drug problem must
begin with the legalization of small scale cultivation and sale
of marijuana so that it is separated from the other, more
dangerous drugs.... We need not fear that if we stop the lying
and hypocrisy, the American people are going to destroy
themselves with drugs.&quot; </p>

<p>This debate has captured the attention of the mainstream
media.(69) Clearly, the challenge to the monopoly status of the
War on Drugs is gaining ground. Nothing approaching this level of
dissent has been seen or heard since the War on Drugs started. </p>

<p>The dissent has also begun to spill over to the political
sector. For example, the _ABA Journal_ (January l st, l 988)
reported that the New York County Lawyers Association Committee
on Law Reform published a report advocating the decriminalization
of heroin, cocaine, and marijuana. New York State Senator Joseph
L. Galiber, from a district in the drug-ravaged Bronx, introduced
on April 18th a bill in the New York State legislature to
decriminalize the possession, distribution, sale, and use of all
forms of controlled substances under the aegis of a
State-Controlled Substance Authority. At a speech at the National
Conference of Mayors and again on a May 10th, 1988, broadcast of
ABC's 'Nightline', the Mayor of Baltimore called for
congressional hearings to study the issue. Other mayors and a few
congressmen supported him. And, surprisingly, Congressman Charles
Rangel, Chairman of the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse
and Control, scheduled a one-day hearing for September 29th,
1988, clearly inadequate for the task at hand, yet perhaps a
harbinger of the future. Even if nothing constructive can emerge
amidst election year maneuvering, at least the genie of change is
out of the bottle. </p>

<p>There are also pressures beginning to come from abroad. For
example, the attorney general of Colombia said in a telephone
interview with the _Miami Herald_ (February 23rd, 1988) that
Colombia's battles against drug-trafficking rings have been a
failure, calling them &quot;useless&quot;. He suggested that
legalizing the drug trade is something that the government
&quot;may have to consider&quot; in the future. _The Economist_
magazine ran a cover story (April 2-8) called 'Getting Gangsters
Out of Drugs', advocating the legalized and taxed distribution of
controlled substances. It followed up with similar commentaries
on May 21st and June 4th. _El Pais_, the most influential Spanish
newspaper, also recommended &quot;La legalizacion de la
droga&quot; in an editorial (May 22nd, 1988).What accounts for
this trend? Negative experience with the War on Drugs certainly
plays a role. In the _Structure of Scientific Revolutions_,
Thomas S. Kuhn argued that &quot;the process by which a new
candidate for paradigm replaces its predecessors&quot; occurs
&quot;only after persistent failure to solve a noteworthy puzzle
has given rise to crisis&quot; (pp.144-45). There is little doubt
that the perception that the War on Drugs is a failure at
controlling drug supply has spread significantly. </p>

<p>Uncritical acceptance of the War on Drugs is no longer
possible. And the perception that it has negative side effects,
breeding crime, violence and corruption, has spread even to the
comic pages of the daily newspapers.(69) In a more serious vein,
Ted Koppel's &quot;Nightline&quot; broadcast a special three-hour
&quot;National Town Forum&quot; on the subject of legalization.
Perhaps we have already reached Kuhn's stage of &quot;persistent
failure and crisis&quot;, in which the war on drugs has been
dislodged as the only conceivable paradigm for the control of
drugs in the U.S. What now should be done? </p>

<hr>

<p>(1) My more recent publications are: 'Crackdown: The Emerging
&quot;Drug Exception&quot; to the Bill of Rights', 38 _Hastings
Law Journal_, 889 (1987); Wisotsky (ed.), 'The War on Drugs: In
Search of a Breakthrough' (Symposium), 11 _Nova Law Journal_ 891
(1987); Wisotsky, 'The Ideology of Drug Testing,' 11 _Nova Law
Journal_, 763 (1987) </p>

<p>(2) President's Radio Address to the Nation, 18 Weekly Comp.
Pres. Doc. 1249 (October 2, 1982) [hereinafter Radio Address]. </p>

<p>(3) President's Message Announcing Federal lnitiatives Against
Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime, 18 Weekly Comp. Pres. Doc.
1311, 1313-14 (October 14th, 1982). </p>

<p>(4) _New York Times_, October 15th, 1982, p. A20 </p>

<p>(5) E. Epstein, _Agency of Fear_ , pp. 173, 179 (1977) Nixon
consolidated agencies and created DEA as the lead agency in drug
enforcement. </p>

<p>(6) Gonzales, 'The War on Drugs: A Special Report', _Playboy_,
April 1982, p. 134. </p>

<p>(7) House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control,
H.R. Rep. No. 418, pp. 1-2, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. 50 (1982). </p>

<p>(8) Attorney General's Task Force on Violent Crime, Final
Report 28 (1981). </p>

<p>(9) The call for the buildup in the size and scope of the
federal drug enforcement bureaucracy also occurred under the
Nixon Administration. At the end of June 1968, the Bureau of
Narcoucs and Dangerous Drugs had 615 agents. By June 1970, this
number had increased to over 900, with authorization for at least
300 more agents during 1971. See H.R. Rep. No. 1444, 91st Cong.,
2d Sess. 18 reprinted in 1970 U.S. Code Cong. &amp; Admin. News
4566, 4584. </p>

<p>(10) See 28 C.F.R. [Sections] 0.85(a), 0.102 (1986). Authority
for federal drug law enforcement is distributed among several
agencies, including the DEA, the Customs Service, the Coast
Guard, the FBI, and the IRS. Supporting roles are played by the
Immigration and Naturalization Service, the CIA, and the
Department of Defense. See National Drug Enforcement Policy
Board, _National and International Drug Law Enforcement Strategy_
(January 1987). </p>

<p>(11) See 'Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces: Goals
and Objectives', 11 _Drug Enforcement_, 6 (1984); Maitland,
'President Gives Plan to Combat Drug Networks', _New York Times_,
October 15th, 1982 [section] A, p. 1. </p>

<p>(12) See Gibson, 'Anti-Smuggling System Would Have CIA Links',
_Ft. Lauderdale News &amp; Sun-Sentinel_, June 18th, 1983,
[Section] A, p. 1. See also Office of Technology Assessment, U.S.
Congress, 'The Border War on Drugs', pp. 33-39 (1987)
[hereinafter 'Border War']. </p>

<p>(13) See Coates and DeLama, 'Satellite Spying on Narcotics
Operations Is a Promising Tool for Drug Task Force', _Miami
Herald_, June 23rd, 1983, p. 11A. </p>

<p>(14) For a description of Operation Greenback, the prototype
money-laundering investigation, see Financial Investigation of
Drug Trafficking: Hearing Before the House Select Comm. on
Narcotics Abuse and Control, 97th Cong., 1st Sess. 65 (1981). </p>

<p>(15) See International Narcotics Control: Hearings Before the
House Committee on Foreign Affairs,97th Cong., 2d Sess. 156
(1982), International Narcotics Trafficking: Hearings Before the
Permanent Subcomm. on Investigations of the Senate Comm. on
Governmental Affairs, 97th Cong., Ist Sess 201-02 (1981). </p>

<p>(16) See President's Commission on Organized Crime, 'America's
Habit: Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime', pp.
412-419 (1986). </p>

<p>(17) Starita, 'Radar Planes to Hunt Drugs in S. Florida',
_Miami Herald_, March 13th, 1982, p. 1B. </p>

<p>(18) Congress has likened the drug smugglers to an invading
army, complete with generals, soldiers, and an armada that
operates over the unpatrolled coastline and unmonitored airspace
of the United States . See Note, 'Fourth Amendment and Posse
Comitatus Act Restrictions on Military Involvement in Federal Law
Enforcement', 54 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 404, 417 &amp; nn 140-42
(1986). </p>

<p>(19) Stein, 'Naval Task Force Enlists in Drug War', _Miami
Herald_, August 24th, 1983, p. 13A. Balmaseda, 'Navy Bullets
Riddle Pot-Smuggling Ship', _Miami Herald_, July 17th, 1983, p.1A
</p>

<p>(20) National Drug Policy Board, 'Federal Drug Enforcement
Progress Report, 1986' Exhibit II-2, pp. 19-20 [hereinafter
&quot;Progress Report&quot;]. </p>

<p>(21) Id., Exhibit II-11, p. 35. </p>

<p>(22) Id., Exhibit III-1, pp. 74-78. </p>

<p>(23) Data on price, purity and supply are taken from the
annual reports of the National Narcotics Intelligence Consumers
Committee called 'The Supply of Illicit Drugs to the U.S. from
Foreign and Domestic Sources'. </p>

<p>(24) 'Progress Report', p. 7. </p>

<p>(25) Id., p. 5. </p>

<p>(26) Id., p. 6. 1987 data from 1987 NNIC Report. </p>

<p>(27) Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress,
'Drug Abuse Prevention and Control: Budget Authority for Federal
Programs', FY 1986 - FY 1988 [IP 334D] (February 27th, 1987). The
budget dropped to 3 plus billion in FY 88. </p>

<p>(28) Leen, 'Drug War Proving a Costly Failure', _Miami
Herald_, September 11th, 1988, p. 18A. </p>

<p>(29) Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, 95th
Cong., 2d Sess., Congressional Resource Guide to the Federal
Effort on Narcotics Abuse and Control 250 (Comm. Print 1976). </p>

<p>(30) 'Border War', p. 3. </p>

<p>(31) These phenomena are described in some detail in _Breaking
the Imparse in the War on Drugs_ Chs. 7-9. </p>

<ol>
    <li>'The Drug Gangs', _Newsweek_, March 28th, 1988, p. 20. </li>
    <li>(33) The leader of Panama, General Manuel Noriega, is
        currently under two separate federal indictments for drug
        trafficking offenses. The Chief Minister and the Commerce
        Minister of the Turks and Caicos were convicted in the
        U.S. of drug smuggling charges in 1985. Top officials in
        Haiti, Honduras, and Nicaragua are also under
        investigation in the U. S. 'Oppenheimer, U.S. urged to
        step up drug fight', _Miami Herald_, February 14th, 1988,
        p. 14A. George Baron, a U.S. government witness in the
        Carlos Lehder Rivas cocaine conspiracy trial testified
        that he paid $3 to $5 million in bribes to Bahamian Prime
        Minister Lynden O. Pindling. Baron testified that he paid
        Pindling $15 for each pound of marijuana smuggled through
        the Bahamas to protect the boats from Bahamian police.
        AP, _Miami Herald_, February 17th, 1988, p. 10A. <br>
    </li>
</ol>

<p>(34) See Bin, 'Drug Lords and the Colombian Judiciary: A Story
of Threats, Bribes and Bullets',5 _Pacific Basin Law Journal_, p.
178 (1986). </p>

<p>(35) Packer, _The Limits of the Criminal Sanction_, pp.
277-282 (1968). </p>

<p>(36) House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control
Annual Report for the Year 1984 H.R. Rep. No. 1199, 98th Cong.,
2d Sess. 9 (1985). </p>

<p>(37) _Albernaz v. United States_, 450 U.S. 333, 343 (1981). </p>

<p>(38) Pub. L. No. 98-473, Tit. II, ch. 1, [section] 203(a), 98
Stat. 1976 (1984) (codified at 18 U.S.C. [section] 3142) (Supp.
1986). </p>

<p>(39) 18 U.S.C. [section] 3142(e) (Supp. 1986). </p>

<p>(40) Kennedy, 'Foreword to Symposium on the Crime Control Act
of 1984', 22 Am. Crim. L. Rev.vi,viii n.4(1985). </p>

<p>(41) Wald, 'Pretrial Detention and Ultimate Freedom: A
Statistical Study', 39 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 631 (1964). </p>

<p>(42) _Weeks v. UnitedStates_, 232 U.S. 383 (1914). </p>

<p>(43) 367 U.S. 643 (1961). </p>

<p>(44) _Florida v. Royer_, 460 U.S. 491, 493 (1983); see also
_UnitedStates v. Montoya_, 473 U.S. 531 (1985); _Florida v.
Rodriguez_, 469 U.S. 1, 5 (1984). Drug courier profiles are based
on an informal compilation of traits commonly associated with
drug smugglers; they have been criticized for allowing
impermissible intrusions on fourth amendment rights based solely
on an agent's 'hunch'. See Note, 'Drug Courier Profiles in
Airport Stops', 14 S.U.L. Rev. 315, 316- 317 &amp; n. 23 ( 1984).
For further criticisms, see Note, 'Search and Seizure: Defining
the Outer Boundaries of the Drug Courier Profile', 17 _Creighton
Law Review_ 973 (1985). </p>

<p>(45) _United States v. Plase_, 462 U.S. 696, 706 (1983). </p>

<p>(46) _United States v. Ross_, 456 U.S. 798, 821 (1982); see
also _Colorado v. Bertine_, 107 S.Ct. 738 (1987). </p>

<p>(47) _United States v. Knotts_, 460 U.S. 276, 282 (1983). </p>

<p>(48) _United States v. Villamonte-Marquez_, 462 U.S. 579 593
(1983) </p>

<p>(49) _Illinois v. Gates_, 462 U.S. 213 (1983). Gates replaced
the principles of probable cause established in _Aguilar v.
Texas_, 378 U.S. 108 (1964) and _Spinelli v. United States_, 393
U.S. 410 (1969) with a more loosely structured 'totality of the
circumstances' test. _Gates_, 462 U.S. at 230. </p>

<p>(50) _United States v. Leon_, 468 U.S. 897, 905 (1984). To
similar effect are _Illinois v. Krull_, 107 S.Ct. 1160 (1987),
and _Maryland v. Garrison_, 107 S.Ct. 1013 (1987). For criticism
of the good faith exception, see I W. LaFave, _Search and
Seizure: A Treatise on the Fourth Amendment_ [section]
1.3(c)-(d), at 51, 58-59 (1987) (arguing that the _Leon_ Court
overestimated the costs of adherence to the exclusionary rule
based on &quot;intuition, hunches, and occasional pieces of
partial and often inconclusive data&quot;). </p>

<p>(51) _United States v. Dunn_, 107 S.C. 1134 (1987) (barn);
_Oliver v. United States_, 466 U.S. 170 (1984) (open fields). </p>

<p>(52) _United States v. Sharpe_, 470 U.S. 675 (1985). </p>

<p>(53) _Texas v. Brown_, 460 U.S. 730 (1983). </p>

<p>(54) _California v. Ciraolo_, 106 S.Ct. 1809, 1813 (1986) </p>

<p>(55) _California v. Carney_, 471 U.S. 386, 390 (1985). </p>

<p>(56) _New Jersey v. T.L.O._, 469 U.S. 325, 333 (1985). </p>

<p>(57) Pub. L. No. 99-750, reprinted in 1986 U.S. Code Cong.
&amp; Admin. News (No. 10A) (codified as amended in scattered
sections of U.S.C.). </p>

<p>(53) A not untypical example comes from a prominent 1988 news
story. Larry Singleton had been convicted of raping a teenager
and hacking off the arms of a teenager between wrist and elbow.
He was convicted in California and given the maximum sentence of
14 years and served 8. In Florida, a person convicted of
possession of 400 grams of cocaine or other similar drug
trafficking offense would receive a non-parolable mandatory term
of 15 years. With typical gain time and work credits, he might
serve approximately 7 years in prison. </p>

<p>(59) _United States v. Miranda_, 442 F. Supp. 786, 795 (S.D.
Fla. 1977). </p>

<p>(60) Financial Investigation of Drug Trafficking: Hearings
Before the House Select Comm. on Narcotics Abuse and Control,
97th Cong., 1st Sess. 58 (1981) (statement of Congressman Hutto).
</p>

<p>(61) _United States v. Caplin &amp; Drysdale_, 814 F.2d 905
(4th Cir. 1987). </p>

<p>(62) President's Message Announcing the Goals and Objectives
of the National Campaign Against Drug Abuse, 22 Weekly Comp.Pres.
Doc. 1040, 1041 (August 4th, 1986). </p>

<p>(63) General Dynamics, General Motors, Greyhound, E.F. Hutton,
IBM, Mobil, The New York Times, The Teamsters, and United Auto
Workers are but a few of the enterprises that have recently
instituted some type of workplace drug testing. Ross, 'Drug
Testing at Work Spreading&#139;and Likely to Spread Further', _LA
Daily Journal_, June 6th, 1985, p. 4. See generally, 'Testing for
Drugs in the American Workplace', 11 _Nova Law Review_ 291
(1987); Wisotsky, 'The Ideology of Drug Testing', 11 _Nova Law
Journal_ 763 (1987). </p>

<p>One rationale for requiring that urinalysis be predicated upon
individual suspicion is the not-unlikely possibility of a false
positive result: &quot;Two Navy doctors were almost drummed out
of the service [in 1984] because they tested positive for
morphine, the result of having eaten too many poppy seed bagels.
Indeed, the Navy program has seen huge errors&#139;over 4,000 men
and women were recalled at full back pay [in 1985] because they
were discharged on the basis of a [false positive].&quot; (Ross,
_supra_.) </p>

<p>(64) Speech, Case of Wilkes January 19th, 1770). </p>

<p>(65) National Drug Policy Board, 'Toward a Drug Free America'
(1988). </p>

<p>(66) 1n February, the House Foreign Affairs Committee Task
Force on International Narcotics Control demanded that the State
Department impose sanctions against Colombia, Peru, Bolivia and
other nations in order to force them to intensify their drug
enforcement efforts. </p>

<p>(67) 'The Drug Enforcement Report', June 23rd, 1988, p.2. </p>

<p>(69) _Time_ magazine ran a cover story on the debate called
'Thinking the Unthinkable' (May 30th, 1988). _Newsweek_ did a
similar piece. The _New York Times_ and the _Miami Herald_ both
ran front page stories on the same subject in May. </p>

<p>(69) The syndicated strip 'Bloom County', for example,
satirized the issue on at least two separate occaslons. The April
18th, 1988, strip portrayed a scenario in which a lobbyist for
smugglers makes contnbutions to anti-drug candidates for
political office as a way to keep drug prices high. &quot;Nothing
makes us madder than some liberal talking drug
legalization.&quot; </p>

<hr>

<p>TOWARD A NEW BEGINNING IN DRUG CONTROL<br>
</p>

<p>One historically tested model of exploring policy reform is
the appointment of a National Study Commission of experts,
politicians and lay leaders to make findings of fact, canvass a
full range of policy options, and recommend further research
where needed. The precedent set by the National Commission on
Marijuana and Drug Abuse in the early 1970s offers a model that
might usefully be emulated in many respects. At the very least, a
National Commission performs a vital educational function: its
public hearings and attendant media coverage inform the public,
bringing to their attention vital facts and a broader array of
policy options. The level of public discourse is almost certain
to be elevated. Only those who prefer ignorance to knowledge
could possibly oppose the commission process.What should be the
agenda of such a commission? Its over-riding goal should be to
develop policies directed toward the objectives of 1.reducing
drug abuse and 2.reducing the black-market pathologies resulting
from the billions in drug money generated by drug law
enforcement. In pursuit of these dual goals, the commission's
study might benefit from adherence to the following five points: <br>
</p>

<p>I. DEFINE THE DRUG PROBLEM </p>

<p>What exactly is the problem regarding drugs in the U.S.? The
absence of an agreed-upon answer to this question is one of the
primary sources of incoherence in present law and policy. People
now speak of &quot;the drug problem&quot; in referring to at
least five very different phenomena: 1. the mere use of any
illegal drugs; 2. especially by teenagers; 3. the abuse of
illegal drugs; 4. drug-induced misbehavior that endangers or
harms others, such as driving while impaired; and 5.
drug-trafficking phenomena (crime, violence, and corruption)
arising from the vast sums of money generated in the black market
in drugs. </p>

<p>This confusion in the very statement of the problem
necessarily engenders confusion in solving it. The &quot;drug
problem&quot; as Edward Brecher reminds us in his classic _Licit
and Illicit Drugs_ is itself a problem. Therefore, it does not
and cannot lead to the formulation of useful solutions. It would
be a real breakthrough if the Congress or the next President
would generate a meaningful statement of the &quot;drug
problem&quot;. </p>

<p>Otherwise, we are condemned to confirm the truth of Eric
Sevareid's quip that the chief cause of problems is solutions. </p>

<p>II. STATE YOUR GOALS </p>

<p>A creative definition or redefinition of the drug problem
would of itself carry us toward a (re)statement of goals.
Rational policy-making is impossible without a clear articulation
of the goals sought to be achieved. Part of that impossibility
arises from the inconsistency between, for example, pursuit of
existing goal number one by an attack on the drug supply and
pursuit of goal number five, the suppression of drug money. </p>

<p>Pursuit of the first creates a crime tariff which makes the
pursuit of the last more or less impossible. Instead, the result
of drug enforcement is a black market estimated by the government
to be over $100 billion per year, money that funds or gives rise
to homicidal violence, street corruption by addicts, corruption
of public officials and international narco-terrorism. It is
therefore essential to distinguish between problems arising from
drugs and problems arising from drug money. For example, how much
criminality is attributable not to the psychopharmacology of
drugs but to the excessive prices intentionally caused by the
prohibition of drugs? Rational policy-makers have to distinguish
between the two and acknowledge the trade-offs between the two
lines of attack. <br>
</p>

<p>III. SET REALISTIC AND PRINCIPLED PRIORITIES BASED ON TRUTH </p>

<p>The suppression of drugs as an end to itself is frequently
justified by arguments that drugs cause addiction, injury, and
even death in the short or long run. Granted that all drug use
has the potential for harm, it is clear beyond any rational
argument that most drug use does not cause such harm. DEA
Director John Lawn to the contrary (&quot;Drugs are illegal
because they are bad&quot;), drugs are not harmful _per se_.
Exposure to drugs is not the same as exposure to radioactive
waste.(70) </p>

<p>Rather, the overwhelming majority of incidents of drug use are
without lasting personal or social consequence, just as the
overwhelming majority of drinking causes no harm to the drinker
or to society. Accepting the truth of that premise means that not
all drug use need be addressed by the criminal law, and that
society might actually benefit from a policy of benign neglect
respecting some forms of drug use. I have in mind the Dutch
model, where nothing is legal but some things are simply ignored,
cannabis in particular. NORML estimates that there are
approximately one half-million arrests per year for marijuana,
almost all for simple possession or petty sale offenses.
Depending upon the age of consent chosen, most of these arrests
could be eliminated from the criminal justice system, thereby
achieving a massive freeing of resources for the policing of real
crime. </p>

<p>Because we live in a world of limited resources, it is not
possible to do everything. It is therefore both logical and
necessary to make distinctions among things that are more or less
important. I have in mind at least five basic dichotomies: </p>

<p>1. drug use by children (top priority) versus drug use by
adults (low priority); </p>

<p>2. marijuana smoking (low priority) versus use of harder drugs
(higher priority); </p>

<p>3. public use of drugs (high priority) versus private use of
drugs at home (low priority); </p>

<p>4. drug consumption (no priority) versus drug impairment (high
priority); </p>

<p>5. occasional use (low priority) versus chronic or dependent
use (higher priority). </p>

<p>From these general criteria for drug policy, I would commend
to the National Commission five specific goals for an effective,
principled drug policy: </p>

<p>1._Protect the Children_. I think this priority is
self-evident and needs no discussion. I would simply add that
this is the only domain in which &quot;zero tolerance&quot; makes
any sense at all and might even be feasible if enforcement
resources were concentrated on this as a top priority. </p>

<p>2._Get Tough on the Legal Drugs_. It is common knowledge that
alcohol (100,000 annual deaths) and tobacco (360,000 annual
deaths) far exceed the illegal drugs as sources of death,
disease, and dysfunction in the U.S. Everyone knows that alcohol
and tobacco are big business -- the advertising budget alone for
alcohol runs about $2 billion a year -- and, what is worse, the
states and federal government are in complicity with the sellers
of these deadly drugs by virtue of the billions in tax revenues
that they reap. </p>

<p>I am not, however, suggesting prohibition of these drugs. That
is wrong in principle and impossible in practice, as experience
teaches. Nonetheless, there are more restrictive measure that can
and should be undertaken. One is to get rid of cigarette vending
machines so that cigarettes are not so readily available to
minors. A second is to require or recommend to the states and
localities more restrictive hours of sale. A third is to levy
taxes on these products that are consistent with their social
costs -- billions of dollars in property damage, disease, and
lost productivity.(71) Those costs should be financed largely by
the sale of these products; at present prices, society is clearly
subsidizing those products by providing police, fire, ambulance
services for road accidents; medicare and medicaid reimbursement
for therapy, surgery, prosthesis or other medical care; and many
other hidden costs effectively externalized by the industries
from smoker and drinker to society as a whole. </p>

<p>Precise numbers need to be derived from studies, but I
wouldn't be surprised to find cigarettes at, say, $10 a pack and
hard liquor at, say, $30-$50 a bottle to be priced more
consistently with their true social costs. Such taxes would have
the additional salutary effect of reducing the consumption of
these dangerous products to the extent that their demand is
elastic. </p>

<p>3. _Public Safety and Order_. Here we need policies directed
toward protection of the public from accident and injury on the
highway, in the workplace and from unruly disruptions in public
streets, public transport, parks and other gathering places.
Programs specifically tailored to accomplish this more focused
goal make a lot more sense than futile and counter productive
&quot;zero tolerance&quot; approaches. Street-level law
enforcement practices need to be reviewed to see to what extent
they may actually encourage hustling drugs in the street to avoid
arrests and forfeitures that might follow from fixed points of
sale. Promotion of driving and workplace safety require more
knowledge. Nothing should be assumed. Drug use, as the Air
Force's and Freud's examples show, does not automatically mean
that a pilot or driver is impaired. Even with marijuana there is
ambiguous evidence as to its effect on motor co-ordination.(72)
Responsible research is required. </p>

<p>4. _Protect Public Health_. The emphasis here is on the word
&quot;public&quot;. Policy should be directed toward 1. treatment
of addicts on a voluntary basis and 2. true epidemiological
concerns such as the use of drugs by pregnant women and the
potential for transmission of AIDS by I.V. drug users. Addiction
treatment is now shamefully underfunded, with months-long waiting
lists in many cities. Purely individualized risks are not in
principle a public health matter and are in any case trivial in
magnitude compared to those now accepted from alcohol and
tobacco. Judge Young found no known lethal dose of marijuana.
Even with cocaine, which has lethal potential, less than 2,000
deaths per year result even though billions of lines or puffs of
cocaine are consumed every year. (Other long-term harms may
result but are not systematically known at this time.) </p>

<p>In any event, harmfulness is not the sole touchstone of
regulation; the requirements of goal number five, listed below,
demand considerable deference to individual choice in this
domain. </p>

<p>5. _Respect the Value of Individual Liberty and
Responsibility_. The current administration's goal of a drug-free
America, except for children, is both ridiculous -- as absurd as
a liquor-free America -- and wrong in principle. This is not
fundamentalist Ayatollah Land after all. A democratic society
must respect the decisions made by its adult citizens, even those
perceived to be foolish or risky. After all, is it different in
principle to protect the right of gun ownership, which produces
some ten to twelve thousand homicides per year and thousands more
non-fatal injuries? Is it different in principle to protect the
right of motorcyclists, skydivers or mountain climbers to risk
their lives? Is it different to permit children to ride bicycles
which &quot;cause&quot; tens of thousands of crippling injuries
and deaths per year? To say that something is
&quot;dangerous&quot; does not automatically supply a reason to
outlaw it. Indeed, the general presumption in our society is that
competent adults, with access to necessary information, are
entitled to take risks of this kind as part of the right to life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. </p>

<p>Why are drugs different? It would be truly totalitarian if the
government could decide these matters. After all, if the
government is conceded to have the power to prohibit what is
dangerous, does it not then have the power to compel what is
safe? More specifically, if one drug can be prohibited on the
ground that it is dangerous to the individual, would it then not
be permissible for the government to degree that beneficial doses
of some other drug must be taken at specified intervals.The
freedom of American citizens has already been seriously eroded by
the War on Drugs.(73) More civil liberties hang in the balance of
the 1988 Omnibus Anti-Drug Abuse Act pending in Congress and
further legislation in years to come. Is the defense of Americans
from drugs to be analogized to the defense of the Vietnamese from
Communism, that it was necessary to destroy the city of Hue in
order to save it? The National Commission should give serious
weight to this value in its policy recommendation. <br>
</p>

<p>IV. FOCUS ON THE BIG PICTURE </p>

<p>Present drug policy suffers from a kind of micro-think that
borders on irresponsibility and is sometimes downright silly.
This typically manifests itself in proud administration
announcements or reports to congressional committees of a new
initiative or new accomplishment without regard to its impact on
the bottom line. The examples are endless -- a joint strike force
with the government of the Bahamas; shutdown of a source of
supply; the Pizza Connection case, the largest organized crime
heroin trafficking case ever made by the federal government; a
new bank secrecy agreement with the Caymans; a new coca
eradication program in Bolivia or Peru, and so on. But none of
these programs or &quot;accomplishments&quot; has ever made any
noticeable or lasting impact on the drug supply. Even now, as the
Godfather of Bolivian cocaine resides in a Bolivian prison, is
there any observable reduction in the supply of cocaine? </p>

<p>The lack of insistence that enforcement programs should make a
difference in the real world produces fatuous reports like this
1979 report by GAO to the Congress: &quot;Gains made in
Controlling Illegal Drugs, Yet The Drug Trade
Flourishes.&quot;(74) </p>

<p>In what sense is it meaningful to say that gains are made if
the bottom line grows worse and worse? This is reprehensible
doubletalk or Newspeak that should not be tolerated by
responsible public officials. The whole drug enforcement
enterprise needs to be put on a more businesslike basis, looking
to the bottom line and not to isolated &quot;achievements&quot;
of the war on drugs. In fact, the investor analogy is a good one
to use: if the war on drugs were incorporated as a business
enterprise, with its profits to be determined by its success in
controlling drug abuse and drug trafficking, who would invest in
it? Even if its operating budget were to be doubled to $6 billion
per year, or doubled again to $12 billion per year, would it be a
good personal investment? If not, why is it a good social
investment? </p>

<p>This kind of hard-headed thinking is exactly what is lacking
and has been lacking throughout the War on Drugs. No attention
has been paid to considerations of cause and effect, or to
trade-offs, or to cost-benefit analysis. New anti-drug
initiatives are not subjected to critical questioning: what
marginal gains, if any, can be projected from new programs or an
additional commitment of resources? Conversely, how might things
worsen? For example, many law enforcement officials believe that
the coast guard's &quot;successful&quot; interdiction of
marijuana coming from Jamaica and Colombia in the early 1980s had
two negative side-effects: the substitution of domestic
cultivation of more potent marijuana in California (and
throughout the U.S.) and the diversion of smugglers into more
compact and more readily concealable cocaine. Was that
interdiction initiative therefore truly successful? Weren't those
side-effects reasonably foreseeable? There are other examples. </p>

<p>Drug gangs are probably far more ruthlessly violent today than
in the 1970s because they have learned to adapt to aggressive
law-enforcement methods. The friendly governments of Colombia,
Peru, Bolivia are far weaker today, far more corrupt, and far
more subject to narco-terrorist subversion because of similar
adaptations there by the drug cartel and its associates. Has our
national security been thus advanced by the War on Drugs? </p>

<p>For these reasons, it is important to abjure meaningless,
isolated &quot;victories&quot; in the war on drugs and to focus
on whether a program or policy offers some meaningful overall
impact on the safety, security and well-being of the American
people. In this respect, does it really matter that the DEA has
doubled the number of drug arrests from 6,000 to 12,000 during
the 1980s? </p>

<p>Or that the Customs Service has dramatically increased its
drug seizures to over 100,000 pounds of cocaine? Or that kingpins
like Carlos Lehder Rivas have been convicted and imprisoned for
life plus 135 years? Might it not be that the resources devoted
to those anti-drug initiatives were not merely wasted but
actually counterproductive? </p>

<p>Similarly, it is critical to pay scrupulous attention to cause
and effect. Throughout the war on drugs, administration officials
have been making absurd claims about the effects of anti-drug
policies. Recently President Reagan asserted that the War on
Drugs is working. His evidence? Marijuana smoking is down to 18
million per year and experimentation with cocaine by high school
seniors in the University of Michigan survey declined by 20
percent. Everyone trained in logic knows that this is the fallacy
of _post hoc ergo propter hoc_. But one need not be trained in
logic to realize that there is no provable correlation between
law enforcement initiatives and levels of drug consumption.
Indeed, the same University of Michigan survey shows that
marijuana consumption peaked in 1979, three years before the War
on Drugs even began. Cocaine is purer, cheaper, and more
available than ever before. If use is down, it is not because of
successful law enforcement. Most categories of drug use are down
and will most likely continue to go down as people become more
educated and more concerned about health and fitness, fueled in
some immeasurable degree by media reports of celebrity overdose
deaths such as those of David Kennedy, John Belushi, Len Bias,
and Don Rogers.(75) </p>

<p>Another important factor is the aging of the baby boom
generation. That demographic bulge leaves fewer young people
behind and thus contributes to the aging of the population as a
whole. An older population is simply one that is less likely to
use cocaine, marijuana, and heroin.To attribute these changes to
law enforcement levels is at the least unprofessional. The
liberalization of marijuana laws in California, Oregon, Maine,
and elsewhere in the early 1970s produced no observable rise in
consumption (either new users or increased frequency) of
marijuana compared to other states.(76) </p>

<p>The connection between law and individual behavior at this
level is remote. Government policies are no more responsible for
the current decline in drug use than they were for the boom in
the 1970s and early 1980s. Drug use will almost certainly decline
in the 1990s, no matter what law enforcement does, for roughly
the same reasons that cigarette smoking has declined dramatically
without any change in the law. </p>

<p>V. SUBSTITUTE STUDY FOR SPECULATION </p>

<p>The War on Drugs has produced a siege mentality. Senators from
large states speak of invasions and national security threats.
Even professionals who should know better succumb to anti-drug
hysteria. A former director of the National Institute of Drug
Abuse claimed that without the War on Drugs to restrain the
people, we would have 60-100,000,000 users of cocaine in this
country.(77) Now this is extremely unlikely; because of the
stimulant nature of the drug, it appeals mostly to younger
people, the population is aging, there is already a downward
trend in cocaine except for crack, and so forth. But rather than
trading assertion and counter-assertion, the real question is
epistemological: How does the Director know what he 'knows'? </p>

<p>Clearly, there is no empirical basis for his claim. It must
therefore be an expression of fear or perhaps political maneuver,
but clearly something other than a statement of fact. Why would
the Director of the public agency most responsible for informing
the public on drugs take that tack? Whatever his reasons, wild
speculation is not the path to informed judgment and intelligent,
workable policy. Why not truly confront the question of what less
restricted availability of cocaine would mean in terms of
increased drug use, taking account of both prevalence and
incidence.(78) </p>

<p>There are a number of ways in which this might be done if we
truly want to know the answers. One way is market research. A
standard technique of market research is to conduct surveys and
ask people about what they desire in a product in terms of price,
quality, and other features. How much w ill they buy at various
prices? The same techniques are adaptable, _mutatis mutandis_, to
illegal drugs. </p>

<p>What about the effects of the drug? Is it addictive?
Longitudinal studies of the kind pioneered by Ronald Siegel of
UCLA should be encouraged.(79) NIDA Household Surveys register
only gross numbers and do not track users. (They do not even
cover group quarters, such as college dormitories and military
barracks, where drug use may be higher than average.) At the
present time we have almost no real-world knowledge of the
experience of past and present cocaine users, except those
unrepresentative few who come forward as former or recovering
addicts. Even NIDA has conceded that we lack any estimate of the
relative proportions of addictive use versus experimental or
other non-consequential use in the total population of cocaine
users.(80) Isn't that critical information in regulating the
drug? </p>

<p>(Drug users should be systematically interviewed, but they
will be loath to step forward in the current climate of
repression.) </p>

<p>Useful experiments might also be performed using volunteers
from the prison population (for instance, those serving life
sentences without parole) and perhaps volunteers from the
military services. How would men behave and how would their
health fare with abundant access to cocaine? Would it be used
widely or intensively or both? Finally, comparative studies from
countries such as Holland can tell us a great deal about the
effects of more freely available cannabis and heroin, although
not so with respect to cocaine. We have a lot to learn from the
Dutch.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>CONCLUSION </p>

<p>I endorse a substantial measure of relaxation of drug laws in
some respects simultaneously with a substantial measure of
intensification in other respects: the enforcement of laws to
protect children, along with more stringent laws regarding the
sale of liquor and tobacco. As to the first point, some measure
of relaxation of drug laws is both correct in principle and
pragmatically necessary in the real world of limited resources.
But this is not a 'surrender' in the War on Drugs. There is a
paradox here: that the use of less force may actually result in
producing more control over the drug situation in this country. </p>

<p>Consider the analogy of a panic stop in an automobile. In a
typical scenario, a driver observes a sudden obstruction in his
path and slams on the brakes in order to avoid a collision. If he
uses too much force on the pedal, the sudden forward weight
transfer will very likely induce front-wheel lockup. At that
point, the car starts skidding out of control. If the driver
turns the wheel left or right, the car will simply keep on
skidding forward toward the very obstacle that he is trying to
avoid. In this moment of panic, the 'logical' or instinctive
thing to do is to stomp the brake pedal even harder. But that is
absolutely wrong. The correct thing to do to stop the skid is to
modulate the brake pedal, releasing it just enough to permit the
front wheels to begin rolling again so that steering control is
restored. </p>

<p>Thus, the correct and safe response is counterintuitive, while
the instinctive response sends the driver skidding toward
disaster. I leave it to the Committee to decide whether this has
any relevance in the re-making of drug policy.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>(70) Truth-based legislation will also have to acknowledge
that 'recreational' drugs also have beneficial uses, most notably
medicinal ones. Respectable authorities in the U.S. and abroad
endorse heroin for pain relief for terminally ill patients.
Francis Young, the chief administrative law judge of the DEA,
recommended this summer that marijuana be re-classified to permit
doctors to prescribe it for relief of nausea from chemotherapy
and for other purposes. His opinion concludes that marijuana is
&quot;far safer than many foods we commonly consume.&quot; and
that its medical benefits are &quot;clear beyond any
question&quot;. Judge Young had previously recommended that MDMA
(&quot;ecstasy&quot;) be removed from Schedule I and be made
legally available to psychiatrists for use in treating their
patients.Medical uses are not the only beneficial effects of
drugs. An AP wire from Frankfurt reported that the U.S. Air Force
allows its pilots to take Dexedrine &quot;so that they are able
to fly when they haven't gotten enough sleep or don't feel fit
enough.&quot; Hundreds of thousands of 'drug abusers' similarly
stimulate themselves with amphetamines and cocaine. Over a
century ago, Sigmund Freud discovered in self-experiments that
moderate doses (one tenth of a gram) of cocaine improved his
muscular strength and reaction time. See Blyck, _Cocaine Papers:
Sigmund Freud_ (New York: New American Library, 1974), pp. 98,
103. <br>
</p>

<p>(71) The Research Triangle Institute estimated the annual
costs of alcohol abuse to society at $116 billion in 1983.
Conference Board, 'Corporate Strategies for Controlling Substance
Abuse' 13 (Axel, ed., 1986). With 1,000 daily deaths from lung
cancer and other diseases often preceded by years of medical
treatment, there must be billions more in social costs
attributable to tobacco. </p>

<p>(72) See Knepper, 'Puff the Dangerous Drug', _Car and Driver_,
June 1980, p.43. </p>

<p>(73) See Wisotsky, 'Crackdown: The Emerging &quot;Drug
Exception&quot; to the Bill of Rights', 38 _Hastings Law Journal_
889 (1987). </p>

<p>(74) GGD-80-4 (October 25th, 1979). </p>

<p>(75) About the only category of drug use that appears to be up
is crack, and even that may be confined in large part to urban
ghettos. See the _New York Times_, July 10th, 1988. The overall
decline, of course, is a positive development so long as it is
not offset by a corresponding rise in other drug use, such as
alcohol or tobacco, or suicide or other forms of
health-endangering behavior. In this regard, the National
Commission should fund research directed toward the development
of some meaningful index of health and well-being by somehow
combining total morbidity/mortality date from all major causes.
It would be a true Big Picture accomplishment if we could somehow
confirm that specified demographic segments were not only using
drugs less but were also happier and healthier. </p>

<p>(76) Maloff, 'A Review of the Effects of the Decriminalization
of Marijuana', _Contemporary Drug Problems_, p.132 (Fall, 1981). </p>

<p>(77) Brinkley, 'The War on Narcotics: Can It Be Won?', _New
York Times_, September 14th, 1984. </p>

<p>(78) To speak of a rise or fall in drug use is simplistic. It
is important to distinguish between prevalence (the number of
users) and incidence (the frequency of use). In measurable health
consequences, it may be meaningless if the number of people who
try cocaine goes up or down; conversely a change in the amounts
and frequency of consumption may significantly alter morbidity
and mortality. </p>

<p>(79) In a 1984 paper for NIDA (Research Monograph 50), Siegel
concluded that the &quot;hypothesis that long-term use of cocaine
is inevitably associated with an escalating dependency marked by
more frequent patterns of use is not supported by the
findings.&quot; Instead he found that &quot;social recreational
drug users maintained relatively stable patterns of use&quot; in
the face of ready supplies and increased income as they aged. </p>

<p>(80) Jerome H. Jaffe, 'Foreword', _Cocaine Use In America:
Epidemiologic and Clinical Perspectives_ (NIDA, 1985). Other
research agendas should include the possibility of addiction
maintenance treatment and other therapeutic uses of cocaine.<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_other_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="other.htm">Other Publications related to drug policy</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="25252" -->

<p><br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>