
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-65</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B028-325</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/eleuch2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122064837 text/html 20414
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:48:29 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:21:45 GMT
Content-length: 20195
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>The Road to Eleusis - Chapter 2</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Internet Assistant for Word 1.0Z">
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
</head>

<body>

<hr>

<h6>CHAPTER TWO </h6>

<h3>A CHALLENGING QUESTION AND MY ANSWER</h3>

<hr>

<p> In July 1975 I was visiting my friend Gordon Wasson in his
home in Danbury when he suddenly asked me this question: whether
Early Man in ancient Greece could have hit on a method to isolate
an hallucinogen from ergot that would have given him an
experience comparable to LSD or psilocybin. I replied that this
might well have been the case and I promised to send him, after
further reflection, an exposition of our present knowledge on the
subject, which I already suspected would support my tentative
position. Two years have passed, and here now is my answer. </p>

<p> Ergot is the English name for a fungal growth, the
&quot;sclerotium&quot; of a mushroom known to mycologists as <i>Claviceps
purpurea</i> (Fr.) Tul. It is a parasite on rye and other cereals
such as barley or wheat, and also on certain wild grasses. Other
species of the genus Claviceps, viz <i>C. paspali</i> Stev. and
Hall, <i>C. nigricans</i> Tul., and <i>C. glabra</i> Langdon,
etc., are parasitical to many species and varieties of grasses.
Ergot itself is not of uniform chemical composition: it occurs in
&quot;biological&quot; or &quot;chemical&quot; races, differing
from each other mainly by the composition of their alkaloidal
constituents. (Chemists define &quot;alkaloids&quot; as
nitrogen-containing alkaline substances that represent the
pharmacologically active principles of many plants.) Thus in
Switzerland there exist three varieties of ergot of rye: (a) in
the Midlands a race containing mainly the alkaloid ergotamine,
(b) in the Valais one with alkaloids of the ergotoxine group, and
(c) in the Grisons a variety with no alkaloids at all.
Furthermore in other kinds of ergot --- growing on wheat, on
barley, on millet, on lolium, etc. --- there are wide variations
in alkaloidal makeup, sometimes depending on geographical
location. </p>

<p> By far the most important of all kinds of ergot is ergot of
rye, purple-brown protrusions from the ears of rye. Ergot of rye
(in scientific nomenclature: <i>Secale cornutum</i>) has been
called in England &quot;horned rye&quot;, &quot;spiked rye&quot;,
&quot;spurred rye&quot;, but most commonly &quot;ergot of
rye&quot;, a translation of the French <i>ergot de seigle</i>.
The word ergot is defined in the Petit Larousse as <i>&quot;petit
ongle pointu derriere le pied du coq&quot;</i>, &quot;small
pointed talon behind the cock's foot&quot;, but the derivation of
the French word <i>ergot</i> is uncertain. Other French names are
<i>blé cornu, seigle ergoté, seigle ivre</i>. In German there
seem to be more variants than in other languages: <i>Mutterkorn,
Rockenmutter, Afterkorn, Todtenkorn, Tollkorn,</i> and many
others. In German folklore there was a belief that, when the corn
waved in the wind, the corn mother (a demon) was passing through
the field; her children were the rye wolves (ergot). In our
context we observe that of these names, two, <i>seigle ivre</i>
(&quot;drunken rye&quot;) and <i>Tollkorn</i> (&quot;mad
grain&quot;), point to a knowledge of the psychotropic effects of
ergot. This folk awareness of the mindchanging effects of ergot
shows an intimate knowledge of its properties, at least among
herbalists, deeply rooted in European traditions. </p>

<p> Ergot of rye has a storied past. Once a dreaded poison, it
has become a rich treasure chamber of valuable pharmaceuticals. </p>

<p> In the Middle Ages bizarre epidemics occurred in Europe
costing thousands of people their lives, occasioned by bread made
from rye contaminated with ergot. These epidemics took two forms,
<i>Ergotismus convulsivus</i>, characterized by nervous
convulsive and epileptiform symptoms, and <i>Ergotismus
gangraenosus</i>, in which gangrenous manifestations leading to
mummification of the extremities were a prominent feature.
Ergotism was also known as<i> ignis sacer</i> (&quot;holy
fire&quot;), or &quot;St. Anthony's fire&quot;, because St.
Anthony was the patron saint of a religious order founded to care
for the victims of ergotism. The cause of these epidemics ---
bread contaminated with ergot --- was not learned until the
seventeenth century, and since then there have been only sporadic
outbreaks of ergot poisoning. </p>

<p> Ergot was first mentioned as a remedy by the German physician
Adam Lonitzer in 1582. He said it was being used by midwives to
precipitate childbirth. The first scientific report on the use of
ergot as a uterotonic agent was presented by the American
physician John Stearns in 1808: &quot;Account of the <i>pulvis
parturiens</i>&quot;. But already in 1824 Dr. David Hosack, also
American, recognizing the dangers of using ergot for accelerating
childbirth, recommended that the drug be used only to control
postpartum haemorrhage. Since then ergot has been used in
obstetrics mainly for this purpose.(1) (This Dr. Hosack was a
distinguished man. He was a physician to many of the eminent New
Yorkers of his time, and he accompanied Alexander Hamilton to
Weehawken heights for his fatal duel with Aaron Burr. This I
learned from the admirable life of Hosack by Christine Robbins.) </p>

<p> The latest and most important chapter in the history of ergot
deals with it as a rich source of pharmacologically useful
alkaloids.(2) More than thirty alkaloids have been isolated from
ergot and it is unlikely that many new ones will be discovered.
Hundreds of chemical modifications of these natural alkaloids
have been prepared and investigated pharmacologically. Today all
these alkaloids are also available by total synthesis. </p>

<p> Medicinally the most useful alkaloids stem from ergot of rye.
The first ergot alkaloid that found widespread therapeutic use
was ergotamine, isolated by A. Stoll in 1918. It is the essential
component of pharmaceutical preparations such as
&quot;Cafergot&quot; and &quot;Bellergal&quot;, medicaments
against migraine and nervous disorders. Modern valuable ergot
preparations are &quot;Hydergine&quot; developed by A. Stoll and
A. Hofmann in the Sandoz laboratories in Basel, containing
hydrogenated ergotoxine alkaloids, used in </p>

<p> the treatment of geriatric disorders, and
&quot;Dihydergot&quot; with dihydroergotamine as active
component, for the therapy of circulatory disturbances. </p>

<p> Of special relevance to our problem here are the
investigations into the alkaloid ergonovine, which is the
specific uterotonic water-soluble principle of ergot. In 1932 H.
W. Dudley and C. Moir in England discovered that water-soluble
extracts of ergot, containing none of the water-insoluble
alkaloids of the ergotamine-ergotoxine-type, elicited strong
uterotonic activity. This observation led three years later to
the isolation of the alkaloid responsible for this action
simultaneously in four separate laboratories, which named it
&quot;ergometrine&quot;, &quot;ergobasin&quot;,
&quot;ergotocine,&quot; &quot;ergostetrine&quot;, respectively.
The International Pharmacopoeia Commission proposed a name to be
internationally accepted to replace these synonyms, viz.
&quot;ergonovine&quot;. </p>

<p> In 1937, starting with naturally occurring lysergic acid, I
prepared ergonovine, which by its chemical composition is
lysergic acid propanolamide. Lysergic acid is the nucleus common
to most ergot alkaloids. It is extracted from special cultures of
ergot and could also be prepared today by total synthesis if this
procedure were not too expensive. I used the method developed for
the synthesis of ergonovine for the preparation of many chemical
modifications of ergonovine. One of these partly synthetic
derivatives of ergonovine was lysergic acid butanolamide. This is
used today in obstetrics, replacing to a major extent ergonovine,
under the brand name &quot;Methergine&quot; to stop postpartum
haemorrhage. </p>

<p> Another lysergic acid derivative that I synthesized in this
context aiming to get an analeptic (that is, an agent with
circulation-and respiration-stimulating properties) was lysergic
acid diethylamide. Pharmacological examination revealed a fairly
strong uterotonic activity in this compound, nearly as strong as
ergonovine. In 1943 I discovered in self-experiments the specific
high hallucinogenic potency of lysergic acid diethylamide, which
became known world-wide under the laboratory code name LSD-25. </p>

<p> My interest in hallucinogenic agents, originating in 1943
from my work with LSD, brought me into personal contact with
Gordon Wasson, pioneer ethnomycologist and also pioneer in the
investigation of the ancient Mexican mushroom cult. From Roger
Heim, then head of the Laboratoire de Cryptogamie and Director of
the famous Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle of Paris, whom
Wasson invited to study and identify in the field his sacred
mushrooms, I received samples of them for chemical analysis. With
my laboratory assistant Hans Tscherter I succeeded in isolating
the hallucinogenic principles of the sacred Mexican mushrooms,
which I named psilocybin and psilocin. With my colleagues of the
Sandoz Research Laboratories, we succeeded in the elucidation of
the chemical structure and the synthesis of psilocybin and
psilocin. </p>

<p> Inspired by my talks with my friend Wasson and encouraged by
our success with the hallucinogenic mushrooms, I decided to
tackle also the problem of another psychotropic Mexican plant, <i>ololiuhqui</i>.
With Wasson's help I obtained a large quantity of authentic <i>ololiuhqui</i>
seeds of the two morning glories that the Mesoamerican Indians
were using, seeds of <i>Turbina corymbosa</i> (L.) Raf. and <i>Ipomoea
violacea</i> L. When we analyzed them we arrived at an unexpected
result: these ancient drugs that we are apt to call
&quot;magical&quot; and the Indians consider divine, contained as
their psychoactive principles some of our already familiar ergot
alkaloids. The main components were lysergic acid amide and
lysergic acid hydroxyethylamide, both water-soluble alkaloids,
closely related to lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), as is
evident even to the non-chemist. Another constituent of the <i>ololiuhqui</i>
alkaloids was ergonovine, the uterotonic principle of ergot. </p>

<p> The psychoactive property of these simple lysergic acid
amides, closely related to LSD, is well established. The question
presented itself whether ergonovine, being not only an alkaloidal
component of ergot but also of <i>ololiuhqui</i>, possessed
hallucinogenic activity. In the light of its chemical structure
this did not seem unlikely: it does not differ much from LSD. But
one may ask why, if it is hallucinogenic, this astonishing fact
has not been announced, in the light of its use over recent
decades in obstetrics. Undoubtedly the answer lies in the
extremely low dosage of ergonovine used to stop postpartum
bleeding, viz 0.1 to 0.25 mg. The effective dose of lysergic acid
amide is 1 to 2 mg by oral application. I decided therefore to
test in a self-experiment a corresponding dose of ergonovine: </p>

<p> 1 April 1976 </p>

<p> 12.20 h: 2.0 mg ergonovine hydrogenmaleinate, containing 1.5
mg ergonovine base, ingested in a glass of water. </p>

<p> 13.00 h: slight nausea, same effect as I have experienced
always in my LSD or psilocybin experiments. Tired, need to lie
down. With eyes closed colored figures. </p>

<p> 13.30 h: the trees in the nearby forest seem to live, their
branches moving in a threatening way. </p>

<p> 14.30 h: strong desire to dream, unable to do systematic
work, with eyes closed or open afflicted by mollusk-like forms
and feelings. </p>

<p> 16.00 h: motives and colors have become clearer, but bearing
still some hidden dangers. </p>

<p> 17.00 h: after a short sleep I awoke by a kind of inner
explosion of all the senses. </p>

<p> 18.00 h: an unexpected visit forced me to become active, but
during the whole evening I lived more in an inner than in the
outer world. </p>

<p> 22.00 h: all effects worn off, normal feeling. </p>

<p> This was an experiment performed without attention to
&quot;set and setting&quot; but it proves that ergonovine
possesses a psychotropic, mood-changing, slightly hallucinogenic
activity when taken in the same amount as is an effective dose of
lysergic acid amide, the main constituent of <i>ololiuhqui</i>.
Its potency is about one-twentieth of the potency of LSD and
about five times that of psilocybin. </p>

<p> There is a further finding that may prove to be of utmost
importance in considering Wasson's question. The main
constituents of the Mexican morning-glory seeds are (a) lysergic
acid amide (= &quot;ergine&quot;), and (b) lysergic acid
hydroxyethylamide, and these are also the main alkaloids in ergot
growing on the wild grass <i>Paspalum distichum</i> L. This grass
grows commonly all around the Mediterranean basin and is often
infected with <i>Claviceps paspali</i>. F. Arcamone et al (3)
were the first to discover these alkaloids in ergot of P.
distichum, in 1960. </p>

<p> Within the kinds of ergot produced by the various species of
the genus <i>Claviceps</i> and its many hosts, cereals and wild
grasses, types of ergot do exist that contain hallucinogenic
alkaloids, the same alkaloids as in the Mexican hallucinogenic
morning-glories. These alkaloids, mainly lysergic acid amide,
lysergic acid hydroxyethylamide, and ergonovine, are soluble in
water, in contrast to the non-hallucinogenic medicinally useful
alkaloids of the ergotamine and ergotoxine type. With the
techniques and equipment available in antiquity it was therefore
easy to prepare an hallucinogenic extract from suitable kinds of
ergot. </p>

<p> What suitable kinds of ergot were accessible to the ancient
Greeks? No rye grew there, but wheat and barley did and <i>Claviceps
purpurea</i> flourishes on both. We analyzed ergot of wheat and
ergot of barley in our laboratory and they were found to contain
basically the same alkaloids as ergot of rye, viz alkaloids of
the ergotamine and ergotoxine group, ergonovine, and sometimes
also traces of lysergic acid amide. As I said before, ergonovine
and lysergic acid amide, both psychoactive, are soluble in water
whereas the other alkaloids are not. As we all know, ergot
differs in its chemical constituents according to its host grass
and according to geography. We have no way to tell what the
chemistry was of the ergot of barley or wheat raised on the
Rarian plain in the 2nd millennium B. C. But it is certainly not
pulling a long bow to assume that the barley grown there was host
to an ergot containing, perhaps among others, the soluble
hallucinogenic alkaloids. The famous Rarian plain was adjacent to
Eleusis. Indeed this may well have led to the choice of Eleusis
for Demeter's temple, and for the growth of the cluster of
powerful myths surrounding them and Triptolemus that still exert
their spell on us today. </p>

<p> The separation of the hallucinogenic agents by simple water
solution from the non- soluble ergotamine and ergotoxine
alkaloids was well within the range of possibilities open to
Early Man in Greece. An easier method still would have been to
have recourse to some kind of ergot like that growing on the
grass <i>Paspalum distichum</i>, which contains only alkaloids
that are hallucinogenic and which could even have been used
directly in powder form. As I said before, <i>P. distichum</i>
grows everywhere around the Mediterranean basin. During the many
centuries when the Eleusinian Mysteries were thriving and holding
the antique Greek world enthralled, may not the hierophants of
Eleusis have been broadening their knowledge and improving their
skills? For the Greek world as for us, the Mysteries are linked
to Demeter and Kore, and they and Triptolemus are the famed
mythical progenitors of cultivated wheat and barley. But in the
course of time the hierophants could easily have discovered <i>Claviceps
paspali</i> growing on the grass <i>Paspalum distichum.</i> Here
they would be able to get their hallucinogen direct, straight and
pure. But I mention this only as a possibility or a likelihood,
and not because we need <i>P. distichum</i> to answer Wasson's
question. </p>

<p> Finally we must also discuss an ergot parasitical to a wild
grass called in scientific nomenclature <i>Lolium temulentum</i>
L. In English this is most widely known as darnel or cockle or
(in the Bible) tares, a weed that plagues grain crops. It is
sometimes called &quot;wild rye grass&quot;, an unfortunate name
because wild rye has nothing to do with rye: the rye of
&quot;wild rye grass&quot; is of utterly different etymology. In
classic Greek darnel was <i>aira</i> and in classic Latin was <i>lolium</i>.
Its name in French is <i>ivraie</i> and in German <i>Taumellolch,</i>
both names pointing to a belief in its psychotropic activity in
the folk knowledge of the traditional European herbalists. A
citation for ivraie in A. D. 1236 has been found, and it must go
back much further than that. </p>

<p> Analysis of <i>Lolium temulentum</i> in my laboratory and an
extended botanical, chemical, and pharmacological investigation
by I. Katz (4) showed that the plant itself contains no alkaloids
nor does it possess any pharmacological activity. But the Lolium
species (<i>L. temulentum</i> and <i>L. perenne</i>) are
notoriously prey to the Claviceps fungus. The psychotropic
reputation of darnel must therefore be attributed to its
parasitic infection by ergot. Samples of ergot grown on L.
temulentum and L.perenne collected in Germany, France, and
Switzerland showed large variation in their alkaloidal
composition. Some contained substantial amounts of ergonovine
together with alkaloids of the ergotamine and ergotoxine group.
(5) A species of ergot growing on darnel may have existed in
ancient Greece that contained mainly hallucinogenic alkaloids of
ergot such as we have found in ergot of Paspalum. </p>

<p> In conclusion I now answer Wasson's question. The answer is
yes, Early Man in ancient Greece could have arrived at an
hallucinogen from ergot. He might have done this from ergot
growing on wheat or barley. An easier way would have been to use
the ergot growing on the common wild grass Paspalum. This is
based on the assumption that the herbalists of ancient Greece
were as intelligent and resourceful as the herbalists of
pre-Conquest Mexico. </p>

<p> ALBERT HOFMANN</p>

<hr>

<p> (1). The standard monograph on the botany and history of
ergot is G. Barger: <i>Ergot and Ergotism,</i> Gurney and
Jackson, London, 1931. </p>

<p> (2). The results of the chemical, pharmacological, and
medicinal investigations on ergot alkaloids carried out in
laboratories all over the world are reviewed in the monograph by
A. Hofmann: <i>Die Mutterkornalkaloide,</i> F. Enke Verlag,
Stuttgart, 1964. </p>

<p> (3) Arcamone, F., Bonino, C., Chain, E. B., Ferretti, A.,
Pennella, P., Tonolo, A., and Vero, L.; <i>Nature</i> (London)
187, 238 (1960). </p>

<p> (4). Katz, 1.: Contribution à Etude de l'ivraie enivrante (<i>Lolium
temulentum</i> L.). Thèse présentée a l'Ecole Polytechnique
Federale, Zurich, 1949. </p>

<p> (5). Kobel, H., Sandoz Research Laboratories, Basel. Private
communication. </p>

<hr>

<blockquote>
    <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/eleucont.htm"><p>The
    Road to Eleusis Contents Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <a
    href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/lsdmenu.htm"><p>LSD
    and the Psychedelics Menu Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm"><p>Cliff
    Schaffer's Home Page</a> </p>
</blockquote>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>