
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B36-16</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B030-137</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/braden2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122065241 text/html 23686
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:52:33 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:31:38 GMT
Content-length: 23467
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Private Sea - Chapter 2</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="William Braden">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body bgcolor="FFFFE0">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->

<h2>2.&nbsp; &nbsp; Through psychedelic eyes</h2>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp; &nbsp; On a good trip the LSD voyager may feel he has
penetrated to the godhead itself. But is it really the godhead he
sees? Or is it the Medusa? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Before we describe what LSD does, let us first ask
what it is. That is a much easier question to handle, admittedly,
and it is mildly ironic that this is so. Where the mysteries of
nature are concerned, the situation is usually reversed, as
Bertrand Russell has pointed out in the case of electricity.
Science can describe very accurately what electricity does but
hasn't the foggiest notion what it really is. As for LSD, it is a
synthetic drug: d-lysergic acid diethylamide tartrate, compounded
from a constituent of a rye fungus known as ergot. Its general
history by now is a twice-told tale and then some, so we shall be
brief about it. LSD was first synthesized in 1938 by Dr. Albert
Hofmann, a biochemist at the Sandoz pharmaceutical firm in Basel,
Switzerland; but the scientist did not know what he had created
until 1943, when he accidentally inhaled or otherwise absorbed a
small amount of LSD and thus discovered the drug's curious
properties. It produced uncanny distortions of space and time and
hallucinations that were weird beyond belief. It also produced a
state of mind in which the objective world appeared to take on a
new and different meaning. These effects, and the agents which
produce them, are now referred to as psychedelic &#151;a generic
term which means &quot;mind manifesting,&quot; which in turn
means nothing. The word has come into common usage simply because
of its neutral connotation; due to the controversy involved, it
is the only word so far that all sides have been willing to
accept. It is used as both noun and adjective. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Unlike heroin, opium, and alcohol, LSD apparently
is not addictive. This means simply that prolonged use of the
drug, so far as we can tell at this time, does not create a <i>physiological</i>
craving or dependency based on changes in a subject's body
chemistry&#151;changes that are produced by liquor and
junk&#151;and there are no physiological withdrawal symptoms when
use of the drug is terminated. LSD on the other hand may be <i>psychologically</i>
habituating; but this, after all, can also be said of chewing gum
and television. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; There are literally scores of psychedelic
substances, natural and synthetic, and LSD is only one of many
agents capable of producing a full-fledged psychedelic
experience. Identical effects can be obtained from Indian hemp
and its derivatives, including hashish; from the peyote cactus
and its extract, mescaline; from a Mexican mushroom and its
laboratory counterpart, psilocybin, which Dr. Hofmann synthesized
in 1958. Hemp and peyote have been used as psychedelics for
centuries, and mescaline was on the market before the turn of the
century. LSD's uniqueness lies in the fact that it is very easy
to make&#151; and mega-potent. According to the Food and Drug
Administration, a single gram of LSD can provide up to ten
thousand doses, each of them capable of producing an experience
lasting up to twelve hours or longer. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Scientists seized upon the drug as a tool for
research and therapy, and literally thousands of technical papers
have been devoted to it. Since LSD appeared to mimic some
symptoms of psychosis, it offered possible insights into the
sufferings of mental patients&#151;although psychotherapists
later came to doubt that it produces what was first referred to
as a model psychosis. Preliminary research indicated it might be
useful in the treatment of alcoholism and neurosis, and it also
served to ease the anguish of terminal patients. In small doses,
in controlled situations, it appeared to enhance creativity and
productivity. But the public at large knew nothing of LSD until
1963, when two professors, Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert, lost
their posts at Harvard University in the wake of charges that
they had involved students in reckless experiments with the drug.
Leary went on to become more or less the titular leader of the
drug movement, in which capacity he soon ran afoul of the law,
and the movement spread to campuses and cities across the
country. By and large, it seemed at first to develop as a
middle-class phenomenon, attracting to its ranks mainly students
and intellectuals, liberal ministers, artists and professional
people, as well as bearded pariahs. Official panic provoked a
wave of legislation which ended or seriously hindered almost all
legitimate research programs; the legislation did little or
nothing to discourage the drug movement, which received its
supplies from black market sources. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Depending upon the point of view, Dr. Hofmann
assumed the role of a Prometheus or Pandora. In correspondence I
once asked him if he sometimes felt like the latter, to which he
replied: &quot;In my opinion, every discovery in the field of
natural science is to be positively viewed, and thus also the
discovery of LSD. If one wishes to deplore the discovery of LSD,
then one must also view the discovery of morphine negatively, for
morphine, one of the most valuable gifts of pharmacy, is just as
dangerous and destructive as LSD when used improperly. There are
no forces in the universe that are bad in themselves. It is
always up to man whether he will make good or bad use of
them.&quot; And if Dr. Hofmann's words have a familiar ring,
perhaps they are reminiscent of the statements nuclear physicists
were making in 1945. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; LSD is a colorless, odorless, tasteless drug. It is
taken orally for the most part, and the precise nature of its
action upon the brain and nervous system has not been determined.
It is believed, however, that only a minute portion of the tiny
dose ever reaches the brain, and even this disappears in less
than an hour. Possibly, then, LSD sets off a reaction which
continues long after the drug itself has been dissipated. As Dr.
Sidney Cohen, a leading medical authority on LSD, expressed it,
&quot;The drug acts to trigger a chain of metabolic processes
which then proceed to exert an effect for many hours
afterward.&quot; In hipsters' terminology, the subject is
&quot;turned on.&quot; And the experience begins. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The nature of the experience will depend on
countless factors, which are commonly summed up as
&quot;set&quot; and &quot;setting&quot;: that is, the mood of the
subject and the environment in which the drug is administered.
The subject becomes highly suggestible, and the slightest false
note can result in the nightmare of a bad trip. Most experiences
will include a hallucinatory period, in which fantastic visions
occur, and in some cases it is possible to see sounds and hear
colors&#151;the result of sensory short-circuiting, referred to
in the literature as synesthesia. One subject reported that he
could taste the categorical imperative (which he said was
something like veal). These very weird effects have received
considerable publicity; when they are pleasurable, they&#151;and
sometimes sexual stimulation&#151;constitute what may be regarded
as the &quot;kicks&quot; aspect of LSD. But the drug movement
cultists are not concerned with kicks in this sense. Skilled
travelers say they can avoid the hallucinatory period altogether
and thus are able to achieve and prolong the &quot;central
experience.&quot; There does appear to be such an experience, and
this is what the cultists refer to when they speak of a good
trip. It does not always occur, and some people may never achieve
it; it must be sought after, perhaps, and expectation may be a
significant factor in its production. But it does exist, and it
is the very basis of the cult. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; From various sources, then, let us see if we can
construct a typology of this central or core experience. While
the problems of description are notorious, in most cases the mind
will appear to operate at a new level of consciousness in which: <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 1. The sense of self or personal ego is utterly
lost. Awareness of individual identity evaporates. &quot;I&quot;
and &quot;me&quot; are no more. Subject-object relationships
dissolve, and the world no longer ends at one's fingertips: the
world is simply an extension of the body, or the mind. The world
shimmers, as if it were charged with a high-voltage current, and
the subject feels he could melt into walls, trees, other persons.
It is not that the world lacks substance; it is real, but one is
somehow conterminous with it. And it is fluid, shifting. One is
keenly aware of the atomic substructure of reality; he can feel
the spinning motion of the electrons in what he used to call his
body, and he senses the incredible emptiness that lies within the
atoms, where the electron planets circle their proton suns at
distances which are comparably as vast as those in the solar
system itself. Thus it seems only natural that one could pass
through a wall, if only it were possible to get all the atoms
lined up properly for just one moment. In the vastness of outer
space, is it not a fact that billion-starred galaxies are able to
drift through each other like clouds of smoke or astral ghosts,
without the single collision of one star with another? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; As for identity, it is not really lost. On the
contrary, it is found; it is expanded to include all that is seen
and all that is not seen. What occurs is simply
depersonalization. The subject looks back on his pre-drug
existence as some sort of game or make-believe in which, for some
reason, he had felt called upon to assume the reduced identity or
smaller self called &quot;I.&quot; Being had concentrated its
attention at a single point in order to create, and play, the
game of writer, banker, cat burglar. Or so it now seems. If there
is any analogy to this in normal existence, is it not perhaps the
moment when one awakens from sleep? In that case, what is the
first thing one asks oneself? &quot;Where am I?&quot; Or isn't it
rather, &quot;Who am I?&quot; And then, in an effort of will,
attention is concentrated to re-create the role that was lost in
sleep. Thus in the drug experience, as in sleep, the normal state
of tension is relaxed. Home at last, after that dreadful party,
Being slips out of her stays, so to speak, and breathes an
ontological sigh of celestial relief. Consciousness is allowed to
scatter, and the subject at last can be Himself again. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The subject is somehow united with the Ground of
his Being, with the life force that has created the visible
world. He <i>remembers</i>. And what he remembers is the true
identity that underlies all the individual egos of the world. He
is one again with the universe, the eternal, the Absolute. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; He has found himself again. He is made whole again.
That which he once knew, he has remembered. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; (But when did he know it? And when did he forget?) <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 2. Time stops. Or, in any case, it ceases to be
important. And perhaps it would be more accurate to say that
memory and forethought stop. The subject is content to exist in
the moment&#151; in the here and now. And time has no meaning in
the here and now. Bergson suggested that the sense of time
consists simply of arrests of our attention. Seconds and minutes
do not really exist; they are artificially created
&quot;immobilities&quot; dreamed up by science, which is unable
to comprehend flux, mobility, or the dynamic character of life
itself. Installed within true movement, said Bergson, the mind
would lose its normal sense of time, since the normal function of
the intellect is to foresee, so as to act upon things. &quot;We
must strive to see in order to see,&quot; he said, &quot;and no
longer to see in order to act.&quot; This is precisely what
happens in the psychedelic experience, where forethought is
anesthetized. Without forethought there is no anticipation.
Without anticipation there is no desire. And time stops. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 3. Words lose all meaning. In the here and now
there are no abstractions. An object represents only that which
it is. It is perceived as a <i>Ding-an-Sich</i>, a
thing-in-itself, and it matters not whether Kant said that sort
of perception is impossible. Kant never took LSD. If he had, he
would have known that rose is a rose is a rose is a rose. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The same feeling is captured in childhood perhaps.
As Wordsworth wrote, recalling his boyish days when nature was
all in all: </p>

<blockquote>
    <p><br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; . . .
    I cannot paint <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; What then I was. The sounding cataract <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Haunted me like a passion: the tall rock, <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood, <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Their colours and their forms, were then to me <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; An appetite; a feeling and a love, <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; That had no need of a remoter charm, <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; By thought supplied, nor any interest <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; Unborrowed from the eye.&#151;That time is
    past, <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; And all its aching joys are now no more, <br>
    &nbsp; &nbsp; And all its dizzy raptures. </p>
</blockquote>

<p><br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; The psychedelic experience is similar but
multiplied at least a thousand times over. Coincidentally,
Havelock Ellis wrote, after experimenting with mescaline in the
1890's: &quot;If it should ever chance that the consumption of
mescal becomes a habit, the favorite poet of the mescal drinker
will certainly be Wordsworth.&quot; <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; But thing-in-itself perception is beyond all
language. It is, in fact, the antithesis of language, which is
the real cause of our normal inability to see the
thing-in-itself. This is so because we think in words, and words
are abstractions or symbols of things; as a result, we tend to
think and perceive in symbols. Thus the American flag fluttering
on the Fourth of July is seen in terms of Concord and Lexington.
The flag-in-itself is never seen; we must always associate it
with something else. And so on. And the English language is
especially crippling because of its painful stress on simile and
metaphor. Thus a rose isn't a rose; it's what my love is like.
Ruskin quite properly attacked the pathetic fallacy as evidence
of a &quot;morbid state of mind.&quot; But the psychedelic
experience suggests that all figures of speech reflect the same
unhealthy attitude&#151;and that speech itself is a web of
deceit. The Greek poets sensed this. For the Greeks, as Edith
Hamilton pointed out, a thing of beauty was never a symbol of
something else, but only itself. A star was just a star, a
primrose a primrose. &quot;That a skylark was like a glow-worm
golden in a dell of dew, or like a poet hidden in the light of
thought, would have been straight nonsense to them. A skylark was
just a skylark. Birds were birds and nothing else, but how
beautiful a thing was a bird, 'that flies over the foam of the
wave with careless heart, sea-purple bird of spring.&quot;' And
if symbols as such are deceptive, how much worse are the symbols
of use. We look at a peach, and we see something to eat. We look
at a field, and we wonder how many bushels of wheat it will
yield. We meet somebody for the first time, and we ask ourselves
what this new person can do for us. Can we play bridge with him?
Sell him some insurance? Worst of all, we look at our loved ones
even in terms of our own needs, emotional and otherwise. In the
terminology of Martin Buber, we live in the world of I-It. We
associate things, and we use things, and we never look at the
thing-in-itself in the here and now. Moreover, we cannot look
upon an object without thinking the word which symbolizes it.
Tree. Lamp. Table. But the psychedelic world is the world of pure
experience and pure relation; it is the world of I-Thou. In this
world, for example, a tree is not a source of timber or shade. A
tree is to look at. And it is not a tree. It is <i>that</i>,
there. Now. And that is a that is a that is a that. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 4. There are no dualities. Sweet and sour, good and
evil&#151; these also are abstractions, inventions of the verbal
mind, and they have no place in the ultimate reality of here and
now. As a result, the world is just as it should be. It is
perfect, beautiful. It is the same world that is seen without
LSD, but it is seen in a different way. It is transfigured, and
it requires no meaning beyond the astonishing fact of its own
existence. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; What does &quot;meaning&quot; mean anyhow? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Meaning is just one more abstraction, implying some
future use or purpose; it has no place in the here and now of
naked existence. And is this perhaps the significance of the Eden
story? They ate of the tree in the midst of the garden, and their
eyes were opened, and they became as gods, knowing good and evil.
The first dualism, fundamental to all others. What does this
story represent if not the introduction into the world of a new
way of thinking and a new form of perception? What does it refer
to if not the evolutionary product we describe so proudly as
intellect, or the rational mind? What does it signify if not that
moment when man looked about him and said for the first time:
&quot;This is wrong.&quot; Not, &quot;This hurts me,&quot; or
&quot;The tiger is chewing my leg, and I wish he wouldn't.&quot;
No. &quot;This is <i>wrong</i>.&quot; What an idea! What a
curious concept. No doubt it was the greatest, or worst, idea
that man ever had. It marks that point in the process of becoming
when life took charge of itself. Man had accepted the world; now
he decided to judge it. Thus Adam became the first
existentialist, taking upon himself the nauseating responsibility
that turned Sartre's stomach. In doing so he laid the basis for
those existential anxieties which are nothing more or less than
ontological anxieties. He estranged himself from his environment;
worse yet, he alienated himself from the very Ground of his
Being. In Eden he had lived in perfect I-Thou relation, neither
judging things nor subsuming them with words. East of Eden lay
the world of I-It, where the ground was cursed for his sake, and
the Lord told him what he could expect from it. Thorns and
thistles he could expect from it. So Adam was cast out of the
garden, his own mind the flaming sword that would prevent his
return. He lived in the world of I-It, and he sought there for
meaning. But he never found it, and none of those who came after
him have found it. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; Men are frustrated in the search by their I-It
minds of use, which have made meaning synonymous with purpose.
Nothing is meaningful unless it leads to something else, or
produces some future effect. Thus a man smokes <i>to</i> enjoy
himself&#151; and that is a meaningless action. But he puts on
his shoes <i>so</i> he can go to the store&#151;and that by
definition is meaningful. But it is not meaningful enough, and
man craves for an ultimate meaning. He wants his life to lead to
something else, somewhere in the future. It doesn't, apparently,
so he feels the anxiety of meaninglessness. Taking hope, however,
he diagnoses his anxiety as a form of psychic pain. The sense of
meaninglessness is meaningful in itself, he decides; it implies
there is a meaning somewhere, and he is estranged from it. Which
is so. But the ultimate meaning he seeks is in fact the absence
of meaning&#151;in the sense of purpose. Meaning is simple
existence in the here and now. And of course man already lives in
the here and now. The trouble is, he doesn't know how to live in
it. And this is what LSD seems to tell him. It tells him that he
is still in Eden, if only he knew it. It is only necessary to
spit out the apple and look at the world through psychedelic
eyes. The apple is his intellect, or way of looking at things,
and under LSD his intellect no longer functions. Forethought is
put to sleep, and he opens his eyes upon Paradise regained. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; A voice whispers in his ear. It tells him: <i>&quot;Essence
precedes existence.&quot;</i> <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; 5. The subject feels he knows, essentially,
everything there is to know. He knows ultimate truth. And what's
more, he knows that he knows it. Yet this sense of authority
cannot be verbalized (any more than the experience as a whole can
be verbalized) because the experience is a whole which cannot be
divided, and it transcends all partial abstractions. What is
known is pure Being, which cannot be compared with anything else.
The subject is identical with that which he knows and therefore
is speechless. In any case, language can never describe that
which language itself is responsible for negating. Finally, there
is the problem raised by H. G. Wells in his tale of &quot;The
Richest Man in Bogota.&quot; To a race of eyeless men, how do you
explain sight? What words do you use? <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; This describes the psychedelic experience, produced
by a chemical. But it also describes something else. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It describes religious mysticism. <br>
&nbsp; &nbsp; It describes the experience of saints and prophets
since the first tick of history's clock. And it describes as well
those flashes of insight that sometimes come to humbler folk in
moments of prayer, or of grace. </p>

<p></p>

<hr width="50%">

<blockquote>
    <a href="braden.htm"><p>Contents Page</a> | <a
    href="braden3.htm">Chapter 3</a> | </p>
</blockquote>

<p></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_LSD_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="lsdmenu.htm">The Psychedelic Library</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="57483" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>