
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B30-24</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B003-272</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/GOVPUBS/amhab/amhabc1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133914 text/html 12344
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:39:01 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:28:31 GMT
Content-length: 12126
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Chapter I The Impact of the Drug Trade</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<hr>

<h2>Chapter I The Impact of the Drug Trade </h2>

<p>Drug trafficking is the most serious organized crime problem
in the world today. The drug trade generates billions of dollars
for organized crime each year, imposing incalculable costs on
individuals, families, communities, and governments worldwide.
But drug trafficking is only part of a broader, unified
phenomenon, which also includes the illicit use of drugs. It is
drug users who finance organized crime through their drug
purchases, and it is they who must accept responsibility for the
broad range of costs associated with the drug industry. </p>

<p>Drug abuse ruins individual lives, drains billions of dollars
each year from American society, and erodes the nation's quality
of life. The violence and corruption that are an integral part of
organized crime drug trafficking take the lives of American and
foreign officials and private citizens, undermine drug control
efforts, and threaten entire governments. To the extent that the
stability of friendly nations is threatened, particularly in this
hemisphere, our own national security is jeopardized. The impact
of organized crime and drug trafficking on society thus has
far-ranging consequences, from the mental or physical destruction
of the individual drug user to questions of national security. </p>

<p>This Commission has found drug trafficking to be the most
widespread and lucrative organized crime activity in the United
States. According to this Commission's survey of local law
enforcement agencies, marijuana, cocaine, and dangerous drug
trafficking are the three primary activities of organized crime
groups, as defined by local agencies, nationwide. Drug
trafficking accounts for almost 38 percent of all organized crime
activity across the country and generates an income estimated to
be as high as $110 billion. </p>

<p>A concept fundamental to this report is the dual nature of the
drug phenomenon: drug supply and drug demand are mutually
dependent aspects of a single global problem. All strategic and
tactical evaluations in this report have been arrived at in this
context, and it is imperative that the planning undertaken by
this government and its allies be performed within the same
framework. The gaps that now exist between strategists who seek
to reduce supply and planners who want to reduce demand must be
closed. The situation confronting us is a crisis both nationally
and internationally. Our response can be no less than national
and international mobilization. As this report sets out in
detail, the menace of drugs is not restricted to a particular
segment of society, but is now of a scope and severity that is a
threat to our national security and therefore a legitimate
national security issue. </p>

<p>The appropriate response must therefore involve our entire
society, not just our law enforcement and health professionals.
Parents, educators, employers, the legal profession, financial
institutions, the military, and the diplomatic and intelligence
communities must all recognize that we are in a national
emergency. </p>

<p>Military strategists have warned and painful national
experience confirmed that a war must not be fought without a
clear notion of the victory sought. In this war on drugs - a
phrase worn by use but nevertheless the only accurate description
of what must be done - this Commission has adopted a definition
of victory: the dramatic reduction, if not complete elimination,
of drug abuse in this society. The ultimate goal is a distant
one, to be sure, requiring patience, determination and vision. No
less an objective is acceptable. Short fixes, compromises, and
resignation are a breach of faith with ourselves, our children,
and generations to come. </p>

<p>Just as we must clearly define victory, so must we identify
the enemy. Here again, there is no room for compromise. We must
unite against drugs themselves, and anyone who is their ally.
Producers, refiners, smugglers, and sellers, all those we know as
&quot;traffickers,&quot; are obvious targets. It is our
obligation to look further and recognize that those among us -
friends, relatives, colleagues, and other &quot;respectable&quot;
people - whose small, personal drug purchases at the base of the
consumption pyramid are the driving force behind the traffickers'
assault on this country. It is the consumer's dollars that come
together to finance the organized crime drug trafficking
described in this report, and it is thus their responsibility and
ours to confront this truth. This means an end to tolerance of
drug use at every level of society. </p>

<p>While all drug trafficking, by its nature, requires some
degree of organization, it is essential for the purposes of this
report to identify the threshold at which the organization
inherent in drug trafficking can be distinguished from organized
crime drug trafficking. The Commission's definition of organized
crime, which sets out the six characteristics of organized crime
groups, is helpful in making this distinction. These
characteristics are: continuity, structure, defined membership,
criminality, violence, and power as its goal. These elements,
together with a reliance on the &quot;buffer&quot; that this
Commission has found to be an integral part of organized crime,
are common to the world's most notorious trafficking
organizations. </p>

<p>This report examines the organized crime groups that traffic
in illicit drugs. To the extent necessary to grasp the dynamics
of worldwide drug traffic, it also details the nature of the
drugs themselves. It describes the array of enforcement agencies
currently in place, analyzes their various strategies and
tactics, and presents specific recommendations for more effective
anti-drug efforts. </p>

<p>In the portion of this report devoted to efforts to reduce the
supply of illicit drugs, &quot;Supply Strategies,&quot; it is
clear that our law enforcement and other government agencies,
particularly on the Federal level, are deployed with a degree of
determination, imagination, and resource commitment unparalleled
in American history. This government must continue to pursue
strategies to reduce supply with all possible vigor, or it is the
government's obligation to do all within its power to protect its
citizens, no matter how formidable the foe. Nevertheless, if the
demand for illicit drugs continues at its present voracious
level, improvements in the area of reducing supply will continue
to be slow, expensive, infrequent, and too often only temporary. </p>

<p>This report places great emphasis on the need for complete
national resolve in this area and for that resolve to be
translated into fully coordinated governmental action.
Compartmentalization and parochialism, which have been far too
common in past efforts, must be brought to an end. In this
regard, we are at a particularly propitious moment in history.
The slow and painful evolution of our strategy has finally
achieved a centralized authority for our national effort: the
National Drug Enforcement Policy Board. Not just another advisory
body, this Board is a true congregation of every component of our
national government's anti-drug effort. It provides the means for
achieving a thoroughly coordinated national attack on every
aspect of drug trafficking and abuse. It is vital that the Policy
Board move effectively, thoughtfully and decisively, but it is
most urgent that it move. Indecisiveness are signals in
themselves, the wrong signals, to drug traffickers, users,
concerned parents, health and social planners, and even foreign
governments. Perhaps most critically, indecisiveness and delay
are the wrong signals to those U.S. governmental agencies that
must choose where anti-drug efforts will fall on the list of
competing priorities in a time of hardening fiscal austerity. By
action, not mere promises, the Policy Board must send the proper
message: we are in a fight for our lives, and every agency must
arrange its priorities accordingly. </p>

<p>Our strategies to reduce supply will require not only
dedication, but patience and objectivity. The war against drugs
will not be won until individuals stop using them. Strategies to
reduce supply can do no more than hold the line against illegal
drugs while public attitudes and private choices change. That is
not to say that our enforcement strategies should not be
aggressive and persistent. On the contrary, this report makes
clear that there is much in this area that is being done and
should continue, and much more that might be done. Many of the
specific recommendations in this report are devoted to this
theme. What is necessary at the outset, however, is an
understanding that such efforts must not be judged by an
unrealistic standard. As long as this society is willing to
provide its enforcement agencies scarcely more than a penny for
every dollar our citizens squander on illicit drugs, it has no
right and no reason to expect more. </p>

<p>Ultimately, the curse of drug abuse will be broken, but only
by a nationwide dedication to persistent and unyielding assaults
on both supply and demand. The supply is already under siege by
our enforcement, diplomatic, and intelligence communities.
Because an end to consumption is our ultimate goal, it is a
concerted and direct attack on demand that must be mounted. </p>

<p>Illicit drugs are an attack upon the integrity, character, and
health of the individual. Although discussions of drugs are often
framed in terms of costs to society and society's responses, the
fact is that individuals, not societies, take drugs. It is the
individual user who finances all of the violence, corruption, and
degradation that this report describes. The powerful,
sophisticated, and thoroughly evil organized crime drug
trafficking groups described herein are a reflection of nothing
more than our self-destructiveness. It is as a result of
individual acts of will that such groups came to be and are
sustained, and it is by individual acts of will that they will
finally be defeated. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>