
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B40-48</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000653-B003-212</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/govpubs/amhab/amhabc9d.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122133847 text/html 15575
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:38:38 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:25:33 GMT
Content-length: 15357
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Consultant Paper: Winning the War Against Drugs</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<h1>America's Habit </h1>

<h2>Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking, &amp; Organized Crime </h2>

<p><b>President's Commission on Organized Crime, 1986 </b></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<h2>Consultant Paper: Winning the War Against Drugs </h2>

<p>By Mitchell S. Rosenthal, M.D. Submitted: October 1, 1985. Dr.
Rosenthal is President of the Phoenix House Foundation, a drug
rehabilitation program. </p>

<p>There is a popular perception these days that America is
locked in a &quot;no win&quot; struggle against drugs. This
notion of &quot;the endless battle,&quot; in which we seem unable
to prevail, that has prompted a good many lawyers, scientists,
and writers to suggest that it might be time for the United
States to quit. </p>

<p>Some Americans have always believed that the use of certain
illicit drugs is not such a terrible thing and others have argued
that the government has no right to tell citizens what they can
or cannot ingest. But the strongest opposition to the nation's
drug laws and policies has come from those who believe that they
should be scrapped because they do not work well. The latest
converts to this cause contend that legalization of marijuana and
cocaine (some would include heroin) would eliminate drug profits
and crime overnight and substantially reduce the costly burden of
enforcing drug laws. </p>

<p>The &quot;quit now&quot; crowd plainly does not recognize that
there is a world of difference between &quot;not winning&quot; a
war and &quot;losing&quot; one. The war against drugs, although
it is going badly at the moment, is far from lost. But quitting
now and attempting to solve the drug crime problem through
legalization would he tantamount to losing - at least in terms of
the impact on drug abuse. </p>

<p>The notion that we could make drugs legal, while
simultaneously mounting (as some advocates of legalization
suggest) a massive public education campaign to discourage their
use would give cocaine and marijuana the same status as
cigarettes. The most likely result, according to the former
director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, would be a
tenfold increase in cocaine use. There would be just about as
many Americans using cocaine as now smoke cigarettes. </p>

<p>Another reason not to give up the fight is because we can win.
After more than 20 years of treating and curing drug abuse, I see
enough evidence to convince me that the war is winnable - not
now, but in time. It is winnable because what denies us victory
today is the nature of the war we are waging and not the nature
of the enemy we are fighting. </p>

<p>The war is going badly for much the same reasons that any war
goes badly. In part, it is inappropriate strategy fighting the
wrong enemy, in the wrong place and with the wrong weapons. In
part, it is a failure of will. </p>

<p>We are on the defensive, with battle lines stretching along
our borders. Our main weapon is interdiction. Most of the billion
dollars a year the Federal government spends enforcing drug laws
(two-thirds of all it spends to fight drug abuse) goes to halt
the flow of illicit drugs into our country. </p>

<p>Yet, the drugs keep flowing, even though 13 tons of cocaine
and 1,500 tons of marijuana (with a total street value of $11
billion) were seized by federal agents last year. It would seem
that when $5 million or $50 million or $500 million worth of
drugs is impounded, the total available for distribution would he
reduced by a like amount. Hut that is not the case. Drugs lost
through seizure are instantly replaced by producers and
importers. The more Federal agents seize at our end of the
pipeline, the more drug traffickers feed into the other end.
Although interdiction efforts have expanded dramatically and vast
quantities of drugs have been seized, the flow to the street has
diminished hardly at all, and cost to consumers has actually
fallen. </p>

<p>In frustration, Americans have turned their ire on producing
nations. Apparently, we feel more comfortable and justified
pressuring Colombians, Peruvians and Bolivians to stop producing
cocaine than pressuring Americans to stop using it. </p>

<p>In spite of minimal success, we remain committed to battling
drugs primarily by reducing supply rather than by reducing
demand. Yet, the supply side is obviously harder to hit and to
hurt. Producers are beyond our reach. Major dealers are
sophisticated, secretive, and ruthless, willing to accept
enormous risks and enormous losses as long as profits remain
equally enormous. </p>

<p>The demand side, however, is easier to reach. It is vast,
barely concealed at all these days, and it consists of the more
than 20 million Americans who now regularly use illicit drugs.
What's more, the demand side is where all three weapons at our
disposal can be deployed - not only law enforcement, but drug
treatment and drug prevention as well. </p>

<p>Our reluctance to attack demand as vigorously as we attack
supply reflects nothing less than a failure of will - not on the
part of the administration, law enforcement agencies or drug
abuse professionals, but on the part of the American public.
Public attitudes and public expectations determine how we go
about fighting this war, limit how much we can do and how far we
dare go. </p>

<p>What limits drug treatment is not just reduced government
support. Even if resources were available, there is no way we
could help the great majority of drug abusers in this country to
overcome their drug dependency because most of them are not
seeking help. They are not seeking help because society does not
require them, and the law does not compel them. </p>

<p>Limits on what drug prevention can accomplish reflect what can
only be called a public demand for selective prevention the
prevention of some but not necessarily all drug use. Just about
everyone wants to prevent one kind of drug use or another. Most
parents believe that kids shouldn't use drugs. Most employers are
convinced that workers ought not use them. The public in general
would like to see criminals stop using drugs and stop stealing in
order to buy drugs. But, beyond this point, public demand softens
considerably and attitudes become ambivalent. </p>

<p>Nowhere is our ambivalence more evident than in our attitudes
towards law enforcement. We are content with a &quot;trickle
down&quot; approach - one that focuses almost exclusively on
putting major dealers behind bars. But we learned during the days
of strict enforcement in New York State during the 1960's and
from recent crackdowns on street dealers in New York City, that
the real victories of law enforcement are not the number of
dealers or users arrested or convicted but the number motivated
to seek treatment. We know that when it becomes too dangerous or
too difficult to sell drugs or to buy them, then a great deal of
drug use will simply disappear and demand for treatment will rise
rapidly to the level of real need. </p>

<p>Lenient or selective enforcement of drug laws - what amounts
to non-enforcement and de facto legalization - in some areas - is
a reflection of our ambivalence. It comes down to the way that
Americans feel personally about drugs - not only about our own
use, but about use by our grown and half-grown children and by
our friends, and about what is wrongheadedly called
&quot;recreational&quot; use of marijuana and cocaine. While it
may make us uncomfortable, most of us do not think of it in the
same way as we think about drug use by nine- and ten-year-olds or
about the heroin addiction of criminals. And we are generally
unwilling to see our friends and children at risk of arrest and
prosecution because of drug use. </p>

<p>But I do not believe we can win the war against drugs until we
have positive consensus on the strict enforcement of drug laws.
However, we need not make that decision any harder than it must
be. We don't have to agree that drug users should go to jail. The
purpose of drug laws is not punishment - certainly not when
applied to users. These laws serve what must be recognized as a
public health function - a means of controlling a contagious
disease by imposing on its carriers the requirement of whatever
it takes in the way of education and treatment to overcome their
drug use. </p>

<p>We are not likely to see this consensus come soon. Too many
drug-using young adults are still convinced they enjoy some
special &quot;right&quot; to use illicit drugs and believe they
can handle them. Too many Americans are torn between the urge to
condemn behavior, of which they disapprove, and the need to
tolerate behavior they have somehow come to believe is a matter
of individual freedom or simply none of their business. </p>

<p>But both drug users and drug tolerators ignore the contagious
nature of drug abuse. The hostess who overlooks a little discreet
after-dinner pot-smoking or the professional who pointedly
ignores covert coke-sniffing by his or her colleagues must
eventually come to realize that a person can no more tolerate a
little recreational drug use than he or she can tolerate a little
recreational smallpox. As for users, even those convinced that
their own drug habits are under control cannot guarantee that the
friends, coworkers or teenagers they influence will be able to
avoid drug dependency and the other high risks of drug use. Nor
is there any basis for them to believe that they will continue to
enjoy immunity from the costs of drug use - if indeed they enjoy
it now. </p>

<p>Broad societal disapproval of illicit drug use is needed
before we can come to a consensus about strict drug law
enforcement. Needless to say, active disapproval and the use of
informal social sanctions will make more aggressive law
enforcement irrelevant in most cases. The hostess who is certain
enough of her own unwillingness to tolerate pot smoking in her
home doesn't need to call the cops to keep her guests from
lighting up - no more than she need call them to stop her guests
from stealing the silver or spitting in the soup. Nor do
professionals who recognize the danger of drug use to their
colleagues, need to turn to the law. They have far more effective
ways of bringing the behavior of these colleagues into line -
once they accept the need to draw such a line. </p>

<p>In many ways our society resembles the American family in the
1960's. Many parents then believed they were doing their children
a favor by laying back and not taking a hard-line stand against
drugs. They allowed youngsters to stumble through the drug
experience. Only later they came to realize the costs. Those
costs ran high, both in chronic impairment and lost educational
and career opportunities. As a result, parental attitudes have
changed markedly. Parents are now taking the hard line, which is
really the loving line, one that shows responsible concern. </p>

<p>More recently, the Navy has demonstrated how to go about
attacking drug use on the demand side. While it brought heavy
weapons into play - drug tests and disciplinary actions - it also
effectively reduced widespread tolerance for drug use. By
stressing the interdependence of seamen, the Navy began replacing
this attitude with a far more responsible one expressed by the
motto: &quot;Not on my watch, not on my ship, not in my
Navy.&quot; </p>

<p>This is the kind of attitudinal change I expect to see
occurring throughout the country over the next decade. It is
already underway. Adolescents have become far more critical of
drug use by their friends, and this is the result not only of
better drug education in the schools, but also of more awareness
of drug dangers on the street. Employers are now responding to
increasing evidence of economic costs directly attributable to
drug use in the work force. </p>

<p>So, there is every reason to believe that public attitudes
about illicit drugs will become firmer and more responsible. As a
result, the limitations on what we have been able to achieve
through prevention, through treatment, and through law
enforcement, will gradually be removed. They will no longer
dictate strategy that prevent us from moving as aggressively
against domestic demand as we do against foreign supply. </p>

<p>If law enforcement is to work effectively in cooperation with
treatment and with prevention in this attack on the demand side,
then we need to adopt consistent goals. While we should certainly
persist in interdiction and target major dealers, we cannot focus
most of our energy and resources on these high visibility
efforts. It is on the street that the final battle is going to be
won, and it will be won by constant pressure, over time, that
will be felt by every drug dealer and every drug user. </p>

<p>This kind of pressure will not result in any impressive string
of convictions, but it will respond directly to the desperate
needs of drug-ridden communities. It will strengthen
drug-troubled families, and it will improve the quality of life
for millions of Americans. </p>

<p>This kind of pressure, supported by a popular mandate, will
result in the gradual erosion of the drug market and the gradual
decline of drug use. Demand for treatment will grow. Prevention
will cease to be selective but reach out broadly across all
society. And drug abuse, while it may never entirely disappear,
will cease to pose any substantial threat to the nation, its
youth.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_amhab_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../GOVPUBS.HTM">Government Publications</a> | <a
href="ahmenu.htm">America's Habits</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="46225" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>