
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-72</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B009-285</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/DEBATE/atlanta.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122035140 text/html 25185
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:51:34 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 07:21:06 GMT
Content-length: 24967
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Atlanta Resolution on drug legalization</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="C. A. Schaffer">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<h2>THE ATLANTA RESOLUTION </h2>

<hr>

<p><b>We, the Mayors of the United States of America, </b>believe
that drug abuse is one of the most critical problems facing our
cities, and that it is inextricably linked to crime and violence.
Cutting across all cultural, racial and economic lines, illicit
drugs impair millions of Americans. Drug use and addiction
contribute to the breakdown of our families, the abuse of adults
and children, the spread of HIV/AIDS, school dropouts and the
declining quality of education, homelessness, urban decay, high
health care costs, and low economic productivity that compromises
our ability to compete in the global marketplace. We must reduce
the number of people who use drugs and the number of people with
the disease of addiction to significantly improve the most
pressing domestic issues we face. <b>Drug use is a preventable
behavior and drug addiction is a treatable disease.</b> </p>

<p><b>1. We, the nation's mayors, reject all proposals to
legalize illicit drugs. This is not the answer to the drug
problem in our cities. </b>We reject legalization, and other
simplistic forms such as decriminalization, because it is morally
reprehensible to consider an action that would a) simultaneously
erode our children's anti-drug attitudes of perceived risk and
social disapproval and b) make harmful and addictive drugs far
more accessible to far more people. We support the medical use of
any drug that research proves is safe and effective under
guidelines established by the Food and Drug Administration. While
we support attempts to reduce harm, we believe that the way to
decrease such problems is to prevent drug use from starting and
to help those who are already in trouble with drugs. </p>

<p><b>2.</b> <b>Prevention works: We have achieved real progress
in decreasing drug use and in</b> <b>understanding what works. </b>Since
1979, dramatic increases in public attitudes of perceived risk
and social disapproval toward illicit drugs produced a decline of
nearly 50 percent in the number of first-time users and
nonaddicted users through all segments of the population.
Throughout the nation, drug prevention efforts came together at
the community level-in families, schools, the media, law
enforcement, youth groups and workplaces-to establish nonuse as
the behavioral standard and social norm. This progress in
prevention has also significantly reduced the numbor of people
who would have become addicted. </p>

<p><b>3.</b> <b>However, diminishing resources and public focus
now threaten future success. </b>The gains so preciously earned
in anti-drug attitudes and declining use are now threatened.
Since the early 1990s there has been decreased attention to the
drug issue and increased pro-drug and pro-legalization publicity.
This has contributed to <b>a reversal in the attitudes of
perceived risk and social disapproval that distinguish nonusers
from users, and significant increases in</b> <b>the number of
young people using illicit drugs. </b>Finally, and despite
increasing evidence of the cost-effectiveness of drug treatment,
we have made little progress in reducing the number of people
already addicted. This reflects a current system that can treat
only one-fifth of the estimated 6 million people in trouble with
drugs. </p>

<p><b>4.</b> <b>We must provide significantly greater resources
and leadership-from governmental, corporate and nonprofit sectors
at national, state and local levels-for the demand reduction
efforts of prevention, intervention, treatment and research. </b>Effective
drug policy requires investment in both supply and demand
reduction, but our nation is not providing enough funding for
prevention or treatment. These are proven, cost-effective
solutions for reducing both drug use and addiction and their
impact on other critical domestic problems. Initial drug use is a
matter of choice, and with sufficient resources, we can influence
that choice positively. When addiction overtakes choice, we can
treat addiction for those who require it. Our focus must combine
efforts to reduce both the number of people who use and the
number of people who are addicted to illicit drugs. </p>

<p><b>a)</b> <b>Preventing drug use by young people, and by all
who influence them, must be the cornerstone of national, state
and local drug strategies and resources if we are to build safe
and healthy families and communities. </b>We must reestablish and
affirm the individual choice to remain drug-free. We must
consistently reinforce the message that drug use is harmful and
unacceptable. This message is vital to preventing drug
experimentation and reducing drug use before it becomes
addiction. We must effectively influence the decisions our young
people make about illicit drugs by providing drug education at
home and in school and by involving local law enforcement
officers and judges, the faith community, health care
professionals, the media, employers, and other community
resources. Comprehensive community prevention programs
significantly reduce adolescent drug use. We support the recently
created National Prevention League, designed to coordinate
prevention efforts and to emphasize the need for prevention as
the first priority in reducing substance abuse. </p>

<p><b>b) We must make treatment more available, more effective
and more accessible if we are to reduce the impact of drugs in</b>
<b>our cities. </b>Treatment is critical to reducing the social
pathology conveyed by those already addicted to drugs. Most acute
is the lack of treatment for those who are least able to function
or whose drug involvement has profound implications for
themselves, their families and society at large. People in the
criminal justice system, pregnant women and women with children,
the homeless, and those infected with HlV/AlDS face intolerable
shortages of treatment slots. Early intervention in the drug
abuse process, aimed especially at adolescents but including
adults as well, decreases harm and increases rehabilitation. </p>

<p><b>c)</b> <b>Law enforcement must remain</b> <b>a strong
component of, and be better linked to, demand reduction efforts. </b>On
the national, state and especially the local level, law
enforcement and the judicial system are critical to the success
of preventing and treatingdrug abuse. We<b> </b>need to increase
cooperation<b> </b>among law enforcement agencies and between law
enforcement and prevention and treatment programs within the
community. </p>

<p><b>d)</b> <b>Research is critical to understanding,
replicating and improving the effectiveness and cost efficiency
of demand reduction efforts. </b>Research, not ideology, must
provide the foundation for drug policies and practices. More
research is needed to improve our understanding of the ways drugs
affect the brain and change behavior, of the reasons for
reversing drug attitude and use trends, of the importance of
community-based prevention programs, and of why particular
treatment approaches are more successful than others. </p>

<p><b>e)</b> <b>Worldwide cooperation in reducing illicit drug
abuse will</b> <b>not only help the international community, but
also will reduce the flow of drugs into our cities. </b>The
spread of illicit drugs throughout Europe and other parts of the
world imperils our ability to reduce drug abuse in our cities. We
support European Cities Against Drugs, which organized last year
to fight the legalization movement abroad. Today, we announce the
formation of American Cities Against Drugs to support our sister
organization in Europe and similar organizations that may form
throughout the world. </p>

<p><b>We believe that reducing drug abuse is essential to the
most important things all Americans care about: </b>our children<b>
</b>and families, our safety, our neighborhoods and communities,
our health, our economy, our freedom to grow and prosper and our
obligation as citizens to help each other build healthy families
and communities. We must maintain our public will. We must elicit
leadership from all segments of society, especially from
individuals and communities. We must recognize that each of us
has a role to play in the solution and all of us have a stake in
the outcome. Drug abuse is a preventable behavior and drug
addiction is a treatable disease. <b>We, the Mayors of the United
States of America, commit ourselves to reducing drug abuse by
mobilizing our citizens and concentrating our resources to
prevent this behavior and treat this disease.</b> </p>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"><b> </b></p>

<h4>Mayors Who Authorized NFIA to Place Their Names on <u>The
Atlanta Resolution</u> </h4>

<h4>May 15, 1995 </h4>

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif" align="bottom"> </p>

<p>Mayor Bill Campbell </p>

<p>Atlanta, Georgia </p>

<p>Mayor Victor Ashe </p>

<p>President, U.S. Conference of Mayors </p>

<p>Knoxville, Tennessee </p>

<p><b>Alabama</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Richard Arrington </p>

<p>Birmingham </p>

<p>Mayor Alfred Saliba </p>

<p>Dothan </p>

<p>Mayor Larry Langford </p>

<p>Fairfield </p>

<p>Mayor James Atkinson </p>

<p>Homewood </p>

<p>Mayor Frank Skinner </p>

<p>Hoover </p>

<p>Mayor Lillian Howard </p>

<p>Hueytown </p>

<p>Mayor Jesse M. Norwood </p>

<p>Prichard </p>

<p>Mayor Alvin P. DuPont </p>

<p>Tuscaloosa </p>

<p>Mayor Johnny Ford </p>

<p>Tuskeegee </p>

<p><b>Arizona</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Jay Tibshraeny </p>

<p>Chandler </p>

<p>Mayor Christopher J. Bavasi </p>

<p>Flagstaff </p>

<p>Mayor William Arnold </p>

<p>Goodyear </p>

<p>Mayor Ken C. Forgia </p>

<p>Peoria </p>

<p>Mayor Neil G. Giuliano </p>

<p>Tempe </p>

<p>Mayor George Miller </p>

<p>Tuscon </p>

<p>Mayor Marilyn R. Young </p>

<p>Yuma </p>

<p><b>Arkansas</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Fred B. Hanna </p>

<p>Fayetteville </p>

<p>Mayor Patrick Henry Mays </p>

<p>North Little Rock </p>

<p><b>California</b> </p>

<p>Ralph J. Appezzato </p>

<p>Alameda </p>

<p>Mayor Leonard K. Herendeen </p>

<p>Antioch </p>

<p>Mayor Barbara Loux </p>

<p>Apple Valley </p>

<p>Mayor Randy Bomgaars </p>

<p>Bellflower </p>

<p>Mayor Shirley Dean </p>

<p>Berkeley </p>

<p>Mayor Donald R. Burr </p>

<p>Campbell </p>

<p>Mayor Michael I. Mitoma </p>

<p>Carson<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor Jeffrey P. Bennett </p>

<p>Corona </p>

<p>Mayor Sid Hollins </p>

<p>Escondido </p>

<p>Mayor Marge Tandy </p>

<p>Hemet </p>

<p>Mayor Cathie Brown </p>

<p>Livermore </p>

<p>Mayor Elihu M. Harris </p>

<p>Oakland </p>

<p>Mayor Dick Lyon </p>

<p>Oceanside </p>

<p>Mayor William M. Paparian </p>

<p>Pasadena </p>

<p>Mayor Rosemary M. Corbin </p>

<p>Richmond </p>

<p>Mayor Ronald O. Loveridge </p>

<p>Riverside </p>

<p>Mayor Claire L. Mack </p>

<p>San Mateo </p>

<p>Mayor Harriet Miller </p>

<p>Santa Barbara </p>

<p>Mayor Jo Anne Darcy </p>

<p>Santa Clarita </p>

<p>Mayor Albert Robles </p>

<p>South Gate </p>

<p>Mayor Anthony John Intintoli, Jr. </p>

<p>Vallejo </p>

<p>Mayor Steve Herfert </p>

<p>West Covina </p>

<p><b>Colorado</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Wellington Webb </p>

<p>Denver </p>

<p>Mayor Ray Emerson </p>

<p>Loveland </p>

<p><b>Connecticut</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Joseph Ganim </p>

<p>Bridgeport </p>

<p>Mayor Paul Audley </p>

<p>Fairfield </p>

<p>Mayor Delores E. Hauber </p>

<p>Groton </p>

<p>Mayor Stephen T. Cassano </p>

<p>Manchester </p>

<p>Mayor Linda A. Blogoslawski </p>

<p>New Britain </p>

<p><b>Delaware</b> </p>

<p>Mayor James Sills </p>

<p>Wilmington </p>

<p><b>District of Columbia</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Marion Barry, Jr. </p>

<p>Washington </p>

<p><b>Florida</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Carol G. Hanson </p>

<p>Boca Raton </p>

<p>Mayor Roger G. Butter </p>

<p>Cape Coral </p>

<p>Mayor John Sommerer </p>

<p>Coral Springs </p>

<p>Mayor Thomas Lynch </p>

<p>Delray Beach </p>

<p>Mayor Jim Naugle </p>

<p>Fort Lauderdale </p>

<p>Mayor Raul I. Martinez </p>

<p>Hialeah </p>

<p>Mayor Mara Giulianti </p>

<p>Hollywood </p>

<p>Mayor John F. Festa </p>

<p>Key Bescayne<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor Arthur J. Bross </p>

<p>Margate </p>

<p>Mayor Joe Mullins </p>

<p>Melbourne </p>

<p>Mayor Vicki Coceano </p>

<p>Miramar </p>

<p>Mayor Frank R. Satchel, Jr. </p>

<p>Mulberry </p>

<p>Acting Mayor Gerald K. Ergle </p>

<p>Ocala </p>

<p>Mayor Glenda Hood </p>

<p>Orlando </p>

<p>Mayor Girard L. Clemons, Jr </p>

<p>Panama City </p>

<p>Mayor John R. Fogg </p>

<p>Pensacola </p>

<p>Mayor Cecil W. Bradbury </p>

<p>Pinellas Park </p>

<p>Mayor Robert E. Minsky </p>

<p>Port St. Lucie </p>

<p>Mayor David Fischer </p>

<p>St. Petersberg </p>

<p>Mayor Norman Abramowitz </p>

<p>Tamarac </p>

<p>Mayor Thomas R. Mariani </p>

<p>Titusville </p>

<p><b>Georgia</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Paul A. Keenan </p>

<p>Albany </p>

<p>Mayor Patsy Jo Hilliard </p>

<p>East Point </p>

<p>Mayor David L. Carter </p>

<p>Macon </p>

<p><b>Illinois</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Robert W. Towse </p>

<p>Alton </p>

<p>Mayor Thomas G. Shaughnessy </p>

<p>Berwyn </p>

<p>Mayor Jesse R. Smart </p>

<p>Bloomington </p>

<p>Mayor Roger C. Claar </p>

<p>Bolingbrook </p>

<p>Mayor Richard M. Daily </p>

<p>Chicago </p>

<p>Mayor Greg Sparrow </p>

<p>DeKalb </p>

<p>Mayor Gordon D. Bush </p>

<p>East St. Louis </p>

<p>Mayor Richard C. Weis </p>

<p>Freeport </p>

<p>Mayor Ronald L. Selph </p>

<p>Granite City </p>

<p>Mayor Raymond J. Geraci </p>

<p>Highland Park </p>

<p>Mayor Michael J. O'Malley </p>

<p>Hoffman Estates </p>

<p>Mayor Arthur Schultz </p>

<p>Joliet </p>

<p>Mayor Donald E. Green </p>

<p>Kankakee </p>

<p>Mayor Stanley F. Leach </p>

<p>Moline </p>

<p>Mayor Rita L. Mullins<b> </b></p>

<p>Palatine<b> </b></p>

<p><b>Idaho</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Linda Milam </p>

<p>Idaho Falls </p>

<p><b>Indiana</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Robert A. Pastrick </p>

<p>East Chicago </p>

<p>Mayor Thoams V. Barnes </p>

<p>Gary </p>

<p>Mayor Stephen Goldsmith </p>

<p>Indianapolis </p>

<p>Mayor Douglas B. England </p>

<p>New Albany </p>

<p>Mayor Roebrt E. Williams </p>

<p>Shelbyville </p>

<p><b>Iowa</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Ed Stachovic </p>

<p>Cedar Falls </p>

<p>Mayor Tom Hanafan </p>

<p>Council Bluffs </p>

<p>Mayor Robert E. Scott </p>

<p>Sioux City </p>

<p><b>Kansas </b></p>

<p>Mayor Edith L. Stunkel </p>

<p>Manhattan </p>

<p><b>Kentucky </b></p>

<p>Mayor Johnny D. Webb </p>

<p>Bowling Green </p>

<p>Mayor Denny Bowman </p>

<p>Covington </p>

<p>Deputy Mayor William Summers </p>

<p>Louisville </p>

<p><b>Louisiana </b></p>

<p>Mayor Edward G. Randolph, Jr. </p>

<p>Alexandria </p>

<p>Mayor Barry P. Bonvillain </p>

<p>Houma </p>

<p>Mayor Aaron F. Broussard </p>

<p>Kenner </p>

<p>Mayor Kenny Bowen </p>

<p>Lafayette </p>

<p>Mayor Robert E. Powell </p>

<p>Monroe </p>

<p>Mayor Cliff Aucoin </p>

<p>New Iberia </p>

<p>Mayor Marc Morial </p>

<p>New Orleans </p>

<p>Mayor Robert W. 'Bo' Williams </p>

<p>Shreveport </p>

<p><b>Maine</b> </p>

<p>Mayor William D. Burney, Jr. </p>

<p>Augusta </p>

<p>Mayor Richard W. Paulson, Jr. </p>

<p>Portland </p>

<p><b>Maryland</b> </p>

<p>W. Edward Bohrer, Jr. </p>

<p>Gaithersburg </p>

<p><b>Massassachusetts </b></p>

<p>Mayor Charles Lyons </p>

<p>Arlington </p>

<p>Mayor Harold E. Tobey </p>

<p>Barnstable </p>

<p>Donna R. Kalikow </p>

<p>Chairwoman of the Board of Selectmen </p>

<p>Brookline </p>

<p>Mayor John R. Mitchell </p>

<p>Fall River </p>

<p>Mayor Jeffrey A. Bean </p>

<p>Fitchburg </p>

<p>Mayor James A. Rurak </p>

<p>Haverhill </p>

<p>Mayor Patrick J. McManus </p>

<p>Lynn </p>

<p>Mayor Thomas B. Concannon, Jr. </p>

<p>Newton </p>

<p>Mayor Robert T. Markel </p>

<p>Springfield </p>

<p>Mayor Raymond Mariano </p>

<p>Worcester </p>

<p><b>Michigan</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Michael J. Buda </p>

<p>Bay City<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor Dennis W. Archer </p>

<p>Detroit </p>

<p>Mayor Ed Annen, Jr. </p>

<p>Kalamazoo </p>

<p>Mayor Billie M. Ireland </p>

<p>Rochester Hills<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor Beverly McAnally </p>

<p>Romulus </p>

<p>Mayor Jeanne M. Stine </p>

<p>Troy </p>

<p>Mayor Ronald L. Bonkowski<b> </b></p>

<p>Warren </p>

<p><b>Minnesota</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Gary L. Doty </p>

<p>Duluth </p>

<p>Mayor Sharon Sayles Belton </p>

<p>Minneapolis </p>

<p>Mayor Chuck Winkelman </p>

<p>St. Cloud </p>

<p><b>Mississippi</b> </p>

<p>Mayor C. C. 'Frank' Self </p>

<p>Greenville </p>

<p>Mayor Ken Combs </p>

<p>Gulfport </p>

<p>Mayor J. Ed Morgan </p>

<p>Hattiesburg </p>

<p>Mayor Kane Ditto </p>

<p>Jackson<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor John Robert Smith </p>

<p>Meridian </p>

<p><b>Missouri</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Duane Schreimann </p>

<p>Jefferson City </p>

<p>Mayor Emanuel Cleaver II </p>

<p>Kansas City<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor Robert L. Moeller </p>

<p>Saint Charles </p>

<p>Mayor Larry R. Stobbs </p>

<p>St. Joseph </p>

<p>Mayor Freeman Bosley, Jr. </p>

<p>St. Louis </p>

<p>Mayor Janet Majerus </p>

<p>University City </p>

<p><b>Montana</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Gayle Morris </p>

<p>Great Falls </p>

<p><b>Nevada</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Jan Laverty Jones </p>

<p>Las Vegas </p>

<p><b>New Jersey</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Leonard P. Kiczek </p>

<p>Bayonne </p>

<p>Mayor James T. Dowden </p>

<p>Bridgewater </p>

<p>Mayor Arnold Webster </p>

<p>Camden </p>

<p>Mayor Cardell Cooper </p>

<p>East Orange </p>

<p>Mayor Georga A. Spadoro </p>

<p>Edison </p>

<p>Mayor Sandra L. Love </p>

<p>Gloucester Township </p>

<p>Mayor John. K. Rafferty </p>

<p>Hamilton </p>

<p>Mayor Timothy C. McDonough </p>

<p>Hope </p>

<p>Mayor Douglas H. Palmer </p>

<p>Trenton<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor Joseph E. Romano </p>

<p>Vineland<b> </b></p>

<p><b>New York</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Richard A. Bucci </p>

<p>Binghamton </p>

<p>Mayor Sandra L. Frankel </p>

<p>Brighton </p>

<p>Mayor Anthony Masiello </p>

<p>Buffalo </p>

<p>Mayor Richard A. Kimball, Jr. </p>

<p>Jamestown </p>

<p>Mayor Rudolph Giuliani </p>

<p>New York City<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor Bill Johnson </p>

<p>Rochester<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor Joseph A. Griffo<b> </b></p>

<p>Rome<b> </b></p>

<p>Mayor Frank J. Duci<b> </b></p>

<p>Schenectady </p>

<p>Mayor Louis D. La Polla </p>

<p>Utica </p>

<p><b>North Carolina </b></p>

<p>Mayor Russell M. Martin </p>

<p>Asheville </p>

<p>Mayor Richard Vinroot </p>

<p>Charlotte </p>

<p>Mayor James B. Garland </p>

<p>Gastonia </p>

<p>Mayor Carolyn S. Allen </p>

<p>Greensboro </p>

<p>Mayor Rebecca R. Smothers </p>

<p>High Point </p>

<p>Mayor M.C. (Joe) Choate </p>

<p>Jacksonville </p>

<p><b>North Dakota</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Bruce W. Furness </p>

<p>Fargo </p>

<p><b>Ohio</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Donald L. Plusquallic </p>

<p>Akron </p>

<p>Mayor Jimmy Dimora </p>

<p>Bedford Heights </p>

<p>Mayor Richard D. Watkins </p>

<p>Canton </p>

<p>Mayor Greg Lashutka </p>

<p>Colombus </p>

<p>Mayor Richard P. Hartmann </p>

<p>Kettering </p>

<p>Mayor Thomas L. Kruse </p>

<p>Marysville </p>

<p>Mayor Edward J. Boyle </p>

<p>North Olmsted </p>

<p><b>Oklahoma</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Ronald J. Norick </p>

<p>Oklahoma City </p>

<p>Mayor M. Susan Savage </p>

<p>Tulsa </p>

<p><b>Oregon</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Alice L. Schlenker </p>

<p>Lake Oswego </p>

<p><b>Pennsylvania</b> </p>

<p>Mayor William B. Heydt </p>

<p>Allentown </p>

<p>Mayor Kenneth R. Smith </p>

<p>Bethlehem </p>

<p>Mayor Barbara Bohannan-Sheppard </p>

<p>Chester City </p>

<p>Mayor Joyce A. Savocchio </p>

<p>Erie </p>

<p>Mayor Stephen R. Reed </p>

<p>Harrisburg </p>

<p>Mayor Jack Salarrione </p>

<p>Norristown </p>

<p>Deputy Mayor John Wilder </p>

<p><b>Puerto Rico</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Melania Bobe Acevedo </p>

<p>Hormigueros </p>

<p>Mayor Julio Cesar Lopez Gerona </p>

<p>Humacao </p>

<p><b>Rhode Island</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Rolland R. Grant </p>

<p>East Providence </p>

<p>Mayor G. Richard Fossa </p>

<p>North Providence </p>

<p>Mayor Vincent A. Cianci, Jr. </p>

<p>Providence </p>

<p><b>South Carolina</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Bob Coble </p>

<p>Columbia </p>

<p>Mayor W. D. Workman, III </p>

<p>Greenville </p>

<p>Mayor Cheryll N. Woods-Flowers </p>

<p>Mount Pleasant </p>

<p>Mayor James Talley </p>

<p>Spartanburg </p>

<p><b>Tennessee</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Gene Roberts </p>

<p>Chattanooga </p>

<p>Mayor Donald W. Trotter </p>

<p>Clarksville </p>

<p>Mayor Tom Rowland </p>

<p>Cleveland </p>

<p>Mayor Willie Herenton </p>

<p>Memphis </p>

<p>Mayor Phil Bredesen </p>

<p>Nashville </p>

<p><b>Texas</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Richard E. Greene </p>

<p>Arlington </p>

<p>Mayor Richard D. Hurt </p>

<p>Bedford </p>

<p>Mayor Henry Gonzalez </p>

<p>Brownsville </p>

<p>Mayor Larry J. Ringer </p>

<p>College Station </p>

<p>Mayor Mary Rhodes </p>

<p>Corpus Christi </p>

<p>Mayor Ed Purcell </p>

<p>Duncanville </p>

<p>Mayor Larry Francis </p>

<p>El Paso </p>

<p>Mayor James B. Ratliff </p>

<p>Garland </p>

<p>Mayor Bob Lanier </p>

<p>Houston </p>

<p>Mayor Bobbie J. Mitchell </p>

<p>Lewisville </p>

<p>Mayor Cathye Ray </p>

<p>Mesquite </p>

<p>Mayor James N. Muns </p>

<p>Piano </p>

<p>Mayor Nelson W. Wolff </p>

<p>San Antonio </p>

<p>Mayor Kathy M. Morris </p>

<p>San Marcos </p>

<p>Mayor Charles T. Doyle </p>

<p>Texas City </p>

<p>Mayor Smith P. Reynolds, Jr. </p>

<p>Tyler </p>

<p>Mayor Ted B. Reed </p>

<p>Victoria </p>

<p>Mayor Robert Sheehy, Jr. </p>

<p>Waco </p>

<p><b>Utah</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Deedee Corradini<b> </b></p>

<p>Salt Lake City </p>

<p><b>Vermont</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Clavelle </p>

<p>Burlington </p>

<p><b>Virginia</b> </p>

<p>Mayor William E. Ward </p>

<p>Chesapeake </p>

<p>Mayor James S. Whitaker </p>

<p>Lynchburg </p>

<p>Mayor Paul D. Fraim </p>

<p>Norfolk </p>

<p>Mayor Gloria O. Webb </p>

<p>Portsmouth </p>

<p>Mayor Leonidas B. Young, II </p>

<p>Richmond </p>

<p>Mayor David A. Bowers </p>

<p>Roanoke </p>

<p>Mayor Meyera E. Oberndorf </p>

<p>Virginia Beach </p>

<p><b>Washington</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Jack Geraghty </p>

<p>Spokane </p>

<p><b>Wisconsin</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Richard T. De Broux </p>

<p>Appleton </p>

<p>Mayor Timothy T. Seider </p>

<p>Greenfield </p>

<p>Mayor Patrick L. Zielke </p>

<p>La Crosse </p>

<p>Mayor James Smith </p>

<p>Racine </p>

<p><b>CNNI</b> </p>

<p>Mayor Jesus Sablan Diguerrero </p>

<p>Saipan <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="11736" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>