
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000651-B024-294</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/sciurin2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122124403 text/html 17936
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 12:43:51 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:15:50 GMT
Content-length: 17718
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Scientific Justification for Urine Testing - Part 2</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h2><font size="3">THE 'SCIENTIFIC' JUSTIFICATION FOR URINE DRUG
SCREENING</font></h2>

<p><font size="3">Dr. John Morgan</font></p>

<p><font size="3">KANSAS LAW REVIEW, VOL. 36, 1988, PP. 683-697
(PART II)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">V. INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENTS AND RAILROAD EMPLOYEES</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Among the fears fueling the drive to test is
the specter of industrial accidents and the likelihood of
intoxicated workers harming other workers and the public. The
lack of data that drug use in industry is harmful or an important
cause of accidents does not deter the frequent attribution of
accidents to drug use. Nowhere is this discussion more focused
than on transportation. It is impossible to raise arguments about
testing without provoking commentary on intoxicated airplane
pilots and locomotive engineers. Perhaps the strongest impetus to
testing occurred on January 4, 1987, when a Conrail engineer, who
later tested positive for marijuana, ignored a number of warning
devices and pulled his train into the path of an Amtrak
Metroliner. (30) Sixteen people were killed. (31)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">From February 10, 1986 to January 15, 1987,
under the auspices of the Federal Railroad Administration
(&quot;FRA&quot;), most American rail carriers conducted an
incident-based testing program. Any train accident or incident
associated with a fatality, injury, or nontrivial property damage
resulted in the testing of all operating personnel--- including
the train crews, dispatcher, and policemen. One hundred
seventy-five events in the year led to the testing of 759
employees. (32) Of the 759 employees sampled, 43 tested positive
for controlled substances including alcohol. (33) Of the
forty-three positives, the drugs identified were as follows:
Alcohol = 9 (1.2%) Illicit drugs = 29 (3.8%) Other controlled
substances = 14 (1.8%). (34)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The FRA made public the specific results only
for the alcohol and illicit drug positives, so it was not
possible to know which licit drugs (one assumes obtained by
prescription) were identified in the fourteen workers. Of the
twenty-nine (3.8%)positives for illicit drugs, eighteen had only
THC carboxylic acid (marijuana metabolite). five had only
benzoylecgonine (cocaine metabolite) and six had both. (35) One
individual who tested positive for methamphetamine also had
tested positive for marijuana and is included in the eighteen.
Despite its listing as illicit, methamphetamine is still
available in the United States as a licit appetite depressant.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The FRA document correctly noted that these
&quot;data are not conclusive of alcohol/drug role in industrial
accidents.&quot; (36) Indeed, of the twenty-nine, at least seven
had job classifications which would seem to place them at a
distance from operating decisions (track patrolman, ticket taker,
conductor, road master). (37) This costly program is not cited
for what appears to be significant evidence that illicit drugs do
not play an obvious role in industrial rail accidents.
Furthermore, there is no reason to believe that an investigation
of other industrial accidents would yield a different picture.
VI. MARIJUANA ISSUES</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Because most workplace positives are due to
marijuana metabolite and most arguments revolve around the
putative dangers of off-the-job marijuana use, the details of
cannabinoid testing are important. A review of these details is,
however, beyond the scope of this article. (38) However, three
points involving marijuana that are commonly used to provoke
testingt merit some discussion. First, the fat storage and
carry-over effect of marijuana. Second, the airplane simuator
testing study. Finally, the growing potency of domestically
available marijuana.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A. Fat Storage and Effect</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The persistence and storage of THC and other
cannainoids after use is subject to much discussion and
misunderstanding. Figure 1 depicts the length of time THC remains
in the plasma after an individual smokes marijuana containing
delta-9-THC (the intoxicating ingredient in marijuana). (39) The
pattern of distribution follows, with some simplification, what
pharmacologists refer to as a two-compartment model. The drug
initially enters the blood stream (compartment I) and then is
rapidly distributed to the deep compartment II, which is most of
the body. The initial rapidly declining concentration curve
represents the disappearance from the blood stream through
distribution. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">(Unable to show Figure 1)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Three to four hours after the initial
ingestion, the concentration of delta-9-THC has fallen below 2-5
ng. ml in the blood. (40) This concentration represents the
minimal effective concentration. (41) Below this concentration in
the blood, the drug exerts no demonstrable effect. We assume that
like other drugs, the concentration has fallen so that the
complementary concentration in the brain and other receptor
tissue is below the threshold which will produce an effect.
However, delta-9-THC remains in the body.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The second phase of the disapearance curve is
nearly level because its decline is so gradual. This phase
represents to some degree the drug's redistribution from
compartment II to compartment I. This slow decline is used to
calculate the terminal half-life (T 1/2) of THC. A low
concentration, say 1.0 ng ml, will take more than twenty-four
hours to fall to .05 ng / ml. (42) Actually, it probably takes
even more time, but an accurate calculation is difficult because
of the inability to measure extremely low concentrations.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This slow decline is the source of the
popularly-held concept that THC persists in the body's fat. From
this another speculation usually follows. The speculation is that
the THC still is exerting some effect. Current evidence simply
says this is not so. There are many speculations about the
long-lasting effects of THC, but in the nearly thirty years since
delta-9-THC was discovered, nothing has been verified. The brain
actually contains little fat and there is no evidence to support
the idea that the drug particularly persists there. Frequent
users will carry the drug and its metabolites with them--even to
the workplace--but they also will carry some amount of
organochlorine pesticide, lead, and the hydrocarbon solvent used
at work. We might better and more profitably examine the long
term effects of these substances.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">B. Airplane Simulator Testing In Private Pilots</font></p>

<p><font size="3">To justify the intrusion of testing, studies
purporting to show a lasting effect of marijuana have been widely
cited. Marijuana users and their defenders frequently state that
marijuana use-off-the-job is no different than alcohol use
off-the -job. The effects of marijuana and the selective
impairment generated by its use dissipate within three to four
hours and generally correlate with the decline in serum
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) to levels of less than 5 ng / ml. (43)
The studies of Herbert Moskowitz and Robert Petersen that
indicate impairment of some psychomotor function for up to eight
hours (44) are puzzling and not entirely scientifically
acceptable. However, assuming they are correct, they still do not
indicate that off-the-job drug use causes on-the-job impairment.
A study by Dr. Jerome Yesavage is another matter. (45) This study
using flight simulators has been widely discussed and previously
used as a strategic justification for urine testing. (46) The
study identifies significant impairment twenty-four hours after
smoking marijuana in a group of volunteer pilots who performed on
a flight simulator. (47) These conclusions are striking and have
not yet been replicated or confirmed.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">After careful analysis of the article, I think
that the experimental methodology was so flawed that the study
does not prove impairment at twenty-four hours. (48) Briefly, the
study was uncontrolled and, therefore, scientifically unreliable.
The subjects were studied with no placebos or attempts to conceal
the active treatment. Subject efforts at a control run were
compared to their efforts after they, and the investigators, knew
that they had consumed an active drug. This violates elementary
rules of study design and constitutes a serious flaw in the
study. The study also fails to deal with the characteristics and
prior drug experience of the volunteers, the issues of repeated
testing and training upon the simulator, and the generation of a
large number of simulator-generated measures some of which may
have varied by chance. (49)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">C. THC Content (Potency) of Domestically
Available Marijuana</font></p>

<p><font size="3">A commonly stated and widely accepted belief is
that marijuana's past record of causing minimal harm to users was
based on the use of low-grade material. Many plants, particularly
those growing wild, have a low content of delta-9-THC. (50) It is
often stated that the THC content has increased greatly. In fact,
critics and proponents of testing sound like dealers extolling
the power of Hawaiian and California grown material. &quot;A
glance at the percentages of THC in confiscated marijuana
would....[indicate] that marijuana is now as strong as hashish in
THC content,&quot; (51) This particular claim also has been
difficult to document. However, NIDA has funded a THC analysis
program at the University of Mississippi since 1980. Under the
program, the University analyzes plants received chiefly by law
enforcement agents, both federal (Drug Enforcement Agency) and a
variety of city and state criminal agencies. The accompanying
table lists the findings since 1980. (52)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Year # of samples Mean THC% 1980 35 4.64 1981
129 2.92 1982 148 2.57 1983 387 1.98 1984 330 2.55 1985 842 2.21
1986 800 1.86 1987 (Sept 100 2.5</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The sampling is irregular but chiefly reflects
material seized by these agencies from the back yards, frms, and
even indoor hydroponic systems of growers. The most suspect year,
1980, of course, is the only one in which the mean percentage
exceeded three percent. There has been no real change and
certainly no real increase in marijuana potency in the 1980's.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Interestingly, significant variation in THC
content of marijuana does not necessarily result in greater
delivery. In a study of the delivery of THC into smoke under
standard conditions, 16-19% of the THC content of a cigarette
actually appeared in the smoke. (53) Increasing the THC content
under some circumstances did not influence delivery. For example,
cigarettes carefully prepared to contain 1.6% THC and 3.1% THC
delivered the same amount of THC in smoke. (54)</font></p>

<p><font size="3">VII. CONCLUSIONS</font></p>

<p><font size="3">This article has examined a series of
rationales for the imposition of urine testing onto unimpaired
American workers. I have tried in good faith to examine the
arguments from the perspective of empirical studies and
appropriate analysis. I have accused, not subtly, the proponents
of testing of zealotry and improper use of statistics and data to
support a moral stance. To some degree my bias as a civil
libertarian has affected my evaluation. In the long run, however,
the truth about this conflict will depend upon ideas and data and
not biography. Urine testing is a wrong-headed intervention into
the lives of some by those with power over them. It is not a
search for illness but a search for deviance conducted in an
un-American manner. Drug abuse is a specter of the 1980's
resembling the specter of domestic communism of the 1950's. Under
the guise of helping, the proponents of testing are creating
enormous harm. Urine testing is simply drug abuse abuse. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">FOOTNOTES</font></p>

<p><font size="3">30. Se N.Y. Times, Jan. 5, 1987, at 1, col. 2.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">31. Id.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">32. Federal Railroad Administration, U.S. Dep't
of Transp., Summary of Post-Accident Testing Events Feb. 10, 1986
through Jan. 15, 1987 (summarized in 53 Fed. Reg. 46,641 (summary
includes data through Dec. 31 1987).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">33. Id.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">34. Id. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">35. Id.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">36. Id.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">37. Id.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">38. See generally Morgan, &quot;Marijuana
Metabolism in the Context of Urine Testing for Cannabinoid
Metabolite, 20 J. PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS 107 (1988). [Editor's Note:
See Miike &amp; Hewitt, &quot;Accuracy and Reliability of Urine
Drug Tests. 36 KAN. L. REV. 641 (1988).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">39. Id. at 109 (reprinted with permission).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">40. Augerell, Lindgren, Ohlsson, Gillespie,
&amp; Hollister, &quot;Recent Studies on the Pharmacokinetics of
Delta-1-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man,&quot; in THE CANNABINOIDS:
CHEMICAL, PHARMACOLOGIC, AND THERAPEUTIC ASPECTS 167 (1984).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">41. See id. at 179.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">42. Cf. E. Johansson, Prolonged Elimination
Half-life in Plasma of delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol in Chronic
Marihuana Users 41 (abstract of presentation given Sept 4, 1987 (
copy on file at the Kansas Law Review).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">43. See supra notes 40-42 and accompanying
test.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">44. H. Moskowitz &amp; R. Petersen, MARIJUANA
AND DRIVING -- A REVIEW (1980).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">45. Yesavage, Leirer, Denari &amp; Hollister,
&quot;Carry-Over Effects of Marijuana Intoxication on Aircraft
Pilot Performance: A Preliminary Report,&quot; 142 AM. J.
PSYCHIATRY 1325 (1985) [hereinafter Yesavage].</font></p>

<p><font size="3">46. See, e.g., Declaration of Dr. Marian W.
Fischman Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
at 2, submitted with Department of Justice Memorandum of Law in
Support of Motion for Summary Judgment, American Fed'n of Gov't
Employees v. Dole, Civ. No. 87-1815 GAG (D.D.C. Sept. 30, 1987);
Declaration of J. Michael Walsh, Ph.D., supra note 19, at 6.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">47. Yesavage, supra note 45, at 1328.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">48. See Morgan, &quot;Carry-Over Effects of
Marijuana,&quot; 144 AM. J. PSYCHIATRY 259, 259-60 (1987) (letter
to the editor); see also Greenblatt, &quot;Marijuana Test Fails
in Scientific Design,&quot; N.Y. Times, Apr. 30, 1986 at A-30
col. 4 (letter to the editor).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">49. Whenever one measures many variables using
a five percent level of significance, one in twenty will vary by
chance.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">50. See Mikurya &amp; Aldrich, &quot;Cannabis
1988 Old Drug, New Dangers, The Potency Question,&quot; 20 J.
PSYCHOACTIVE DRUGS 47, 52 (1988).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">51. S. Cohen, THE SUBSTANCE ABUSE
PROBLEMS,VOLUME TWO, NEW ISSUES FOR THE 1980's 65 (1985) (citing
NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL, AN ANALYSIS OF MARIJUANA POLICY
(1982).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">52. Telephone interview with Carol Abel,
University of Mississippi Research Institute (Feb. 4, 1988).</font></p>

<p><font size="3">53. Davis, McDaniel, Cadwell &amp; Moody,
&quot;Some Smoking Characteristics of Marijuana Cigarettes,&quot;
in THE CANNABINOIDS: CHEMICAL, PHARMACOLOGIC, AND THERAPEUTIC
ASPECTS 102 (1984). </font></p>

<p><font size="3">54. Id. </font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>