
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B27-29</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B009-249</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Library/drugbib1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040551 text/html 313398
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:05:10 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:40:33 GMT
Content-length: 313179
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1">
<title>Drug Bibliography -- Citations no later than 1990</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.03z">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">
<a href="http://www.druglibrary.org">

<p>Schaffer Library of Drug Policy</a> </p>

<p> <b><font size="5">DRUG BIBLIOGRAPHY </p>
</font></b>

<p> (CITATIONS NO LATER THAN 1990) </p>

<p> NOTE: This bibliography was compiled by Donald J. Mabry, </p>

<p> Professor of History and Senior Fellow, Center for
International Security and Strategic Studies, Mississippi State
University, Mississippi State, MS 39762 (Telephone:
601-325-7095). E-Mail: djm1@ra.msstate.edu. The article summaries
came from UnCover of the CARL, Inc. online public access catalog.
Pages cited are often just the first page of an article. </p>

<p> Abbott, Michael H. &quot;The Army and the Drug War: Politics
or National Security?&quot; Parameters. December, 1989, 99-. </p>

<p> Abend, Jules. &quot;Narcotics Cited as Key Threat.&quot;
Stores (June 1989), pp. 56-. </p>

<p> Abrams, Elliott. Drug Wars: the New Alliances Against
Traffickers and Terrorists. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of
State, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of Public Communication,
Editorial Division, 1986. (Current Policy; no. 792). (February
10, 1986 speech to Council on Foreign Relations. </p>

<p> Abruzzese, R. Coca-leaf Production in the Countries of the
Andean Subregion. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 95-. </p>

<p> Adelekan, M.L. Self-reported drug use among secondary school
students in the Nigerian State of Ogun. Bulletin on Narcotics,
41:1-2 (1989), pp. 109-. </p>

<p> Ahmed, Mahmoud S., Zhou, De-He, and Maulik, Dev.
Characterization of a Cocaine Binding Protein in Human Placenta.
Life Sciences, 46:8 (1990), pp. 553-. </p>

<p> Akimoto, K., Hamamura, T. and Otsuki, S. Subchronic cocaine
treatment enhances cocaine-induced dopamine efflux, studied by in
vivo intracerebral dialysis. Brain Research, 490:2 (June 26
1989), pp. 339. </p>

<p> Akimoto, K., Hamamura, T., Kazahaya, Y. Tetraethylammonium
stimulates adrenomedullary secretion by causing fluctuations in a
cytosolic free Ca concentration. Enhanced extracellular dopamine
level may be the fundamental neuropharmacological basis of
cross-behavioral sensitization between methamphetamine and
cocaine- an in vivo dialysis study in freely moving rats. Brain
Research, 507:2 (January 22 1990), pp. 344-. </p>

<p> Alberti, Giorgio and Enrique (Mayer, eds. Reciprocidad e
inteal use and abuse of cocaine has a great influence on the
outcome of pregnancy. </p>

<p> Anglin, M. D., Booth, M. W., and Ryan, T. M. Ethnic
Differences in Narcotics Addiction. II. Chicano and Anglo
Addiction Career Patterns. The International Journal of the
Addictions, 23:10 (1988), pp. 1011-. </p>

<p> Anglin, M. D. The Efficacy of Civil Commitment in Treating
Narcotics Addiction. Journal of Drug Issues, 18:4 (Fall 1988),
pp. 527-. </p>

<p> Anglin, M.D., Weisman, C.P., and Fisher, D.G. The MMPI
Profiles of Narcotics Addicts: I. A Review of the Literature. The
International Journal of the Addictions, 24:9 (1989), pp. 867-. </p>

<p> Anon. (Mayor Barry is busted on cocaine charges. Newsweek,
115:5 (January 29, 1990), p 5. </p>

<p> Anon. Addicts In The Workplace. Director, 43:2 (September 1,
1989), pp. 66-. Summary: Addiction to alcohol and other Drugs,
Narcotics, tranquilizers, even nicotine is a growing social
problem that has major implications for business. Tom Nash looks
at the action companies are starting to take. </p>

<p> Anon. Agreement on Cooperation in Combating Narcotics
Trafficking and Drug Dependency. International Legal Materials:
Current Documents, 29:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 58-. </p>

<p> Anon. America's War On Panama. Maclean's, 103:1 (January 1,
1990), 52-. Summary: After Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega
declared war on the United States and his troops fatally shot an
off-duty American officer, President George Bush last week
ordered an invasion of the Central American nation. One
objective: to capture Noriega, wanted on drug-trafficking charges
in Florida. </p>

<p> Anon. Another Deadly Danger of Cocaine. Emergency Medicine.
(March 30 1989) v 21 n 6 pp. 100. Summary: It kicks may strike
not only the cardiovascular and nervous systems but skeletal
muscle as well, triggering a cascade of problems that can end in
death. </p>

<p> Anon. Asia: Drugs. Far Eastern Economic Review, 146:47
(November 23 1989), pp. 44-. Summary: From the Golden Triangle to
Manila, more drugs than ever are being produced in Asia.
Correspondents in Manila, Seoul and Bangkok report on a dual
concern for narcotics agencies: </p>

<p> The emergence of super-charged speed and a record opium
harvest. </p>

<p> Anon. Ballots and Bullets. Presstime, 12:4 (April 1, 1990),
pp. 8-. Summary: The election of journalists as public officals,
all-out media wars and drug lords' bombing newspapers they're the
norm in Latin America. </p>

<p> Anon. BCCI and the laundering of cocaine cash. The Economist.
(October 15 1988) v 309 n 7572. pp. 96-. </p>

<p> Anon. BCCI on the record-exclusively to The Banker. The
banker. December 1 1988) v 138 n 754. pp. 40. </p>

<p> Anon. Was This Bank A Laundry? A drug-money trail leads to
BCCI. Business week. (October 24 1988) n 3076. pp. 29. </p>

<p> Anon. Beating back the cocaine kings. U.S. News &amp; World
Report. (February 19 1990) v 108 n 7 pp. 18. </p>

<p> Anon. Belisario No Entregar a Ning£n Colombianos, Quindio
Libre, (October 1, 1983, 8B. </p>

<p> Anon. Bolivia Asks U.S. for Big Loan to Make Up Lost Cocaine
Income, New York Times, (July 31, 1986, A4. </p>

<p> Anon. Bush Names drug mob capos to rule Panama. Executive
Intelligence Review, 17:2 (January 5, 1990), pp. 32-. </p>

<p> Anon. Bush Taking Military Tack in Drug Battle. Congressional
Quarterly Weekly Report. (September 9 1989) v 47 n 36. pp. 2322.
Summary: The president's proposal for an infusion of aid to the
armed forces in cocaine'producing Latin American countries marks
a major shift toward a military response to the overseas drug
trade. </p>

<p> Anon. Bush's threats to blockade Colombia give big boost to
drug cartels. Executive Intelligence Review, 17:4 (January 19
1990), pp. 34-. </p>

<p> Anon. Carriers sign pacts to halt drug smuggling. Traffic
World. Sep 18 1989). 219:49-50. </p>

<p> Anon. Carta Abierta de Roberto Su rez, El Diario [La Paz],
(October 19, 1988). </p>

<p> Anon. Civismo en (Marcha, Medell¡n C¡vico, (March 1984, 2. </p>

<p> Anon. Coast Guard uses Schweizer SA 2-37A on undercover
missions to observe suspected drug smuggling. Aviation Week &amp;
Space Technology, 130:53 (May 1 1989). </p>

<p> Anon. Cocaine and Strokes. Medical World News. (May 23 1989)
v 30 n 10 pp. 40. Summary: The rising incidence of
cocaine-related strokes means that anyone younger than 45 with
cerebral ischemia or occlusion should have toxicology screen,
researchers say. </p>

<p> Anon. Cocaine Babies. Editorial Research Reports. (July 28
1989) v 2 n 4 pp. 419. Summary: Some activist prosecutors are
trying to bring criminal charges against women for drug-related
injuries to their fetuses. So far they have been unsuccessful,
but this month a Florida prosecutor won a conviction by using a
legal twist. </p>

<p> Anon. Cocaine Babies. Medical World News. December 15, 1988),
v 29 n 24. pp. 14. Summary: Accumulating evidence documents the
adverse effects of cocaine, even in small amounts, upon the
fetus. </p>

<p> Anon. Cocaine Capitalism. The Nation. (October 2 1989) v 249
n 10. pp. 341-. </p>

<p> Anon. Cocaine, Communism and Crisis in Peru. The war on drugs
draws the U.S. into a land of terror and crackpot economics. U.S.
news &amp; world report. September 18 1989) v 107 n 11. pp. 45. </p>

<p> Anon. Cocaine-Induced Seizures in the Young. Emergency
Medicine. (March 30 1990) v 22 n 6. pp. 101-. Summary: Passive or
accidental drug intoxication may not be your first suspicion when
a child seizes, but if they come from an environment where adults
use drugs, children may also suffer the effects. </p>

<p> Anon. Cocaine: The Federal Express Connection. Newsweek.
(August 21 1989) v 114 n 8 pp. 18. </p>

<p> Anon. Colombia Drug War Lends Urgency to U.S. Aid.
Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report. September 2 1989) v 47 n
35 pp. 2264 . </p>

<p> Anon. Colombia Drug War Lends Urgency to U.S. Aid.
Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report, 47:35 (September 2, 1989),
pp. 2264-. </p>

<p> Anon. Colombia: Human Rights Implications of United States
Drug Control Policy. Harvard Human Rights Journal (Spring 1990),
pp. 186-. </p>

<p> Anon. Colombia: The Drug Economy, The Economist (April 2,
1988), 63. </p>

<p> Anon. Colombian judge located by Detroit news flees area.
Editor &amp; Publisher, the Fourth Estate 122:11 (May 20 1989). </p>

<p> Anon. Crack Secret Police Outfit to Combat Shining Path'sNew
Offensive, The Andean Report (March 1987). </p>

<p> Anon. Cracking Down on Crack. Editorial Research Report. </p>

<p> (February 23 1990) v 1 n 8. pp. 112-. Summary: President </p>

<p> Reagan, who began the latest war on drugs, was responding </p>

<p> to a sudden increase in the use of crack cocaine in the </p>

<p> mid-1980s. </p>

<p> Anon. Creating Customers for Dangerous Drugs, Outlook 82 </p>

<p> (April 7, 1906), 778-79. </p>

<p> Anon. Crisis in the Courts. Business Week. (March 26, </p>

<p> 1990), pp. 76. Summary: Delays caused by Narcotics cases </p>

<p> are boosting corporate legal bills. </p>

<p> Anon. Cutting Cocaine's Chemical Cord. Summary: The </p>

<p> Organization of American States meets to vote on </p>

<p> controls. Chemical Week, 146:15 (April 18 1990), pp. 10-. </p>

<p> Anon. Daedalus: Coca-coda. Nature. (June 15 1989) v 339 n </p>

<p> 6225. pp. 514-. </p>

<p> Anon. Drug Legalization. Congressional Quarterly's </p>

<p> Editorial Research Report (February 23, 1990), pp. 116-. </p>

<p> Summary: Some believe the only way to control drug abuse </p>

<p> is to legalize drugs like marijuana and cocaine and </p>

<p> subject them to government regulation and taxation. </p>

<p> Anon. Drug Legalization. Congressional Quarterly's </p>

<p> Editorial Research Report. (February 23 1990) v 1 n 8 </p>

<p> pp. 116. Summary: Some believe the only way to control </p>

<p> drug abuse is to legalize drugs like marijuana and </p>

<p> cocaine and subject them to government regulation and </p>

<p> taxation. </p>

<p> Anon. Drug Therapy to Treat Cocaine Withdrawal. U.S. </p>

<p> Pharmacist. (May 1 1990) v 15 n 5. pp. 48-. </p>

<p> Anon. Drug Wars: How the Battles Are BEing Fought Across </p>

<p> the United States and Canada. Police Chief (June 1988), </p>

<p> p. 48. </p>

<p> Anon. Drugs of Choice. Science News, 136:25 (December 16 </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 392-. </p>

<p> Summary: Most cigarette smokers are physically and </p>

<p> psychologically dependent on their &quot;best friends,&quot;
but </p>

<p> some light smokers show no signs of dependence. Studies </p>

<p> of nonaddicted smokers also known as cigarette </p>

<p> &quot;chippers&quot;may shed light on the nature of nicotine </p>

<p> addiction. Researchers are also looking at nondependent </p>

<p> users of other drugs, such as cocaine, to understand </p>

<p> better why some people get hooked on intoxicating </p>

<p> substances. </p>

<p> Anon. Drugs. Summary: Marijuana and Learning: Grass </p>

<p> Gets an F. Current Health 2, 15:5 (January 1, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 20. </p>

<p> Anon. Drugs: The Downside of Smoking Tobacco and </p>

<p> Marijuana. Current Health 2, 16:3 (November 1, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 24-. </p>

<p> Anon. E-2C aircraft are key to Coast Guard's antidrug </p>

<p> smuggling operations. Aviation Week and Space </p>

<p> Technology. (January 30 1989) v 130 n 5 pp. 37. Summary: </p>

<p> Grumman early warning aircraft fitted with an APS-125 </p>

<p> radar flying missions form Key West in search for </p>

<p> aircraft that might be bringing narcotics into the U.S. </p>

<p> Anon. Effects of Crack and Cocaine Upon Infants: A Brief </p>

<p> Review of the Literature. Children's Legal Rights </p>

<p> Journal. Fall 89 v 10 n 4. pp. 4. </p>

<p> Anon. El Dinero Caliente Pretende Entrar en Pol¡tica, </p>

<p> Gui¢n, (July 15-21, 1983, 21. </p>

<p> Anon. El Dossier de Medell¡n, Semana, (January 27, 1987, </p>

<p> 25. </p>

<p> Anon. El tr fico de drogas es mecanismo de autodefensa, </p>

<p> El Espectador, (July 3, 1984. </p>

<p> Anon. Estupor por Subornos de la Mafia, El Tiempo, </p>

<p> (January 10, 1988), 9A. </p>

<p> Anon. Existen Mas de Dos Millones de Desempleados, </p>

<p> Medell¡n C¡vico, (May 1987, 6. </p>

<p> Anon. Focus On Loss Prevention. Stores, 71:6 (June 1, </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 56. Summary: Narcotics are cited by </p>

<p> retailers as top threat to asset protection-both </p>

<p> internal and external. </p>

<p> Anon. From Coca-Cola to the Cartels. Scholastic Update. </p>

<p> Teachers' edition. (November 17 1989) v 122 n 6. pp. 10. </p>

<p> Summary: A look back at a century of drug abuse and drug </p>

<p> wars in America. </p>

<p> Anon. Getting Gangsters Out of Drugs. The Economist </p>

<p> (April 2, 1988), pp. 11-12. </p>

<p> Anon. Guns, Drugs, and the C.I.A., Frontline, PBS, (May </p>

<p> 18, 1988), 34. </p>

<p> Anon. Haiti: Coupsters and cocaine. The Economist. (April </p>

<p> 8 1989) v 311 n 7597. pp. 46. </p>

<p> Anon. Hay Que Hablar con los Narcos Dicen 2 Obispos, El </p>

<p> Tiempo, (February 13, 1988), 1A. </p>

<p> Anon. Hitting Kingpins in Their Assets, US News and World </p>

<p> Report, December 8, 1988). </p>

<p> Anon. In Europe, some don't want to halt the flow. </p>

<p> Barron's. 69:33 Jun 26 1989). (Money-laundering </p>

<p> legislation). </p>

<p> Anon. Is Prohibition Making Drug Fiends? Literary Digest </p>

<p> 69 (April 16, 1921), 19-20. </p>

<p> Anon. Jacobo Arenas Discusses Lehder, Semana, (March 10, </p>

<p> 1987, 22-25. </p>

<p> Anon. Japan: Drugs. Far Eastern Economic Review., 147:11 </p>

<p> (March 15 1990), pp. 12. Summary: Police face Legal </p>

<p> obstacles in pursuit of narcotics traffickers at a time </p>

<p> when the country is seen as the next big market for </p>

<p> illicit drugs. </p>

<p> Anon. La Conexi¢n, Caretas, (September 7, 1987, 36. </p>

<p> Anon. La Mafia Asesino a Pardo Leal, El Tiempo, (November </p>

<p> 13, 1987, 3A. </p>

<p> Anon. La Patria Acorralada, Quindio Libre, (October 1, </p>

<p> 1983, 2A. </p>

<p> Anon. La Paz es la Justicia Social, Medell¡n C¡vico, </p>

<p> (November 1986, 3. </p>

<p> Anon. Libre Capo de la Mafia porque Ning£n Juez Quiso </p>

<p> Procesarlo, El Tiempo, (February 9, 1988), 24. </p>

<p> Anon. Lo Unico que Hacemos Es el Oso, El Tiempo, </p>

<p> (February 22, 1988). </p>

<p> Anon. Los barrios Pobres y la Eradicaci¢n de la Pobreza, </p>

<p> Medell¡n C¡vico, (October 1986, 3. </p>

<p> Anon. Marijuana Controversy Sparks Debate Among DEA </p>

<p> Officials. Drug Topics, 132:20 (October 17, 1988), pp. </p>

<p> 42-. </p>

<p> Anon. Marine OV-10Ds with Flir systems detect, track </p>

<p> aircraft smuggling narcotics. Aviation Week and Space </p>

<p> Technology. (July 10 1989) v 131 n 2 pp. 49. Summary: </p>

<p> The success of OV-10D patrols along a broad stretch of </p>

<p> the coast, from the Florida Keys to the Carolinas, has </p>

<p> caught the attention of both the illegal drug traffickers </p>

<p> and congressional officials. </p>

<p> Anon. Medicine: Is there a technical fix for cocaine </p>

<p> addiction? U.S. News &amp; World Report. (April 17 1989) v </p>

<p> 106 n 15 pp. 61. </p>

<p> Anon. Memorable Moments - Overdosing a Gunman. American </p>

<p> Druggist, 200:2 (August 1, 1989), pp. 56. Summary: The </p>

<p> robber who waved his gun demanding Narcotics got more </p>

<p> than he bargined for. </p>

<p> Anon. Mexico Urged to Boost Efforts in Drug War. </p>

<p> Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report, 47:9 (March 4, </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 473-. </p>

<p> Anon. Mexico Week. Mexico Journal, 3:2 (October 9, 1989), </p>

<p> pp. 8-. Summary: Salinas vs Bush on trade issues: </p>

<p> Attorney general gives drug-fight report.: Durazo gets </p>

<p> six years: The south gets swamped: Zuno Arce tries to </p>

<p> leave L.A.: Roundup: Mu¤oz Ledo on the hot seat. </p>

<p> Anon. Mientras el Pueblo Padece Hambre, Varias Industrias </p>

<p> Se Enriquen, Medell¡n C¡vico, (April 1987, 4. </p>

<p> Anon. Military-Drug Trafficking Link Alleged, Radio </p>

<p> Patria Libre (Clandestine) to Colombia, (November 15, </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> Anon. Multinacional de la Droga: Qui&#130;n Esta Detr s? El </p>

<p> Tiempo, (February 17, 1986, 10. </p>

<p> Anon. Narcotics. U.S.-Mexico report; monthly translations </p>

<p> ..., 9:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 14. </p>

<p> Anon. Narcotics: A Primer. Current Health 2, 15:7 (March </p>

<p> 1 1989), pp. 11. </p>

<p> Anon. Narcotr fico y pol¡tica II: Bolivia 1982-1985. </p>

<p> Cochabamba: [s.n.], 1985. </p>

<p> Anon. Nation: The U.S. readies emergency aid for Colombia </p>

<p> as drug barons declare &quot;total war&quot; against the </p>

<p> government. Time (September 4, 1989), 12. Summary: </p>

<p> President Barco strikes back against assassinations and </p>

<p> bombings by threatening extradition of cocaine kingpins </p>

<p> to the U.S. and seizing planes, yachts and lavish </p>

<p> mansions of the narcotrafficantes. But the leading </p>

<p> gangsters disappear after their hit men rub out Luis </p>

<p> Carlos Gal n, the front-running candidate in next (May's </p>

<p> presidential election. </p>

<p> Anon. National Menace of the Dope Traffic, Literary </p>

<p> Digest 76 (February 24, 1923), 34-35. </p>

<p> Anon. News. Chemistry and Industry (March 5, 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 114. Summary: Dutch tackle Narcotics chemicals. </p>

<p> Anon. No a la Extradici¢n, Medell¡n C¡vico, (March 1984, </p>

<p> 7. </p>

<p> Anon. Noriega and the CIA in Costa Rica. Newsweek, 115:7 </p>

<p> (February 12, 1990), p. 22. </p>

<p> Anon. NTSB asserts captain's cocaine use contributed to </p>

<p> crash of Metro 3. Aviation week and space technology. </p>

<p> (February 6 1989) v 130 n 6 pp. 59. Summary: Both </p>

<p> pilots, seven passengers were killed Jan. 19, 1988), when </p>

<p> a Trans-Colorado Airlines Metro 3 crashed at night near </p>

<p> Durango, Colo. </p>

<p> Anon. Pakistan: Narcotics. Far Eastern Economic Review, </p>

<p> 145:32 (August 10, 1989), pp. 25-. Summary: The </p>

<p> government arrests a former general, now an opposition </p>

<p> politician, on charges of International Drug trafficking. </p>

<p> Anon. Pakistan: Narcotics. Summary: Prime Minister </p>

<p> Bhutto cracks down on Drug syndicates in the country. </p>

<p> Far Eastern Economic Review, 144:18 (May 4, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 28-. </p>

<p> Anon. Paro armado de 72 horas, Bases Huallaga, (August </p>

<p> 1988), 1. </p>

<p> Anon. Patent Medicine Crusade, Nation 81 (November 9, </p>

<p> 1905), 376. </p>

<p> Anon. Patent Medicines and Poverty, Outlook 83 (June 2, </p>

<p> 1906), 253-254. </p>

<p> Anon. Peru's Failed Experiment, Dollars &amp; Sense, 1989). </p>

<p> Anon. Quality Watch. Hospitals, 63:15 (August 5, 1989), </p>

<p> pp. 34-. Summary: Are you monitoring prescribed </p>

<p> narcotics at your facility? More than 87 percent of the </p>

<p> hospitals accredited by the Joint Commission on </p>

<p> Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations fail to comply </p>

<p> with JCAHO standards in the area of Drug usage. Such </p>

<p> serious quality problems can lead to a loss of </p>

<p> accreditation. </p>

<p> Anon. Questions and Answers: Availability of </p>

<p> pharmaceutical cocaine. American Journal of Hospital </p>

<p> Pharmacy (August 1 1989) v 46 n 8 pp. 1534. </p>

<p> Anon. Quien Esta Matando a la mafia, Semana, (April 1, </p>

<p> 1986, 32. </p>

<p> Anon. Quien Fue, Semana, (January 25, 1986. </p>

<p> Anon. Radio in the War on Drugs. Communications, 26:9 </p>

<p> (September 1, 1989), pp. 74-. Summary: The Mississippi </p>

<p> Narcotics Bureau is using digital speech encrypting to </p>

<p> protect agents and improve their effectiveness. </p>

<p> Anon. Reactivaci¢n Econ¢mica por Dinero Caliente, El </p>

<p> Espectador, (October 3, 1987, 1A, 7A. </p>

<p> Anon. Rural Mexico turns to drug cultivation to put food </p>

<p> on the table. Mexico Journal, 3:4 (October 23, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 16-. </p>

<p> Anon. Street Level Narcotics Enforcement. Law and Order, </p>

<p> 38:7 (July 1, 1990), pp. 87-. </p>

<p> Anon. Struggling To Cut The Cocaine/Chemicals </p>

<p> Connection: So far, the war against chemical diversion is </p>

<p> a stalemate. Chemical Week. (January 4 1989) v 143 n 26 </p>

<p> pp. 44. </p>

<p> Anon. The coming cocaine plague in Europe. Demand is up, </p>

<p> and the parallels with the American experience are </p>

<p> frightening. U.S. News &amp; World Report. (February 20 </p>

<p> 1989) v 106 n 7 pp. 34 </p>

<p> Anon. The dramas of BCCI. The economist. December 17 </p>

<p> 1988) v 309 n 7581. pp. 81. </p>

<p> Anon. The Drug Bill's 2.3 Billion Promise, New York </p>

<p> Times, (October 25, 1988), 26y. </p>

<p> Anon. The Drug Flames Rise Higher, New York Times, (March </p>

<p> 3, 1988), 30. </p>

<p> Anon. The Drug-money hunt. Narcotics warriors target </p>

<p> laundered cash. U.S. News &amp; World Report (August 21 </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 22. </p>

<p> Anon. The Epidemic. Medical World News. 1989). </p>

<p> Anon. The Helmsman. The Illustrated weekly of India. </p>

<p> (October 8 1989) v 110 n 41. pp. 42-. Summary: S N M </p>

<p> Abdi talks to BCCI president B K Dutt about the </p>

<p> controversies that have rocked the criketing </p>

<p> establishment. </p>

<p> Anon. The Long, Losing Battle Against Drugs. The </p>

<p> Economist (March 5, 1988), pp. 23-24. </p>

<p> Anon. The NACLA Report: Coca The Real Green Revolution. </p>

<p> NACLA Report on the Americas. (March 1 1989) v 22 n 6. </p>

<p> pp. 12. </p>

<p> Anon. The NACLA Report: Colombia Cracks Up. NACLA Report </p>

<p> on the Americas, 23:6 (April 1, 1990), pp. 13-. Summary: </p>

<p> The People's War; The Dirty War; The Drug War. </p>

<p> Anon. The Superstition of Dope, Literary Digest 54 (June </p>

<p> 30, 1917), 1990). </p>

<p> Anon. Those stubborn coca growers. U.S. News &amp; World </p>

<p> Report. (February 26 1990) v 108 n 8. pp. 13. </p>

<p> Anon. Tocache: Some Things Go Better With..., The Andean </p>

<p> Report, December 1985. </p>

<p> Anon. Top drug cop weighs use of marijuana as an Rx drug. </p>

<p> Drug Topics, 132:23 (December 12 1988), pp. 50-. </p>

<p> Anon. Turf War Over Coca-Growing Territory Leaves 34 </p>

<p> Dead, 11 Wounded in Peru, Miami Herald, (October 14, </p>

<p> 1987, 3A. </p>

<p> Anon. Vereniging Happy Family v. Inspecteur Der </p>

<p> Omzetbelasting. European Court of Justice. Common Market </p>

<p> Law Reports, 56:736 (December 5, 1989), pp. 743-. </p>

<p> Summary: Value added tax-illegal goods-Narcotics-no </p>

<p> import VAT chargeable-outside commercial sector </p>

<p> altogether (except for strictly controlled medical </p>

<p> use)-no VAT on internal transactions either-controlled </p>

<p> goods-amphetamines-equivalent to Narcotics for VAT </p>

<p> purposes-hands-off policy of Dutch police regarding `soft </p>

<p> drugs' irrelevant-not equivalent to legislation-soft </p>

<p> drugs also outside VAT system. </p>

<p> Anon. Virginia ROTHR system covers Caribbean drug </p>

<p> smuggling routes. Aviation Week &amp; Space Technology. </p>

<p> 131:76+ Nov 27 1989). </p>

<p> Anon. Wanted: godfather of Colombia's drug cartels. </p>

<p> Executive Intelligence Review, 17:23 (June 1, 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 26-. Summary: Once the President of Colombia during the </p>

<p> heyday of the country's dope trade, Alfonso L¢pez </p>

<p> Michelsen is now at the center of the drug traffickers' </p>

<p> empire aganist which the current government has declared </p>

<p> total war. Now the authorities are on the tail of the </p>

<p> godfather himself; the material assembled here is aimed </p>

<p> at helping that process along. </p>

<p> Anon. Was This Bank A Laundry? A drug-money trail leads </p>

<p> to BCCI Business week. (October 24 1988) n 3076. pp. 29. </p>

<p> Anon. Weed It And Reap.Summary: Fueled by the U.S. </p>

<p> government's war on drugs, marijuana is now this </p>

<p> country's largest cash crop. And it's not just California </p>

<p> hippies who are growing it. Dollars &amp; Sense (March 1, </p>

<p> 1989). pp. 12-. </p>

<p> Anon. When Coke Leads to Stroke. Emergency Medicine. </p>

<p> (April 15 1990) v 22 n 7. pp. 35-. Summary: More and </p>

<p> more young people today are finding out the hard way </p>

<p> that the downside of the cocaine high can be something </p>

<p> they expect to happen to their elders--an intracerebral </p>

<p> or subarachnoid hemorrhage or cerebral infarction. </p>

<p> Anon. World. Maclean's, 102:36 (September 4, 1989), p. </p>

<p> 16-. Summary: Washington provides massive military and </p>

<p> related aid to Colombia to help Bogota fight drug </p>

<p> traffickers who vow to wage total war against the </p>

<p> government. </p>

<p> Anslinger, Harry J. and William F. Tompkins. The Traffic </p>

<p> in Narcotics. New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1953. </p>

<p> Anthony, James C., Tien, Allen Y., and Petronis, Kenneth </p>

<p> R. Epidemiologic Evidence on Cocaine Use and Panic </p>

<p> Attacks. American Journal of Epidemiology. (March 1 1989) </p>

<p> v 129 n 3 pp. 543. </p>

<p> Anturiano Hurtado, Julio. La hiena: drama social sobre </p>

<p> la droga, drogadiccion, y corrupcion. Santa Cruz, </p>

<p> Bolivia: Empresa Editora El Pais, 1986. 159 p. </p>

<p> Araki, H, Y. Uchiyama-Tsuyuki, and H. Aihara, H. Effects </p>

<p> of Chronic Administration of Haloperidol, Methamphetamine </p>

<p> or Cocaine on Wet-Dog Shakes Elicited by Stimulation of </p>

<p> the Rat Hippocampus. Archives internationales de </p>

<p> pharmacodynamie et de therapie. (January 1 1989) v 297 </p>

<p> pp. 217. </p>

<p> Arango Jaramillo, Mario, and Jorge Child. Coca-Coca: </p>

<p> historia, manejo politico y mafia de la cocaina. Bogota: </p>

<p> Dos Mundos, 1986. </p>

<p> Arango Jaramillo, Mario, and Jorge Child. Los condenados </p>

<p> de la coca: el manejo politico de la droga. Medellin, </p>

<p> Colombia: Editorial J.M. Arango, 1985. </p>

<p> Arango Jaramillo, Mario, and Jorge Child. Narcotrafico </p>

<p> imperio de la cocaina. 1a ed. Medellin, Colombia: </p>

<p> Editorial Percepcion, 1984. </p>

<p> Arango Jaramillo, Mario. Impacto del Narcotr fico en </p>

<p> Antioqu¡a. Medell¡n: Editorial J. M. Arango, 1988). </p>

<p> Arauz, Celestino Andres. El contrabando holandes en el </p>

<p> Caribe durante la primera mitad del siglo XVIII / </p>

<p> Celestino Andres Arauz Monfante. Caracas: Academia </p>

<p> Nacional de la Historia, 1984. Biblioteca de la Academia </p>

<p> Nacional de la Historia. Fuentes para la historia </p>

<p> colonial de Venezuela ; 168-169. </p>

<p> Arif, A., ed., Adverse health consequences of cocaine </p>

<p> abuse. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1987. </p>

<p> Ashley, Richard. Cocaine: its history, uses and </p>

<p> effects. New York: Warner Books, 1976. </p>

<p> Avakian, E.V., LeRoy, M., and St. John-Allan, K. Effect </p>

<p> of Chronic Cocaine Administration and Cocaine Withdrawal </p>

<p> on Coronary Flow Rate and Heart Rate Responses to </p>

<p> Epinephrine and Cocaine in Isolated Perfused Rat Hearts. </p>

<p> Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 22. pp. 1569-. </p>

<p> Ayatollah, Guerrillas y Narcos, Cuentas Pendientes, El </p>

<p> Tiempo, (November 15, 1987, 5A. </p>

<p> Bachman, Jerald G., Johnston, Lloyd D., and O'Malley, </p>

<p> Patrick M. Explaining the Recent Decline in Cocaine Use </p>

<p> among Young Adults: Further Evidence That Perceived Risks </p>

<p> and Disapproval Lead to Reduced Drug Use. Journal of </p>

<p> Health and Social Behavior. (June 1 1990) v 31 n 2 pp. </p>

<p> 173. </p>

<p> Bagley, Bruce. Colombia and the War on Drugs, Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs 67:1 (Fall 1988), 70-92. </p>

<p> Bagley, Bruce. The Colombian Connection: The Impact of </p>

<p> Drug Traffic on Colombia, in Coca and Cocaine: Effects on </p>

<p> People and Policy in Latin America. edited by Deborah </p>

<p> Pacini and Christine Franquemont. Peterborough, N.H.: </p>

<p> Cultural Survival and Cornell University, 1986. </p>

<p> Bailey, David N, and Richard F. Shaw. Cocaine- and </p>

<p> Methamphetamine-Related Deaths in San Diego County </p>

<p> (1987): Homicides and Accidental Overdoses. Journal of </p>

<p> Forensic Sciences. (March 1 1989) v 34 n 2 pp. 407. </p>

<p> Bailey, Susan L., and Hubbard, Robert L. Developmental </p>

<p> Variation in the Context of Marijuana Initiation among </p>

<p> Adolescents. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 31:1 </p>

<p> (March 1, 1990), pp. 58-. </p>

<p> Bak, David J. Sant and Fournier, Robert. New weapons in </p>

<p> the war against drugs. Journal of the American Chemical </p>

<p> Society, 9 Aug 16 1989). </p>

<p> Baker, J. The 'You Fly, You Die' Debate. Newsweek </p>

<p> (October 2, 1989), 26. </p>

<p> Bakht, Fred R., Kirshon, Brian, and Baker, Tahirih. </p>

<p> Postpartum cardiovascular complications after </p>

<p> bromocriptine and cocaine use. American Journal of </p>

<p> Obstetrics and Gynecology. (April 1 1990) v 162 n 4. pp. </p>

<p> 1065-. Summary: The potential for adverse cardiovascular </p>

<p> effects after postpartum bromocriptine use, especially in </p>

<p> conjunction with recent cocaine use, is discussed. </p>

<p> Ball, Aimee Lee. White Lies: Cocaine-the Dirty Little </p>

<p> Secret in the Age of Clean. pp. 266. (April 1 1989) v 95 </p>

<p> n 4. </p>

<p> Ballon, Eduardo, ed. Movimientos sociales y crisis: el </p>

<p> caso peruano. Lima: Centro de Estudios y Promocion del </p>

<p> Desarrollo, 1986. </p>

<p> Bannon, Michael J., Xue, Chang-Hong, and Shibata, </p>

<p> Kazuhiko. Expression of a Human Cocaine-Sensitive </p>

<p> Dopamine Transporter in Xenopus laevis Oocytes. Journal </p>

<p> of neurochemistry, 54:2 (February 1, 1990), pp. 706-. </p>

<p> Barnes, Deborah. The Biological Tangle of Drug Addiction, </p>

<p> Science 241 (July 22, 1988), 415-17. </p>

<p> Barr, Cameron. Colombia's Bloodied Bench. The American </p>

<p> Lawyer, 12:2 (March 1, 1990), pp. 94-. Summary: Being a </p>

<p> judge in Colombia is &quot;almost heroic,&quot; says one
young </p>

<p> jurist--a struggle against the bribes and bullets of the </p>

<p> drug cartels on the one hand and the inefficiencies of </p>

<p> the judicial system on the other. </p>

<p> Barrett, R. L. and J.B. Appel, Effects of stimulation and </p>

<p> blockade of dopamine receptor subtypes on the </p>

<p> discriminative stimulus properties of cocaine. </p>

<p> Psychopharmacology. September 1 1989) v 99 n 1 pp. 13. </p>

<p> Barrios, Jaime. Low-intensity Warfare: Reasons and </p>

<p> Rationale. World Marxist Review, 32:7 (July 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 40-. </p>

<p> Barron, John. Castro, Cocaine and the A-Bomb Connection. </p>

<p> The Reader's Digest. (March 1 1990) v 136 n 815 pp. </p>

<p> 65-. </p>

<p> Barton, Scott B., Kofoed, Bruce A., and Doleys, Daniel M. </p>

<p> Smoking and Narcotics Use Among Chronic Pain Patients. </p>

<p> Psychological Reports, 64:3 (June 1, 1989), pp. 1253-. </p>

<p> Bascope Aspiazu, Rene. La veta blanca: coca y cocaina en </p>

<p> Bolivia. La Paz: Ediciones Aqui, 1982. </p>

<p> Bateman, David A., and Margaret C. Heagarty. Passive </p>

<p> Freebase Cocaine (Crack) Inhalation by Infants and </p>

<p> Toddlers. American Journal of diseases of children . </p>

<p> (January 1 1989) v 143 n 1 pp. 25. </p>

<p> Battjes, R. J., Leukefeld, C. G., and Pickens, R. W. The </p>

<p> Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome and Intravenous Drug </p>

<p> Abuse. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 21-. </p>

<p> Bauchner, Howard, Barry Zuckerman, and Mary McClain. Risk </p>

<p> of sudden infant death syndrome among infants with in </p>

<p> utero exposure to cocaine. The Journal of pediatrics. </p>

<p> (November 1 1988) v 113 n 5 pp. 831. Summary: In a </p>

<p> cohort of mothers with multiple risk factors for sudden </p>

<p> infant death syndrome, the incidence of SIDS among their </p>

<p> infants was not significantly greater in those who used </p>

<p> cocaine. </p>

<p> Beargie, Tony, Latin carriers ink anti-drug agreement. </p>

<p> American Shipper, 31:59 Jan 1989). </p>

<p> Beargie, Tony. ILA pledges boycott to stop drugs. </p>

<p> American Shipper. 31:42 Jun 1989). </p>

<p> Beck, Susan. The Cocaine War in America's Fruitbowl. The </p>

<p> American Lawyer, 12:2 (March 1, 1990), pp. 82-. Summary: </p>

<p> The once-tranquil town of Yakima, Washington, is dead set </p>

<p> on battling drugs, even if it means turning itself inside </p>

<p> out. </p>

<p> Bell, R., Tayloir, E.H., and Pappas, A.A. Interpretation </p>

<p> of Urine Quantitative 11-nor delta-9 </p>

<p> tetrahydrocannabionol-9-Carboxylic Acid to Determine </p>

<p> Abstinence from Marijuana Smoking. Journal of Toxicology. </p>

<p> Clinical Toxicology, 27:1-2 (1989), pp. 109-. </p>

<p> Bentancur, Arturo Ariel. Contrabando y contrabandistas: </p>

<p> historias coloniales. Montevideo: Arca, 1982. </p>

<p> Benuck, M., M.E.A. Reith, and H. Sershen. Oxidative </p>

<p> Metabolism of Cocaine: Comparison of Brain and Liver. </p>

<p> Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology. </p>

<p> (January 1 1989) v 190 n 1 pp. 7. </p>

<p> Bergman, Jack, and Warren, Phillip H. Effects of Kappa </p>

<p> Opiods on Schedule-controlled Behavior of Squirrel </p>

<p> Monkeys. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental </p>

<p> Therapeutics.rapeutics . (March 1 1989) v 248 n 3. pp. </p>

<p> 1102. </p>

<p> Bergman, Jack, Madras, Bertha K., and Johnson, Sara E. </p>

<p> Effects of Cocaine and Related Drugs in Nonhuman </p>

<p> Primates. III. Self-Administration by Squirrel Monkeys. </p>

<p> The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental </p>

<p> Therapeutics. (October 1 1989) v 251 n 1. pp. 150-. </p>

<p> Billman, G. E. Mechanisms responsible for the </p>

<p> carediotoxic effects of cocaine. The FASEB Journal. (May </p>

<p> 1 1990) v 4 n 8. pp. 2469-. </p>

<p> Billman, G.E, and R.S. Hoskins. Cocaine-induced </p>

<p> ventricular fibrillation: protection afforded by the </p>

<p> calcium antagonist verapamil. The FASEB Journal: Official </p>

<p> Publication of the Federation of Americans Societies for </p>

<p> Experimental Biology. (November 1 1988) v 2 n 14 pp. </p>

<p> 2990. </p>

<p> Blachman, Morris J., and Sharpe, Kenneth E. &quot;The War on </p>

<p> Drugs: American Democracy Under Assault.&quot; World Policy </p>

<p> Journal, V. 7:1 (Winter 1990), pp. 135-. </p>

<p> Blockstein, William L., ed. Seminar on Control </p>

<p> Procedures in Drug Production 2d, University of </p>

<p> Wisconsin, 1966. Control procedures in drug production; </p>

<p> the proceedings of a seminar. Madison, University of </p>

<p> Wisconsin, University Extension, 1966. </p>

<p> Blue, Carolyn, L. CE: Home Care of the Epidural Analgesia </p>

<p> Patient: The Nurse's Role. Home Healthcare Nurse, 7:4 </p>

<p> (July 1, 1989), pp. 23-. Summary: Spinal analgesia </p>

<p> offers a viable alternative for the patient with cancer </p>

<p> whose pain cannot be controlled by systemic Narcotics. </p>

<p> The success of this therapy depends largely on the </p>

<p> effectiveness of the home health nurse in instructing the </p>

<p> patient and caregivers, monitoring catheter care, and </p>

<p> assessing the patient's response to treatment. </p>

<p> Boaz, David. Let's Quit the Drug War, New York Times, </p>

<p> (March 17, 1988), 25y. </p>

<p> Bodor, Geza, Roggeman, Robert, and Turk, John. Variations </p>

<p> in Abudance of the Molecular Ion of the Derivatized </p>

<p> Cocaine Metabolite Benzoylecgonine. Clinical Chemistry. </p>

<p> (May 1 1990) v 36 n 5. pp. 742-. </p>

<p> Boffey, Philip. Drug Users Not Suppliers Hold Key to </p>

<p> Problem, The New York Times, (April 12, 1988), A1, A10. </p>

<p> Boja, J.W., and Kuhar, M.J. [3H]Cocaine binding and </p>

<p> inhibition of [3H]dopamine uptake is similar in both the </p>

<p> rat striatum and nucleus accumbens. European journal of </p>

<p> pharmacology. December 7 1989) v 173 n 2 / 3 pp. 215 </p>

<p> Bolivia. Consejo Nacional de Lucha contra el </p>

<p> Narcotrafico. Narcotrafico: causas y soluciones. La Paz, </p>

<p> Bolivia: Consejo Nacional de Lucha contra el </p>

<p> Narcotrafico, 1982. </p>

<p> Bonnie, Richard J. and Charles H. Whitehead. The </p>

<p> Marihuana Conviction: A History of Marihuana Prohibition </p>

<p> in the United States. Charlottesville, University Press </p>

<p> of Virginia, 1974. </p>

<p> Border management reorganization and drug interdiction / </p>

<p> prepared for the Committee on Governmental Affairs, </p>

<p> United States Senate, by the Congressional Research </p>

<p> Service, Library of Congress. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> Bouis, P., Taccard, G., and Boelsterli, U.A. </p>

<p> Determination of cocaine and norcocaine in plasma and </p>

<p> cell cultures using high-performance liquid </p>

<p> chromatography. Journal of Chromatography. (April 6 1990) </p>

<p> v 526 n 2. pp. 447. </p>

<p> Boyce, D. Narco-Terrorism. FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin. </p>

<p> (October 1987), pp. 24-7. </p>

<p> Boyer, C. Scott, and Petersen, Dennis R. Potentiation of </p>

<p> Cocaine-Mediated Hepatotoxicity by Acute and Chronic </p>

<p> Ethanol. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. </p>

<p> (February 1 1990) v 14 n 1 pp. 28-. </p>

<p> Bracken, M.E., D.R. Bracken, and W.W. Winder. Effect of </p>

<p> various doses of cocaine on endurance capacity in rats. </p>

<p> Journal of Applied Physiology: Respiratory, env... </p>

<p> (January 1 1989) v 66 n 1 pp. 377. </p>

<p> Bradbury, S. P., Henry, T. R., and Niemi, G. J. Use of </p>

<p> Respiratory-Cardiovascular Responses of Rainbow Trout </p>

<p> (Salmo gairdneri) in Identifying Acute Toxicity Syndromes </p>

<p> in Fish: Part 3. Polar Narcotics. Environmental </p>

<p> Toxicology and Chemistry, 8:3 (1989), pp. 247-. </p>

<p> Branigan, William. The Mexican Connection, Washington </p>

<p> Post National Weekly Edition, (March 14-20, 1988), 7. </p>

<p> Bridges, Tyler. Resurgence of Bolivia's Drug Trade Sparks </p>

<p> New Prevention Push with US, Christian Science Monitor, </p>

<p> (July 1, 1987), 6-7. </p>

<p> Brinkley, Joel. Bolivia Asks U.S. for Big Loan to Make Up </p>

<p> Lost Cocaine </p>

<p> Income, New York Times, (July 31, 1986, A4. </p>

<p> Brock, David. The World of Narcoterrorism. The American </p>

<p> Spectator, 22:6 (June 1, 1989), pp. 24-. Summary: The </p>

<p> growing violence of the drug wars makes it clear that </p>

<p> it's time for the Bush Administration to name names, </p>

<p> identifying the insidious political forces underlying the </p>

<p> Narcotics business. </p>

<p> Brock, David. The World of Narcoterrorism. The American </p>

<p> Spectator. (June 1 1989) v 22 n 6 pp. 24. Summary: The </p>

<p> growing violence of the drug wars makes it clear that </p>

<p> it's time for the Bush Administration to name names, </p>

<p> identifying the insidious political forces underlying the </p>

<p> narcotics business. </p>

<p> Brody Cocaine-Related Medical Problems.The American </p>

<p> Journal of Medicine. (April 1 1990) v 88 n 4. pp. 325. </p>

<p> Brook, Judith S., Grodon, Ann Scovell, and Brook, Adam. </p>

<p> The Consequences of Marijuana Use on Intrapersonal and </p>

<p> Interpersonal Functioning in Black and white Adolescents. </p>

<p> Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monograph, 115:3 </p>

<p> (August 1, 1989), pp. 349-. </p>

<p> Brown, Michael F. Narcotics Investigations in Smaller </p>

<p> Agencies. The Police Chief. (October 1, 1989) v 56 n 10 </p>

<p> pp. 103-. </p>

<p> Brown, Roger M., Clouet, Doris H, and Friedman, DAvid P., </p>

<p> eds., Opiate receptor subtypes and brain function. </p>

<p> Rockville, Md.: U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, </p>

<p> Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental </p>

<p> Health Administration, National Institute on Drug Abuse ; </p>

<p> Washington, DC: , U.S. G.P.O, 1986. </p>

<p> Bruera, Eduardo, Brenneis, C., and Michaud, M. Use of the </p>

<p> Subcutaneous Route for the Administration of Narcotics in </p>

<p> Patients with Cancer Pain. Cancer; Diagnosis, Treatment, </p>

<p> Research, 62:2 (July 15 1988), pp. 407-. </p>

<p> Burke, William M., Ravi, Narsipur V., and Dhopesh, </p>

<p> Vasant. Prolonged Presence of Metabolite in Urine After </p>

<p> Compulsive Cocaine Use. The Journal of Clinical </p>

<p> Psychiatry. (April 1 1990) v 51 n 4. pp. 145. </p>

<p> Burton, Karen R. Hyperthyroidism in a Cocaine-Dependent </p>

<p> Patient. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. (August 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 50 n 8 pp. 305. </p>

<p> Cabieses, Fernando. Etnologia, fisiologia y farmacologia </p>

<p> de la coca y la cocaina. Lima, Peru: Museo Peruano de </p>

<p> Ciencias de la Salud, 1985. </p>

<p> Caceres, Baldomero. Coca y realidad: aula sin muros. </p>

<p> Lima: Universidad Nacional (Mayor de San Marcos, </p>

<p> Direccion de Proyeccion Social, Seminario de Historia </p>

<p> Rural Andina, 1979. </p>

<p> Caine, Eric D. A Review of Major Treatment Methods for </p>

<p> Chronic Narcotics Dependence, and Suggestions for a </p>

<p> Comprehensive Approach to Therapy. Ithaca, N. Y.: Center </p>

<p> for Housing and Environmental Studies, Division of Urban </p>

<p> Studies, Cornell University, 1969. Series title: Working </p>

<p> papers in comprehensive health planning working paper no. </p>

<p> 1. </p>

<p> California. Bureau of Criminal Statistics. Drug diversion </p>

<p> recidivism 1000 PC: a project conducted for the State </p>

<p> Office of Narcotics and Drug Abuse: prepared by State of </p>

<p> California, Department of Justice, Division of Law </p>

<p> Enforcement, Bureau of Bureau of Criminal Statistics. </p>

<p> Sacramento: The Bureau, 1978. </p>

<p> California. Office of Narcotics and Drug Abuse. Training </p>

<p> resource directory, (February 1975: prepared by the State </p>

<p> Office of Narcotics Drug Abuse. Sacramento: State of </p>

<p> California, Office of Narcotics and Drug Abuse, 1975. </p>

<p> Calogero, A.E., Gallucci, W.T., and Kling, M.A. Cocaine </p>

<p> stimulates rat hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing </p>

<p> hormone secretion in vitro. Brain research. 505:1 </p>

<p> (December 25, 1989), 7-. </p>

<p> Camacho Guizado, Alvaro. Droga, corrupcion y poder: </p>

<p> marihuana y cocaina en la sociedad colombiana. Cali, </p>

<p> Colombia: CIDSE, Universidad del Valle, 1981. </p>

<p> Canelas Orellana, Amado, and Juan Carlos Canelas Zannier. </p>

<p> Bolivia, coca, cocaina: subdesarrollo y poder politico. </p>

<p> Cochabamba ; La Paz: Editorial Los Amigos del Libro, </p>

<p> 1983. </p>

<p> Canna, Elizabeth, and Lida, Jim. Sea-Land fined $83.9 </p>

<p> million. American Shipper 31:60 Feb 1989). (US Customs </p>

<p> Service drug smuggling penalty). </p>

<p> Canna, Elizabeth. Drug Policy considered unworkable. </p>

<p> American Shipper. 31:40 Jun 1989). </p>

<p> Canna, Elizabeth. Way seen to take the drug war off </p>

<p> Customs' back. American Shipper. 31:18 (July 1989). </p>

<p> Caplan, Yale H. Levine, Barry S. Abbott phencyclidine </p>

<p> and barbiturates abused drug assays: Evaluation and </p>

<p> comparison of ADx FPIA, TDx FPIA, EMIT and GC/MS </p>

<p> methods. Journal of analytical toxicology. September 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 13 n 5. pp. 289. </p>

<p> Carlini, E. A. Research is Badly Needed to Improve </p>

<p> Programmes for the Prevention and Treatment of Drug Abuse </p>

<p> and Drug Dependence in Brazil. Drug and Alcohol </p>

<p> Dependence, 25:2 (April 1, 1990), pp. 167. </p>

<p> Carlisle, Johan. &quot;Drug War Propaganda,&quot; Propaganda
Review </p>

<p> (Winter 1990). </p>

<p> Carlson, Ken, et al. Unreported Taxable Income for </p>

<p> Selected Illegal Activities. Cambridge, MA, Apt </p>

<p> Associates, 1983. </p>

<p> Carpenter, Ted Galen, and Rouse, R. Channing. Perilous </p>

<p> Panacea: The Military in the Drug War. CATO Policy </p>

<p> Analysis No. 128. (February 15, 1990). </p>

<p> Carroll, M. E. Lac, S. T. Asencio, M. Fluoxetine </p>

<p> reduces intraveonous cocaine self-administration in rats. </p>

<p> Pharmacology, biochemistry and behavior. (January 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 35 n 1. pp. 237-. </p>

<p> Carroll, M.E., Lac, S.T., and Nygaard, S.L. A </p>

<p> concurrently available nondrug reinforcer prevents the </p>

<p> acquisition of decreases the maintenance of </p>

<p> cocaine-reinforced behavior. Psychopharmacology. (January </p>

<p> 1 1989) v 97 n 1 pp. 23. </p>

<p> Casella, Nicola, Muntaner, Carles, and Kumor, Karen M. </p>

<p> Cardiovascular Responses to Cocaine Placebo in Humans: A </p>

<p> Preliminary Report. Biological Psychiatry. (February 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 25 n 3 pp. 285. </p>

<p> Casey, J. D. More Than Good Intentions Needed in War </p>

<p> Against Drugs. Police Chief (November 1987), pp, 7. </p>

<p> Casey, Marty Guardians of the Gold. Soldier of Fortune, </p>

<p> 15:6 (June 1, 1990), pp. 44-. Summary: Security in Peru </p>

<p> is complicated matter, with Shining Path guerrillas, drug </p>

<p> barons and garden variety bandits terrorizing the </p>

<p> country. Enter American Herb Dunn's International </p>

<p> Security Consultants - private sector's answer to the </p>

<p> breakdown of law and order. </p>

<p> Castillo, Fabio. Los Jinetes de la Cocaina. Bogot : </p>

<p> Editorial Documentos Periodistas, 1987. </p>

<p> Centellas G., Jose Maria. La verdad sobre la coca y la </p>

<p> cocaina. La Paz: Instituto Boliviano de Estudios de </p>

<p> Comunicacion Social, 1981. </p>

<p> Centro de Investigaciones Socio-Economicas. El Problema </p>

<p> actual de la coca en la sociedad peruana: diferentes </p>

<p> enfoques. Lima: Centro de Investigaciones </p>

<p> Socio-Economicas, Taller de Coyuntura Agraria, </p>

<p> Universidad Nacional Agraria, 1979. </p>

<p> Cesesole, Norberto, comp. Peru: Sendero Luminoso, </p>

<p> ejercito y democracia. 1a ed. Madrid: Prensa y Ediciones </p>

<p> Iberoamericanas ; Buenos Aires: Instituto </p>

<p> Latinoamericano de Cooperacion Tecnologica y Relaciones </p>

<p> Internacionales, 1987. </p>

<p> Chaiken, Marcia R., and Johnson, Bruce D.C. </p>

<p> Characteristics of different types of drug-involved </p>

<p> offenders. prepared for the National Institute of </p>

<p> Justice,U.S. Department of Justice, by Abt Associates </p>

<p> Inc., under contract number OJP-86-C-002. Washington, </p>

<p> D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Justice, National Institute of </p>

<p> Justice, Office of Communication and Research </p>

<p> Utilization, 1988). </p>

<p> Chaission, R.E., Bacchetti, P., and Osmond, D. Cocaine </p>

<p> Use and HIV Infection in Intravenous Drug Users in San </p>

<p> Francisco. JAMA. the Journal of the American Medical </p>

<p> Association. (January 27 1989) v 261 n 4 pp. 561. </p>

<p> Chait, L.D., and Pierri, L.D. Some physical </p>

<p> charactistics of NIDA marijuana cigarettes. Addictive </p>

<p> Behaviors, 14:1 (1989), pp. 53-. </p>

<p> Chait, L.D. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol content and </p>

<p> human marijuana self-administration. Psychopharmacology, </p>

<p> 98:1 (May 1, 1989), pp. 51-. </p>

<p> Chait, L.D. Subjective and behavioral effects of </p>

<p> marijuana the morning after smoking. Psychopharmacology, </p>

<p> 100:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 328-. </p>

<p> Chase, Stuart, and F. J. Schlink. Consumers in </p>

<p> Wonderland: What We Get For Our Money When We Buy From </p>

<p> Quacks and Vendors for Cure-Alls, New Republic 49 </p>

<p> (February 16, 1927), 348-51. </p>

<p> Chasnoff, Ira J. Cocaine, Pregnancy, and the Neonate. </p>

<p> Women &amp; health. 1989) v 15 n 3. pp. 23-. </p>

<p> Chasnoff, Ira J., Griffith, D. R., and MacGregor, S. </p>

<p> Temporal Patterns of Cocaine Use in Pregnancy. JAMA: the </p>

<p> Journal of the American Medical Association. (March 24 </p>

<p> 1989) v 261 n 12 pp. 1741. </p>

<p> Chasnoff, Ira J., Hunt, Carl E., and Kletter, Ron. </p>

<p> Prenatal Cocaine Exposure Is Associated With Respiratory </p>

<p> Pattern Abnormalities. American Journal of Diseases of </p>

<p> Children. (May 1 1989) v 143 n 5 pp. 583. </p>

<p> Chasnoff, Ira J., Lewis, Douglas E., and Griffith, Dan R. </p>

<p> Cocaine and Pregnancy: Clinical and Toxicological </p>

<p> Implications for the Neonate. Clinical Chemistry. (July 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 35 n 7 pp. 1276. </p>

<p> Chavez, G. F., Mulinare, J., and Cordero, J. F. Maternal </p>

<p> Cocaine Use During Early Pregnancy as a Risk Factor for </p>

<p> Congenital Urogenital Anomalies. JAMA: the Journal of the </p>

<p> American Medical Association. (August 11 1989) v 262 n 6 </p>

<p> pp. 795. </p>

<p> Chepesiuk, Ron Drug Lords vs. the Press in Latin </p>

<p> America. The New Leader, 73:7 (April 30, 1990), pp. 9-. </p>

<p> Chepesiuk, Ron. Fighting Anarchy in Colombia. New </p>

<p> Leader. September 18 1989) v 72 n 14 pp. 5-. </p>

<p> Chernick, Marc W. The Drug War. NACLA Report on the </p>

<p> Americas. (April 1 1990) v 23 n 6. pp. 30-. Summary: The </p>

<p> drug wars decreed periodically by the government are </p>

<p> really skirmishes with the cocaine nouveau riche, </p>

<p> intended not to stem the flow of drugs, but to end </p>

<p> attacks on the traditional elite. U.S. policy, however, </p>

<p> seems bound to raise the stakes and involve the United </p>

<p> States in the dirty war against the Left. </p>

<p> Chitwood, Dale D., and Comerford, Mary. Drugs, Sex, and </p>

<p> AIDS Risk: Cocaine Users Versus Opiate Users. American </p>

<p> Behavioral Scientist. (March 1 1990) v 33 n 4 pp. 465. </p>

<p> Christensen, H. G. Undercover Drug Agent: Unsung Heros of </p>

<p> Modern Law Enforcement. Police Chief (September 1988), p. </p>

<p> 10. </p>

<p> Chychula, Nina Maria, and Okore, Cynthia. The Cocaine </p>

<p> Epidemic: A Comprehensive Review of Use, Abuse and </p>

<p> Dependence. The Nurse Practitioner, 15:7 (July 1, 1990), </p>

<p> pp. 31-. </p>

<p> Clapp, III. James F., Keve, Tara M., and Vial, Catalina. </p>

<p> Ovine placental perfusion balance: Effect of marijuana </p>

<p> smoke. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, </p>

<p> 159:6 (December 1, 1988), pp. 1430-. </p>

<p> Clark, Norman H. Deliver Us from Evil: An Interpretation </p>

<p> of American Prohibition. New York: W. W. Norton, 1976. </p>

<p> Clawson, Patrick. Coping with Terrorism in the United </p>

<p> States. ORBIS, Sumr 198 v 33 n 3-. </p>

<p> Clayton, Richard R. Legalization of Drugs: An Idea Whose </p>

<p> Time Has Not Come. ABS, American Behavioral Scientist. </p>

<p> (January 1 1989) v 32 n 3 pp. 316. </p>

<p> Clements, G., Krenner, L., and Molk, W. The use of the </p>

<p> Transcendental Meditation programme in the prevention of </p>

<p> Drug abuse and in the treatment of Drug-addicted persons. </p>

<p> Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 51-. </p>

<p> Cochran, John K. Beyond Hellfire: An Exploration of the </p>

<p> Variable Effects of Religiosity on Adolescent Marijuana </p>

<p> and Alcohol Use. Journal of Research in Crime and </p>

<p> Delinquency, 26:3 (August 1, 1989), pp. 198-. </p>

<p> Cockburn, Alexander. Trees, Cows and Cocaine: an </p>

<p> Interview with Susanna Hecht. (January 1 1989) n 173 pp. </p>

<p> 33-. </p>

<p> Coffey, John P. The Navy's Role in Interdicting Narcotics </p>

<p> Traffic: War on Drugs or Ambush on the Constitution? </p>

<p> Georgetown Law Journal, V. 75, (August, 1987. </p>

<p> Coffin, V.L., and Spealman, R.D. Psychomotor-stimulant </p>

<p> effects of 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine: comparison with </p>

<p> caffeine and 7-(2-chloroethyl) theophylline. European </p>

<p> journal of pharmacology. (October 24 1989) v 170 n 1 / 2. </p>

<p> pp. 35. </p>

<p> Collett, Merill. Colombia's Drug Lords Waging War on </p>

<p> Leftists, Washington Post, (November 14, 1987, 14A, 22A. </p>

<p> Collett, Merill. The Cocaine Coonection: Drug Trafficking </p>

<p> and Inter-American Relations. New York: Foreign Policy </p>

<p> Association, 1989). </p>

<p> Collett, Merill. The Myth of the Narcoguerrillas, The </p>

<p> Nation (August 13-20, 1988), 132. </p>

<p> Collins, C.D. Local Government and Urban Protest in </p>

<p> Colombia. Public Administration and development. </p>

<p> (October 1 1988) v 8 n 4 pp. 421 </p>

<p> Colombia. Presidenc¡a de la Rep£blica. La lucha contra el </p>

<p> narcotr fico en Colombia (Bogot : Presidenc¡a de la </p>

<p> Rep£blica, 1988). </p>

<p> Cone, Edward J. and Mitchell, John. Validity Testing of </p>

<p> Commercial Urine Cocaine Metabolite Assays: II. </p>

<p> Sensitivity, Specificity, Accuracy, and Confirmation by </p>

<p> Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry. Journal of Forensic </p>

<p> Sciences. (January 1 1989) v 34 n 1 pp. 32. </p>

<p> Cone, Edward J. and Weddington, William W., Jr. Prolonged </p>

<p> Occurrence of Cocaine in Human Saliva and Urine after </p>

<p> Chronic Use. Journal of Analytical Toxicology. (March 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 13 n 2 pp. 65-. </p>

<p> Cone, Edward J., Menchen, Sandra L., and Paul, Buddha D. </p>

<p> Validity Testing of Commercial Urine Cocaine Metabolite </p>

<p> Assays: I. Assay Detection Times, Individual Excretion </p>

<p> Patterns and Kinetics After Cocaine Administration to </p>

<p> Humans. Journal of Forensic Sciences. (January 1 1989) v </p>

<p> 34 n 1 pp. 15. </p>

<p> Connors, S., Rankin, D.R., and Gondolfi, A.J. Cocaine </p>

<p> hepatotoxicity in cultured liver slices: a species </p>

<p> comparison (Induced rat and mice are the most sensitive, </p>

<p> whereas pig and man are the least sensitive). </p>

<p> Toxicology. (April 17 1990) v 61 n 2. pp. 171. </p>

<p> Cook, James. The paradox of antidrug enforcement. Forbes. </p>

<p> 144:105-6+ Nov 13 1989). (Tougher enforcement makes drug </p>

<p> trade more profitable; including interview with W J </p>

<p> Bennett). </p>

<p> Cooper, S.J., Rusk, I.N., and Barber, D.J. Sucrose </p>

<p> sham-feeding in the rat after administration of the </p>

<p> selective dopamine D2 receptor agonist N-0437, </p>

<p> d-amphetamine or cocaine. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and </p>

<p> Behavior. (February 1 1989) v 32 n 2 pp. 447. </p>

<p> Costall, B., Kelley, M.E., and Naylor, R.J. The actions </p>

<p> of nicotine and cocaine in a mouse model of anxiety. </p>

<p> Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (May 1 1989) v </p>

<p> 33 n 1. pp. 197-. </p>

<p> Costantino, Anthony G., Caplan, Yale H., and Levine, </p>

<p> Barry S. Thiamylal: Review of the Literature and Report </p>

<p> of a Suicide. Journal of Forensic Sciences. (January 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 35 n 1. pp. 89. </p>

<p> Cotler, Julio, Luis Pasara, and Jorge Parodi, Democracia, </p>

<p> sociedad y gobierno en el Peru. Peru: Centro de Estudios </p>

<p> de Democracia y Sociedad, 1988). </p>

<p> Cottam, Martha L. Cognitive Psychology and Bargaining </p>

<p> Behavior: Peru Political Psychology. 1989). </p>

<p> Courtwright, David T. Dark Paradise: Opiate Addiction in </p>

<p> America before 1940. Cambridge, Harvard University Press, </p>

<p> 1982. </p>

<p> Courtwright, David T. Opiate Addiction as a Consequence </p>

<p> of the Civil War, Civil War History 25 (June 1978), </p>

<p> 101-11. </p>

<p> Craft, Neal E. Preparation and Certification of Standard </p>

<p> Reference Material 1507: </p>

<p> 11-Nor-Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic Acid in </p>

<p> Freeze-Dried Urine. Analytical Chemistry. 61:6 (March 15 </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 540-. Summary: The certified concentration of </p>

<p> 11-nor-Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic acid, the </p>

<p> major urinary marijuana metabolite, is obtained from the </p>

<p> concordant results of GC/MS and HPLC analyses. Results </p>

<p> from five Department of Defense laboratories are </p>

<p> presented. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B., and Michael A. Turner. International </p>

<p> Control of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, Indian </p>

<p> Political Science Review 11 (1977), 33-47. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B. Colombian Narcotics and United </p>

<p> States-Colombian Relations, Journal of Interamerican </p>

<p> Studies and World Affairs 36 (1981), 243-70. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B. Domestic Implications of Illicit Drug </p>

<p> Cultivation, Processing, and Trafficking in Colombia, </p>

<p> Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs, 25 </p>

<p> (1983), 325-50. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B. Human Rights and Mexico's Antidrug </p>

<p> Campaign, Social Science Quarterly, 60 (1980), 691-701. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B. Illegal Drug Traffic, in Borderlands </p>

<p> Sourcebook: A Guide to the Literature of Northern Mexico </p>

<p> and the American Southwest. Edited by E.R. Stoddard, R. </p>

<p> L. Nostrand, and J.P. West. Norman, University of </p>

<p> Oklahoma Press, 1983, 209-13. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B. Illicit Drug Traffic Implications for </p>

<p> South American Source Countries, Journal of Interamerican </p>

<p> Studies and World Affairs 29:2 (Summer, 1987), 1-34. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B. Illicit Drug Trafficking and U.S.-Latin </p>

<p> American Relations, Washington Quarterly 8 (1985), </p>

<p> 105-24. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B. La Campa¤a Permanente: Mexico's </p>

<p> Antidrug Campaign, Journal of Interamerican Studies and </p>

<p> World Affairs, 20 (1978), 107-31. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B. Operaci¢n Intercepci¢n: una pol¡tica de </p>

<p> presi¢n internacional, Foro Internacional 22 (1981), </p>

<p> 203-30. </p>

<p> Craig, Richard B. Operation Condor: Mexico's Antidrug </p>

<p> Campaign Enters a New Era, Journal of Interamerican </p>

<p> Studies and World Affairs 22 (1980), 345-63. </p>

<p> Craig, Robert J., and Olson, Ronald E. MCMI Comparisons </p>

<p> of Cocaine Abusers and Heroin Addicts. Journal of </p>

<p> Clinical Psychology. (March 1 1990) v 46 n 2 pp. 230. </p>

<p> Cristobal, Juan. Todos murieron? 1a ed. Lima: Tierra </p>

<p> Nueva, 1987. </p>

<p> Crowley, P. Family therapy approach to addiction. </p>

<p> Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 57-. </p>

<p> Crumb, Jr. William J. Electrocardiographic evidence for </p>

<p> cocaine cardiotoxicity in cat. Canadian Journal of </p>

<p> Physiology and Pharmacology (May 1 1990) v 68 n 5 pp. </p>

<p> 622-. </p>

<p> Curriden, Mark. Holding Mom Accountable. ABA Journal. </p>

<p> (March 1 1990) v 76 pp. 50-. Summary: Cocaine-addicted </p>

<p> women have a good chance of giving birth to </p>

<p> cocaine-addicted babies. Is that a crime? Should it be a </p>

<p> crime? </p>

<p> Cushing, Michael A. Combating Street-Level Narcotics </p>

<p> Sales. The Police Chief, 56:10 (October 1, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 113-. </p>

<p> Czitrom, Carolyn Baus Reed. Tecuexes y cocas: dos grupos </p>

<p> de la region Jalisco en el siglo XVI. Mexico: Instituto </p>

<p> Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Departamento de </p>

<p> Investigaciones Historicas, 1982. </p>

<p> Da Matta Chasin, A.A., and Midio, A.F. Cocaine-related </p>

<p> problems in the city of Sao Paulo, 1982-1986. Bulletin on </p>

<p> narcotics. 1989) v 41 n 1 / 2. pp. 99-. </p>

<p> Daigle, Robert D., Clark, H. Westley, and Landry, Mim J. </p>

<p> A Primer on Neurotransmitters and Cocaine. Journal of </p>

<p> Psychoactive Drugs. (July 1 1988) v 20 n 3 pp. 283. </p>

<p> Davidson, Adele K. Narcotics in California: a program </p>

<p> review. A special report for CAPAN, Incorporated. Los </p>

<p> Angeles, Welfare Planning Council, Los Angeles Region, </p>

<p> 1961. Series title: Welfare Planning Council, Los </p>

<p> Angeles Region Special report series no. 62. Series </p>

<p> title: Welfare Planning Council, Los Angeles Region. </p>

<p> Research Dept Special report no. 62. </p>

<p> Davis, Jr., Sammy. Sammy Davis Jr.: How He Faced Aging </p>

<p> And Cocaine Crisis. Ebony. (July 1 1989) v 44 n 9. pp. </p>

<p> 66-. </p>

<p> de Greiff, Monica, and Gugliotta, Guy. A Woman Today, &quot;I
</p>

<p> Fought the Drug Lords&quot;. Ladies' Home Journal, 107:3 </p>

<p> (February 1, 1990), pp. 22-. Summary: As minister of </p>

<p> justice in Colombia, she tried to combat the deadly </p>

<p> terror of the cocaine kingpins. Now she and her family </p>

<p> have been forced to flee their homeland in fear for their </p>

<p> lives. </p>

<p> De Olloqui, Jos&#130; Juan. On the Formulation of a U.S. </p>

<p> Policy toward Mexico, in Mexico in Transition. edited by </p>

<p> Susan Kaufman Purcell. New York: Council on Foreign </p>

<p> Relations, 1988). </p>

<p> De Vry, Jean Food Deprivation and Acquisition of </p>

<p> Intravenous Cocaine Self-Administration in Rats: Effect </p>

<p> of Naltrexone and Haloperidol. The Journal of </p>

<p> Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (November 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 251 n 2. pp. 735. </p>

<p> Degregori, Carlos Ivan. Sendero Luminoso. 4a ed. Lima: </p>

<p> Instituto de Estudios Peruanos, 1986. </p>

<p> Del Villar, Samuel I. Drogas: el Nudo Gordiano, Nexos 126 </p>

<p> (junio, 1988). </p>

<p> Del Villar, Samuel I. The Illicit Drug Market between </p>

<p> Mexico and the United States: Failure and Alternative. </p>

<p> (Mexico, D.F., 1988), scheduled to appear in a book on </p>

<p> U.S.-Mexican relations of the School of Advanced Social </p>

<p> Studies, Johns Hopkins University). </p>

<p> Delaine, Bernard L. Coca farming in the Chapare, Bolivia. </p>

<p> microform: a form of collective innovation, Ph.D. thesis, </p>

<p> St. Louis University, 1979. xi, 230 </p>

<p> Delfs, J.M., Schreiber, L., and Kelley, A.E. </p>

<p> Microinjection of Cocaine into the Nucleus Accumbens, </p>

<p> Elicits Locomotor Activation in the Rat. Journal of </p>

<p> Neuroscience. (January 1 1990) v 10 n 1. pp. 303. </p>

<p> Derlet, R.W., and Albertson, T.E. Acute cocaine </p>

<p> toxicity: Antagonism by agents interacting with </p>

<p> adrenoceptors. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. </p>

<p> (June 1 1990) v 36 n 2. pp. 225-. </p>

<p> Derlet, R.W., and Albertson, T.E. Anticonvulsant </p>

<p> modification of cocaine induced toxicity in the rat. </p>

<p> Neuropharmacology. (March 1 1990) v 29 n 3. pp. 255. </p>

<p> Deutsch, Harold L., and Millard, D. Ralph Jr., A New </p>

<p> Cocaine Abuse Complex: Involvement of Nose, Septum, </p>

<p> Palate, and Pharynx. Archives of Otolaryngology--Head &amp; </p>

<p> Neck Surgery. (February 1 1989) v 115 n 2 pp. 235. </p>

<p> Dews, P.B. Directional running in mice: effects of </p>

<p> cocaine and chlorpromazine. Psychopharmacology. (June 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 101 n 2. pp. 190-. </p>

<p> Di Francesco, P., Pica, F., and Favalli, C. Inhibition </p>

<p> of rat ribroblast cell proliferation at specific cell </p>

<p> cycle stages by cocaine. Cell Biology International </p>

<p> Reports, 14:6 (June 1, 1990), pp. 549-. </p>

<p> Dickson, C. Drug Stings in Miami. FBI Law Enforcement </p>

<p> Bulletin (January 1988), pp. 1-6. </p>

<p> Digregorio, G. John. Cocaine Update: Abuse and Therapy. </p>

<p> American Family Physician, 41:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 247-. Summary: The effects of cocaine abuse include </p>

<p> acute, possibly fatal overdose and chronic, severe </p>

<p> psychologic dependence. </p>

<p> Dillin, J. (1989)a) US Paying Stiff Price for Porous </p>

<p> Borders. The Christian Science Monitor (10 (October), 1- </p>

<p> 2. </p>

<p> Dillin, J. (1989)b) Task Force Steps Up Drug War. The </p>

<p> Christian Science Monitor (24 (October), 7. </p>

<p> Dionne, E. J. Drugs as 1988) Issue: Filling a Vacuum, New </p>

<p> York Times, (May 24, 1988), 14y. </p>

<p> Dolkart, Lawrence A., Plessinger, Mark A., and Woods Jr., </p>

<p> James R. Effect of Alpha, Receptor Blockade Upon </p>

<p> Maternal and Fetal Cardiovascular Responses to Cocaine. </p>

<p> Obstetrics and Gynecology. (May 1 1990) v 75 n 5. pp. </p>

<p> 745. Summary: Although phenoxybenzamine, an alpha 1 </p>

<p> receptor blocker, eliminated the maternal and fetal </p>

<p> hypertensive responses to maternally administered </p>

<p> cocaine, the vasoconstrictive action upon the uterine </p>

<p> vasculature persisted. </p>

<p> Dollberg, S., Armon, Y., and Gur, I. Hyponatremia in a </p>

<p> Neonate of a Cocaine Abusing Mother. Journal of </p>

<p> toxicology. Clinical toxicology, 27:4-5 (1989), pp. 287. </p>

<p> Dow-Edwards, D., Fico, T.A., and Osman, M. Comparison of </p>

<p> oral and subcutaneous routes of cocaine administration on </p>

<p> behavior, plasma drug conentration and toxicity in </p>

<p> female rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. </p>

<p> (May 1 1989) v 33 n 1. pp. 167-. </p>

<p> Doyle, Kate, and Duklis, Jr., Peter S. The Andrew </p>

<p> Wellington Cordier Essay The Long Twilight Struggle: </p>

<p> Low-Intensity Warfare and the Salvadoran Miltary. Journal </p>

<p> of international affairs, 43:2 (Winter 1990), pp. 431-. </p>

<p> Dressler, Frederick A., Malekzadeh, Sonya, and Roberts, </p>

<p> William C. Quantitative Analysis of Amounts of Coronary </p>

<p> Arterial Narrowing in Cocaine Addicts. The American </p>

<p> Journal of Cardiology. (February 1 1990) v 65 n 5. pp. </p>

<p> 303-. Summary: Twenty-two cocaine addicts were studied at </p>

<p> necropsy over a 10-year period and were divided into 2 </p>

<p> groups: those with cocaine-related deaths and those in </p>

<p> whom death was not due to cocaine. </p>

<p> Dubiel, Diana. Action stat! Cocaine overdose. Nursing, </p>

<p> 20:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 33. </p>

<p> Duffy, Patricia and Kalivas, Peter W. Inhibition of </p>

<p> Endogenous Dopamine Release from the Ventromedial </p>

<p> Mesencephalon after Daily Cocaine or Morphine. Annals of </p>

<p> the New York Academy of Sciences. 1988) v 537 pp. 475. </p>

<p> Dumlao, Jr., Pantaleon G. International Policing: </p>

<p> International Cooperation - Marijuana Eradication in the </p>

<p> Philippines. The Police Chief, 56:11 (November 1, 1989), </p>

<p> pp. 12-. </p>

<p> Duncan, S. (1989) Testimony to hearing of Subcommittees </p>

<p> on Legislation and National Security and Government </p>

<p> Information, Justice and Agriculture, U.S. House of </p>

<p> Representatives, 17 (October. 101st Congress, 1st </p>

<p> Session. Mimeo. </p>

<p> Duster, Troy. The Legislation of Morality: Law, Drugs, </p>

<p> and Moral Judgement. New York: The Free Press, 1970. </p>

<p> Dworkin, Steven I., Bimle, Cindy, and Miyauchi, Tatsuo. </p>

<p> Differential effects of pentobarbital and cocaine on </p>

<p> punished and non-punished respongind. Journal of the </p>

<p> Experimental Analysis of Behavior. (March 1 1989) v 51 n </p>

<p> 2 pp. 173. </p>

<p> Eagleburger, Lawrence S. The case against Panama's </p>

<p> Noriega. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of State, Bureau </p>

<p> of Public Affairs, Office of Public Communication, </p>

<p> Editorial Division, Current Policy, No. 1222 (November </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> EFE News Agency. Colombia Might Repudiate Extradition </p>

<p> Treaty with U.S., Miami Herald, (May 17, 1988), 11a. </p>

<p> Ehrenfeld, R. and M. Kahan. The 'Doping of America': The </p>

<p> Ambivalence of the Narco-terrorist Connection and a </p>

<p> Search for Solutions, in Contemporary Research on </p>

<p> Terrorism, edited by Paul Wilkinson and A. M. Stewart. </p>

<p> Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press, 1987. </p>

<p> Ehrenfeld, R. and M. Kahan. The Narcotic-Terrorism </p>

<p> Connection, Wall Street Journal, (February 10, 1986. </p>

<p> Ehrenfeld, R. Narco-Terrorism: The Kremlin Connection, </p>

<p> The Heritage Foundation, (February, 1987. </p>

<p> Ehrenfeld, R. The United States and the Drug Problem, The </p>

<p> World and I (October 1986). </p>

<p> Eisenlohr, L. E. S. International narcotics control. </p>

<p> London, G. Allen &amp; Unwin ltd. 1934; New York: Arno Press,
</p>

<p> 1981. </p>

<p> Elliott, Ronald D. Intelligence Communications in </p>

<p> Nonconvential Warfare. Signal, 44:3 (November 1 1989), </p>

<p> pp. 57-. Summary: An era of low intensity conflict places </p>

<p> radically different demands on communications and calls </p>

<p> for modular automated media. </p>

<p> Elliott, Ronald D. Intelligence Communications in </p>

<p> Nonconvential Warfare. Signal, 44:3 (November 1, 1989), </p>

<p> pp. 57-. Summary: An era of low intensity conflict places </p>

<p> radically different demands on communications and calls </p>

<p> for modular automated media. </p>

<p> Engebo, David A. Safe and effective use of tetracaine, </p>

<p> adrenaline, and cocaine (TAC) solution anesthesia for </p>

<p> anesthetizing of lacerations. Journal of Emergency </p>

<p> Nursing: JEN. (March 1 1990) v 16 n 2. pp. 100. </p>

<p> Engelking, L.R., Anwer, M.S., and McConnell, J. Cocaine </p>

<p> and Lidocaine Interfere with Epinephrine-Induced Changes </p>

<p> in Intracellular Calcium Concentration and Glucose Efflux </p>

<p> from Rat Hepatocytes. Pharmacology. (March 1 1990) v 40 n </p>

<p> 3 pp. 129. </p>

<p> Erickson, P.G., Murray, G.F. Sex Differences in Cocaine </p>

<p> Use and Experiences: A Double Standard Received? The </p>

<p> American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse. 1989) v 15 </p>

<p> n 2. pp. 135. </p>

<p> Erickson, Patricia, et al., The Steel drug: cocaine in </p>

<p> perspective. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, 1987. </p>

<p> Erickson, Patricia G., and Murray, Glenn F. The </p>

<p> Undeterred Cocaine User: Intention to Quit and its </p>

<p> Relationship to Perceived Legal and Health Treats. </p>

<p> Contemporary Drug Problems. Sumr 89 v 16 n 2. pp. 141. </p>

<p> Summary: Twenty-four of 111 Ontario users of cocaine </p>

<p> and cannabis intended to quit using cocaine. Factors </p>

<p> predicting this included never having purchased it, </p>

<p> seeing harm in regular use, and feeling uncontrollable </p>

<p> urges to use; fear of legal consequences. </p>

<p> Erickson, Patricia G., and Murray, Glenn F. The </p>

<p> Undeterred Cocaine User: Intention to Quit and its </p>

<p> Relationship to Perceived Legal and Health Treats. </p>

<p> Contemporary Drug Problems, 16:2 (Summer 1989), pp. 441-. </p>

<p> Summary: Twenty-four of 111 Ontario users of cocaine and </p>

<p> cannabis intended to quit using cocaine. Factors </p>

<p> predicting this included never having purchased it, </p>

<p> seeing harm in regular use, and feeling uncontrollable </p>

<p> urges to use; fear of legal consequences. </p>

<p> Eurman, Daniel W. Chest Pain and Dyspnea Related to Crack </p>

<p> Cocaine Smoking: Value of Chest Radiography. Radiology. </p>

<p> (August 1 1989) v 172 n 2 pp. 459. </p>

<p> Evans, Anne. Allergic Inhalant Dermatitis Attributable </p>

<p> to Marijuana Exposure in a Dog. Journal of the American </p>

<p> Veterinary Medical Association, 195:11 (December 1, </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 1588-. </p>

<p> Evans, E.B.,and Wenger, G.R. The acute effects of </p>

<p> caffeine, cocaine and d-amphetamine on the repeated </p>

<p> acquisition responding of pigeons. Pharmacology, </p>

<p> Biochemistry and Behavior. (March 1 1990) v 35 n 3 pp. </p>

<p> 631. </p>

<p> Fagan, Jeffrey. Initiation into Crack and Cocaine: A Tale </p>

<p> of Two Epidemics. Contemporary Drug Problems, 16:4 </p>

<p> (Winter 1989), 579-. Summary: Crack has been </p>

<p> characterized as a uniquely powerful drug and a gateway </p>

<p> for criminal justice involvement, new generations of </p>

<p> users and dealers, and violence, to an extent unseen in </p>

<p> past drug epidemics. Comparative analyses of arrests for </p>

<p> cocaine hydrochloride powder in 1983-84 and crack in 1986 </p>

<p> suggest that the natural history of crack does not differ </p>

<p> markedly from that of other forms of cocaine. </p>

<p> Fajardo Sainz, Humberto. La herencia de la coca: pasado y </p>

<p> presente de la cocaina: estudio sobre la coca y su </p>

<p> influencia en el desarrollo psico-fisico, social y </p>

<p> economico del hombre de los Andes Bolivianos. Ed. </p>

<p> ampliada y corr. La Paz, Bolivia: Universo, 1984. </p>

<p> Falco, Mathea. The Historical Record: U.S. Narcotics </p>

<p> Control Collaboration with Turkey, Mexico and Colombia </p>

<p> (Bilateral Commission on the Future of United </p>

<p> States-Mexico Relations, Working Documents, Mexico D.F., </p>

<p> (August 1987). </p>

<p> Falk, J. L., Vigorito, M., and Tang, M. Schedule-induced </p>

<p> cocaine drinking: Choice between cocaine and vehicle. </p>

<p> Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (January 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 35 n 1 pp. 187-. </p>

<p> Farnsworth, Elizabeth. Special Report: Peru. World </p>

<p> Policy Journal. 1988). </p>

<p> Feinman, Beth N. Neurologic Sequelae of Cocaine. Hospital </p>

<p> practice. (January 30 1989) v 24 n 1A pp. 97. </p>

<p> Fernandez Salvatteci, Jose Antonio. Guerrillas y </p>

<p> contraguerrillas en el Peru: Sendero Luminoso y el </p>

<p> gobierno del Arq. F. Belaunde T. Lima, Peru: Ediciones </p>

<p> Fernandez Salvatteci, 1984. </p>

<p> Fernandez Salvatteci, Jose Antonio. Terrorismo y guerra </p>

<p> sucia en el Peru. Lima, Peru: Ediciones Fernandez </p>

<p> Salvatteci, 1986. </p>

<p> Fields, Howard. Senate unit hears testimony on </p>

<p> censorship. Publishers Weekly. 235:10 Mar 24 1989). </p>

<p> Finnell, Richard H., Toloyan, Sorahi, and Van Waes, </p>

<p> Michael. Preliminary Evidence for a Cocaine-Induced </p>

<p> Embryopathy in Mice. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology. </p>

<p> (April 1 1990) v 103 n 2. pp. 228. </p>

<p> Fiorelli, R. L., Manfrey, S. J., and Belkoff, L. H. </p>

<p> Priapism associated with intranasal cocaine abuse. The </p>

<p> Journal of Urology, 143:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 584-. </p>

<p> Fischman, Marian W., Foltin, Richard W., and Nestadt, </p>

<p> Gerald. Effects of Desipramine Maintenance on Cocaine </p>

<p> Self-Administration by Humans. The Journal of </p>

<p> Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (May 1 1990) </p>

<p> v 253 n 2. pp. 760-. </p>

<p> Fitzgerald, Mark, A case of ethics, Editor &amp; Publisher, </p>

<p> the Fourth Estate.122:11-12 Mar 4 1989). </p>

<p> Fitzmaurice, L.S., Wasserman, G.S., and Knapp, J.F. TAC </p>

<p> Use and Absorption of Cocaine in a Pedriatirc Emergency </p>

<p> Department. Annals of Emergency Medicine. (May 1 1990) </p>

<p> v 19 n 5. pp. 515. </p>

<p> Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. The effects of </p>

<p> combinations of intranasal cocaine, smoked marijuana, and </p>

<p> task performance on heart rate and blood pressure. </p>

<p> Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (June 1 1990) v </p>

<p> 36 n 2. pp. 311-. </p>

<p> Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. The effects of </p>

<p> combinations of intranasal cocaine, smoked marijuana, and </p>

<p> task performance on heart rate and blood pressure. </p>

<p> Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 36:2 (June 1, </p>

<p> 1990), pp. 311-. </p>

<p> Foltin, R.W., Fischman, M.W., and Brady, J.V. The </p>

<p> regularity of smoked marijuana self-administration. </p>

<p> Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 32:2 (February </p>

<p> 1, 1989), pp. 483-. </p>

<p> Foltin, Richard W., Fischman, Marian W., and Brady, </p>

<p> Joseph V. Motivational Effects of Smoked marijuana: </p>

<p> Behavioral Contingencies and Low-probability Activities. </p>

<p> Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 53:1 </p>

<p> (January 1, 1990), pp. 5-. </p>

<p> Fonseca, R., Hinojal Martinez, J. J., and </p>

<p> Rodriguez-Hevia, A. J. Characteristics of a population </p>

<p> undergoing treatment for Drug addiction in a therapeutic </p>

<p> community setting in Spain. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 </p>

<p> (1988), pp. 67-. </p>

<p> Fontana, David J. Effects of Cocaine on Conflict Behavior </p>

<p> in the Rat. Life Sciences. 1989) v 45 n 9 pp. 819. </p>

<p> Fox, J. Edward. Department of State Memorandum </p>

<p> accompanying Report to Congress, Section 2013, P.L. </p>

<p> 99-570, Reports and Restrictions Concerning Certain </p>

<p> Countries, (May 1, 1988). </p>

<p> Fraker, Jr., Theodore D., Temesy-Armos, Peter N., and </p>

<p> Brewster, Pamela S. Mechanism of Cocaine-Induced </p>

<p> Myocardial Depression in Dogs. Circulation. (March 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 81 n 3. pp. 1012. </p>

<p> Frank, D. A. Cocaine Use During Pregnancy. Pediatrics. EC </p>

<p> 1 1988) v 82 n 6 pp. 888. </p>

<p> Frankel, Alison, and Freeland, Lisa Is Street-Level </p>

<p> Enforcement A Bust? The American Lawyer, 12:2 (March 1, </p>

<p> 1990), pp. 100-. Summary: Following one day's arrests </p>

<p> by a Manhattan Tactical Narcotics Team suggests that </p>

<p> concentrated buy-and-bust operations can make a </p>

<p> difference-at least temporarily. </p>

<p> Freud, Sigmund. Cartas de Amor. Mexico: Premia Editora, </p>

<p> 1983. </p>

<p> Friedman, Milton, et al. America After Prohibition. </p>

<p> Reason, 20:5 (October 1, 1988), 22-. Summary: Milton </p>

<p> Friedman, Ethan Nadelmann, Ron Paul, et al. Nine </p>

<p> prescriptions for withdrawal from bad drug policy. </p>

<p> Frishman, William H., Karpenos, Alexander, and Molloy, </p>

<p> Thomas J. Cocaine-induced Coronary Artery Disease: </p>

<p> Recognition and Treatment. The Medical Clinics of North </p>

<p> America (March 1 1989) v 73 n 2 pp. 475. Summary: </p>

<p> Recreational use of cocaine has reached epidemic </p>

<p> proportions. Recent reports have linked cocaine use to </p>

<p> various acute and chronic cardiovascular disorders. The </p>

<p> pharmacology of cocaine is discussed in this article, and </p>

<p> the experiences with cocaine-induced coronary artery </p>

<p> disease reviewed. </p>

<p> Fulroth, R. Infants Exposed to Cocaine and/or Heroin In </p>

<p> Utero. American Journal of Diseases of Children. (August </p>

<p> 1 1989) v 143 n 8 pp. 905. </p>

<p> Ganem, Bruce. The Flash Vacuum Thermolysis of </p>

<p> (--)-Cocaine. Chemtracts. Organic Chemistry. (March 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 3 n 2 pp. 157-. </p>

<p> Garhart, Christine A., Anwer, Sawkat M., and Shuster, </p>

<p> Louis. Cocaine-induced changes in perfusion pressure and </p>

<p> bile flow in perfused rat livers. Biochemical </p>

<p> Pharmacology. (July 1 1989) v 38 n 13 pp. 2139. </p>

<p> Garrison, Peter. Innocence Abroad: Even the drug wars </p>

<p> can't sully the vivid, unexpected pleasures of flying in </p>

<p> Mexico. Flying, 117:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 78-. </p>

<p> Gatley, S.J., MacGregor, R.R., and Fowler, J.S. Rapid </p>

<p> Stereoselective Hydrolysis of (+)-Cocaine in Baboon </p>

<p> Plasma Prevents Its Uptake in the Brain: Implications for </p>

<p> Behavioral Studies. Journal of Neurochemistry. (February </p>

<p> 1 1990) v 54 n 2. pp. 720. </p>

<p> Gaviria Berrio, Hernan. Letter to Fabio Castillo, </p>

<p> Medell¡n C¡vico, (April, 1987. </p>

<p> Gawin, Frank H., Allen, D., and Humblestone, B. </p>

<p> Outpatient Treatment of 'Crack' Cocaine Smoking With </p>

<p> Flupenthixol Decanoate: A Preliminary Report. Archives of </p>

<p> General Psychiatry. (April 1 1989) v 46 n 4 pp. 322-. </p>

<p> Gawin, Frank H., Kleber, Herbert D., Byck, Robert </p>

<p> Desipramine Facilitation of Initial Cocaine Abstinence. </p>

<p> Archives of General Psychiatry. (February 1 1989) v 46 n </p>

<p> 2 pp. 117. </p>

<p> Gawin, Frank H., Morgan, C., and Kosten, T.R. </p>

<p> Double-blind evaluation of the effect of acute amantadine </p>

<p> on cocaine craving. Psychopharmacology. (March 1 1989) v </p>

<p> 97 n 3 pp. 402-. </p>

<p> George, F.R., and Ritz, M.C. Cocaine produces locomotor </p>

<p> stimulation in SS but not LS mice: relationship to </p>

<p> dopaminergic function. Psychopharmacology. (May 1 1990) </p>

<p> v 101 n 1 pp. 18. </p>

<p> George, F.R. Cocaine produces low dose locomotor </p>

<p> depressant effects in mice. Psychopharmacology. </p>

<p> (October 1 1989) v 99 n 2 pp. 147 </p>

<p> Georgia broadcaster in drug arrest. Broadcasting, 117:32 </p>

<p> (Sep 25 1989). </p>

<p> Gerber, G.J., and Wise, R.A. Pharmacological regulation </p>

<p> of intravenous cocaine and heroin self-administration in </p>

<p> rats: A variable dose paradigm. Pharmacology, </p>

<p> Biochemistry and Behavior. (February 1 1989) v 32 n 2 pp. </p>

<p> 527. </p>

<p> Gettman, Jon. Decriminalizing Marijuana. American </p>

<p> Behavioral Scientist, 33:3 (January 1, 1989), pp. 243. </p>

<p> Ghosh, Srikanta. The traffic in narcotics and drug </p>

<p> addiction. New Delhi: Ashish Pub. House, 1987. </p>

<p> Gifford, Douglas, and Pauline Hoggarth. Carnival and coca </p>

<p> leaf: some traditions of the Peruvian Quechua ayllu. </p>

<p> Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press, 1976. </p>

<p> Gilmore, William C. Narcotics interdiction at sea: UK-US </p>

<p> cooperation. Marine Policy. (July 1 1989) v 13 n 3 pp. </p>

<p> 218. </p>

<p> Giordano, Magda, Moody, Carole A., and Zubrycki, Eve M. </p>

<p> Prenatal Exposure to Cocaine in Rats: Lack of Long-Term </p>

<p> Effects on Locomotion and Stereotypy. Bulletin of the </p>

<p> Psychonomic Society. (January 1 1990) v 28 n 1. pp. 51. </p>

<p> Glockman, Walter. A Thorn Among the Roses. Security </p>

<p> Management. (May 1 1989) v 33 n 5. pp. 72-. Summary: </p>

<p> How Tampa Air's security system thwarts Colombian drug </p>

<p> smugglers. </p>

<p> Godshaw, Gerald, Ross Koppel, and Russell Pancoast. </p>

<p> Antidrug Law Enforcement Efforts and Their Impact. Bala </p>

<p> Cynwyd, PA: Wharton Econometrics, (August, 1987. </p>

<p> Goeders, N., Bell, V., and Guidroz, A. Dopaminergic </p>

<p> involvement in cocaine induced up-regulatin o </p>

<p> benzodiazepine receptors in the rat caudate nucleus. </p>

<p> Brain Research. (May 7 1990) v 515 n 1 / 2 pp. 1-. </p>

<p> Goff, M. Lee, Omori, Alvin I., and Goodbrod, James R. </p>

<p> Effect of Cocaine in Tissues on the Development Rate of </p>

<p> Boettcherisca peregrina (Diptera: Sarcophagidae). Journal </p>

<p> of Medical Entomology. (March 1 1989) v 26 n 2 pp. 91. </p>

<p> Golwyn, D.H. Cocaine Abuse Treated with Phenelzine: The </p>

<p> International Journal of the Addictions. 1988) v 23 n 9 </p>

<p> pp. 897. </p>

<p> Gomez, Hugo Chvatal. New Control Center for EPM in </p>

<p> Medellin, Colombia.: IEEE Computer Applications in Power. </p>

<p> (July 1 1989) v 2 n 3 pp. 9-. </p>

<p> Gomez, J. Rodriguez, A. An evaluation of the results of a </p>

<p> drug sample analysis. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 </p>

<p> (1989), pp. 121-. </p>

<p> Gonzalez, Gerardo M. Perceptions of Risk as Predictors </p>

<p> of Alcohool, Marijuana, and Cocaine Use Among College </p>

<p> Students. Journal of College Student Development, 31:4 </p>

<p> (July 1, 1990), pp. 313-. </p>

<p> Gonz lez, Raul, &quot;Sendero: Los Problemas del campo y de
la </p>

<p> ciudad ... Y ademas el MRTA&quot;, QueHacer, 50 (Jan-Feb, </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> Gonz lez, Raul. Trafficking, Subversion in Upper </p>

<p> Huallaga, Quehacer, (September-(October 1987, 55-72. </p>

<p> Goodell, John A., Gilroy, Genevieve, and Huntress, </p>

<p> Jeffrey D. Reducing cocaine solution use by promoting the </p>

<p> use of a lidocaine-phenylephrine solution. American </p>

<p> Journal of Hospital Pharmacy. December 1 1988) v 45 n 12 </p>

<p> pp. 2510. </p>

<p> Goodman, L. and J. Mendelson (1988) Whose Drug War is it, </p>

<p> anyway? The Christian Science Monitor (22 (July), 12. </p>

<p> Goodman, Murray, and Mierke, Dale F. Configurations of </p>

<p> morphiceptins by 1H and 13C NMR spectroscopy. Journal of </p>

<p> the American Chemical Society. 111:3489-96 (May 10 1989). </p>

<p> Gorriti, Gustavo A. How to Fight The Drug War. The </p>

<p> Atlantic. (July 1 1989) v 264 n 1 pp. 70-. Summary: </p>

<p> Fitful efforts at crop eradiation and law enforcement </p>

<p> have failed to undermine the cocaine business in Peru, </p>

<p> Bolivia, and Colombia. A more effective way to curb </p>

<p> supply, the author suggests, would be to strengthen the </p>

<p> legal economies of the coca-producing countries. </p>

<p> Gorriti, Gustavo. Southern Exposure: The View From Peru. </p>

<p> New Perspectives Quarterly. 1989). </p>

<p> Graham, Bradley. Bolivia Runs Risk in Drug Drive, </p>

<p> Washington Post, (July 16, 1986, A1. </p>

<p> Graham, Bradley. Drug Killings Cow Colombians, Washington </p>

<p> Post, (February 6, 1987, A14. </p>

<p> Graham, Bradley. Impact of Colombian Drug Traffickers </p>

<p> Spreads, Washington Post, (February 24, 1988), 41. </p>

<p> Graham-Mulhall, Sara. The Evil of Drug Addiction, New </p>

<p> Republic, 26 (May 18, 1921), 357. </p>

<p> Grant, B. F., and Harford, T. C. Concurrent and </p>

<p> simultaneous use of alcohol with cocaine: results of </p>

<p> national survey. Drug and Alcohol Dependence. (February 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 25 n 1. pp. 97-. </p>

<p> Greenhaw, Wayne. Flying high: inside big-time drug </p>

<p> smuggling. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1984. </p>

<p> Greenleaf, Vicki D. Women &amp; Cocaine. New Realities, </p>

<p> 10:5 (May 1 1990), pp. 21-. Summary: Cocaine's ability </p>

<p> to bolster self-confidence, provide a sense of </p>

<p> empowerment, and create a feeling of euphoria has made it </p>

<p> the illegal drug of choice for women. </p>

<p> Greenleaf, Vicki D. Women &amp; Cocaine. New realities. (May </p>

<p> 1 1990) v 10 n 5. pp. 21-. Summary: Cocaine's ability to </p>

<p> bolster self-confidence, provide a sense of empowerment, </p>

<p> and create a feeling of euphoria has made it the illegal </p>

<p> drug of choice for women. </p>

<p> Grier, P. (1989) Pentagon's Support Role Increases. The </p>

<p> Christian Science Monitor (1 (September), 8. </p>

<p> Griffin, Margaret L., Weiss, Roger D. , Mirin, Steven M. </p>

<p> A Comparison of Male and Female Cocaine Abusers. Archives </p>

<p> of General Psychiatry. (February 1 1989) v 46 n 2 pp. </p>

<p> 122. </p>

<p> Grilly, D. M., and Grogan, T. W. Cocaine and level of </p>

<p> arousal: Effects on vigilance task performance of rats. </p>

<p> Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (January 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 35 n 1 pp. 269-. </p>

<p> Grinspoon, Lester, and James B. Bakalar. Cocaine: a drug </p>

<p> and its social evolution. Rev. ed. New York: Basic </p>

<p> Books, 1985. </p>

<p> Guarisco, J. Lindhe, Cheney, Mack L., and LeJeune Jr., </p>

<p> Francis E. Isolated Uvulitis Secondary to Marijuana Use. </p>

<p> The Laryngoscope. 98:12 (December 1, 1988), pp. 1309-. </p>

<p> Hadeed, A.J. Maternal Cocaine Use During Pregnancy. </p>

<p> Pediatrics. (August 1 1989) v 84 n 2 pp. 205. </p>

<p> Halloran, Richard. In War against Drugs, Military is </p>

<p> Found Wanting, New York Times, (May 30, 1988), 20y. </p>

<p> Hamow, Ronald, ed., Dealing with drugs: consequences of </p>

<p> government control. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books, </p>

<p> 1987. </p>

<p> Hanson, David. Chemical makers rebut link to cocaine </p>

<p> trade. Chemical &amp; Engineering News, 67:6 (May 8 1989). </p>

<p> Hanson, G.R., Smiley, P., Johnson, M. Response by the </p>

<p> nerotensin systems of the basal ganglia to cocaine </p>

<p> treatment (EJP 50617). European Journal of Pharmacology. </p>

<p> (January 24 1989) v 160 n 1 pp. 23. </p>

<p> Harland, R. D., Gauvin, D. V., and Michaelis, R. C. </p>

<p> Behavioral interaction between cocaine and caffeine: A </p>

<p> drug discrimination analysis in rats. Pharmacology, </p>

<p> Biochemistry and Behavior. (April 1 1989) v 32 n 4. pp. </p>

<p> 1017-. </p>

<p> Hartlyn, Jonathan. The politics of coalition rule in </p>

<p> Colombia. Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 1988). </p>

<p> Hartnoll, R., Avico, U., and Ingold, F.R. A multi-city </p>

<p> study of drug misuse in Europe. Bulletin on Narcotics, </p>

<p> 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 3-. </p>

<p> Hartnoll, R., U. Avico, and F.R. Ingold. A multi-city </p>

<p> study of drug misuse in Europe. Bulletin on narcotics. </p>

<p> 1989) v 41 n 1 / 2 pp. 3. </p>

<p> Harwood, R. (1989) Hyperbole Epidemic, The Washington </p>

<p> Post National Weekly Edition (October 9-15). </p>

<p> Hatsukami, D., Keenan, R., and Carroll, M. A method for </p>

<p> delivery of precise doses of smoked cocaine-base to </p>

<p> humans. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (May 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 36 n 1 pp. 1-. </p>

<p> Hazleton, William A., and Woy-Hazleton, Sandra. Sendero </p>

<p> Luminoso and the Future of Peruvian Democracy. Third </p>

<p> World Quarterly, 12:2 (April 1, 1990), pp. 21-. </p>

<p> Hazleton, William A., and Woy-Hazleton, Sandra. Terrorism </p>

<p> and the Marxist Left: Peru's Struggle against Sendero </p>

<p> Luminoso. Terrorism: an International Journal, 11:6 </p>

<p> (1988), pp. 471-. </p>

<p> Healey, Kevin. Bolivia and Cocaine: A Developing </p>

<p> Country's Dilemma, British Journal of Addiction, 1988). </p>

<p> Healey, Kevin. Coca, The State, and the Peasantry in </p>

<p> Bolivia, l982-1988). Journal of Interamerican Studies and </p>

<p> World Affairs. Sumr 88 v 30 n 2 &amp; 3. pp. 105. </p>

<p> Healey, Kevin. The Boom Within the Crisis: Some Recent </p>

<p> Effects of Foreign Cocaine Markets on Bolivian Rural </p>

<p> Society and Economy, Coca and Cocaine, edited by Deborah </p>

<p> Pacini and Christine Franquemont. Peterborough, NH: </p>

<p> Transcript Publishing Company, 1986. </p>

<p> Healey, Kevin. The Cocaine Industry and Bolivian </p>

<p> Peasants, Andean Focus, 3, (June 1986, 4. </p>

<p> Heishman, S.J., and Stitzer, M.L. Effect of </p>

<p> d-amphetamine, secobarbital, and marijuana on choice </p>

<p> behavior: social versus nonsocial options. </p>

<p> Psychopharmacology, 99:2 (October 1, 1989), pp. 156-. </p>

<p> Henderson, M.G., and McMillen, B.A. Effects of prenatal </p>

<p> exposure to cocaine or related drugs on rat development </p>

<p> and neurological indices. Brain Research Bulletin. </p>

<p> (February 1 1990) v 24 n 2 pp. 207-. </p>

<p> Henry, Douglas J. Greene, Margaret A. White, Francis J. </p>

<p> Electrophysiological Effects of Cocaine in the </p>

<p> Mesoaccumbens Dopamine System: Repeated Administration. </p>

<p> The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental </p>

<p> Therapeutics. December 1 1989) v 251 n 3 pp. 833 </p>

<p> Hernandez, Luiz, Lee, Francis, and Hoebel, Bartley G. </p>

<p> Microdialysis in the Nucleus Accumbens during Feeding or </p>

<p> Drugs of Abuse: Amphetamine, Cocaine, and Phencyclidine. </p>

<p> Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1988) v 537 </p>

<p> pp. 508. </p>

<p> Herridge, Peter and Gold, Mark S.. Pharmacological </p>

<p> Adjuncts in the Treatment of Opioid and Cocaine Addicts. </p>

<p> Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. (July 1 1988) v 20 n 3 </p>

<p> pp. 233. </p>

<p> Hersh, Seymour M. Our Man in Panama: We call Manuel </p>

<p> Noriega a common goon these days, but for 20 years we </p>

<p> overlooked his drug dealing and brutality. Life. (March </p>

<p> 1, 1990), pp. 81-. </p>

<p> Hersh, Seymour M.. Why Democrats Can't Make an Issue of </p>

<p> Noriega, New York Times, (May 4, 1988), 31y. </p>

<p> Hertsgaard, Mark.The Media in Panama: In an effort to </p>

<p> cover the Noriega manhunt, did the news media miss the </p>

<p> real story? Rolling Stone (March 8, 1990), pp. 77-. </p>

<p> Higgins, Patrick Learning from Bolivia: Mission stint </p>

<p> alters life of New York priest. Maryknoll. (May 1 1989) </p>

<p> v 83 n 5 pp. 23 </p>

<p> Higgins, Rosemary. Cocaine abuse: What every emergency </p>

<p> nurse should know. Jen, Journal of Emergency Nursing. </p>

<p> (July 1 1989) v 15 n 4 pp. 318. Summary: Current data </p>

<p> suggest that 30 million Americans have at least </p>

<p> experimented with cocaine, but neither the public nor the </p>

<p> health care community are fully aware of all its </p>

<p> dangerous effects. </p>

<p> Hilton, Isabelle. The terrorist threat to tourism in </p>

<p> Peru. The Geographical Magazine. 1989). </p>

<p> Hilton, Robert E. Recent Developments Relating to the </p>

<p> Posse Comitatus Act, Army Lawyer 121 (January 1983), 1-8. </p>

<p> Hoban, Phoebe. Getting Clean. New York. (February 20 </p>

<p> 1989) v 22 n 8 pp. 38. Summary: All over town, young New </p>

<p> Yorkers are flocking to meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous, </p>

<p> Cocaine Anonymous, and Narcotics Anonymous. There are </p>

<p> some 1,800 meetings of AA alone each week in Manhattan. </p>

<p> Though cynics might say becoming sober is the lastest </p>

<p> fashion, most of these addicts are very serious about </p>

<p> recovery. </p>

<p> Hoffman, Christopher K. Pulmonary Edema in Cocaine </p>

<p> Smokers. Radiology. (August 1 1989) v 172 n 2 pp. 463. </p>

<p> Hogan, Harry, et al. Drug Control: Highlights of P.L. </p>

<p> 99-570, Antidrug Abuse Act of 1986. Washington: </p>

<p> Congressional Research Service. Library of Congress, </p>

<p> 86-968 GOV, (October 31, 1986. </p>

<p> Hoge, Warren. Bolivians Find A Patron in Reputed Drug </p>

<p> Chief, New York Times, (August 15, 1982, 1. </p>

<p> Hood, Ian, Ryan, David, and Monforte, Joseph. Cocaine in </p>

<p> Wayne County Medical Examiner's Cases. Journal of </p>

<p> Forensic Sciences. (May 1 1990) v 35 n 3. pp. 591-. </p>

<p> Horowitz, Jay. Anesthetic implications of substance abuse </p>

<p> in the parturient. AANA Journal, 56:6 (December 1, 1988), </p>

<p> pp. 510-. Summary: The author discusses the effects of </p>

<p> four commonly abused substances-alcohol, marijuana, </p>

<p> cocaine and Narcotics-on the mother fetus, as well as the </p>

<p> anesthesia implications. </p>

<p> Horowitz, Jay. Anesthetic implications of substance abuse </p>

<p> in the parturient. AANA Journal. December 1 1988) v 56 n </p>

<p> 6 pp. 510. Summary: The author discusses the effects of </p>

<p> four commonly abused substances--alcohol, marijuana, </p>

<p> cocaine and narcotics--on the mother fetus, as well as </p>

<p> the anesthesia implications. </p>

<p> Horowitz, Jay. Anesthetic implications of substance abuse </p>

<p> in the parturient. AANA journal, 56:6 (December 1, 1988), </p>

<p> pp. 510-. Summary: The author discusses the effects of </p>

<p> four commonly abused substances-alcohol, marijuana, </p>

<p> cocaine and narcotics-on the mother fetus, as well as the </p>

<p> anesthesia implications. </p>

<p> House, Mary Ann. Here's what cocaine and crack abusers </p>

<p> look like and what you can do to help them. AJN: </p>

<p> American Journal of Nursing. (April 1 1990) v 90 n 4. pp. </p>

<p> 40-. </p>

<p> Howell, L.L., and Morse, W.H. Behavioral effects of </p>

<p> chronically administered cocaine in squirrel monkeys. </p>

<p> Psychopharmacology. (January 1 1989) v 97 n 1 pp. 12. </p>

<p> Howell, Sam L., and Ezell, Anna L. An example of cocaine </p>

<p> tolerance in a gunshot wound fatality. Journal of </p>

<p> analytical toxicology, 14:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 60. </p>

<p> Hoyme, H. Eugene, Jones, Kenneth Lyons, and Dixon, </p>

<p> Suzanne D. Prenatal Cocaine Exposure and Fetal Vascular </p>

<p> Disruption. Pediatrics. (May 1 1990) v 85 n 5 pp. 743-. </p>

<p> Hser, Yih-Ing, Chou, Chih-Ping, and Anglin, M. Douglas. </p>

<p> The Criminality of Female Narcotics Addicts: A Causal </p>

<p> Modeling Approach. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, </p>

<p> 6:2 (June 1, 1990), pp. 207-. </p>

<p> Huang, Q. F., Gebrewold, A., and Altura, B. T. </p>

<p> Cocaine-induced cerebral vascular damage can be </p>

<p> ameliorated by Mg2+ in rat brain. Neuroscience Letters. </p>

<p> (February 5 1990) v 109 n 1 / 2 pp. 113-. </p>

<p> Hubner, C. B., and Koob, G. F. The ventral pallidum plays </p>

<p> a role in mediating cocaine and heroin </p>

<p> self-administration in the rat. Brain Research. </p>

<p> (January 29 1990) v 508 n 1 pp. 20-. </p>

<p> Hume Jr., Roderick. In utero cocaine exposure: </p>

<p> Observations of fetal behavior. American Journal of </p>

<p> Obstetrics and Gynecology.1989). </p>

<p> Hunt, C. W. Booze boats and billions: smuggling liquid </p>

<p> gold! Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1988). </p>

<p> Hunt, Claude William. Booze boats and billions: </p>

<p> smuggling liquid gold! Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> Hunt, Michael H. Ideology and U.S. Foreign Policy. New </p>

<p> Haven: Yale University Press, 1987. </p>

<p> Hurd, Y. L., Weiss, F., and Koob, G. The influence of </p>

<p> cocaine self-administration on in vivo dopamine and </p>

<p> acetylcholine neurotransmission in rat caudate-putamen. </p>

<p> Neuroscience Letters. (February 5 1990) v 109 n 1 / 2 </p>

<p> pp. 227-. </p>

<p> Hurley, Dan. Cycles of Craving. Psychology Today. (July </p>

<p> 1 1989) v 23 n 7 / 8. pp. 54-. Summary: From pot to </p>

<p> LSD, from cocaine to crack, our patterns of drug use have </p>

<p> shifted. Plus: The Search for Cocaine's Methadone. </p>

<p> Hurley, Dan. The search for cocaine's methadone. </p>

<p> Psychology Today. (July 1 1989) v 23 n 7 / 8 pp. 59. </p>

<p> Inciardi, James A. and Duane C. McBride, Legalization: A </p>

<p> High-Risk Alternative in the War on Drugs. ABS, American </p>

<p> Behavioral Scientist. (January 1 1989) v 32 n 3 pp. 259. </p>

<p> Inciardi, James A. Debating the Legalization of Drugs. </p>

<p> American behavioral scientist. (January 1 1989) v 32 n 3 </p>

<p> pp. 233. </p>

<p> Inciardi, James A. The War on Drugs: Heroin, Cocaine, </p>

<p> Crime, and Public Policy. Palo Alto, Calif.: (Mayfield </p>

<p> Pub. Co.,1986. </p>

<p> Ingold, F.R., and Ingold, S. The effects of the </p>

<p> liberalization of syringe sales on the behaviour of </p>

<p> intravenous drug users in France. Bulletin on Narcotics, </p>

<p> 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 67-. </p>

<p> Isaac, W.L., Nonnenan, A.J., and Neisewander, J. </p>

<p> Prefrontal Cortex Lesions Differentially Disrupt </p>

<p> Cocaine-Reinforced Conditioned Place Preference but Not </p>

<p> Conditioned Taste Aversion. Behavioral Neuroscience. </p>

<p> (April 1 1989) v 103 n 2 pp. 345. </p>

<p> Ishizuka, Y. Differential Senstitivity to Cocaine in </p>

<p> Spontaneously Hypertensive and Wistar Kyoto Rats. Life </p>

<p> sciences. 1989) v 45 n 3 pp. 223-. </p>

<p> Jaffe, J.H., Cascella, N.G., and Kumor, K.M. </p>

<p> Cocaine-induced cocaine craving. Psychopharmacology. </p>

<p> (January 1 1989) v 97 n 1 pp. 59. </p>

<p> Jain, R.K., Jain, M.K., and Bachenheimer, L.C. Factors </p>

<p> Determining Whether Cocaine Will Potentiate the Cardiac </p>

<p> Effects of Neurally Released Norepinephrine. The Journal </p>

<p> of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (January </p>

<p> 1 1990) v 252 n 1. pp. 147-. </p>

<p> Jandreski, Mark A., Bermes, Edward W., and Leischner, </p>

<p> Ralph. Rhabdomyolysis in a Case of Free-Base Cocaine </p>

<p> (&quot;Crack&quot;) Overdose. Clinical Chemistry, 35:7 (July
1, </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 1547-. </p>

<p> Jandreski, Mark A., Bermes, Edward W., and Leischner, </p>

<p> Ralph. Rhabdomyolysis in a Case of Free-Base Cocaine </p>

<p> (Crack) Overdose. Clinical Chemistry. (July 1 1989) v 35 </p>

<p> n 7 pp. 1547. </p>

<p> Janke, Jill Real. Prenatal Cocaine Use: Effects on </p>

<p> Perinatal Outcome. Journal of Nurse-Midwifery. (March 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 35 n 2. pp. 74. Summary: A review of the </p>

<p> effects on cocaine use during pregnancy on perinatal </p>

<p> morbidity and mortality. </p>

<p> Jaramillo, Jaime, Leonidas Mora R., Fernando Cubides C. </p>

<p> Colonizacion, coca y guerrilla 3a ed. Bogota: Alianza </p>

<p> Editorial Colombiana, 1989). </p>

<p> Jeffcoat, Robert A., P&#130;rez-Reyes, Mario, and Hill,
Judith </p>

<p> M. Cocaine Disposition in Humans after intravenous </p>

<p> Injection, Nasal insufflation (Snorting), or Smoking. </p>

<p> Drug Metabolism and Disposition. (March 1 1989) v 17 n 2 </p>

<p> pp. 153. </p>

<p> Jindal, Satya P., and Lutz, Theresa. Mass Spectrometric </p>

<p> Studies of Cocaine Disposition in Animals and Humans </p>

<p> Using Stable Isotope-Labeled Analogues. Journal of </p>

<p> pharmaceutical sciences. December 1 1989) v 78 n 12. pp. </p>

<p> 1009-. </p>

<p> Johanson, Chris-Ellyn, and Fischman, Marian W. The </p>

<p> Pharmacology of Cocaine Related to Its Abuse. </p>

<p> Pharmacological reviews. (March 1 1989) v 41 n 1. pp. 3- </p>

<p> . </p>

<p> Johansson, Eva. Urinary Excretion Half-Life of </p>

<p> delta1-Tetrahydrocannabinol-7-oic Acid in Heavy Marijuana </p>

<p> Users After Smoking. Journal of Analytical Toxicology, </p>

<p> 13:4 (July 1, 1989), pp. 218. </p>

<p> Johnston, L.D. The survey technique in drug abuse </p>

<p> assessment. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. </p>

<p> 29-. </p>

<p> Jones, Leslie F., and Tackett, Randall, L. Central </p>

<p> Mechanisms of Action Involved in Cocaine-Induced </p>

<p> Tachycardia. Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 10 pp. 723-. </p>

<p> Jones, Patricia A. Cocaine and Violence. The Crisis. </p>

<p> (March 1 1989) v 96 n 3 pp. 17. </p>

<p> Joyce, Stephanie. Snorting Peru's Rain Forests. </p>

<p> International Wildlife. (May 1 1990) v 20 n 3. pp. 20. </p>

<p> Summary: Cocaine is killing the land. </p>

<p> Kabas, J. Scott, Blanchard, Susan M., and Matsuyama, </p>

<p> Yuzuru. Cocaine-Mediated Impairment of Cardiac </p>

<p> Conduction in the Dog: A Potential Mechanism for Sudden </p>

<p> Death After Cocaine. The Journal of Pharmacology and </p>

<p> Experimental Therapeutics. (January 1 1990) v 252 n 1. </p>

<p> pp. 185-. </p>

<p> Kaker, R.N. Laws for controlling illicit drug traffic in </p>

<p> Narcotics-a summary. The Indian Journal of Social Work, </p>

<p> 50:1 (January 1, 1989), pp. 113-. </p>

<p> Kalivas, Peter W. Similar Effects of Daily Cocaine and </p>

<p> Stress on Mesocorticolimbic Dopamine Neurotransmission in </p>

<p> the Rat. Biological Psychiatry. (April 1 1989) v 25 n 7 </p>

<p> pp. 913. </p>

<p> Kamstra, Jerry. Weed: Adventures of a Dope Smuggler. New </p>

<p> York: Bantam Books, 1974. </p>

<p> Kantak, K.M., Bourg, J.F., and Lawley, S.I. Failure of </p>

<p> magnesium to maintain self-administration in </p>

<p> cocaine-naive rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and </p>

<p> Behavior. (May 1 1990) v 36 n 1 pp. 9-. </p>

<p> Kantak, K.M. Magnesium alters the potency of cocaine and </p>

<p> haloperidol on mouse aggression. Psychopharmacology. </p>

<p> (October 1 1989) v 99 n 2. pp. 181. </p>

<p> Kaplan, John. Heroin. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of </p>

<p> Justice, National Institute of Justice, 1988). </p>

<p> Kaplan, John. Heroin: a study guide. Rockville, MD: </p>

<p> U.S. Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice, </p>

<p> 1986. </p>

<p> Kardon, Randy H., Denison, Chad E., and Brown, Carl K. </p>

<p> Critical Evaluation of the Cocaine Test in the Diagnosis </p>

<p> of Horner's Syndrome. Archives of Ophthalmology. (March 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 108 n 3. pp. 384-. </p>

<p> Karler, R., Calder, L.D., and Chaudhry, I.A. Blockage of </p>

<p> Reverse Tolerance to Cocaine and Amphetamine by MK-801. </p>

<p> Life Sciences. 1989) v 45 n 7 pp. 599. </p>

<p> Kawell, Jo Ann. Drug Wars: The Rules of the Game. Nacla </p>

<p> report on the americas, 23:6 (April 1, 1990), pp. 9-. </p>

<p> Summary: As drug war blustering replaces Cold War </p>

<p> rhetoric, the Pentagon's low intensity conflict theorists </p>

<p> turn their sights on the Andes. </p>

<p> Kawell, Jo Ann. Going to the Source. NACLA Report on the </p>

<p> Americas. (March 1 1989) v 22 n 6 pp. 13-. Summary: </p>

<p> What fuels the guerrilla presence in Peru's coca-growing </p>

<p> Huallaga Valley is not the drug traffickers, but U.S. </p>

<p> drug control policy itself. It has failed to stem the </p>

<p> growth of the cocaine industry, and threatens to draw the </p>

<p> United States into a vast and bitter war. </p>

<p> Kawell, Jo Ann. Under the Flag of Law Enforcement. NACLA </p>

<p> Report on the Americas. (March 1 1989) v 22 n 6 pp. 25 </p>

<p> Summary: In Bolivia, after the U.S. Embassy pushed </p>

<p> through a harsh new anti-coca law and failed to offer a </p>

<p> viable alternative crop, may now view U.S. actions as a </p>

<p> graver threat to democracy than the drug trade itself. </p>

<p> Kazahaya, Yasuko, Akimoto, Kiyoshi, and Otsuki, Saburo. </p>

<p> Subchronic Methamphetamine Treatment Enhances </p>

<p> Methamphetamine- or Cocaine-Induced Dopamine Efflux in </p>

<p> Vivo. Biological Psychiatry. (April 1 1989) v 25 n 7 pp. </p>

<p> 903-. </p>

<p> Kelly, Thomas H., Foltin, Richard W., and Rose, Andrea J. </p>

<p> Smoked Marijuana Effects on Tobacco Cigarette Smoking </p>

<p> Behavior. The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental </p>

<p> the , 252:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 934-. </p>

<p> Kennedy, Joseph. Coca Exotica: the Illustrated Story of </p>

<p> Cocaine. Rutherford: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press </p>

<p> ; New York: Cornwall Books, 1985. </p>

<p> Kerr, Peter. U.S. Drug Crusade Is Seen Undermining </p>

<p> Itself, New York Times, (October 26,1987, 13y. </p>

<p> Kharasch, Sigmund, Vinci, Robert, and Reece, Robert </p>

<p> Esophagitis, Epiglotitis, and Cocaine Alkaloid (`Crack'): </p>

<p> `Accidental' Poisoning or Child Abuse? Pediatrics, 86:1 </p>

<p> (July 1, 1990), pp. 117-. </p>

<p> Kinder, Douglas Clark, and William O. Walker III. Stable </p>

<p> Force in a Storm: Harry J. Anslinger and United States </p>

<p> Narcotic Policy, 1930-1962, The Journal of American </p>

<p> History, 72:4 (March 1986), 908-927. </p>

<p> Kinder, Douglas Clark. Bureaucratic Cold Warrior: Harry </p>

<p> J. Anslinger and Illicit Narcotics Traffic, Pacific </p>

<p> Historical Review, 50 (May 1981), 169-191. </p>

<p> Kinder, Douglas Clark. Nativism, Cultural Conflict, Drug </p>

<p> Control:United States and Latin American Antinarcotics </p>

<p> Diplomacy through 1965 in Donald J. Mabry (ed.) The Latin </p>

<p> American Narcotics Trade and US National Security. </p>

<p> Westport CT: Greenwood Press, 1989). </p>

<p> King, Rufus. The Drug Hang-Up: America's Fifty Year </p>

<p> Folly. New York: W. W. Norton, 1972. </p>

<p> King, T.S., Schenken, T.S., and Kang, R.S. Cocaine </p>

<p> Disrupts Estrous Cyclicity and Alters the Reproductive </p>

<p> Neuroendocrince Axis in the Rat. Neuroendocrinology, 51:1 </p>

<p> (January 1, 1990), pp. 15-. </p>

<p> Kinsley, Michael TRB: Regrets Only. The New Republic, </p>

<p> 202:18 (April 30 1990), pp. 4. Summary: Youthful </p>

<p> indiscretions with marijuana are fine, so long as you're </p>

<p> very sorry. </p>

<p> Kleber, Herbert. Epidemic Cocaine Abuse: America's </p>

<p> present, Britain's future? Journal of rehabilitation of </p>

<p> the Deaf. December 1 1988) v 83 n 12 pp. 1359. </p>

<p> Kleiman, Mark A. and Christopher E. Putala. State and </p>

<p> Local Drug Enforcement: Issues and Practice, Program in </p>

<p> Criminal Justice Policy and Management, John F. Kennedy </p>

<p> School of Goverent, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., </p>

<p> (March 1987. </p>

<p> Kleiman, Mark A. Snowed In. New Republic. (April 23 </p>

<p> 1990) v 202 n 17. pp. 14-. Summary: A cold-eyed analysis </p>

<p> of why trying to keep cocaine our of the country is </p>

<p> destined to prove futile. </p>

<p> Kleven, M.S., and Woolverton, W.L. Effects of </p>

<p> bromocriptine and desipramine on behavior maintained by </p>

<p> cocaine or food presentation in rhesus monkeys. </p>

<p> Psychopharmacology. 1990) v 101 n 2. pp. 208-. </p>

<p> Kline, Joel N., and Hirasuna, Jon D. Pulmonary edema </p>

<p> after freebase cocaine smoking--Not due to an adulterant. </p>

<p> Chest. (April 1 1990) v 97 n 4. pp. 1009-. </p>

<p> Klonoff, D.C., Andrews, B.T., and Obana, W.G. Stroke </p>

<p> Associated With Cocaine Use. Archives of Neurology. </p>

<p> September 1 1989) v 46 n 9 pp. 989. </p>

<p> Knox, Paul. The Cost of Cocaine: How long can Colombia </p>

<p> pay the emotional and economic price of its war on drugs. </p>

<p> Report on business magazine, 6:7 (January 1, 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 121-. </p>

<p> Koek, Wouter, and Colpaert, Francis C. Selective Blockade </p>

<p> of N-Methyl-d-Aspartate (NMA)-Induced Convulsions by NMA </p>

<p> Antagoists and Putative Glycine Antagonists: Relationship </p>

<p> with Phencyclidine-Like Behavioral Effects. The Journal </p>

<p> of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (January 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 252 n 1. pp. 349. </p>

<p> Koek, Wouter, Colpaert, Francis C., Woods, James H. </p>

<p> The phencyclidine (PCP) analog </p>

<p> N-[1-(2-benzo(B)thiophenyl)cyclohexyl]piperidine shares </p>

<p> cocaine-like but not other characteristic behavioral </p>

<p> effects with PCP, ketamine and MK-81. The Journal of </p>

<p> Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. September 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 250 n 3. pp. 119. </p>

<p> Kohn, Howard. Company Town: What does it take to become </p>

<p> the cocaine capital of the world? Hard work, marketing </p>

<p> and a talent for murder. Rolling Stone. (April 6 1989) n </p>

<p> 549, pp. 67-. </p>

<p> Kokko, Juha P. Metabolic and Social Consequences of </p>

<p> Cocaine Abuse. The American Journal of the Medical </p>

<p> Sciences, 299:6 (June 1, 1990), 362-. </p>

<p> Kolb, Lawrence and A. G. DuMez. The Prevalence and Trend </p>

<p> of Drug Addiction in the United States and the Factors </p>

<p> Influencing It, Public Health Reports 23 (May 1924), </p>

<p> 1198. </p>

<p> Koren, Gideon, Graham, Karen, and Shear, Heather. Bias </p>

<p> against the Null Hypothesis: the Reproductive Hazards of </p>

<p> Cocaine. The Lancet, 2:8677 (December 16, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 1440-. </p>

<p> Kosten, Thomas R. Pharmacotherapeutic Interventions for </p>

<p> Cocaine Abuse. Matching Patients to Treatments. Journal </p>

<p> of Nervous and Mental Disease. (July 1 1989) v 177 n 7 </p>

<p> pp. 379. </p>

<p> Kovacs, G.L., Sarnyai, Z., and Babarczi, E. The role of </p>

<p> oxytocin-dopamine interactions in cocaine-induced </p>

<p> locomotor hyperactivity. Neuropharmacology. (April 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 29 n 4. pp. 365-. </p>

<p> Kremsner, P. G., Zotter, G. M., and Feldmeier, H. In </p>

<p> vitro drug sensitivity of Plasmodium falciparum in Acre, </p>

<p> Brazil. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 67:3 </p>

<p> (1989), pp. 289-. </p>

<p> Kudrow, D.B. Botulism Associated with Clostridium </p>

<p> botulinum Sinusitis after Intranasal Cocaine Abuse. </p>

<p> Annals of Internal Medicine. December 15 1988) v 109 n 12 </p>

<p> pp. 984. Summary: A 25-year-old man developed botulism </p>

<p> associated with maxillary sinusitis 10 days after </p>

<p> intranasal cocaine abuse. Anaerobic cultures of maxillary </p>

<p> sinus fluid subsequently grew Clostriuium botulinum type </p>

<p> A. The incubation period in this case of C. botulinum </p>

<p> sinusitis is similar to that seen in patients with wound </p>

<p> botulism. </p>

<p> Kurtz, Warren, Jr., Lt. Col. A Proposed Military Strategy </p>

<p> for the War on Drugs. Study Project. U.S. Army War </p>

<p> College. (April 8, 1989). </p>

<p> Kwitny, Jonathan.The crimes of patriots: a true tale of </p>

<p> dope, dirty money, and the CIA. New York: W.W. Norton, </p>

<p> 1987. Nugan Hand Bank--Corrupt practices. Money </p>

<p> laundering--Australia. Murder--Australia. United States. </p>

<p> Central Intelligence Agency. </p>

<p> LAB [y] IEPALA.Narcotrafico y politica: militarismo y </p>

<p> mafia en Bolivia / LAB [y] IEPALA. Madrid: IEPALA, 1982. </p>

<p> Lacey, M. G., Mercuri, N. B., and North. R. A. Actions </p>

<p> of cocaine on rat dopaminergic neurones in vitro. </p>

<p> British Journal of Pharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 99 n 4. </p>

<p> pp. 731-. </p>

<p> Lafuente, Basilia. Coca y cocaina: una vision distinta. </p>

<p> Bolivia: Impresion Quipus, 1986. </p>

<p> Lane, Dennison, and Weisenbloom, Mark. Low-intensity </p>

<p> conflict: In search of a paradigm. International Defense </p>

<p> Review, 23:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. 35-. </p>

<p> Lange, R.A., Cigarroa, R.G., and Flores, E.D. </p>

<p> Potentiation of Cocaine-Induced Coronary Vasoconstriction </p>

<p> by Beta-Adrenergic Blockade. Annals of Internal </p>

<p> Medicine. (June 15 1990) v 112 n 12. pp. 897-. Summary: </p>

<p> Cocaine-induced coronary vasoconstriction is potentiated </p>

<p> by beta--adrenergic blockade, Beta-adrenergic blocking </p>

<p> agents probably should be avoided in patients with </p>

<p> cocaine-associated myocardial ischemia of infarction. </p>

<p> Lanska, Douglas J., and Lanska, Mary Jo. PCP use among </p>

<p> adolescent marijuana users. The Journal of Pediatrics, </p>

<p> 113:5 (November 1, 1988), pp. 950-. </p>

<p> Lawrence, C. C. Members Plan New Assault in War on Drugs. </p>

<p> Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report (March 26, 1988), </p>

<p> p. 776. </p>

<p> League of Nations, Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium </p>

<p> and Other Dangerous Drugs. Report on the Work of the </p>

<p> Committee During its Second Session, held at Geneva from </p>

<p> (April 19-29, 1922 C. 233 (1).1922.XI (Geneva, 1922), </p>

<p> 1-3. </p>

<p> League of Nations, Opium Advisory Committee. Report to </p>

<p> the Council on the Work of the Fifth Session (May 24 to </p>

<p> (June 7, 1923) A.13.1923.XI. 12. </p>

<p> Lee, III, Rensselaer W. The white labyrinth: cocaine and </p>

<p> political power. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> Lee, III., Rensselaer W. South American Cocaine: Why the </p>

<p> U.S. Can't Stop It. ORBIS. Current. (June 1 1989) n 313 </p>

<p> pp. 22-. </p>

<p> Lee, Rensselaer W. Cocaine Mafia. Society, 27:2 (January </p>

<p> 1, 1990), pp. 53-. </p>

<p> Lee, Rensselaer W. The white labyrinth: cocaine and </p>

<p> political power. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> Leirer, Von O., Yesavage, Jerome A., and Morrow, Daniel </p>

<p> G. Marijuana, Aging, and Task Difficulty Effects on </p>

<p> Pilot Performance. Aviation Space and Environmental </p>

<p> Medicine, 60:12 (December 1, 1989), pp. 1145-. </p>

<p> Lernoux, Penny. The U.S. in Bolivia: Playing Golf While </p>

<p> Drugs Flow. The Nation. (February 13 1989) v 248 n 6 </p>

<p> pp. 188-. </p>

<p> Lester, Barry M. Effects of Marijuana Use during </p>

<p> Pregnancy on Newborn Cry. Child development, 60:4 (August </p>

<p> 1, 1989), pp. 765-. </p>

<p> Lett, B.T. Conditioned taste preference produced by </p>

<p> pairing a taste with a low dose of morphine or </p>

<p> sufentanil. Psychopharmacology. (June 1 1989) v 98 n 2. </p>

<p> pp. 236. </p>

<p> Lett, B.T. Repeated exposures intensify rather than </p>

<p> diminish the rewarding effects of amphetamine, morphine, </p>

<p> and cocaine. Psychopharmacology. (July 1 1989) v 98 n 3. </p>

<p> pp. 357. </p>

<p> Levine, Barry S., and Caplan, Yale H. A comprehensive </p>

<p> study of cocaine and its metabolites. Journal of </p>

<p> analytical toxicology. September 1 1989) v 13 n 5. pp. </p>

<p> 50. </p>

<p> Levy, Susan J., and Pierce, John P. Predicting intention </p>

<p> to use cocaine in teenagers in Sydney, Australia. </p>

<p> Addictive Behaviors. 1989) v 14 n 2 pp. 105. </p>

<p> Lewis, Keeta DeStefano, Bennett, Barbara, and Schmeder, </p>

<p> Nadya Hellinger. The Care of Infants Menaced by Cocaine </p>

<p> Abuse. MCN, the American journal of maternal child nurs </p>

<p> September 1 1989) v 14 n 5. pp. 324. Summary: Parents </p>

<p> can be prepared to promote the development of their </p>

<p> drug-affected infants and children--0 to 3 years. </p>

<p> Lewis, R. European markets in cocaine. Contemporary </p>

<p> crises. (March 1 1989) v 13 n 1 pp. 35. </p>

<p> Lex, B.W., Griffin, M.L., and Mello, N.K. Alcohol, </p>

<p> Marijuana, and Mood States in Young Women. The </p>

<p> international Journal of the Addictions, 24:5 (1989), pp. </p>

<p> 405-. </p>

<p> Lex, Barbara W. Narcotics Addicts' Hustling Strategies: </p>

<p> Creation and Manipulation of Ambiguity. Journal of </p>

<p> Contemporary Ethnography, 18:4 (January 1, 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 388-. </p>

<p> Lindau, J. D.. Percepciones mexicanas de la pol¡tica </p>

<p> exterior de Estados Unidos: el caso Camarena Salazar, </p>

<p> Foro Internacional, 27 (1987), 562-575. </p>

<p> Lindesmith, Alfred R. The Addict and the Law. </p>

<p> Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1965. </p>

<p> Lindesmith, Alfred R. Traffic in Dope: Medical Problem, </p>

<p> Nation, 182 (April 21, 1956), 337-338. </p>

<p> Little, Arthur D., Inc. International narcotics control; </p>

<p> a source book of conventions, protocols, and multilateral </p>

<p> agreements, 1909-1971. Washington, Drug Control Division, </p>

<p> Bureau of Narcotics &amp; Dangerous Drugs, 1972. </p>

<p> Logan, L., Carney, J.M., and Holloway, F.A. Effects of </p>

<p> caffeine, cocaine and their combination on </p>

<p> fixed-interval behavior in rats. Pharmacology, </p>

<p> Biochemistry and Behavior. (May 1 1989) v 33 n 1. pp. </p>

<p> 99-. </p>

<p> Loh, E.A., and Roberts, D.C.S. Break-points on a </p>

<p> progressive ratio schedule reinforced by intravenous </p>

<p> cocaine increase following depletion of forebrain </p>

<p> serotonin. Psychopharmacology. 1990) v 11 n 2. pp. 262-. </p>

<p> Lomax, P., and Daniel, K. A. Cocaine and Body </p>

<p> Temperature in the Rat: Effects of Ambient Temperature. </p>

<p> Pharmacology. (February 1 1990) v 40 n 2. pp. 103-. </p>

<p> London, Edythe D., Phillips, Robert L., and Dannals, </p>

<p> Robert F. Cocaine-Induced Reduction of Glucose </p>

<p> Utilization in Human Brain: A Study Using Positron </p>

<p> Emission Tomography and [Fluorine 18]-Fluorodeoxyglucose. </p>

<p> Archives of general psychiatry, 47:6 (June 1, 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 567-. </p>

<p> Long, Janice. Chemical group vows to help fight drugs. </p>

<p> Chemical &amp; Engineering News. 67:5 Sep 11 1989). </p>

<p> Long, Robert Emmet. Drugs and American society. New York: </p>

<p> Wilson, 1986. </p>

<p> Long, William. Powerful Medell¡n Cartel Safe in its </p>

<p> Colombian Base, Los Angeles Times, (February 21, 1988), </p>

<p> 18. </p>

<p> L¢pez Alvarez, M.J., Guti&#130;rrez Renedo, T., and Hern
ndez </p>

<p> Mej¡a, R. Extent and patterns of drug use by students at </p>

<p> a Spanish university. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 </p>

<p> (1989), pp. 117-. </p>

<p> Losada Posada, Benjamin. Economia subterranea, o, El </p>

<p> imperio del contra-derecho en Colombia. Bogota: </p>

<p> Informativo Finanzas, 1981. </p>

<p> Louie, Alan K., Lannon, Richard A., and Ketter, Terence </p>

<p> A. Treatment of Cocaine-Induced Panic Disorder. The </p>

<p> American Journal of Psychiatry. (January 1 1989) v 146 n </p>

<p> 1 pp. 40. </p>

<p> Lurie, I.S., Moore, J.M., and Kram, T.C. Isolation </p>

<p> identification and seperation of isomeric truxillines in </p>

<p> illicit cocaine. Journal of Chromatography. (April 20, </p>

<p> 1990) v 504 n 2 pp. 391. </p>

<p> Lynch, Jim. In the Line of Fire: Hispanic Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement. Administration agents face frustration from </p>

<p> within and danger from without in the war against </p>

<p> Narcotics. Hispanic (July 1, 1990), pp. 38-. </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J., and Shafer, Robert J. Neighbors--Mexico </p>

<p> and the United States: Wetbacks and Oil. Chicago: </p>

<p> Nelson-Hall, 1981. See chapters on drugs and sealing the </p>

<p> border. </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J. Andean Drug Trafficking and the Military </p>

<p> Option, The Military Review (March, 1990). </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J., Drugs and Democracy in Central America, </p>

<p> International Center Conference, Washburn University, </p>

<p> (November, 1988). </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J., ed., The Latin American Narcotics Trade </p>

<p> and U.S. National Security. Westport: Greenwood Press, </p>

<p> (November, 1989). </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J., Military Options, Illicit Drugs, and </p>

<p> the Andes, paper presented to conference sponsored by </p>

<p> Leadership for the Americas, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, </p>

<p> (January 4, 1990). </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J., The Andean Initiative and the Military </p>

<p> Option, testimony to the Committee on Government </p>

<p> Operations, U.S. House of Representatives, (October 18, </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J. The Latin American Narcotics Trade and </p>

<p> Hemispheric Security, International Third World Studies </p>

<p> Journal and Review 1 (1988), 1-7. </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J., The Military and the Drug War, paper </p>

<p> presented to the International Studies Association, </p>

<p> University of London, (March, 1989). </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J., The Possible Roles of the U.S. Military </p>

<p> in the Andes, The Andean Drug Strategy and the Role of </p>

<p> the U.S. Military. Proceedings of a seminar held by the </p>

<p> Congressional Research Service, (November 9, 1989). </p>

<p> Report of the Defense Policy Panel and Investigations </p>

<p> Subcommittee of the Committee on Armed Services, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, 11st Congress, First Session. </p>

<p> Washington: Government Printing Office, (January, 1990). </p>

<p> pp.39-41, plus printed testimony. </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J., The Role of the U.S. Military in the </p>

<p> War on Drugs in the Caribbean Basin, paper presented to </p>

<p> the International Drug Money Laundering Symposium, </p>

<p> University of Miami, (October 26-28, 1989). </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J., The U.S. Military and the War on Drugs, </p>

<p> paper presented to the Wilson International Center for </p>

<p> Scholars (Smithsonian Institution) and George Washington </p>

<p> University Seminar on Latin American Narcotics, </p>

<p> Washington, D.C., (September, 1988). </p>

<p> Mabry, Donald J. The U.S. Military and the War on Drugs </p>

<p> in Latin America, Journal of Interamerican Studies and </p>

<p> World Affairs 30:2 (Summer-Fall 1988). </p>

<p> Macdonald, Patrick T. Competing Theoretical Explanations </p>

<p> of Cocaine Use: Differential Association Versus Control </p>

<p> Theory. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice. (June </p>

<p> 1 1989) v 5 n 2 pp. 73-88. </p>

<p> Macdonald, Patrick T., Waldorf, Dan, and Reinarman, </p>

<p> Craig. Heavy Cocaine Use and Sexual Behavior. Journal of </p>

<p> Drug Issues. Fall 198 v 19 n 3 pp. 437. </p>

<p> Mackerron, Conrad B., CMA takes issue with Bush's drug </p>

<p> remarks, Chemical Week. 144:15 (May 10 1989). </p>

<p> Madras, B. K., Kamien, J. B., and Fahey, M. A. </p>

<p> N-Modified fluorophenyltropane analogs of cocaine with </p>

<p> high affinity for cocaine receptors. Pharmacology, </p>

<p> Biochemistry and Behavior. (April 1 1990) v 35 n 4. pp. </p>

<p> 949. </p>

<p> Madras, Bertha, Fahey, Michele A., and Bergman, Jack. </p>

<p> Effects of Cocaine and Related Drugs in Nonhuman </p>

<p> Primates. I. [3H]Cocaine Bindings Sites in </p>

<p> Caudate-Putamen. The Journal of Pharmacology and </p>

<p> Experimental Therapeutics. (October 1 1989) v 251 n 1. </p>

<p> pp. 131. </p>

<p> Mahar, Maggie. Dirty money: it triggers a bold, new </p>

<p> attack in the war on drugs, Barron's, 69:6-7+ Jun 26 </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> Malcomson, Scott L. Cocaine Republic, Village Voice, </p>

<p> (August 26, 1986. </p>

<p> Marc, Bernard, Baud, Frederic J., and Aelion, Mony J. </p>

<p> The Cocaine Body-Packer Syndrome: Evaluation of a Method </p>

<p> of Contrast Study of the Bowel. Journal of Forensic </p>

<p> Sciences. (March 1 1990) v 35 n 2. pp. 345-. </p>

<p> Marcella, Gabriel. The Latin American Military, Low </p>

<p> Intensity Conflict, and Democracy. Journal of </p>

<p> Interamerican Studies and World Affairs, 32:1 (Spring </p>

<p> 1990), pp. 45-. </p>

<p> Mardon, Mark. The Big Push. Sierra. (November 1 1988) </p>

<p> v 73 n 6 pp. 66. Summary: Sierra's reporter files a </p>

<p> battlefield report from the U.S.-sponsored war on </p>

<p> cocaine-and offers some thoughts on the rainforest </p>

<p> connection. </p>

<p> Marks, Tom. Corner of the Dead. Soldier of Fortune, 15:3 </p>

<p> (March 1, 1990), pp. 44-. Summary: Peru is fighting </p>

<p> against rampant inflation, indifferent politicians and an </p>

<p> incredibly violent Maoist insurgency-Sendero Luminoso </p>

<p> (The Shining Path). SOF's correspondent is on the ground </p>

<p> in Ayacucho, focal point of the insurgency, to determine </p>

<p> if Peru can continue to hold the line. </p>

<p> Marks, Tom. Peru's Fatal Distraction. Soldier of </p>

<p> Fortune, 15: 7 (July 1, 1990), pp. 30-. Summary: Are </p>

<p> drugs lords or the Sendero Luminoso guerrillas the real </p>

<p> threat to Peru? Our veteran political/military analyst </p>

<p> interviews a senior Peruvian intelligence officer on the </p>

<p> explosive situation. </p>

<p> Marshall, Eliot. A War on Drugs With Real Troops? </p>

<p> Science, 241. </p>

<p> Martin, Billy R., Boni, Joseph P., and Lue, Louis P. </p>

<p> Pyrolysis and Volatilization of Cocaine. Journal of </p>

<p> Analytical Toxicology. (May 1 1989) v 13 n 3 pp. 158. </p>

<p> Martin, Steven D., Yeragani, Vikram K., and Lidhi, </p>

<p> Rashid. Clinical Ratings and Plasma HVA During Cocaine </p>

<p> Abstinence. Biological Psychiatry. (August 1 1989) v 26 n </p>

<p> 4 pp. 356. </p>

<p> Martsh, J. (1989) Comments in Drugs and Latin America: </p>

<p> Economic and Political Impact and U.S. Policy Options, </p>

<p> report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and </p>

<p> Control, 101st Congress, 1st Session, Washington DC: US </p>

<p> Government Printing Office. </p>

<p> Marzuk, P.M., Tardiff, K., and Leon, A.C. Prevalence of </p>

<p> Recent Cocaine Use Among Motor Vehicle Fatalities in New </p>

<p> York City. JAMA, 263:2 (January 12, 1990), pp. 250-. </p>

<p> Mathew, R.J., Wilson, W. H., and Tant, S. R. Acute </p>

<p> changes in cerebral blood flow associated with marijuana </p>

<p> smoking. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 79:2 (February </p>

<p> 1, 1989), pp. 118-. </p>

<p> May, Herbert L. The International Control of Narcotic </p>

<p> Drugs, International Conciliation 441 (May 1948), 31-371. </p>

<p> Mayer, John E., and Ligman, Jeffrey D. Personality </p>

<p> Characteristics of Adolescent Marijuana Users. </p>

<p> Adolescence, 24:96 (Winter 1989), pp. 965-. </p>

<p> McCaffery, Margo, and Beebe, Alexandra Giving Narcotics </p>

<p> for pain: A problem-solver handbook. Summary: A </p>

<p> Nursing89 Handbook, packed with useful facts and handy </p>

<p> charts. Nursing, 19:10 (October 1, 1989), pp. 161 </p>

<p> McCarthy and Anglin. Narcotics Addicts: Effect of Family </p>

<p> and Parental Risk Factors on Timing of Emancipation, Drug </p>

<p> Use Onset, Pre-addiction Incarcerations and Educational </p>

<p> Achievement. Journal of Drug Issues, 20:1 (Winter 1990), </p>

<p> pp. 99-. </p>

<p> McClintock, Cynthia. The Prospects for Democratic </p>

<p> Consolidation in a Least Likely Case: Peru. Comparative </p>

<p> Politics, (January 1 1989), v 21 n 2. pp. 127. </p>

<p> McCurdy, H. Horton, Callahan, Lisa S., and Williams, </p>

<p> Robert D. Studies on the Stability and Detection of </p>

<p> Cocaine, Benzoylecgonine, and </p>

<p> 11-Nor-Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol-9-Carboxylic Acid in </p>

<p> Whole Blood Using Abuscreen Radioimmunoassay. Journal of </p>

<p> Forensic Sciences. (July 1 1989) v 34 n 4 pp. 858. </p>

<p> McFadden, Peter. New Eradication Program Winning Over </p>

<p> Coca Farmers, Business News, December 31, 1987, 8. </p>

<p> McMahon, Bernard F. Low-Intensity Conflict: The </p>

<p> Pentagon's Foible. Orbis, 34:1 (Winter 1990), pp. 3-. </p>

<p> McWilliams, John C. Unsung Partner Against Crime: Harry </p>

<p> J. Anslinger and the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, </p>

<p> 1930-1962. The Pennsylvania Magazine of History and </p>

<p> Biography, 113:2 (April 1, 1989), pp. 207-. </p>

<p> Means, L. B., Small, M., and Capone, D. M. Client </p>

<p> Demographics and Outcome in Outpatient Cocaine Treatment. </p>

<p> The international journal of the addictions, 24:8 (1989), </p>

<p> pp. 765-. </p>

<p> Meese, Edwin, III. Organized Crime and International Drug </p>

<p> Trafficking. Police Chief (January 1988), p. 12. </p>

<p> Meisch, R. A., George, F. R., and Lemaire, F. A. Orally </p>

<p> delivered cocaine as a reinforcer for rhesus monkeys. </p>

<p> Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (January 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 35 n 1. pp. 245-. </p>

<p> Mello, N.K., Mendelson, J.H., and Bree, M.P. </p>

<p> Buprenorphine Suppress Cocaine Self-Administration by </p>

<p> Rhesus Monkeys. Science. (August 25 1989) v 245 n 4920 </p>

<p> pp. 859. </p>

<p> Mellow, Craig, Congress just says no, Business Month, </p>

<p> 133:14-15 (May 1989). (Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988). </p>

<p> Melvern, Linda, Anning, Nick, and Hebditch, David. </p>

<p> Techno-bandits. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1984. vi, 313 </p>

<p> p. ; Includes index. Bibliography: p. [285]-305. </p>

<p> Menard, Scott, and Huizinga, David. Age, Period, and </p>

<p> Cohort Size Effects on Self-Reported Alcohol, Marijuana, </p>

<p> and Polydrug Use: Results from the National Youth Survey. </p>

<p> Social Science Research, 18:2 (June 1, 1989), pp. 174-. </p>

<p> Mercado I, Ivan. El Genocidio aprista contra Sendero </p>

<p> Luminoso. Lima: Ediciones Latinoamericanas, 1986. </p>

<p> Mercado, Rogger, ed. Algo mas sobre Sendero: teoria y </p>

<p> tactica, violencia, represion y desaparecidos: </p>

<p> documentos Lima, Peru: Ediciones de Cultura Popular, </p>

<p> 1983. </p>

<p> Mercado, Rogger. El Partido Comunista del Peru: Sendero </p>

<p> Luminoso. 3ra. ed., corr. y aum. Lima: Librerias </p>

<p> Studium-La Universidad, 1986. </p>

<p> Mercado, Rogger. Los partidos politicos en el Peru: el </p>

<p> (AprilA, el P.C.P. y Sendero Luminoso, sintesis </p>

<p> historiografica, documentos. Lima, Peru: Ediciones </p>

<p> Latinoamericanas, 1985. </p>

<p> Mercado, Rogger. Periodismo para el pueblo y por el </p>

<p> pueblo. Lima, Peru: Ediciones Latinoamericanas, 1986. </p>

<p> Metz, Steven. An American Strategy for Low-Intensity </p>

<p> Conflict. Strategic Review, 17:4 (Fall 1989), pp. 9-. </p>

<p> Mexico, Office of the President, Bureau of Social </p>

<p> Communication. The Mexican Army and the Fight Against </p>

<p> Drugs, Mexico Today (April, 1987), 6-7. </p>

<p> Mexico. Treaties, etc. United States, 1977 (June 2. </p>

<p> Protocols, etc., 1983 Nov. 10. Narcotic drugs, additional </p>

<p> cooperative arrangements to curb illegal traffic: </p>

<p> agreement between the United States of America and </p>

<p> Mexico, amending the agreement of (June 2, 1977, as </p>

<p> amended and extended, effected by exchange of letters, </p>

<p> signed at Mexico (November 10, 1983. Washington, D.C.: </p>

<p> Dept. of State, U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> Meyer, Lorenzo. Carta Abierta al Alcalde Koch: Certificar </p>

<p> al Certificador, Excelsior, (March 9, 1988), 7. </p>

<p> Milhorn Jr., H. Thomas. Nicotine Dependence. American </p>

<p> Family Physician. (March 1 1989) v 39 n 3 pp. 214. </p>

<p> Summary: The pharmacologic and behavioral processes </p>

<p> involved in nicotine addiction are similar to those that </p>

<p> determine addiction to other drugs such as heroin and </p>

<p> cocaine. </p>

<p> Miller, Norman S., Gold, Mark S., and Belkin, Beth M. The </p>

<p> Diagnosis of Alcohol and Cannabis Dependence in Cocaine </p>

<p> Dependents and Alcohol Dependence in their Families. </p>

<p> British journal of addiction, 84:12 (December 1, 1989). </p>

<p> pp. 1491-. </p>

<p> Miller, Norman S., Gold, Mark S., and Millman, Robert L. </p>

<p> Cocaine: Cocaine intoxication can produce virtually any </p>

<p> psychiatric symptom. Many of the effects can be </p>

<p> attributed to the dopamine system. American family </p>

<p> physician. (February 1 1989) v 39 n 2 pp. 115. </p>

<p> Mills, James. The underground empire: where crime and </p>

<p> governments embrace. Garden City, N.Y., Doubleday, 1986. </p>

<p> Minsky, Terri. Don Juan in Hell. Premiere. (May 1 1990) </p>

<p> v 3 n 9. pp. 48-.Mintz, Sidney W. The Forefathers of </p>

<p> Crack. NACLA Report on the Americas. (March 1 1989) v 22 </p>

<p> n 6 pp. 31. </p>

<p> Summary: Stimulants have played a key role in the </p>

<p> history of capitalism. But unlike tea, coffee, sugar and </p>

<p> tobacco, cocaine sins thrice: It interferes with labor </p>

<p> productivity, the profits it garners are not made by </p>

<p> respectable capitalists, and the state has trouble </p>

<p> claiming its share. </p>

<p> Misra, A. L., Pontani, R. B., and Vadlomani, N. L. </p>

<p> Interactions of Cocaine with Barbital, Pentobarbital and </p>

<p> Ethanol. Archives internationales de pharmacodynamie et </p>

<p> de therapie. (May 1 1989) v 299 pp. 44. </p>

<p> Misra, A.L., Pontani, R.B., and Vadlamani, V.L. Blockade </p>

<p> of tolerance to morphine analgesia by cocaine. Pain. </p>

<p> (July 00 1989) v 38 n 1 pp. 77. </p>

<p> Mitchell, Marilyn, Sabbagha, Rudy E., Keith, Louis. </p>

<p> Ultrasonic growth parameters in fetuses of mothers with </p>

<p> primary addiction to cocaine. American Journal of </p>

<p> Obstetrics and Gynecology. (November 1 1988) v 159 n 5 </p>

<p> pp. 1104. </p>

<p> Mitsui, T., Hida, M., and Fujimura, Y. Determination of </p>

<p> alkaloidal Narcotics by pyrolysis-gas chromatography. </p>

<p> Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis, 17:1 </p>

<p> (December 1, 1989), pp. 83-. </p>

<p> Mohr, C. Drug Bill Passes, Finishing Business of 100th </p>

<p> Congress, New York Times, (October 23, 1988), 1y, 16y. </p>

<p> Molano, Alfredo. Selva Adentro. Bogot , 1987. </p>

<p> Moore, F.M.L., and Simpson, D. Detection of </p>

<p> benzoylecgonine (cocaine metabolite) in urine: a </p>

<p> cost-effect low risk immunoassay procedure. Medical </p>

<p> Laboratory Sciences. (April 1 1990) v 47 n 2 pp. 85-. </p>

<p> Moore, Mark H. Drug Policy and Organized Crime in </p>

<p> President's Commission on Organized Crime, Report to the </p>

<p> President and the Attorney General, America's Habit: Drug </p>

<p> Abuse, Drug Trafficking, and Organized Crime, Appendix. </p>

<p> (Washington: GPO, 1986). </p>

<p> Moore, Mark H. Drug trafficking. Washington, D.C.: U.S. </p>

<p> Dept. of Justice, National Institute of Justice, 1988). </p>

<p> Moore, W. John. No Quick Fix, National Journal, (November </p>

<p> 21, 1987, 2954. </p>

<p> Morales, Edmundo. Cocaine: White Gold Rush in Peru. </p>

<p> Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1989). Note: An </p>

<p> important book based on field research in Peru. </p>

<p> Contradicts the findings of many Congressional reports on </p>

<p> narcotics control programs. Important, as well, for his </p>

<p> data on coca growing and Sendero Luminiso. </p>

<p> Morales, Luis Guillermo. Colombia: New Tax Measures. </p>

<p> Bulletin for international fiscal documentation. (April 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 43 n 4 pp. 181. Summary: A series of new tax </p>

<p> measures were recently adopted by Congress and national </p>

<p> Gevernment of Colombia which affect, inter alia, the net </p>

<p> wealth tax, the presumption of income, disclosure </p>

<p> requirement of banks, non-deductible expenses, </p>

<p> depreciation, bad debts and leasing. This article </p>

<p> summarizes several of the new measures. </p>

<p> Morales, Waltraud Queiser. &quot;The War on Drugs: a New US </p>

<p> National Security Doctrine?&quot; Third World Quarterly, V
11, </p>

<p> (July 1989). </p>

<p> Morgan, H. Wayne. Drugs in America: A Social History, </p>

<p> 1800-1980. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 1981. </p>

<p> Morley, Christopher. Cocaine Bottle and Untitled. The </p>

<p> Baker Street Journal, 40:1 (March 1, 1990), pp. 37-. </p>

<p> Morley, J., and Byrne, M. The Drug War and 'National </p>

<p> Security': The Making of a Quagmire. Dissent (Winter </p>

<p> 1989), 39-46. </p>

<p> Morley, Jefferson. The Great American High: </p>

<p> Contradictions of Cocaine Capitalism. The nation. </p>

<p> (October 2 1989) v 249 n 10 pp. 341. </p>

<p> Mortimer, William Golden. History of Coca; the Divine </p>

<p> Plant of the Incas. Fitz Hugh Ludlow Memorial Library </p>

<p> edition, complete and unabridged. San Francisco, And/or </p>

<p> Press, 1974. </p>

<p> Muhlemann, Christoph. Surviving on the Coca Bush. Swiss </p>

<p> Review of world Affairs. (April 1 1990) v 40 n 1 pp. </p>

<p> 11-. </p>

<p> Muntaner, C., Cascella, N.G., and Kumor, K.M. Placebo </p>

<p> responses to cocaine administration in humans: effects </p>

<p> of prior administrations and verbal instructions. </p>

<p> Psychopharmacology. (October 1 1989) v 99 n 2. pp. 282. </p>

<p> Muntaner, C., Walter, D., and Nagoshi, C. Self-report vs </p>

<p> laboratory measures of aggression as predictors of </p>

<p> substance abuse. Drug and alcohol dependence. (February 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 25 n 1. pp. 1. </p>

<p> Murphy, Sheigla B., Reinarman, Craig, and Waldorf, Dan. </p>

<p> An 11-year Follow-up of a Network of Cocaine Users. </p>

<p> British Journal of Addiction (to Alcohol and Other </p>

<p> Drugs). (April 1 1989) v 84 n 4 pp. 427. </p>

<p> Musto, David F. America's First Cocaine Epidemic. The </p>

<p> Wilson Quarterly. 1989). </p>

<p> Musto, David F. The American Disease: Origins of Narcotic </p>

<p> Control. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973. Expanded </p>

<p> ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987. </p>

<p> Musto, David F. Why Did Sherlock Holmes Use Cocaine? </p>

<p> Baker Street Journal: an Irregular Quarterly. 1988). </p>

<p> Nadelmann, Ethan A. Drug Prohibition in the United </p>

<p> States: Costs, Consequences and Alternatives. Science, </p>

<p> 245:4921 (September 1, 1989), pp. 939-. </p>

<p> Nadelmann, Ethan A. The DEA in Latin America. Dealing </p>

<p> with Institutionalized Corruption. Police Journal. </p>

<p> (January 1 1989) v 62 n 1 pp. 31. </p>

<p> Nadelmann, Ethan A. The Drugs Enforcement Agency in Latin </p>

<p> America: The Ins and Outs of Working Around Corruption. </p>

<p> Part Two. Police Journal, 62:2 (April 1, 1989), pp. 157-. </p>

<p> Nadelmann, Ethan A. The Great Drug Debate: The Case for </p>

<p> Legalization. The Public Interest (Summer 1989), pp. 3-. </p>

<p> Nadelmann, Ethan A. U.S. Drug Policy: A Bad Export? </p>

<p> Foreign Policy (Spring 1988), pp. 83-108. </p>

<p> Navaratnam, V., and Foong, K. Development and application </p>

<p> of a system for monitoring drug abuse: the Malaysian </p>

<p> experience. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-2 (1989), pp. 53- </p>

<p> . </p>

<p> Neerhof, Mark G., MacGregor, Scott N., and Retzky, Sandy </p>

<p> S. Cocaine abuse during pregnancy: Peripartum prevalence </p>

<p> and perinatal outcome. American journal of obstetrics </p>

<p> and gynecology. September 1 1989) v 161 n 3. pp. 633. </p>

<p> Summary: In this study peripartum cocaine abuse was </p>

<p> common, increased during the 2-year study period, and </p>

<p> was associated with increased perinatal morbidity. </p>

<p> Nettleton, Jilda, and Wang, Ging Kuo. pH-dependent </p>

<p> binding of local anesthetics in single </p>

<p> batrachotoxin-activated Na+ channels. Cocaine vs. </p>

<p> quaternary compounds. Biophysical Journal, 58:1 (July 1, </p>

<p> 1990), pp. 95-. </p>

<p> Newcomb, Michael D., Fahy, Bridget N., and Skager, </p>

<p> Rodney. Correlates of Cocaine Use Among Adolescents. </p>

<p> Journal of Drug Issues. Fall 198 v 19 n 3 pp. 327. </p>

<p> Nicholl, Charles. The Fruit Palace: An Odyssey Through </p>

<p> Colombia's Cocaine UnderWorld. New York: St. Martin's </p>

<p> Press, 1985. London: Heinemann, 1985. </p>

<p> Nightline. Role of the Military in the War on Drugs. </p>

<p> Nightline. (January 4, 1990). Guests: Sen. Sam Nunn, Adm. </p>

<p> William Crowe (Ret.). </p>

<p> Novak, Michal, and Salemink, Cornelis A. Novel </p>

<p> rearrangements during pyrolysis of cocaine. Tetrahedron. </p>

<p> 1989) v 45 n 13 pp. 4287. </p>

<p> Nuckols, Cardwell C., and Greeson, Janet. Cocaine </p>

<p> Addiction: Assessment and Intervention. The Nursing </p>

<p> clinics of North America. (March 1 1989) v 24 n 1 pp. </p>

<p> 33. Summary: The cocaine epidemic is causing clinical </p>

<p> problems that are recognizable, have predictable </p>

<p> patterns, and are treatable. Technologies exist that </p>

<p> allow for accurate assessment of pathologic severity. </p>

<p> Medical research has assisted with chemical tools that </p>

<p> aid in restoration of depleted neurochemistry. However, </p>

<p> in the treatment of cocaine addition the basics still </p>

<p> apply. Measurers such as good assessment and chemical </p>

<p> intervention will not solve the problem without overall </p>

<p> rehabilitative and self-help support. </p>

<p> Nunes, Edward V., McGrath, Patrick J., and Wager, </p>

<p> Steven. Lithium Treatment for Cocaine Abusers With </p>

<p> Bipolar Spectrum Disorders. The American Journal of </p>

<p> Psychiatry. (May 1 1990) v 147 n 5. pp. 655-. </p>

<p> Olson, Wm. J. Low-Intensity Conflict: The Challenge to </p>

<p> the National Interest. Terrorism: An International </p>

<p> Journal, 12:2 (1989), pp. 75-. </p>

<p> Olsson, Gayle Lanie, leddo, Christine C., and Wild, </p>

<p> Lorie. Nursing management of patients epidural Narcotics. </p>

<p> Heart &amp; Lung, 18:2 (March 1, 1989), pp. 130-. </p>

<p> Orozco, Jorge Eliecer. Lehder: El Hombre. Bogot , 1987. </p>

<p> Ortega, Julio. [ Adios Ayacucho] Adios Ayacucho ; </p>

<p> seguido de, El oro de Moscu, y otros peligros que </p>

<p> acechan a los adolescentes en su primeros pasos hacia la </p>

<p> vida adulta. Lima: Mosca Azul Editores ; Philadelphia, </p>

<p> PA: ISHI Publications, 1986. </p>

<p> Ortiz, A., Romano, M., and Soriano, A. Development of an </p>

<p> information reporting system on illicit drug use in </p>

<p> Mexico. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1 (1989), pp. 41-. </p>

<p> Oviedo, Alvaro. Colombia Narcocracy-Will It Be Defeated? </p>

<p> New Times. (October 10 1989) n 41 pp. 23. </p>

<p> Pacella, James A. Controlled substance cross reference </p>

<p> index: DEA base drug code, generic names, common trade </p>

<p> names. 2nd ed. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Justice, </p>

<p> Drug Enforcement Administration, Office of Diversion </p>

<p> Control, 1986. </p>

<p> Pacini, Deborah, and Franquemont, Chrisitine, eds. Coca </p>

<p> and cocaine: effects on people and policy in Latin </p>

<p> America: proceedings of the conference, the Coca Leaf and </p>

<p> its Derivatives-- Biology, Society and Policy. Cambridge, </p>

<p> MA: Cultural Survival ; Ithaca, N. Y.: LASP, 1986. </p>

<p> Pan, Z. Z., and Williams, J. T. GABA- and </p>

<p> Glutamate-Mediated Synaptic Potentials in Rat Dorsal </p>

<p> Raphe Neurons In Vitro. Journal of neurophysiology. </p>

<p> (April 1 1989) v 61 n 4. pp. 719. </p>

<p> Pan, Z. Z., Colmers, W. F., and Williams, J. T. </p>

<p> 5-HT-Mediated Synaptic Potentials in the Dorsal Raphe </p>

<p> Nucleus: Interactions with Excitatory Amion Acid and GABA </p>

<p> Neurotransmission. Journal of neurophysiology. (August 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 62 n 2. pp. 481. </p>

<p> Pan, Z.Z., and Williams, J.T. Differential Actions of </p>

<p> Cocaine and Amphetamine on Dorsal Raphe Neurons in Vitro. </p>

<p> The Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental </p>

<p> Therapeutics. (October 1 1989) v 251 n 1. pp. 56. </p>

<p> Parks, James M., Reed, Gary, and Knochel, James P. </p>

<p> Cocaine-Associated Rhabdomyolysis. American Journal of </p>

<p> Medical Sciences. (May 1 1989) v 297 n 5 pp. 334. </p>

<p> Pascual-Leone, A., Dhuna, A., and Altafullah, I. </p>

<p> Cocaine-induced seizures. Neurology. (March 1 1990) v 40 </p>

<p> n 3 p 1. pp. 404-. </p>

<p> Payne, Douglas W. The Drug &quot;Super State&quot; in Latin </p>

<p> America. Freedom at Issue (March 1, 1989), pp. 7-. </p>

<p> Payne, Richard. Medication-Induced Performance Deficits: </p>

<p> Analgesics and Narcotics. JOM, Journal of Occupational </p>

<p> Medicine, 32:4 (April 1, 1990), pp. 362-. </p>

<p> Pearce, Jenny. The Dirty Wars. NACLA Report on the </p>

<p> Americas. (April 1 1990) v 23 n 6. pp. 22-. Summary: </p>

<p> Cocaine-financed death squads, operating with the advice </p>

<p> and consent of the armed forces, have murdered 8,000 </p>

<p> grassroots activists since 1986. When not killing </p>

<p> leftist, these paramilitary armies advance the drum </p>

<p> barons' quest for political power. </p>

<p> Pela, A.O. Recent trends in drug use and abuse in </p>

<p> Nigeria. Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1 (1989), pp. 103 </p>

<p> Pellens, Mildred. The Opium Problem. New York: The Bureau </p>

<p> of Social Hygiene, 1928. </p>

<p> P&#130;rez Escamilla Costas, Juan Ricardo. La Estructura </p>

<p> Administrativa de la Administraci¢n de Justicia en
M&#130;xico </p>

<p> (submitted to the El Colegio de Mexico-Harvard Conference </p>

<p> on a New Approach to the U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy </p>

<p> held at El Colegio de Mexico, Mexico D.F., on (April </p>

<p> 28-29, 1988). </p>

<p> Peris, J., and Zahniser, N. R. Persistent augmented </p>

<p> dopamine release after acute cocaine requires dopamine </p>

<p> receptor activation. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and </p>

<p> Behavior. (January 1 1989) v 32 n 1 pp. 71. </p>

<p> Peris, Joanna, Boyson, Sally J., and Cass, Wayne A. </p>

<p> Persistence of Neurochemical Changes in Dopamine Systems </p>

<p> After Repeated Cocaine Administration. The Journal of </p>

<p> Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics (April 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 253 n 1. pp. 38-. </p>

<p> Perl, Raphael F. Congress, International Narcotics </p>

<p> Policy, and the Antidrug Abuse Act of 1988), Journal of </p>

<p> Interamerican Studies and World Affairs 30:2 (Summer-Fall </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> Perl, Raphael F.. International Narcotics Control and </p>

<p> Foreign Assistance Certification: Requirements, </p>

<p> Procedures, Timetables, and Guidelines. Report prepared </p>

<p> for the Committee on Foreign Relations, U.S. Senate. </p>

<p> Washington: GPO, 1988). </p>

<p> Perl, Raphael F.. International Narcotics Control: The </p>

<p> President's (March 1, 1988) Certification for Foreign </p>

<p> Assistance Eligibility and Options for Congressional </p>

<p> Action. Washington: Congressional Research Service, </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> Perl, Raphael. International narcotics control and </p>

<p> foreign assistance certification: requirements, </p>

<p> procedures, timetables, and guidelines: report / </p>

<p> prepared for the use of the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Relations, United States Senate ; by the Congressional </p>

<p> Research Service, Library of Congress. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> Perry, Stuart H. The Unarmed Invasion. Atlantic Monthly </p>

<p> 135 (January 1925), 70-77. </p>

<p> Peterson, Allen L. Flying Air Cavalry Missions in the </p>

<p> Low-Intensity Conflict. United states army aviation </p>

<p> digest, 90:2 (March 1, 1990), pp. 54-. </p>

<p> Peterson, S.L., Olsta, S.A., and Matthews, R.T. Cocaine </p>

<p> enhances medial prefrontal cortex neuron response to </p>

<p> ventral tegmental area activation. Brain Research </p>

<p> Bulletin. (February 1 1990) v 24 n 2. pp. 267-. </p>

<p> Petronis, K.R., and Anthony, J.C. An epidemiologic </p>

<p> investigation of marijuana-and cocaine-related </p>

<p> palpitations. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 23:3 (June 1, </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 219-. </p>

<p> Phelps, J. F. Report of the United States Situation and </p>

<p> Trends in Drug Abuse and Illicit Traffic. Police Chief </p>

<p> (March 1987), pp. 141-2. </p>

<p> Phillips, Chris. Living in Fear. The nation's Narcotics </p>

<p> nightmare: One girl's terrifying tale of life in a </p>

<p> Drugged-out neighborhood. YM, 38:5 (June 1, 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 72-. </p>

<p> Pike, Ronald F. Cocaine Withdrawal: An Effective </p>

<p> Three-Drug Regimen. Postgraduate Medicine. (April 1 1989) </p>

<p> v 85 n 4 pp. 115-. </p>

<p> Pilotte, N.S., Sharpe, L.G., and Dax, E.M. Multiple, but </p>

<p> not acute, infusions of cocaine alter the release of </p>

<p> prolactin in male rats. Brain Research. (March 26 1990) </p>

<p> v 512 n 1. pp. 107-. </p>

<p> Pinto Flores, Aquiles. Yo fu¡ reh&#130;n del M-19 (61 d¡as
en </p>

<p> la Embajada de la Rep£blica Dominicana. Bogot : Canal </p>

<p> Ram¡rez-Antares, 1980). </p>

<p> Pitts, D.K. and Marwah, J. Chronic cocaine reduces </p>

<p> a2-adrenoceptor elicited mydriasis and inhibition of </p>

<p> locus coeruleus neurons. European Journal of </p>

<p> pharmacology. (January 31 1989) v 160 n 2 pp. 21. </p>

<p> Plunkett, L.M., Seifen, E., and Kennedy, R.H. Effects of </p>

<p> Morphine Pretreatment of Cocaine Cardiotoxicity in </p>

<p> Anesthetized Guinea-Pigs. Archives internationales de </p>

<p> pharmacodynamie et de therapie... (January 1 1989) v 297 </p>

<p> pp. 60. </p>

<p> Pogue, Velvie A., and Nurse, Hazeline M. </p>

<p> Cocaine-Associated Acute Myoglobinuric Renal Failure. The </p>

<p> American Journal of medicine. (February 1 1989) v 86 n </p>

<p> 2 pp. 183. Summary: The four cases reported provide </p>

<p> additional support for an association between cocaine </p>

<p> use, non-traumatic rhabdomyolysis, and myoglobinuric </p>

<p> renal failure. </p>

<p> Pollack, Mark H., Brotman, Andrew W., and Rosenbaum, </p>

<p> Jerrold F. Cocaine Abuse and Treatment. Comprehensive </p>

<p> Psychiatry. (January 1 1989) v 30 n 1 pp. 31. </p>

<p> Pombo, Jose Ignacio de. Comercio y contrabando en </p>

<p> Cartagena de Indias, 2 de junio de 1800. 1a ed. Bogota, </p>

<p> Colombia: Procultura, 1986. </p>

<p> Ponce Caballero, A. Gaston. Coca, cocaina, trafico. </p>

<p> [La Paz?]: Empresa El Diario, 1983. </p>

<p> Pooley, Eric. Death of a Hood. New York, 23:4 (January 29 </p>

<p> 1990), pp. 26. Summary: Last (February, when cocaine </p>

<p> cowboy Gus Farace killed undercover drug agent Everett </p>

<p> Hatcher, he touched off a nationwide manhunt. But not </p>

<p> only the Feds were after the hulking wiseguy. Police </p>

<p> pressure on the Bonanno and Colombo crime families had </p>

<p> put them in a hunt as well. Then, last (November, Farace </p>

<p> was shot dead while he sat in a Pontiac on a Bensonhurst </p>

<p> street. &quot;We'd all seen that face in our sleep,&quot;
says the </p>

<p> detective who identified Farace's body. </p>

<p> Post, Robert M., Weiss, Susan R.B., and Pert, Agu. </p>

<p> Cocaine-Induced Behavioral Sensitization and Kindling: </p>

<p> Implications for the Emergence of Psychopathology and </p>

<p> Seizures. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. </p>

<p> 1988) v 537 pp. 292. </p>

<p> Potter, Gary, Gaines, Larry, and Holbrook, Beth. Blowing </p>

<p> Smoke: An Evaluation Of Marijuana Eradication In </p>

<p> Kentucky. American Journal of Police, 9:1 (1990), pp. 97- </p>

<p> . </p>

<p> Povenmire, Katie Izor, and House, Mary Ann. Recognizing </p>

<p> the cocaine addict. Nursing, 20:5 (May 1 1990), pp. 46-. </p>

<p> Summary: With cocaine-related hospital admissions on the </p>

<p> rise, this clinical profile of the cocaine addict will </p>

<p> enhance your assessment skills. </p>

<p> President's Commission on Organized Crime, The. America's </p>

<p> Habit: Drug Abuse, Drug Trafficking and Organized Crime. </p>

<p> Report to the President and the Attorney General, (March </p>

<p> 1986. </p>

<p> Puyana, Alicia. El Narcotr fico y la Sociedad Colombiana, </p>

<p> Notas para el Estudio del Fen¢meno, (paper presented in </p>

<p> the El Colegio de Mexico-Harvard on a New Approach to the </p>

<p> U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy, held at El Colegio de </p>

<p> Mexico, Mexico, D.F. (April 28-29, 1988). </p>

<p> Puyana Garc¡a, Gabriel. La Seguridad Interior en la </p>

<p> Defensa Nacional de Colombia, in Seguridad Nacional y </p>

<p> Relaciones Internacionales: Colombia, edited by S. </p>

<p> Cintra. Mexico: Centro Latinoamericano de Estudios </p>

<p> Estrat&#130;gicos, 1987. </p>

<p> Qiao, J. T., Dougherty, P.M., and Wiggins, R.C. Effects </p>

<p> of microiontophoretic application of cocaine, alone and </p>

<p> with receptor antagonists, upon the neurons of the medial </p>

<p> prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens and caudate nucleus </p>

<p> of rats. Neuropharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 29 n 4. pp. </p>

<p> 379-. </p>

<p> Rachlinski, J.J., Foltin, R.W., and Fischman, M.W. The </p>

<p> Effects of Smoked Marijuana on Interpersonal Distances in </p>

<p> Small Groups. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 24:3 (December </p>

<p> 1, 1989), pp. 183-. </p>

<p> Raines, Virgil E., Lt. Col. Criteria for Success in the </p>

<p> War on Drugs. Study Project. U.S. Army War College. </p>

<p> (March 31, 1989). </p>

<p> Ramirez Figueroa, Yonel. Coca, cocaina, el trafico </p>

<p> ilicito. 1a ed. [Lima, Peru]: Y. Ramirez Figueroa, </p>

<p> [1983. </p>

<p> Ramsey, Russell W. Panama Today: Should the West Help. </p>

<p> The Army Quarterly and Defence Journal, 119:3 (July 1, </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 307-. Summary: General Manuel Noriega still </p>

<p> holds power. What will happen in 1990. </p>

<p> Rangel, Charles B. Legalize drugs? Not on Your Life, op. </p>

<p> ed., New York Times, (May 17, 1988), A25. </p>

<p> Ranly, Ernest W. Peru in Peril, The Christian Century. </p>

<p> 1989) </p>

<p> Rau, Kenneth, Voorhees, Richard Z., and Vines, Mack M. </p>

<p> The Word from the Trenches. Police Chief, 57:5 (May 1, </p>

<p> 1990), pp. 42-. Summary: Patrol NET in Suffolk County; </p>

<p> The Narcotics Strike Force; Controlling Drugs in Dallas; </p>

<p> Drug Abatements: An Effective Tool; Community Empowerment </p>

<p> Policing; Effective use of Search Warrant in the War on </p>

<p> Crack. </p>

<p> Raum, W. J., McGivern, R. F., and Peterson, M. A. </p>

<p> Prenatal inhibition of hypothalamic sex steroid uptake by </p>

<p> cocaine: effects on neurobehavioral sexual </p>

<p> differentiation in male rats. Developmental Brain </p>

<p> Research. (May 1 1990) v 53 n 2. pp. 230-. </p>

<p> Rawson, Richard A. Cut the Crack: The Policymaker's Guide </p>

<p> to Cocaine Treatment. Policy Review (Winter, 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 10-. </p>

<p> Reid, Michael. Peru, paths to poverty. London: Latin </p>

<p> America Bureau, Third World Publications, 1985. </p>

<p> Reuter, Peter, and Mark Kleian. Risks and Prices: An </p>

<p> Economic Analysis of Drug Enforcement, Crime and Justice </p>

<p> (July 1986), 293. </p>

<p> Reuter, Peter, Gordon Crawford, and Jonathan Crane. </p>

<p> Sealing the Borders: The Effects of Military </p>

<p> Participation in Drug Interdiction, Santa Monica, Rand </p>

<p> Corporation, 1988). </p>

<p> Reuter, Peter. Eternal Hope: America's International </p>

<p> Narcotics Effort. Santa Monica: The Rand Corporation, </p>

<p> 1987. </p>

<p> Reuter, Peter. Eternal Hope: America's Quest for </p>

<p> Narcotics Control, The Public Interest 79 (Spring 1985). </p>

<p> Reuter, Peter. Quantity Illusions and Paradoxes of Drug </p>

<p> Interdiction: Federal Intervention into Vice Policy. Law </p>

<p> &amp; Contemporary Problems (Winter 1988), pp. 233-52. </p>

<p> Reuter, Peter. Testimony to Committee on Government </p>

<p> Operations, U.S. House of Representatives. (October 17, </p>

<p> 1989). Mimeo. </p>

<p> Revkin, Andrew C. Crack in the Cradle: The horrors of </p>

<p> cocaine are penetrating ever deeper into our society, </p>

<p> claiming more and more victims within the womb. Discover. </p>

<p> September 1 1989) v 10 n 9 pp. 62. </p>

<p> Reznik, Vivian M., Anderson, Jack, and Briswold, William </p>

<p> R. Successful Fibrinolytic Treatment of Arterial </p>

<p> Thrombosis and Hypertension in a Cocaine-Exposed </p>

<p> Neonate. Pediatrics. (October 1 1989) v 84 n 4. pp. 735. </p>

<p> Richardson, Gale A. The Effect of Prenatal Alcohol, </p>

<p> Marijuana and Tobacco Exposure on Neonatal Behavior. </p>

<p> Infant Behavior &amp; Development, 12:2 (April 1, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 199-. </p>

<p> Ridgway, John M. [ Road to Elizabeth] Road to Osambre: </p>

<p> a daring adventure in the high country of Peru. 1st </p>

<p> American ed. New York, NY: Viking, 1987,c 986. 244 p., </p>

<p> [8] p. of plates: col. ill., maps ; First published in </p>

<p> Great Britain under the title: Road to Elizabeth--T.p. </p>

<p> verso. Maps on lining papers. </p>

<p> Riding, Alan. Colombia Says U.S. Reprisals Weakens </p>

<p> Support for Drug Fight, New York Times, (January 13, </p>

<p> 1988), A13. </p>

<p> Riding, Alan. Colombians Grow Weary of Waging War on </p>

<p> Drugs, New York Times, (February 1, 1988), 8y. </p>

<p> Rielly, John E., ed. American Public Opinion and U.S. </p>

<p> Foreign Policy 1987. Chicago: Chicago Council on Foreign </p>

<p> Relations, 1987. </p>

<p> Riemer, Blanca, Rossant, John, and Dwyer, Paula. The drug </p>

<p> war--European style. Business Week. 31-2 Oct 2 1989). </p>

<p> Salzano, Carlo J. Security of U.S. ports challenged by </p>

<p> thieves, smugglers and terrorists. Traffic World. 219:11+ </p>

<p> Sep 25 1989). </p>

<p> Ringwalt, Christopher L., and Palmer, James H. Cocaine </p>

<p> and Crack Users Compared. Adolescence, 24:96 (Winter, </p>

<p> 1989), pp. 851-. </p>

<p> Ritterband, Charles E. Colombia: 'La Violencia' </p>

<p> Continues. Swiss Review of World Affairs. (October 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 39 n 7 pp. 8. </p>

<p> Ritz, M. C., Cone, E. J., and Kuhar, M. J. Cocaine </p>

<p> inhibition of ligand binding at dopamine, norepinephrine </p>

<p> and serotonin transporters: A structure-activity study. </p>

<p> Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 9. pp. 635-. </p>

<p> Ritz, Mary C., and Kuhar, Michael J. Relationship between </p>

<p> Self-Administration of Amphetamine and with Cocaine. The </p>

<p> Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. </p>

<p> (March 1 1989) v 248 n 3 pp. 110. </p>

<p> Rob, Marilyn, Reynolds, Ingrid, and Finlayson, Paul F. </p>

<p> Adolescent Marijuana Use: Risk Factors and Implications. </p>

<p> Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 24:1 </p>

<p> (March 1, 1990), pp. 47-. </p>

<p> Roberts, D.C.S., Bennett, S.A.L., and Vickers, G.J. The </p>

<p> estrous cycle affects cocaine self-administration on a </p>

<p> progressive ratio schedule in rats. Psychopharmacology. </p>

<p> (July 1 1989) v 98 n 3 pp. 408. </p>

<p> Roberts, D.C.S., Loh, E.A., and Vickers, G. </p>

<p> Self-administration of cocaine on a progressive ration </p>

<p> schedule in rats: dose-response relationship and effect </p>

<p> of haloperidol pretreatment. Psychopharmacology. (April 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 97 n 4. pp. 535-. </p>

<p> Roberts, S.M., Pounds, J.G., and James, R.C. Cocaine </p>

<p> toxicity in cultured rat hekpatocytes. Toxicology </p>

<p> Letters. (February 1 1990) v 50 n 2/3. pp. 283-. </p>

<p> Robin, Wong. Increased Lung Water and Ascites after </p>

<p> Massive Cocaine Overdosage in Mice and Improved Survival </p>

<p> Related to Beta-Adrenergic Blockage. Annals of Internal </p>

<p> Medicine. (January 29 1989) v 110 n 3 pp. 202. </p>

<p> Robison, Leslie L., Buckley, Jonathan D., and Daigle, </p>

<p> Anne E. Maternal Drug Use and Risk of Childhood </p>

<p> Onlymphoblastic Leukemia Among Offspring: An </p>

<p> Epidemiologic Investigation Implicating Marijuana (A </p>

<p> Report From the Childrens Cancer Study Group). Cancer; </p>

<p> Diagnosis, Treatment, Research, 63:10 (May 15, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 1904-. </p>

<p> Roehrich, Herb. For RPhs: A Review of the Changing </p>

<p> Cocaine Epidemic. Pharmacy Times. (July 1 1989) v 55 n 7 </p>

<p> pp. 35.Lett, B.T. Repeated exposures intensify rather </p>

<p> than diminish the rewarding effects of amphetamine, </p>

<p> morphine, and cocaine. Psychopharmacology. (July 1 1989) </p>

<p> v 98 n 3 pp. 357. </p>

<p> Ropp, Steve C. Panama's Defiant Noriega. Current </p>

<p> History, 87:533 (December 1, 1988), pp. 417-. </p>

<p> Rosenberg, Tina. A Mess in the Andes - Columbia's </p>

<p> government-by-cocaine. The New Republic. 1989). </p>

<p> Rosenberg, Tina. Colombia: Murder City. The Atlantic. </p>

<p> (November 1 1988) v 262 n 5 pp. 20. </p>

<p> Rosenberg, Tina. Guerrilla Tourism. The New Republic, </p>

<p> 202:25 (June 18, 1990), pp. 23-. Summary: A guided tour </p>

<p> through the netherworld of Sendero Lumnoso, whose members </p>

<p> have no doubt that victory will ultimately be theirs. </p>

<p> Rosenstein, B.J., Wheeler, J.S., and Heid, P.L. </p>

<p> Congenital Renal Abnormalities in Infants With In Utero </p>

<p> Cocaine Exposure. The Journal of urology, 144:1 (July 1, </p>

<p> 1990), 110-. </p>

<p> Rossini, R.G., and Thomas, J.J. The Size of the Informal </p>

<p> Sector in Peru: A Critical Comment on Hernando de Soto's </p>

<p> El Otro Sendero. World Development, 18:1 (January 1, </p>

<p> 1990), pp. 125-. </p>

<p> Rothman, Richard B. High Affinity Dopamine Reuptake </p>

<p> Inihibitors as Potential Cocaine Antagonists: A Strategy </p>

<p> for Drug Development. Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 20. </p>

<p> pp. PL-17-. </p>

<p> Rubin, Rhonda B., and Neugarten, Joel. Cocaine-Induced </p>

<p> Rhabdomyolysis Masquerading as Myocardial Ischemia. The </p>

<p> American Journal of Medicine. (May 1 1989) v 86 n 5 pp. </p>

<p> 551. Summary: Rhabdomyolysis must be added to the </p>

<p> ever-growing list of medical complications associated </p>

<p> with the illicit use of cocaine. </p>

<p> Ruseler, Sonia. Growing Dependence: Sonia Ruseler reports </p>

<p> from Peru where cocaine eases the pain of poverty. The </p>

<p> Listener. (April 5 1990) v 123 n 3159. pp. 4-. </p>

<p> San Pedro, R. M. Ponce, E. G. School programmes in Drug </p>

<p> rehabilitation and social reintegration in the </p>

<p> Philippines. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 63- </p>

<p> . </p>

<p> Sanders, Thomas Griffin. Peru Between Democracy and the </p>

<p> Sendero Luminoso. Hanover, NH: Universities Field Staff </p>

<p> International, 1984. </p>

<p> Satel, S. L., and Gawin, F. H. Migrainelike Headache and </p>

<p> Cocaine Use. JAMA. the Journal of the American Medical </p>

<p> Association. (May 26 1989) v 261 n 20 pp. 2995. </p>

<p> Schama, K.F., and Branch, M.N. Tolerance to effects of </p>

<p> cocaine on schedule-controlled behavior: Effects of </p>

<p> fixed-interval schedule parameter. </p>

<p> Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. (January 1 1989) </p>

<p> v 32 n 1 pp. 267. </p>

<p> Schemmer, Benjamin F. Senate Leaders Ask Scrowcroft for </p>

<p> New White House Focus on Low-Intensity Conflict. Armed </p>

<p> Forces Journal International, 126:8 (March 1, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 66-. </p>

<p> Schmeckebier, Lawrence F. and Francis X. A. Eble. The </p>

<p> Bureau of Internal Revenue: Its History, Activities, and </p>

<p> Organization. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University </p>

<p> Press, 1923. </p>

<p> Schroth, Raymond A. Has God forgotten Peru? Commonweal. </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> Schultz, T.W., Wyatt, N.L., and Lin, D.T. </p>

<p> Structure-Toxicity Realtionships for Nonpolar Narcotics: </p>

<p> A Comparison of Data from the Tetrahymena, Photobacterium </p>

<p> and Pimephales Systems. Bulletin of Environmental </p>

<p> Contamination and Toxicology, 44:1 (January 1, 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 67-. </p>

<p> Schulze, Gene E., McMillan, D.E., and Bailey, John R. </p>

<p> Acute Effects of Marijuana Smoke on Complex Operant </p>

<p> Behavior in Rhesus Monkeys. Life Sciences, 45:6 (1989), </p>

<p> pp. 465-. </p>

<p> Schwartz, Richard H., Estroff, Todd, and Fairbanks, David </p>

<p> N.F. Nasal Symptoms Associated With Cocaine Abuse During </p>

<p> Adolescence. Archives of Otolaryngology--Head &amp; Neck </p>

<p> Surgery. (January 1 1989) v 115 n 1 pp. 63. </p>

<p> Schwartz, Richard H., Lewis, David C., and Hoffmann, </p>

<p> Norman G. Cocaine and Marijuana Use by Medical Students </p>

<p> before and during medical school. Archives of Internal </p>

<p> Medicine, 150:4 (April 1, 1990), pp. 883. </p>

<p> Sciolino, Elaine, with Stephen Engelberg. Narcotics </p>

<p> Efforts Foiled by U.S. Security Goals, New York Times, </p>

<p> (April 10, 1988), 1y, 10. </p>

<p> Segal, Nicholas, and Lillian Segal. The Drug Evil, New </p>

<p> Republic, 34 (March 7, 1923), 41-43. </p>

<p> Selser, Gregorio. Bolivia, el cuartelazo de los </p>

<p> cocadolares. Mexico: MEX-SUR, 1982. </p>

<p> Sen, Sankar. Drug War in Colombia. Police Journal, 63:2 </p>

<p> (April 1, 1990), pp. 153-. </p>

<p> Serecigni, J., Guardia Vidal, J., and Masip Segues, M. C. </p>

<p> Viladrich Follow-up study of heroin-addicted persons </p>

<p> admitted for treatment in Barcelona. Bulletin on </p>

<p> Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 71-. </p>

<p> Seymour, Allen Raskin, and E. H. Uhlenhuth. Cocaine: </p>

<p> clinical and biobehavioral aspects. New York: Oxford </p>

<p> University Press, 1987. </p>

<p> Shafer, Robert J., and Donald J. Mabry. Neighbors--Mexico </p>

<p> and the United States. Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1981. </p>

<p> Shaffer, Howard J., and Jones, Stephanie B. Quitting </p>

<p> cocaine. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1989). </p>

<p> Shannon, Elaine. Desperados: Latin Drug Lords, U.S. </p>

<p> Lawmen, and the War America Can't Win. New York: Viking </p>

<p> Press, 1988). </p>

<p> Shannon, Michael, Lacouture, Peter G., and Roa, Jaime. </p>

<p> Cocaine Exposure Among Children Seen at a Pediatric </p>

<p> Hospital. Pediatrics. (March 1 1989) v 83 n 3 pp. 337. </p>

<p> Sharma, K., and Shukla, V. Rehabilitation of </p>

<p> Drug-addicted persons: the experience of the Nav-Chetna </p>

<p> Center in India. Bulletin on Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. </p>

<p> 43-. </p>

<p> Sharpe, Kenneth. The Drug War: Going After Supply - A </p>

<p> Commentary. Journal of Interamerican Studies and World </p>

<p> Affairs, 30:2-3 (Summer 1988), pp. 77-. </p>

<p> Sheffield, Alan W. Narcotics Investigation for the </p>

<p> Smaller Agency. The Police Chief, 55:10 (October 1, </p>

<p> 1988), pp. 58-. </p>

<p> Sherer, Michael A. Intravenous Cocaine: Psychiatric </p>

<p> Effects, Biological Mechanisms. Biological Psychiatry. </p>

<p> December 1 1988) v 24 n 8 pp. 865. </p>

<p> Shoemaker, Pamela J., ed., Communication campaigns about </p>

<p> drugs. L. Erlbaum, 1989). Excellent study of the relation </p>

<p> between the news media and the percpetion of the drug </p>

<p> problem. </p>

<p> Shultz, George Pratt. Narcotics: a global threat. </p>

<p> Washington, D. C.: U. S. Dept. of State, Bureau of </p>

<p> Public Affairs, Office of Public Communication,Editorial </p>

<p> Division, 1987. </p>

<p> Shultz, George Pratt. Winning the war against narcotics. </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of State, Bureau of Public </p>

<p> Affairs, Office of Public Communication, Editorial </p>

<p> Division, 1988). (Current Policy ; no. 1099). </p>

<p> Shultz Jr., Richard H. Low intensity conflict. Survival, </p>

<p> 31:4 (July 1, 1989), pp. 359-. </p>

<p> Siegel, B. Z. Mercury in Marijuana. Bioscience, 38:9 </p>

<p> (October 1, 1988), pp. 619-. </p>

<p> Siegel, Loren. Zero Tolerance and Calls for the Military </p>

<p> Spark Debate about Decriminalization, Civil Liberties. </p>

<p> (Spring/Summer, 1988), 4-5. </p>

<p> Silva, Guillermo Rochabrun. Crisis, Democracy, and the </p>

<p> Left in Peru, Latin American Perspectives, Sumr 88 v 15 </p>

<p> n 3 pp. 77-. </p>

<p> Single, Eric W. The Impact of Marijuana </p>

<p> Decriminalization: An Update. Journal of Public Health </p>

<p> Policy, 10:4 (1989), pp. 456-. </p>

<p> Sivam, S. P. D1 dopaminereceptor-mediated substance P </p>

<p> depletion in the striatonigral neurons of rats subjected </p>

<p> to neonatal dopaminergic denervation: implications for </p>

<p> self-injurious behavior. Brain research. (October 23 </p>

<p> 1989) v 500 n 1 / 2. pp. 119. </p>

<p> Sivam, S.P. Cocaine selectively increases striatonigral </p>

<p> dynorphin levels by a dopaminergic mechanism. The Journal </p>

<p> of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. </p>

<p> September 1 1989) v 250 n 3 pp. 818. </p>

<p> Skinner, William F., and Cattarello, Anne M. </p>

<p> Understanding the Relationships among Attitudes, Group </p>

<p> Norms, and Behavior Using Behavioral Commitment: A </p>

<p> Structural Equation Analysis of Marijuana Use. Journal of </p>

<p> Applied Social Psychology, 15:1 (November 1, 1989), pp. </p>

<p> 1268-. </p>

<p> Smith, Deborah E. Heavy Cocaine Use by Adolescents. </p>

<p> Pediatrics, 83:4 (April 1, 1989), pp. 539-. </p>

<p> Smith, M. O., and Khan, I. An acupuncture programme for </p>

<p> the treatment of Drug-addicted persons. Bulletin on </p>

<p> Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 35. </p>

<p> Smolen, T.N., and Smolen, A. Developmental expression of </p>

<p> cocaine hepatotoxicity in the mouse. Pharmacology, </p>

<p> Biochemistry and Behavior. (June 1 1990) v 36 n 2. pp. </p>

<p> 333-. </p>

<p> Sobolev, Vitaly. Coca, &quot;Donkeys&quot; and Bombs. New
Times. </p>

<p> December 19 1989) n 51. pp. 20-. </p>

<p> Sobrian, S.K., Burton, L.E., and Robinson, N.L. </p>

<p> Neurobehavioral and immunological effects of prenatal </p>

<p> cocaine exposure in rat. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and </p>

<p> Behavior. (March 1 1990) v 35 n 3. pp. 617-. </p>

<p> Spealman, R.D., Madras, B.K., and Bergman, Jack. Effects </p>

<p> of Cocaine and Related Drugs in Non-Human Primates. II. </p>

<p> Stimulant Effects on Schedule-Controlled Behavior. The </p>

<p> Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. </p>

<p> (October 1 1989) v 251 n 1. pp. 142. </p>

<p> Spear, L.P., Frambes, N.A., and Kirstein, C.L. Fetal and </p>

<p> maternal brain and plasma levels of cocaine and </p>

<p> benzoylecgonine following chronic subcutaneous </p>

<p> administration of cocaine during gestation in rats. </p>

<p> Psychopharmacology. (April 1 1989) v 97 n 4 pp. 427. </p>

<p> Speckart, George. Modeling the Longitudinal Impact of </p>

<p> Legal Sanctions on Narcotics Use and Property Crime. </p>

<p> Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 5:1 (March 1, 1989), </p>

<p> pp. 33-. </p>

<p> Stawar, Terry L. IES Arrow Dot Performance and Success in </p>

<p> a Cocaine Detoxification Program. Perceptual and motor </p>

<p> skills. December 1 1988) v 67 n 3 pp. 960. </p>

<p> Stieb, Jeffrey D. Survey of United States Jurisdiction </p>

<p> Over High Seas Narcotics Trafficking. The Georgia Journal </p>

<p> of International and Comparative Law, 19:1 (1989), pp. </p>

<p> 119-. </p>

<p> Strang, John. Crack and cocaine use in South London drug </p>

<p> addicts: 1987-1989). British Journal of Addiction. </p>

<p> (February 1 1990) v 85 n 2. pp. 193 -. </p>

<p> Surrett, W. R. The International Narcotics Trade: An </p>

<p> Overview of Its Dimensions, Production Sources, and </p>

<p> Organizations. Congressional Research Service Report No. </p>

<p> 88-643-F. Washington DC: Library of Congress, 1988).. </p>

<p> Swartz, Conrad M., Breen, Kevin, and Leone, Filippa. </p>

<p> Serum Prolactin Levels During Extended Cocaine </p>

<p> Abstinence. The American Journal of Psychiatry. (June 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 147 n 6. pp. 777-. </p>

<p> Tamura, M. Japan: stimulant epidemics past and present. </p>

<p> Bulletin on Narcotics, 41:1-1 (1989), pp. 83-. </p>

<p> Tang, M., and Falk, J. L. Schedule induced oral self </p>

<p> administration of cocaine and ethanol solutions: lack of </p>

<p> effect of chronic desipramine. Drug and Alcohol </p>

<p> Dependence, 25:1 (February 1 1990), pp. 21-. </p>

<p> Tardiff, Kenneth, Gross, Elliot, and Wu, Jeffrey. </p>

<p> Analysis of Cocaine-Positive Fatalities. Journal of </p>

<p> Forensic Sciences, 34:1 (January 1 1989), pp. 53-. </p>

<p> Taxa Cuadros, Manuel. Drogas, pornografia y otras </p>

<p> tragedias ; Cocaina y narcotrafico. Lima, Peru: </p>

<p> Diselpesa, 1987. </p>

<p> Taylor, Arnold H. American Diplomacy and the Narcotics </p>

<p> Traffic, 1900-1939: A Study in International Humanitarian </p>

<p> Reform. Durham: Duke University Press, 1969. </p>

<p> Taylor, Wanda A., and Gold, Mark S. Pharmacologic </p>

<p> Approaches to the Treatment of Cocaine Dependence. The </p>

<p> Western Journal of Medicine. (May 1 1990) v 152 n 5. </p>

<p> pp. 573-. </p>

<p> Tella, Srihari R., Schindler, Charles W., and Goldberg, </p>

<p> Steven R. Role of Central and Autonomic Neural </p>

<p> Mechanisms in the Cardiovascular Effects of Cocaine in </p>

<p> Conscious Squirrel Monkeys. The Journal of Pharmacology </p>

<p> and Experimental Therapeutics. (February 1 1990) v 252 </p>

<p> n 2. pp. 491-. </p>

<p> Texeira, Stephen B. Port conference addresses issue of </p>

<p> drugs on the docks. Traffic World, 219 (Aug 21 1989), </p>

<p> 23-4. </p>

<p> Thomas, Jon. Mexico and Narcotics: A Must-Win Situation. </p>

<p> Tempe, AZ: INCAMEX, 1987. </p>

<p> Thompson, Mark. Senate Oks Bill Pitting Military Against </p>

<p> Drugs, Miami Herald, (May 28, 1988), 8a. </p>

<p> Timberlake, James H. Prohibition and the Progressive </p>

<p> Movement, 1900-1920. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, </p>

<p> 1966. </p>

<p> Tokatlian, Juan G. National Security and Drugs: Their </p>

<p> Impact on Colombia-U.S. Relations. Journal of </p>

<p> Interamerican Studies and World Affairs (Spring 1988), </p>

<p> pp. 133-60. </p>

<p> Tongue, E., and Turner, D. Treatment options in </p>

<p> responding to drug misuse problems. Bulletin on </p>

<p> Narcotics, 40:1 (1988), pp. 3-. </p>

<p> Toro, Maria Celia. Acuerdos de Cooperaci¢n Fallidos: </p>

<p> M&#130;xico y Estados Unidos frente al Narcotr fico,
submitted </p>

<p> to the El Colegio de Mexico-Harvard Conference on a New </p>

<p> Approach to the U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy, held at El </p>

<p> Colegio de Mexico, Mexico D.F. on (April 28-29, 1988). </p>

<p> 24. </p>

<p> Torry, Saundra. Call to Debate Legalization of Drugs </p>

<p> Becomes Louder, New York Times, (May 15, 1988), 1. </p>

<p> Trachtenberg, Michael C. and Blum, Kenneth. Improvement </p>

<p> of Cocaine Induced Neuromodulator Deficits by the </p>

<p> Neuronutrient Tropamine. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs. </p>

<p> (July 1 1988) v 20 n 3 pp. 315. </p>

<p> Trainor, John C. Coping With the Drug Runners at Sea, </p>

<p> Naval War College Review, V. 40, summer, 1987. </p>

<p> Tran, Mary Helen M. Obstetrical complications and </p>

<p> perinatal effects associated with cocaine use and abuse </p>

<p> during pregnancy. Hospital Pharmacy, 25:6 (June 1, 1990), </p>

<p> pp. 530. Summary: Current information suggests that the </p>

<p> dramatic increase in the recreational use and abuse of </p>

<p> cocaine has a great influence on the outcome of </p>

<p> pregnancy. </p>

<p> Trebach, Arnold S. The great drug war: and radical </p>

<p> proposals that could make America safe again. New York: </p>

<p> Macmillan ; London: Collier Macmillan, 1987. </p>

<p> Treverton, Gregory F. U.S. Interests in Mexico Beyond </p>

<p> Drugs, paper prepared for the El Colegio de </p>

<p> Mexico-Harvard Conference on a New Approach to </p>

<p> U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy, held at El Colegio de </p>

<p> M&#130;xico, Mexico D.F. on (April 28-29, 1988). </p>

<p> Trevi¤o Cant£, Javier. Evaluaci¢n de la Estrateg¡a </p>

<p> Internacional de Eradicaci¢n de Cultivos, submitted to </p>

<p> the El Colegio de M&#130;xico-Harvard Conference on a New </p>

<p> Approach to the U.S.-Mexico Antidrug Strategy, held at El </p>

<p> Colegio de M&#130;xico, Mexico D.F. on (April 28-29, 1988). </p>

<p> Tudehope, David I. Perinatal Cocaine Intoxication: a </p>

<p> Precaution. Medical Journal of Australia, 150:6 (March </p>

<p> 20, 1989), pp. 290-. </p>

<p> Tumlin, James A., Sands, Jeff M., and Someren, Ayten. </p>

<p> Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome Following &quot;Crack&quot; Cocaine
</p>

<p> Inhalation. The American Journal of the Medical Sciences, </p>

<p> 299:6 (June 1, 1990), pp. 366-. </p>

<p> Turkanis, S. A., Partlow, L. M., and Karler, R. Effect of </p>

<p> cocaine on neuromuscular transmission in the lobster. </p>

<p> Neuropharmacology. September 1 1989) v 28 n 9. pp. 971. </p>

<p> U.S. News &amp; World Report. The AIDS threat to teenagers. </p>

<p> Casual sex and crack cocaine. U.S. News &amp; World Report </p>

<p> (1989). </p>

<p> U.S. News and World Report. Cocaine, Communism and crisis </p>

<p> in Peru. The war on drugs... U.S. News &amp; World Report. </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> U.S. News and World Report. Cocaine, Communism and crisis </p>

<p> in Peru. The war on drugs... U.S. News &amp; World Report. </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> Uchimura, N., and North, R. A. Actions of cocaine on rat </p>

<p> nucleus accumbens neurones in vitro. British Journal of </p>

<p> Pharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 99 n 4. pp. 736-. </p>

<p> Uchimura, N., and North, R. A. Actions of cocaine on rat </p>

<p> nucleus accumbens neurones in vitro. British Journal of </p>

<p> Pharmacology. (April 1 1990) v 99 n 4. pp. 736-. </p>

<p> United Nations. International Conference on Drug Abuse </p>

<p> and Illicit Trafficking (1987 (June 17-26: Vienna): </p>

<p> Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and </p>

<p> Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 (June 1987. New York: </p>

<p> United Nations, 1987. </p>

<p> United Nations. International Conference on Drug Abuse </p>

<p> and Illicit Trafficking (1987 (June 17-26: Vienna): </p>

<p> Report of the International Conference on Drug Abuse and </p>

<p> Illicit Trafficking, Vienna, 17-26 (June 1987. New York: </p>

<p> United Nations, 1987. </p>

<p> United Nations. The Draft Convention against Illicit </p>

<p> Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances: a </p>

<p> report on the status of the draft convention, the U.S. </p>

<p> neg wanted on drug-trafficking charges in Florida. </p>

<p> United Nations. The Draft Convention against Illicit </p>

<p> Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances: a </p>

<p> report on the status of the draft convention, the U.S. </p>

<p> negotiating position, and issues for the Senate / </p>

<p> prepared for the use of the Senate Caucus on </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. An act to amend the Drug abuse office and </p>

<p> treatment act of 1972, and for other purposes. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P. O., 1980. Public Law ; 96-181. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Congressional Research Service </p>

<p> Library of Congress. Compilation of narcotics laws, </p>

<p> treaties, and executive documents: report /prepared for </p>

<p> the Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of </p>

<p> Representatives. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. 99th </p>

<p> Congress, 2d session. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Congressional Research Service </p>

<p> Library of Congress. Narcotics Interdiction and the Use </p>

<p> of the Military: Issues for Congress: proceedings of a </p>

<p> seminar held by the Congressional Research Service, (June </p>

<p> 7, 1988): report of the Defense Policy Panel and </p>

<p> Investigations Subcommittee of the Committee on Armed </p>

<p> Services, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Congressional Research Service </p>

<p> Library of Congress. Narcotics-related foreign aid </p>

<p> sanctions: an effective foreign policy?: report/ prepared </p>

<p> by the Congressional Research Service, Library of </p>

<p> Congress, on a seminar held on (July 30, 1987 for the </p>

<p> Caucus on International Narcotics Control of the United </p>

<p> States Senate. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987 [i.e. </p>

<p> 1988)]. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Congressional Research Service </p>

<p> Library of Congress. Combating international drug </p>

<p> cartels: issues for U.S. policy: report /prepared by the </p>

<p> Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, on a </p>

<p> seminar held on (May 8, 1987 for the Caucus on </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control of the United States </p>

<p> Senate. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (S. prt. ; </p>

<p> 100-45). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on </p>

<p> Appropriations. Subcommittee on Foreign Operations and </p>

<p> Related Agencies (1968-1978). Foreign assistance and </p>

<p> related agencies appropriations for 1974. Hearings before </p>

<p> a subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, House </p>

<p> of Representatives, Ninety-third Congress, first session </p>

<p> [by] Subcommittee... Washington, U.S.G.P.O., 1973. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Armed </p>

<p> Services. Investigations Subcommittee. Military Role in </p>

<p> Drug Interdiction (3). Hearing before the Investigations </p>

<p> Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Subcommittee. </p>

<p> (September 21, 1989). One hundred and first Congress. </p>

<p> 101-35. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Armed </p>

<p> Services. Investigations Subcommittee. Military Role in </p>

<p> Drug Interdiction [1]. Hearing before the Investigations </p>

<p> Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Subcommittee. </p>

<p> (February 22, 1989). One hundred and first Congress. 101- </p>

<p> 2. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Armed </p>

<p> Services. Investigations Subcommittee. Military Role in </p>

<p> Drug Interdiction (2). Hearing before the Investigations </p>

<p> Subcommittee of the House Armed Services Subcommittee. </p>

<p> (April 18, 1989). One hundred and first Congress. 101-5. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Energy and </p>

<p> Commerce. Railroad Drug Abuse Prevention Act of 1988): </p>

<p> report together with separate views (to accompany H.R. </p>

<p> 4748) (including cost estimate of the Congressional </p>

<p> Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> House Report ; 100-940. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Bulgarian-Turkish narcotics connection: United </p>

<p> States-Bulgarian relations and international drug </p>

<p> trafficking: hearings and markup before the Committee on </p>

<p> Foreign Affairs and its Subcommittee on Europe and the </p>

<p> Middle East,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Subcommittee on International Security and </p>

<p> Scientific Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for </p>

<p> fiscal years 1984-85: hearings before the Subcommittee on </p>

<p> International Security and Scientific Affairs of the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives,... Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1983- </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. International narcotics control: hearings before </p>

<p> the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-seventh Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (April 20, 21, and 22, 1982. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1982. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Narcotics review in South America: hearing </p>

<p> before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (March 17 and 22, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Worldwide narcotics review of the 1988) </p>

<p> international narcotics control strategy report: hearing </p>

<p> before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (March 3, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Narcotics review in southeast/southwest Asia, </p>

<p> the Middle East, and Africa: hearing before the Committee </p>

<p> on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One </p>

<p> Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 15, 1988). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Consideration of miscellaneous bills and </p>

<p> resolutions: markup before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred First </p>

<p> Congress, first session, on H.R. 1373, S. Con. Res. 15, </p>

<p> H.J. Res. 187... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs. </p>

<p> Review of Attorney General's trip to Asia in regard to </p>

<p> the narcotics situation: hearing before the Subcommittee </p>

<p> on Asian and Pacific Affairs of the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives,... Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1983. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Narcotics review in Central America: hearing </p>

<p> before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (March 10, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Narcotics review in the Caribbean: hearing </p>

<p> before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (March 9, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. International narcotics control: report of staff </p>

<p> study missions to Latin America, Southeast Asia, and </p>

<p> Pakistan (October 22, 1981-(April 3, 1982, to the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of </p>

<p> Representatives, December... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1982. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Subcommittee on International Security and </p>

<p> Scientific Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for </p>

<p> fiscal year 1983: hearings before the Subcommittee on </p>

<p> International Security and Scientific Affairs of the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1982- </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Subcommittee on Arms Control, International </p>

<p> Security, and Science. Foreign assistance legislation for </p>

<p> fiscal years 1988)-89: hearing before the Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Arms Control, International Security, and Science of the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One... Washington: U.S. G.P.O.: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. International narcotics control: report of staff </p>

<p> study missions to Latin America, Southeast Asia, and </p>

<p> Pakistan, (October 22, 1981-(April 3, 1982, to the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of </p>

<p> Representatives, December... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1982. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Consideration of miscellaneous bills and </p>

<p> resolutions: markup before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session on H.Con. Res. 146 .... </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Annual review of international narcotics control </p>

<p> programs and the impact of Gramm-Rudman on overseas </p>

<p> narcotics control efforts: hearing before the Committee </p>

<p> on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives,... </p>

<p> Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Cuban involvement in international narcotics </p>

<p> trafficking: hearings before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred First </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (July 25 and 27, 1989). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O.: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years </p>

<p> 1986-87: hearings before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, </p>

<p> first session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1985-1986. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years </p>

<p> 1990)-91: hearings before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred First </p>

<p> Congress, first session .... Washington: U.S. G.P.O. </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years </p>

<p> 1980-81: hearings before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-sixth Congress, </p>

<p> first session. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1979. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal year </p>

<p> 1981: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, Ninety-sixth Congress, second </p>

<p> session ... Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1980. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal years </p>

<p> 1988)-89: hearings before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session. Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal year </p>

<p> 1982. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1981. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Foreign assistance legislation for fiscal year </p>

<p> 1985: hearings before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, Ninety-eighth Congress, second </p>

<p> session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984- </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Review of United States narcotics control </p>

<p> efforts in the Middle East and South Asia: hearings </p>

<p> before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (May 13 and (May... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Review of the international narcotics control </p>

<p> strategy report: mid-year update: hearing before the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One hundredth Congress, first session, (October 7, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Review of Latin American narcotics control </p>

<p> issues: hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first </p>

<p> session, (March 18, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Review of the 1989) International Narcotics </p>

<p> Control Strategy. Hearings before the House Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs Committee, (February and (March, 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Review of the 1989) International narcotics </p>

<p> control strategy report: hearings before the Committee on </p>

<p> Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred </p>

<p> First Congress, first session, (February 28; (March 7, 9, </p>

<p> 14,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Review of the International Aspects of the </p>

<p> President's Drug Control Strategy. Hearing before the </p>

<p> House Foreign Affairs Committee. (September 12, 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Review of the President's Andean Initiative. </p>

<p> Hearing before the House Foreign Affairs Committee. </p>

<p> (November 7 and 8, 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Review of the Department of State Inspector </p>

<p> General's reports on Bureau of International Narcotics </p>

<p> Matters programs: hearings before the Committee on </p>

<p> Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundred </p>

<p> First... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1990). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. Task Force on International Narcotics Control. </p>

<p> Status report on GAO's worldwide review of narcotics </p>

<p> control programs: hearing before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (July 29, 1987. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs. U.S. response to Cuban government involvement in </p>

<p> narcotics trafficking and review of worldwide illicit </p>

<p> narcotics situation: hearings before the Committee on </p>

<p> Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives,... </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on </p>

<p> International Relations. Foreign assistance legislation </p>

<p> for fiscal year 1978: hearings before the Committee on </p>

<p> International Relations, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-fifth Congress, first session .... Washington: </p>

<p> U.S.G.P.O., 1977- </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on </p>

<p> International Relations. Foreign assistance legislation </p>

<p> for fiscal year 1979: hearings before the Committee on </p>

<p> International Relations, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-fifth Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1978- </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate </p>

<p> and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Health and the </p>

<p> Environment. Drug abuse office and treatment act </p>

<p> amendments of 1975: hearings before the Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Health and the Environment of the Committee on Interstate </p>

<p> and Foreign Commerce, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-fourth Congress,...Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1975. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate </p>

<p> and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Health and the </p>

<p> Environment. Drug Abuse Office and treatment amendments </p>

<p> of 1978: hearing before the Subcommittee on Health and </p>

<p> the Environment of the Committee on Interstate and </p>

<p> Foreign Commerce, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth </p>

<p> Congress,...Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1978. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate </p>

<p> and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Health and the </p>

<p> Environment. Drug Abuse Office and treatment amendments </p>

<p> of 1978: hearing before the Subcommittee on Health and </p>

<p> the Environment of the Committee on Interstate and </p>

<p> Foreign Commerce, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth </p>

<p> Congress,... Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1978. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate </p>

<p> and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Public Health and </p>

<p> Environment. Special Action Office for Drug Abuse </p>

<p> Prevention. Hearings, Ninety-second Congress, first </p>

<p> session, on H.R. 9264 ... [and] H.R. 9059 ... </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1971. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on Interstate </p>

<p> and Foreign Commerce. Subcommittee on Health and the </p>

<p> Environment. Comprehensive alcohol abuse and alcoholism </p>

<p> prevention, treatment, and rehabilitation act and the </p>

<p> Drug Abuse Office and treatment act authorizations: </p>

<p> hearing before the Subcommittee on Health and the </p>

<p> Environment of... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1979. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Committee on the </p>

<p> Judiciary. Subcommittee on Crime. Drug production and </p>

<p> trafficking in Latin America and the Caribbean: hearing </p>

<p> before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the </p>

<p> Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-eighth </p>

<p> Congress, first session ... (May... Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1984. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. Asian Heroin Production and </p>

<p> Trafficking. Hearing before the House Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. (August 1, 1989). SNAC-101- </p>

<p> 1-10. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. Cocaine Production in the </p>

<p> Andes. Hearing before the House Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. (June 7, 1989). SNAC-101-1- </p>

<p> 6. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics </p>

<p> control: hearings before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, Thursday, </p>

<p> (September 12, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics </p>

<p> control: provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 </p>

<p> and budget decisionmaking: hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics </p>

<p> control study missions to Latin America and Jamaica </p>

<p> (August 6-21, 1983), Hawaii, Hong Kong, Thailand, Burma, </p>

<p> Pakistan, Turkey, and Italy (January 4-22, 1984): a </p>

<p> report of the Select Committee... Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1984. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. Legalization of illicit </p>

<p> drugs: (a review of recent hearings): report of the </p>

<p> Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, One </p>

<p> Hundred First Congress, first session, together with </p>

<p> additional views. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. Review of LEAA narcotics </p>

<p> funding: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-fifth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (June 8, 1977. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1977. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. International study </p>

<p> missions: summary report 1984 / Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control of the U.S. House of </p>

<p> Representatives. Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1984. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics </p>

<p> control study missions to Latin America and Jamaica </p>

<p> (August 6-21, 1983), Hawaii, Hong Kong, Thailand, Burma, </p>

<p> Pakistan, Turkey, and Italy (January 4-22, 1984): a </p>

<p> report of the Select Committee... Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1984. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. Latin American study </p>

<p> missions concerning international narcotics problems </p>

<p> (August 3-19, 1985): a report of the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, </p>

<p> second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. International narcotics </p>

<p> control: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-eighth Congress, second session, (June 27, 1984. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1984 [i.e. 1985]. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control. Drugs and Latin America: </p>

<p> Economic and Political Impact and U.S. Policy Options. </p>

<p> Proceedings of a seminar held by the Congressional </p>

<p> Research Service, (April 26, 1989). Report of the House </p>

<p> Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control. </p>

<p> SNAC-101-1-12. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. House. Special Study Mission to </p>

<p> Latin America and the Federal Republic of Germany. The </p>

<p> world narcotics problem: the Latin American perspective: </p>

<p> report, pursuant to H. Res. 267 ... Washington, </p>

<p> U.S.G.P.O., 1973. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. International Narcotics Control </p>

<p> Act of 1989): conference report (to accompany H.R. 3611 </p>

<p> [101st, 1st session: 1989)]). Washington, D.C.: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1989). House Report ; 101-383. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on </p>

<p> Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry. Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Agricultural Research, Conservation, Forestry, and </p>

<p> General Legislation. Status of American foreign food </p>

<p> assistance programs: hearing before the Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Agricultural Research, Conservation, Forestry, and </p>

<p> General Legislation of the Committee on Agriculture, </p>

<p> Nutrition, and Forestry,... Washington: U.S. G.P.O. , </p>

<p> 1987. S. hrg. ; 100-47. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on </p>

<p> Appropriations. Subcommittee on Foreign Operations. </p>

<p> International narcotics control: hearing before a </p>

<p> subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, United </p>

<p> States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session: </p>

<p> special hearing: congressional witnesses, Department... </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1985. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on </p>

<p> Appropriations. Subcommittee on District of Columbia. </p>

<p> Followup hearings on District of Columbia appropriations </p>

<p> for fiscal year 1984: hearings before a subcommittee of </p>

<p> the Committee on Appropriations, United States Senate, </p>

<p> Ninety-eighth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1983. S. hrg. ; 98-534. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Relations. Foreign assistance legislation, fiscal year </p>

<p> 1972. Hearings, Ninety-second Congress, first session, on </p>

<p> S. 1656 ... and S. 1657 ... (June 10, and 14, 1971. </p>

<p> Washington, U.S.G.P.O., 1971. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Relations. Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific </p>

<p> Affairs. Southeast Asian drug trade: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs of the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, </p>

<p> Ninety-seventh Congress, second session, on Southeast </p>

<p> Asian... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1982. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Relations. International narcotics control: hearing </p>

<p> before the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States </p>

<p> Senate, Ninety-eighth Congress, first session on </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control Program and drug </p>

<p> trafficking in the... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1983. S. </p>

<p> hrg. ; 98-598. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Relations. FY 1981 foreign assistance legislation: </p>

<p> hearings before the Committee on Foreign Relations, </p>

<p> United States Senate, Ninety-sixth Congress, second </p>

<p> session, on S. 2423 ... S. 2422 ... S. 2588. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1980-. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on </p>

<p> Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Investigations. U.S. Government Anti-Narcotics Activities </p>

<p> in the Andean Region of South America. Hearings before </p>

<p> the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Senate </p>

<p> Governmental Affairs Committee. (September, 1989). 101- </p>

<p> 311. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on </p>

<p> Governmental Affairs. Subcommittee on Federal Spending, </p>

<p> Budget, and Accounting. Review of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act </p>

<p> of 1986: joint hearing before the Subcommittee on Federal </p>

<p> Spending, Budget, and Accounting of the Committee on </p>

<p> Governmental Affairs, United States Senate and the Senate </p>

<p> Caucus... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). S. hrg.; </p>

<p> 100-525. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on </p>

<p> Governmental Affairs. Permanent Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Investigations. International narcotics trafficking: </p>

<p> hearings before the Permanent Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, </p>

<p> United States Senate, Ninety-seventh Congress, first </p>

<p> session, (November... Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1981 [i.e. 1982]. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Human </p>

<p> Resources. Subcommittee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse. </p>

<p> Drug abuse office, prevention, and treatment amendments </p>

<p> of 1978: hearing before the Subcommittee on Alcoholism </p>

<p> and Drug Abuse of the Committee on Human Resources, </p>

<p> United States Senate, Ninety-fifth Congress,... </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1978. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Human </p>

<p> Resources. Nominations: hearing before the Committee on </p>

<p> Human Resources, United States Senate, Ninety-fifth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, on Peter G. Bourne, of the </p>

<p> District of Colombia, to be Director, Office of Drug </p>

<p> Abuse Policy... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1977. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Labor and </p>

<p> Human Resources. Subcommittee on Children, Family, Drugs </p>

<p> and Alcoholism. International narcotics control report: </p>

<p> hearing before the Subcommittee on Children, Family, </p>

<p> Drugs, and Alcoholism of the Committee on Labor and Human </p>

<p> Resources, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, </p>

<p> first... Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1985. S. hrg. ; 99-74. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Labor and </p>

<p> Public Welfare. Nominations. Hearing, Ninety-second </p>

<p> Congress, second session, on Dr. Jerome H. Jaffe, of </p>

<p> Virginia, to be director and Paul Louis Perito, of </p>

<p> Massachusetts, to be deputy director of the Special </p>

<p> Action Office for... Washington, U.S. G.P.O., 1972. </p>

<p> United States. Congress. Senate. Committee on Labor and </p>

<p> Public Welfare. Nomination. Hearing, Ninety-third </p>

<p> Congress, first session, on Robert L. DuPont, of </p>

<p> Maryland, to be Director of the Special Action Office for </p>

<p> Drug Abuse Prevention. (June 4, 1973. Washington, U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1973. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Defense. Report to House and </p>

<p> Senate Armed Services Committee, accompanying 20 (April </p>

<p> 1989) letter from J.D.C. White, Office of National Drug </p>

<p> Control Policy, to Les Aspin, Chairman, Committee on </p>

<p> Armed Services, House of Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Bureau of Justice </p>

<p> Statistics. Drug law violaters, 1980-86: Federal offenses </p>

<p> and offenders. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of </p>

<p> Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. Training manual. 1st ed. , Feb. 1988). </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Administration, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. National Conference on the Control and </p>

<p> Diversion of Controlled Substances. Committee report on </p>

<p> license revocation &amp; management control systems: </p>

<p> presented at the National Conference on the Control and </p>

<p> Diversion of Controlled Substances, San Antonio, Texas, </p>

<p> 1987. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Administration, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administartion. Intelligence collection and analytical </p>

<p> methods. Washington: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Administration, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. The Illicit drug situation in the United </p>

<p> States and Canada, 1984-1986. Washington, D.C.: Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Administration, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. National Conference on the Control and </p>

<p> Diversion of Controlled Substances. Committee report on </p>

<p> scheduling of controlled substances, precursors, </p>

<p> chemicals and controlled substances analogs: presented at </p>

<p> the National Conference on the Control and Diversion of </p>

<p> Controlled Substances, San Antonio, Texas, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Administration, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. Procedimentos de seguranca para o </p>

<p> manuseio e a remocao de substancias qu¡micas apreendidas </p>

<p> em laboratorios ilegais de cocaina no exterior. </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: Departamento de Justica dos Estados </p>

<p> Unidos, Administra&#135;ao para a Execu&#135;ao das Leis </p>

<p> Antitoxicas, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. Intelligence trends. Vol. 14, no. 3. </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Justice, Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. Training manual. 1st ed., Feb. 1988). </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice, Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Administration, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. Procedimientos para el manejo y la </p>

<p> eliminacion en condiciones de seguridad de productos </p>

<p> quimicos decomisados en lugares de fabricacion ilicita de </p>

<p> cocaina en el exterior. Washington, D.C.: Departamento de </p>

<p> Justicia de los Estados Unidos, Administracion para la </p>

<p> Ejecucion de las Leyes sobre Estupefacientes, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. Procedures for the safe handling and </p>

<p> disposal of chemicals seized at foreign illicit cocaine </p>

<p> sites. Washington, D. C.: U.S. Department of Justice, </p>

<p> Drug Enforcement Administration, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. Committee report on model state programs: </p>

<p> presented at the 2nd National Conference on the Control </p>

<p> and Diversion of Controlled Substances. Tucson, Ariz.: </p>

<p> U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration, 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Administration. National Conference on the Control and </p>

<p> Diversion of Controlled Substances. Conference report: </p>

<p> 2nd National Conference on the Control and Diversion of </p>

<p> Controlled Substances. Tucson, Ariz. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> Dept. of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Department of Justice. Le Programme de </p>

<p> stupefiants d'INTERPOL. Washington, D. C.: U.S. </p>

<p> Department of Justice: U.S. Department of Treasury, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of </p>

<p> International Narcotics Matters. International Narcotics </p>

<p> Control Strategy Report. Washington: 1990). </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of </p>

<p> International Narcotics Matters. International Narcotics </p>

<p> Control Strategy Report. Washington: GPO, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of </p>

<p> International Narcotics Matters. International Narcotics </p>

<p> Control Strategy Report. Washington: 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of </p>

<p> International Narcotics Matters. International Narcotics </p>

<p> Control Strategy Report. Washington: 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public </p>

<p> Affairs. The International drug problem and U.S. foreign </p>

<p> policy. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of State, </p>

<p> Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of Public Communication, </p>

<p> Editorial Division, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public </p>

<p> Affairs. International narcotics control update. </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of State, Bureau of Public </p>

<p> Affairs, 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public </p>

<p> Affairs. International Narcotics Control. Washington, </p>

<p> D.C.: Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State, </p>

<p> 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public </p>

<p> Affairs. International narcotics control. Washington, </p>

<p> D.C.: Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State, </p>

<p> 1988). (Gist, (June 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public </p>

<p> Affairs. Narcotics in Latin America. Washington, D.C.: </p>

<p> Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Bureau of Public </p>

<p> Affairs. International narcotics control update. Rev. </p>

<p> Jan. 1990). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of State, Bureau </p>

<p> of Public Affairs, 1990). </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. The Drug problem: </p>

<p> Americans arrested abroad. Washington, D.C.: Bureau of </p>

<p> Public Affairs, Department of State, 1986, 1987, 1988). </p>

<p> (Gist). </p>

<p> United States. Department of State. Travel warning on </p>

<p> drugs abroad. Washington, D. C.: U.S. Department of </p>

<p> State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, 1987. (Department of </p>

<p> State publication; 9558). </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Interior. Wanted, your </p>

<p> help in locating marijuana grown on public lands. </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau </p>

<p> of Land Management, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Interior. Wanted: your </p>

<p> help in locating marijuana grown on national forest </p>

<p> lands. Milwaukee, Wis.: U.S. Department of Agriculture, </p>

<p> Forest Service, Eastern Region, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Bolivia. Latin </p>

<p> American Reports (March 3, 1988), 8. </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs </p>

<p> Service. Narcotic identification manual. Rev. 1988). </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: Department of the Treasury, U.S. </p>

<p> Customs Service: U.S.G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs </p>

<p> Service. Narcotic identification manual. Rev. 1988). </p>

<p> Washington, D. C.: Department of the Treasury, U.S. </p>

<p> Customs Service, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs </p>

<p> Service. Usted puede ayudar: denuncie el contrabando de </p>

<p> estupefacientes al Servico de Aduanas de los Estados </p>

<p> Unidos. Washington: Treasury, U.S. Customs Service, 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs </p>

<p> Service. You can help!: report drug smuggling to U.S. </p>

<p> Customs: 1 (800) BE ALERT. Washington, D.C.: Department </p>

<p> of the Treasury, U.S. Customs Service, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs </p>

<p> Service. You can help!: join America's crusade against </p>

<p> drug abuse. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Customs Service, Drug </p>

<p> Awareness Program, 1987. (Customs publication ; no. 569). </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Customs </p>

<p> Service. You can help!: report drug smuggling to U.S. </p>

<p> Customs. Washington, D.C.: Treasury, U.S. Customs </p>

<p> Service, 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Administration. Procedures for the safe </p>

<p> handling and disposal of chemicals seized at foreign </p>

<p> illicit cocaine sites. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department </p>

<p> of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Internal </p>

<p> Revenue Service. Drugs, money launderers, and banks. </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: Department of the Treasury, Internal </p>

<p> Revenue Service, 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Department of the Treasury. Traffic in </p>

<p> Narcotic Drugs: Report of the Special Committee of </p>

<p> Investigation Appointed (March 25, 1918, by the Secretary </p>

<p> of the Treasury (Washington: GPO, 1919). </p>

<p> United States. Departments of Justice and Treasury. El </p>

<p> Programa INTERPOL de estupefacientes. Washington, D.C.: </p>

<p> U.S. Department of Justice: U.S. Department of the </p>

<p> Treasury, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Departments of Justice and Treasury. Le </p>

<p> Programme de stupefiants d'INTERPOL. Washington, D.C.: </p>

<p> U.S. Department of Justice: U.S. Department of Treasury, </p>

<p> 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Departments of Justice and Treasury. The </p>

<p> INTERPOL drug program. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department </p>

<p> of Justice: U.S. Department of Treasury, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Drug abuse office and treatment act for </p>

<p> 1972: P.L. 92-255 (S 2097) 86 Stat 65. Englewood, Colo.: </p>

<p> Information Handling Services, 1974. </p>

<p> United States. Drug Abuse Policy Office. Office of Policy </p>

<p> Development, the White House. 1984 national strategy for </p>

<p> prevention of drug abuse and drug trafficking: prepared </p>

<p> pursuant to the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act of </p>

<p> 1972. Washington, D.C.: Drug Abuse Policy Office, Office </p>

<p> of Policy Development, the White House, 1984. </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. DOD </p>

<p> Counter-Drug Activities: GAO Review of DoD's Compliance </p>

<p> with FY 1989) Dod Authorization Act. Testimony, (October </p>

<p> 17, 1989). GAO-T-NSIAD-90-03. </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Control: </p>

<p> U.S.-Supported Efforts in Colombia and Bolivia. NSIAD-89- </p>

<p> 24. (November, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Control: </p>

<p> Enforcement Efforts in Burma Are Not Effective. NSIAD-89- </p>

<p> 197. (September, 1989). </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Control: </p>

<p> Issues Surrounding Increased Use of the Military in Drug </p>

<p> Interdiction. NSIAD-88-156. (April, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Drug control: </p>

<p> U.S. supported efforts in Burma, Pakistan, and Thailand: </p>

<p> report to the Congress. Washington, D. C.: The Office, </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Drug </p>

<p> interdiction: Operation Autumn Harvest: a National </p>

<p> Guard-Customs anti-smuggling effort: report to </p>

<p> Congressional requesters. Washington, D.C.: U.S. General </p>

<p> Accounting Office, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Drug </p>

<p> Interdiction: Customs Service's Procurement of the P-38 </p>

<p> Airborne Early Warning Aircraft. NSIAD-89-139. (June, </p>

<p> 1989). </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Law </p>

<p> Enforcement: Military Assistance for Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Agencies. NSIAD-89-45. (November, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Drug Smuggling: </p>

<p> Capabilities for Interdicting Private Aircraft are </p>

<p> Limited and Costly. (GAO/GGD-89-93). 9 (June 1989). </p>

<p> Washington, DC: GAO, 1989). </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Federal </p>

<p> Drug-Related Efforts: Budget Information by Strategy. </p>

<p> GGD-89-96FS. (June, 1989). </p>

<p> United States. General Accounting Office. Review of </p>

<p> selected narcotics enforcement research and development </p>

<p> projects: report / of the Comptroller General of the </p>

<p> United States. Washington: General Accounting Office, </p>

<p> 1977. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Agriculture. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Forests, Family Farms, and Energy. Review </p>

<p> of the drug law enforcement activities of the Forest </p>

<p> Service; and the Omnibus Public Lands Act of 1987: </p>

<p> hearing before the Subcommittee on Forests, Family Farms, </p>

<p> and Energy of the Committee on Agriculture, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> on H. R. 3680, (July 12,1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Banking, Finance, and </p>

<p> Urban Affairs. Subcommittee on International Development </p>

<p> Institutions and Finance. Decertification resolutions: </p>

<p> hearing before the Subcommittee on International </p>

<p> Development Institutions and Finance of the Committee on </p>

<p> Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One-hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (May 5, 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Banking, Finance, and </p>

<p> Urban Affairs. Subcommittee on Financial Institutions </p>

<p> Supervision, Regulation and Insurance. Tax evasion, drug </p>

<p> trafficking, and money laundering as they involve </p>

<p> financial institutions: hearings before the Subcommittee </p>

<p> on Financial Institutions Supervision, Regulation, and </p>

<p> Insurance of the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, </p>

<p> second session, on H.R. 1367 ... H.R. 1474 ... H.R. 1945 </p>

<p> ... H.R. 2785 ... H.R. 3892 ... H.R.4280 ... H.R. 4573 </p>

<p> ... (April 16, 17, 23; and (May 14, 1986. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S.G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Developments in Latin American narcotics control, </p>

<p> (November 1985: hearing before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, </p>

<p> first session, (November 12, 1985. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Disapproving the 1988) certification by the President </p>

<p> with respect to Peru under section 481(h) of the Foreign </p>

<p> Assistance Act of 1961: report together with dissenting </p>

<p> views (to accompany H.J. Res. 497 which ... was referred </p>

<p> jointly to the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the </p>

<p> Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs) </p>

<p> (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget </p>

<p> Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (Rept. / </p>

<p> 100th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Disapproving the 1988) certification by the President </p>

<p> with respect to Bolivia under section 481(h) of the </p>

<p> Foreign Assistance Act of 1961: report together with </p>

<p> dissenting views (to accompany H.J. Res. 493 which ... </p>

<p> was referred jointly to the Committee on Foreign Affairs </p>

<p> and the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs) </p>

<p> (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget </p>

<p> Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (Rept. / </p>

<p> 100th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives </p>

<p> ;100-61). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> European Integration, the United States, and Narcotics </p>

<p> Control: Rhetoric and Reality. Report of a staff study </p>

<p> mission to Great Britain, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and </p>

<p> Kenya, (January 8-26, 1990), to the House Foreign Affairs </p>

<p> Committee. (March, 1990). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control Act of 1986: report of </p>

<p> the Committee on Foreign Affairs (including cost estimate </p>

<p> of the Congressional Budget Office) on H. R. 5352 to </p>

<p> combat international narcotics trafficking. Washington:, </p>

<p> 1986. (Report / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of </p>

<p> Representatives ; 99-798). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control Act of 1988): report </p>

<p> together with additional views (to accompany H.R. 4841 </p>

<p> which ... was referred jointly to the Committee on </p>

<p> Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Banking, Finance, and </p>

<p> Urban Affairs, and the Committee on Ways and Means) </p>

<p> (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget </p>

<p> Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (Rept. / </p>

<p> 100th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Issues in United States-Panamanian antinarcotics control: </p>

<p> hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (June 19, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O.: 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Legislation on international narcotics control: markup </p>

<p> before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session </p>

<p> on H.R. 4841, (June 15, 1988). Washington: U.S G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Legislation on international narcotics control: markup </p>

<p> before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> on H.R. 5352, (August 6, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Narcotics issues in the Bahamas and the Caribbean: </p>

<p> hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, </p>

<p> (May 12, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Narcotics review in Central America: hearing before the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 10, 1988). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Narcotics review in the Caribbean: hearing before the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 9, 1988). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Narcotics review in southeast/southwest Asia, the Middle </p>

<p> East, and Africa: hearing before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, second session, (March 15, 1988). Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G. P. O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Narcotics review in South America: hearing before the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 17 and 22, </p>

<p> 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Nicaraguan government involvement in narcotics </p>

<p> trafficking: hearing before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, </p>

<p> second session, (March 11, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Recent developments in Colombia: hearing before the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, second session, (January 27, </p>

<p> 1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Review of the international narcotics control strategy </p>

<p> report: mid-year update: hearing before the Committee on </p>

<p> Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (October 7, 1987. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Review of Latin American narcotics control issues: </p>

<p> hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, </p>

<p> (March 18, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Review of United States narcotics control efforts in the </p>

<p> Middle East and South Asia: hearings before the Committee </p>

<p> on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (May 13 and (May </p>

<p> 22, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Status report on GAO's worldwide review of narcotics </p>

<p> control programs: hearing before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (July 29, 1987. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs. Presidential </p>

<p> certifications regarding international narcotics control: </p>

<p> hearing and markup before the Subcommittee on Western </p>

<p> Hemisphere Affairs of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second </p>

<p> session on H. R. 4162, H. J. Res. 491, 493, 495, 497, and </p>

<p> 499, (March 29 and (April 13, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. </p>

<p> P. O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. The </p>

<p> role of the U.S. military in narcotics control overseas: </p>

<p> hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (August 5, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. The </p>

<p> role of intelligence in international narcotics control: </p>

<p> hearing before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, </p>

<p> (May 7, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. The </p>

<p> worldwide drug situation and international narcotics </p>

<p> control programs: hearing before the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (March 5, 1987. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. U.S. </p>

<p> narcotics control efforts in the Caribbean: report of a </p>

<p> staff study mission to the Caribbean, (August </p>

<p> 23-(September 6, 1987 to the Committee on Foreign </p>

<p> Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1987. 100th Congress, 1st session. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Foreign Affairs. </p>

<p> Worldwide narcotics review of the 1988) international </p>

<p> narcotics control strategy report: hearing before the </p>

<p> Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 3, 1988). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Reorganization to combat drug traffic and drug abuse: </p>

<p> report (to accompany H. R. 5266) (including cost </p>

<p> estimate of the Congressional Budget Office) . </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Report / 99th </p>

<p> Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives; 99-786). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Agriculture Subcommittee. National narcotics law </p>

<p> enforcement strategy: hearing before a subcommittee of </p>

<p> the Committee on Government Operations, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (March 31, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Clandestine manufacturing of dangerous drugs: </p>

<p> thirty-third report / by the Committee on Government </p>

<p> Operations. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. House report / </p>

<p> 99th Congress, 2d session ;99-570). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Coast Guard drug interdiction air operations: the case of </p>

<p> the faltering Falcon jet: forty-seventh report / by the </p>

<p> Committee on Government Operations together with </p>

<p> dissenting and additional views. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1988). (House report / 100th Congress, 2d session ; </p>

<p> 100-628). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Going to pot: marijuana cultivation on public lands and </p>

<p> the federal response: twenty-seventh report / by the </p>

<p> Committee on Government Operations together with </p>

<p> additional views. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (House </p>

<p> report / 100th Congress, 1st session. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture </p>

<p> Subcommittee. Initiatives in drug interdiction: hearings </p>

<p> before a subcommittee of the Committee on Government </p>

<p> Operations, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, first session . . . . Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1986. Pt. I. (February 6, 7, (April 16, (May 14, and </p>

<p> (September 9, 1986--Pt. 2. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture </p>

<p> Subcommittee. Oversight of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of </p>

<p> 1986: hearings before a subcommittee of the Committee on </p>

<p> Government Operations, House of Representatives, One </p>

<p> Hundredth Congress, second session, (June 1, 2, and 3, </p>

<p> 1988). Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture </p>

<p> Subcommittee. Federal antidrug abuse policies, 1987: </p>

<p> hearings before a subcommittee of the Committee on </p>

<p> Government Operations, House of Representatives, One </p>

<p> Hundredth Congress, first session, (May 8, 21, (September </p>

<p> 10, (October 28, and December 17, 1987. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Government Information, Justice, and Agriculture </p>

<p> Subcommittee. The clandestine manufacture of illicit </p>

<p> drugs: hearings before a subcommittee of the Committee on </p>

<p> Government Operations, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (September 24, and </p>

<p> December 5, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Just saying no is not enough: HUD's inadequate response </p>

<p> to the drug crisis in public housing: forty-eighth report </p>

<p> / by the Committee on Government Operations. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (House report / 100th Congress, 2d </p>

<p> session ; 100-702). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> Operation Alliance: drug interdiction on the Southwest </p>

<p> border: forty-fourth report / by the Committee on </p>

<p> Government Operations. Washington: U.S. G.P.O.,1988). </p>

<p> (House report / 100th Congress, 2d session ; 100-562). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> The National Drug Policy Board: a failure in the war on </p>

<p> drugs: twelfth report / by the Committee on Government </p>

<p> Operations, together with additional views. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (House report / 100th Congress, 1st </p>

<p> session ; 100-184). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Government Operations. </p>

<p> The National Drug Policy Board: fighting the war without </p>

<p> a battle plan: sixty-eighth report / by the Committee on </p>

<p> Government Operations together with additional views. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (House report / 100th </p>

<p> Congress, 2d session ; 100-1063). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and </p>

<p> Fisheries. Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation. </p>

<p> Zero tolerance drug Policy and confiscation of property: </p>

<p> hearing before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and </p>

<p> Navigation of the Committee on Merchant Marine and </p>

<p> Fisheries, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, second session... (May 26, 1988). Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and </p>

<p> Fisheries. Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation. </p>

<p> Coast Guard drug activities: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation of the </p>

<p> Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> on H.R. 4230, H.R.4446, H.R. 4608, and H.R. 4658, bills </p>

<p> to enforce drug laws, to curtail the flow of drugs into </p>

<p> the United States, and promote a drug free America, (June </p>

<p> 15,1988). Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and </p>

<p> Fisheries. Subcommittee on Panama Canal/Outer Continental </p>

<p> Shelf. Update on Panama situation: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Panama Canal/Outer Continental Shelf of </p>

<p> the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session . </p>

<p> . . (March 10 and (April 20, 1988). Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and </p>

<p> Fisheries. Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation. </p>

<p> Coast Guard oversight: hearings before the Subcommittee </p>

<p> on Coast Guard and Navigation of the Committee on </p>

<p> Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, first session. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S.G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and </p>

<p> Fisheries. Coast Guard Drug Interdiction and Law </p>

<p> Enforcement Act of 1986: report (to accompany H.R. 5406) </p>

<p> (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget </p>

<p> Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Rept. / </p>

<p> 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives </p>

<p> ;99-973). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and </p>

<p> Fisheries. Coast Guard Drug Enforcement Act of 1988): </p>

<p> report together with dissenting views (to accompany H. R. </p>

<p> 4658) (including cost estimate of the Congressional </p>

<p> Budget Office) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> (Rept. / 100th Congress, 2d session, House of </p>

<p> Representatives ;100-814). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Merchant Marine and </p>

<p> Fisheries. Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation. </p>

<p> Coast Guard drug interdiction: hearings before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Navigation of the </p>

<p> Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> on H.R. 10371 and H.R. 10698 .... Washington: U.S. Govt. </p>

<p> Print. Off., 1978. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Public Works and </p>

<p> Transportation. FAA's role in aviation drug enforcement: </p>

<p> hearing before the Committee on Public Works and </p>

<p> Transportation, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, second session, (June 8, 1988). Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Public Works and </p>

<p> Transportation. Federal Aviation Administration Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Assistance Act of 1988): report (to accompany </p>

<p> H.R. 4844) (including cost estimate of the Congressional </p>

<p> Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> (Report / 100th Congress, 2d session, House of </p>

<p> Representatives ; 100-891) Caption title.: 88-576-P. </p>

<p> (September 7, 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Rules. Providing for </p>

<p> the consideration of H. R. 5484: report (to accompany H. </p>

<p> Res. 541) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Report </p>

<p> / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ; </p>

<p> 99-810). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Rules. Providing for </p>

<p> the establishment of the Select Committee on Hunger, the </p>

<p> Select Committee on Children, Youth, and Families, and </p>

<p> the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control: </p>

<p> report together with minority views (to accompany H. R. </p>

<p> 26). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (Report / 100th </p>

<p> Congress, 1st session, House of Representatives ; 100-1). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Small Business. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Regulation and Business Opportunities. </p>

<p> Impact of clandestine drug laboratories on small </p>

<p> business: hearing before the Subcommittee on Regulation </p>

<p> and Business Opportunities of the Committee on Small </p>

<p> Business, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, second session, Eugene, OR, (May 13, 1988). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the District of </p>

<p> Columbia. Subcommittee on Fiscal Affairs and Health. </p>

<p> National capital area--drug trafficking: joint oversight </p>

<p> hearing before the Subcommittee on Fiscal Affairs and </p>

<p> Health of the Committee on the District of Columbia and </p>

<p> the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second </p>

<p> session on interstate drug trafficking in the Washington </p>

<p> Metropolitan Area, (April 20, 1988). Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the District of </p>

<p> Columbia. Subcommittee on Judiciary and Education. Drug </p>

<p> problem in schools and colleges: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Judiciary and Education of the Committee </p>

<p> on the District of Columbia, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, second session . . . (September </p>

<p> 23, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Designer Drug Enforcement Act of 1986: report (to </p>

<p> accompany H. R. 5246 . . . was referred jointly to the </p>

<p> Committee on the Judiciary and the Committee on Energy </p>

<p> and Commerce) (including cost estimate of the </p>

<p> Congressional Budget Office) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1986. (Rept. / 99th Congress, 2d session, House </p>

<p> of Representatives ;99-848, pt. 1). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Drug </p>

<p> Enforcement Enhancement Act of 1986: report (to accompany </p>

<p> H. R. 5393) (including cost estimate of the Congressional </p>

<p> Budget Office) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> (Report / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of </p>

<p> Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Federal </p>

<p> Firearms Law Reform Act of 1986: report together with </p>

<p> additional views (to accompany H. R. 4332) (including </p>

<p> cost estimate of the Congressional Budget Office) . </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Report / 99th </p>

<p> Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives ; 99-495). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Narcotics Penalties and Enforcement Act of 1986: report </p>

<p> together with additional views (to accompany H.R. 5394 </p>

<p> ... referred jointly to the Committees on the Judiciary </p>

<p> and Energy and Commerce) (including cost estimate of the </p>

<p> Congressional Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1986. (Rept. / 99th Congress, 2d session, House </p>

<p> of Representatives ; 99-845, pt. 1). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime. White House Conference on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second </p>

<p> session, on H. J. Res. 631 . . . (July 24, 1986. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime. Designer drugs: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first </p>

<p> session,on H.R. 214, H.R. 2977, H.R. 3936, and S. 1437, </p>

<p> (May 1, 1986. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime. Drug Enforcement Administration </p>

<p> reauthorization for fiscal year 1986: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first </p>

<p> session ... (May 1, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime. Armed career criminal legislation: </p>

<p> hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee </p>

<p> on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, second session, on H.R. 4639 and H.R. 4768 ... </p>

<p> (May 21, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime. Military cooperation with civilian </p>

<p> law enforcement: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime </p>

<p> of the Committee on the Judiciary, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first session ... </p>

<p> (April 24, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime. Drug enforcement: hearing before </p>

<p> the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the </p>

<p> Judiciary, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, second session, on H.R. 526 and related bills </p>

<p> ... (August 7, 1986. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the District of </p>

<p> Columbia. Subcommittee on Judiciary and Education. Drug </p>

<p> problem in schools and colleges: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Judiciary and Education of the Committee </p>

<p> on the District of Columbia, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, second session ... (September 23, </p>

<p> 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime. Drug Enforcement Administration </p>

<p> reauthorization for fiscal year 1986: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee on the Judiciary, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, first </p>

<p> session . . . (May 1, 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime. State and local law enforcement </p>

<p> assistance provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: </p>

<p> hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the Committee </p>

<p> on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, on H.R. 1411 ... (April 1, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Crime. Forfeiture portions of the </p>

<p> Comprehensive Crime Bill and the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of </p>

<p> 1986: hearing before the Subcommittee on Crime of the </p>

<p> Committee on the Judiciary, House of Representatives, One </p>

<p> Hundredth Congress, first session ...(March 9, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on the Judiciary. White </p>

<p> House Conference on Drug Abuse and Control Resolution of </p>

<p> 1986: report (to accompany H.J. Res. 631 ... was referred </p>

<p> jointly to the Committee on the Judiciary, the Committee </p>

<p> on Foreign Affairs, and the Committee on Energy and </p>

<p> Commerce) (including cost estimate of the Congressional </p>

<p> Budget Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> (Rept. / 99th Congress, 2d session, House of </p>

<p> Representatives ;99-846, pt. 1). </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Ways and Means. </p>

<p> International Drug Traffic Enforcement Act: report </p>

<p> together with dissenting views (to accompany H.R. 5410) </p>

<p> (including cost estimate of the Congressional Budget </p>

<p> Office). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. (Report / </p>

<p> 99th Congress, 2d session, House of Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Committee on Ways and Means. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Trade. International Drug Enforcement </p>

<p> Act: hearing before the Subcommittee on Trade of the </p>

<p> Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, second session on H. R. 5310 . . . </p>

<p> (August 5, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Judiciary Committee. Military </p>

<p> Cooperation with Civilian Law Enforcement Officials: </p>

<p> hearing before Subcommittee on Crime, (July 23, 1983. </p>

<p> Serial No. 141. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug trafficking and abuse along the </p>

<p> southwest border (El Paso): hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (January 13, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in New </p>

<p> England: a report of the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. Committee print. 99th </p>

<p> Congress, 2d session. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Study mission to Korea, Thailand, Burma, </p>

<p> Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Hawaii (January </p>

<p> 14-25, 1988): report of the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, One Hundredth Congress, second </p>

<p> session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). 100th Congress, </p>

<p> 2d session. House of Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug interdiction: hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, </p>

<p> (April 30, 1987. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug trafficking and abuse along the </p>

<p> southwest border (San Diego): hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (January 16, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse treatment and prevention </p>

<p> provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing </p>

<p> before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and </p>

<p> Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (March 11, 1987. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Issues relating to drug trafficking in the </p>

<p> New Jersey area: hearing before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, Friday, (April 11, </p>

<p> 1986. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse prevention in America's schools: </p>

<p> hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, Tuesday, (June 9, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug trafficking and abuse along the </p>

<p> southwest border (El Paso): hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (January 13, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Narcotics control in Mexico: hearing before </p>

<p> the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first </p>

<p> session, (August 5, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Strategy report of New York City Narcotics </p>

<p> Control Task Force: report of the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, One hundredth Congress, </p>

<p> first session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. 100th </p>

<p> Congress, 1st session. House of Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Sports and drug abuse prevention: hearing </p>

<p> before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and </p>

<p> Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (September 10, 1987. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Panama: hearing before the Select Committee </p>

<p> on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (June 19, 1986. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Southwest border hearings: El Paso, </p>

<p> Texas--Tucson, Arizona--San Diego, California and Mexico </p>

<p> trip report: Nogales--Mexico City--Culiac n (January </p>

<p> 12-19, 1986): a report of the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, </p>

<p> second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug interdiction: hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, </p>

<p> (April 30, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Trafficking and abuse of crack in New York </p>

<p> City: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, second session, (July 18, 1986. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. The crack cocaine crisis: joint hearing </p>

<p> before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and </p>

<p> Control, House of Representatives and the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Children, Youth, and Families, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> Tuesday, (July 15, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O.,, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Dialog [Dialogue] with the Andean </p>

<p> Parliament: executive session of the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, second session, (June 21, 1988). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., , 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse education: hearing before the </p>

<p> Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (May 20, 1986--Pt. 1. (May </p>

<p> 21, 1986--Pt. 2. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking along the </p>

<p> Southwest border (Tucson): hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (January 14, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Implementation of provisions of the </p>

<p> Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One hundredth Congress, first session, </p>

<p> (February 26, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. National Drug Policy Board strategy plans: </p>

<p> hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, (April 14, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. U.S. foreign Policy and international </p>

<p> narcotics control--Part II: hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (March 29, 1988). Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Narcotics trafficking and abuse in the Los </p>

<p> Angeles area: hearing before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (October 31, 1986. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse prevention in America's schools: </p>

<p> hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control, House of Representatives, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, Tuesday, (June 9, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. The federal war on drugs; past, present, and </p>

<p> future: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, House of Representatives,Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, second session, (October 3, 1986. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S.G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Cocaine abuse and the federal response: </p>

<p> hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress,first session, Tuesday, (July 16, 1985. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. International narcotics control: provisions </p>

<p> of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and budget decision </p>

<p> making: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One </p>

<p> hundredth Congress, first session, (March 25, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Heroin and cocaine trafficking and the </p>

<p> relationship between intravenous drug use and AIDS (New </p>

<p> York): hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (November 26, 1985. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in Chicago: </p>

<p> hearings before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (May 31-(June 1, 1985. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. U.S. narcotics control efforts in Mexico and </p>

<p> on the Southwest border: hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (July 22, 1986.: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Colombian drug trafficking and control: </p>

<p> hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (May 6, 1987. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G. P. O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drugs and dropouts: a report of the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, second session. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> Committee print. 99th Congress, 2d session, House of </p>

<p> Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Cocaine and marihuana trafficking in </p>

<p> southeastern United States: hearings before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-fifth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (June 9 and 10, 1978. Washington: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., </p>

<p> 1978. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control. Use of international cargo for </p>

<p> narcotics smuggling: hearing before the Select Committee </p>

<p> on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-fifth Congress, second session, (October 24, 1978. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1979. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. U.S. foreign Policy and international </p>

<p> narcotics control: hearing before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, second session, (March 16, 1988). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Study mission report, US congressional </p>

<p> delegation to the Andean Parliament, Paipa, and Bogota, </p>

<p> Colombia: report of the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, One Hundredth Congress, first session. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Intravenous drug use and AIDS: the impact on </p>

<p> the black community: hearing before the Select Committee </p>

<p> on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, first session, (September 25, </p>

<p> 1987. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in the </p>

<p> Northeast region: hearings before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (September 20-21, </p>

<p> 1985. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Latin American study missions concerning </p>

<p> international narcotics problems (August 3-19, 1985): a </p>

<p> report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and </p>

<p> Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O.,1986. 99th Congress, 2d session. </p>

<p> House of Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in New </p>

<p> England: a report of the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, Ninety-ninth Congress, second </p>

<p> session.Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. 99th Congress, 2d </p>

<p> session. House of Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. The Federal Drug Strategy. Hearing before </p>

<p> the House Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and </p>

<p> Control. (September 25, 1989). SNAC-101-1-15. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. 1987 update on drugs and dropouts: report of </p>

<p> the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, One </p>

<p> hundredth Congress, first session. Washington: U.S. G. P. </p>

<p> O., 1987. 100th Congress, lst session. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse and drug trafficking in the </p>

<p> Northeast region: hearings before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (September 20-21, </p>

<p> 1985. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse treatment and prevention </p>

<p> provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing </p>

<p> before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and </p>

<p> Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (March 11, 1987. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G. P. O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Narcotics interdiction and enforcement </p>

<p> efforts in South Florida: hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> Friday (May 16, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. The effect of drug abuse on the black </p>

<p> community: hearing before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, first session, (September 27, </p>

<p> 1985. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Cocaine babies: hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first </p>

<p> session,(October 16, 1987. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Federal drug enforcement and interdiction </p>

<p> provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: hearing </p>

<p> before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and </p>

<p> Control, House of Representatives, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (March 18, 1987. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse education: hearing before the </p>

<p> Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Oversight of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 </p>

<p> and the federal drug strategy: hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, One Hundredth Congress, first session, </p>

<p> December 8, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. International narcotics control: hearings </p>

<p> before the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and </p>

<p> Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, </p>

<p> first session, Thursday, (September 12, 1985. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse in the workplace: hearing before </p>

<p> the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second </p>

<p> session, (May 7, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Hearing on the state and local law </p>

<p> enforcement assistance provisions of the Anti-Drug Abuse </p>

<p> Act of 1986: hearing before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One hundredth Congress, first session, (March 4, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Narcotics control conference: hearing before </p>

<p> the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second </p>

<p> session, (February 10, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug trafficking and abuse along the </p>

<p> southwest border (San Diego): hearing before the Select </p>

<p> Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of </p>

<p> Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (January 16, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Implementation of state and local grants </p>

<p> programs: hearing before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, second session, (May 26, 1988). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Impact of Gramm-Rudman on federal drug </p>

<p> programs: hearing before the Select Committee on </p>

<p> Narcotics Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, (March 18, 1986. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. International narcotics control: provisions </p>

<p> of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and budget decision </p>

<p> making: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, One </p>

<p> hundredth Congress, first session, (March 25, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. 1986 major city survey on drug arrests and </p>

<p> seizures: report of the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, One Hundredth Congress, first session. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. 100th Congress, 1st </p>

<p> session. House of Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Implementation of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of </p>

<p> 1986: report of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control, One Hundredth Congress, first session, </p>

<p> together with additional views. Washington: U.S. G. P. </p>

<p> O., 1988). 100th Congress, 1st session, House of </p>

<p> Representatives. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. Drug abuse in the workplace: hearing before </p>

<p> the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, </p>

<p> House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth Congress, second </p>

<p> session, (May 7, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. House. Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse </p>

<p> and Control. The federal war on drugs; past, present, and </p>

<p> future: hearing before the Select Committee on Narcotics </p>

<p> Abuse and Control, House of Representatives, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, second session, (October 3, 1986. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O.: </p>

<p> United States. House. U.S. House of Representatives. </p>

<p> Conference Report to Accompany H.R. 4481, National </p>

<p> Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1989). Report </p>

<p> 100-989. 100th Congress, 2nd sess. 28 (September 1988). </p>

<p> United States. House. U.S. narcotics control programs </p>

<p> overseas: a continuing assessment: report of a staff </p>

<p> study mission to South America, the Mediterranean and </p>

<p> Middle East, and Southwest Asia, (March 1986-(January </p>

<p> 1987, to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, U.S. House of </p>

<p> Representatives. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. 100th </p>

<p> Congress, 1st session. </p>

<p> United States. House. Ways and Means Committee. Report </p>

<p> No. 852 of the Ways and Means Committee: Importation and </p>

<p> Exportation of Narcotic Drugs, 67th Congress, 2nd sess., </p>

<p> (March 27, 1922. </p>

<p> United States. International Narcotics Control Act of </p>

<p> 1989). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1989). </p>

<p> United States. National Defense Authorization Act for FY </p>

<p> 1989) (PL-100-456), Congressional Record-House, 100th </p>

<p> Congress, 2nd sess., vol. 134. </p>

<p> United States. National Institute for Drug Abuse. </p>

<p> National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, Washington, GPO, </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> United States. National Narcotics Intelligence Consumer's </p>

<p> Committee. The NNICC Report, 1985-1986. Washington, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Office of Drug Abuse Policy. Federal </p>

<p> strategy for prevention of drug abuse and drug </p>

<p> trafficking, 1982: prepared for the President pursuant to </p>

<p> the Drug Abuse Office and Treatment Act of 1972 / </p>

<p> participating departments and independent agencies,... </p>

<p> Washington, D.C.: Drug Abuse Policy Office, Office of </p>

<p> Policy Development, the White House, U.S. G.P.O., 1982. </p>

<p> United States. Office of National Drug Policy. National </p>

<p> Drug Control Strategy. Washington, DC: US Government </p>

<p> Printing Office, 1989). </p>

<p> United States. Office of National Drug Policy. National </p>

<p> Drug Control Strategy. Washington, DC: US Government </p>

<p> Printing Office, 1990). </p>

<p> United States. Office of Technology Assessment. The </p>

<p> Border war on drugs. Washington, DC: Congress of the </p>

<p> U.S., Office of Technology Assessment, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. President. Proposed legislation--Criminal </p>

<p> Justice Reform Act of 1987: message from the President of </p>

<p> the United States transmitting a draft of proposed </p>

<p> legislation to reform procedures for enforcement of the </p>

<p> Fourth Amendment to the Constitution, for collateral </p>

<p> review of criminal judgments, and for the imposition of </p>

<p> capital punishment, and for other purposes. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (House document / 100th Congress, 1st </p>

<p> session ; 100-117) Referred to the Committee on the </p>

<p> Judiciary. 87-641-P. (October 19, 1987. </p>

<p> United States. President. The Drug Free America Act of </p>

<p> 1986: message from the President of the United States </p>

<p> transmitting a draft of proposed legislation to foster a </p>

<p> drug-free federal workplace, to promote excellence in </p>

<p> American education by achieving and maintaining a </p>

<p> drug-free environment in our nation's schools, to extend </p>

<p> and make improvements in substance abuse service programs </p>

<p> . . . . Washington: G.P.O., 1986. (House document / 99th </p>

<p> Congress, 2d session ; 99-266). </p>

<p> UNited States. President. White House Conference for a </p>

<p> Drug Free America. The White House Conference for a Drug </p>

<p> Free America: final report, (June 1988). Washington, D. </p>

<p> C.: The Conference, U.S. G.P.O. , 1988). </p>

<p> United States. President's Commission on Organized Crime. </p>

<p> America's habit: drug abuse, drug trafficking, and </p>

<p> organized crime: report to the President and the Attorney </p>

<p> General. Washington, D.C.: The Commission: 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Caucus on International Narcotics </p>

<p> Control. Drug trafficking: the escalating crisis on the </p>

<p> Southwest border: hearing before the Caucus on </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control of the United States </p>

<p> Senate, One Hundredth Congress, first session ... (August </p>

<p> 18, 1987, Phoenix, AZ. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Caucus on International Narcotics </p>

<p> Control. National and international security threat of </p>

<p> narcotics trafficking: hearing before the Caucus on </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control of the United States </p>

<p> Senate, One Hundredth Congress, first session . . . (June </p>

<p> 8, 1987, New York, New York. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1987. (S. hrg. ; 100-246). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Armed Services. Role </p>

<p> of the Department of Defense in drug interdiction: </p>

<p> hearings before the Committee on Armed Services, United </p>

<p> States Senate, One Hundredth Congress, second session, </p>

<p> (June 8, 14, 1988) and a joint hearing before the </p>

<p> Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate and the </p>

<p> Committee on Armed Services, House of Representatives, </p>

<p> One Hundredth Congress, second session, (June 15, 1988). </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (S. hrg. ; 100-878). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Banking, Housing, and </p>

<p> Urban Affairs. The Drug Money Seizure Act and the Bank </p>

<p> Secrecy Act amendments: hearing before the Committee on </p>

<p> Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States </p>

<p> Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, on S. 571 </p>

<p> . . . S. 2306 . . . (May 1,1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. </p>

<p> O.,U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. </p>

<p> International terrorism, insurgency, and drug </p>

<p> trafficking: present trends in terrorist activity: joint </p>

<p> hearings before the Committee on Foreign Relations and </p>

<p> the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, </p>

<p> Ninety-ninth Congress,first session, (May 13, 14, and 15, </p>

<p> 1985. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. </p>

<p> Resolution pertaining to the presidential certification </p>

<p> that the Bahamas have fully cooperated with the United </p>

<p> States anti-drug efforts: report (to accompany S.J. Res. </p>

<p> 90). Washington, D.C.: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. (Report / 100th </p>

<p> Congress, 1st session, Senate ; 100-24). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. </p>

<p> Resolution pertaining to the presidential certification </p>

<p> that Panama has fully cooperated with the United States </p>

<p> anti-drug efforts: report (to accompany S. J. Res. 91) </p>

<p> together with additional views. Washington, D.C.: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1987. (Report / 100th Congress, 1st session, </p>

<p> Senate ; 100-25). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. </p>

<p> Resolution pertaining to the presidential certification </p>

<p> that Mexico has fully cooperated with the United States </p>

<p> anti-drug efforts: report (to accompany S.J. Res. 92) </p>

<p> together with additional views. Washington, D.C.: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O.,1987. Report / 100th Congress, 1st session, Senate </p>

<p> ; 100-26). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Foreign Relations. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics, and International </p>

<p> Communications. Drugs, law enforcement, and foreign </p>

<p> Policy: hearings before the Subcommittee on Terrorism, </p>

<p> Narcotics, and International Communications and </p>

<p> International Economic Policy, Trade, Oceans, and </p>

<p> Environment of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United </p>

<p> States Senate, One Hundredth Congress, first session.: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (S. hrg.; 100-773) Second </p>

<p> session--Pt. 2. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Federal Spending, Budget, and Accounting. </p>

<p> Review of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986: joint hearing </p>

<p> before the Subcommittee on Federal Spending, Budget, and </p>

<p> Accounting of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, </p>

<p> United States Senate and the Senate Caucus on </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control, One Hundredth Congress, </p>

<p> first session, (May 4,1987, Miami, FL. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1988). (S. hrg. ; 100-525). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Border management reorganization and drug interdiction. </p>

<p> prepared for the Committee on Governmental Affairs, </p>

<p> United States Senate, by the Congressional Research </p>

<p> Service, Library of Congress. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., </p>

<p> 1988). (100th Congress, 2d session). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Structure of </p>

<p> International Drug Trafficking Organizations. Hearing </p>

<p> before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of </p>

<p> the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee. (September 12, </p>

<p> 13, 1989). No. 101-350. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Banking Secrecy </p>

<p> Act: hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, </p>

<p> United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, first </p>

<p> session, (October 29, 1985. Washington: 1986. (S. hrg. ; </p>

<p> 99-472). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Banking Secrecy </p>

<p> Act: hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, </p>

<p> United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, first </p>

<p> session, (October 29, 1985. Washington: U.S.G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> (S. hrg. ; 99-472) </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. General </p>

<p> Accounting Office findings on the enforcement of the Bank </p>

<p> Secrecy Act: hearing before the Permanent Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs, </p>

<p> United States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, second </p>

<p> session, (June 12, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1986. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Federal Drug </p>

<p> Interdiction: Role of the Department of Defense. Hearing </p>

<p> before the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. </p>

<p> (June 9, 1989). One hundred and first Congress. 101-216. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Role of the </p>

<p> feature film industry in a national effort to diminish </p>

<p> drug use among young people: hearing before the Permanent </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on </p>

<p> Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (October 24, 1985. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G. P. O., 1986. (S. hrg. ; 99-566). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Drugs and money </p>

<p> laundering in Panama: hearing before the Permanent </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on </p>

<p> Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, One Hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, second session, (January 28, 1988). Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1988). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Governmental Affairs. </p>

<p> Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Federal drug </p>

<p> interdiction: command, control, communications, and </p>

<p> intelligence network: hearings before the Permanent </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on </p>

<p> Governmental Affairs, United States Senate, One hundredth </p>

<p> Congress, first session, (March 18 and 24, 1987. </p>

<p> Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on Labor and Human </p>

<p> Resources. Subcommittee on Children, Family, Drugs and </p>

<p> Alcoholism. Scope and impact of narcotic trafficking in </p>

<p> Alaska: hearing before the Subcommittee on Children, </p>

<p> Family, Drugs, and Alcoholism of the Committee on Labor </p>

<p> and Human Resources, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, first session ... (August 30, 1985. Washington: </p>

<p> U.S. G.P.O., 1986.(S. hrg. ; 99-394): </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary and </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control Caucus. Fighting Drug </p>

<p> Abuse. Prepared by the Majority Staffs of the Senate </p>

<p> Judiciary Committee and the International Narcotics </p>

<p> Control Caucus. (January, 1990). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1987: hearing before </p>

<p> the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, One </p>

<p> Hundredth Congress, first session on S. 789 . . . (May </p>

<p> 14, 1987. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., 1988). (S. hrg.; </p>

<p> 100-486.). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Criminal Law. The Armed Career Criminal </p>

<p> Act amendments: hearing before the Subcommittee on </p>

<p> Criminal Law of the Committee on the Judiciary, United </p>

<p> States Senate, Ninety-ninth Congress, second session, on </p>

<p> S. 2312 . . . (May 14, 1986. Washington: U.S. G.P.O., </p>

<p> 1986. (S. hrg. ; 99-797). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism. DEA budget and </p>

<p> oversight for fiscal year 1987: hearing before the </p>

<p> Subcommittee on Security and Terrorism of the Committee </p>

<p> on the Judiciary, United States Senate, Ninety-ninth </p>

<p> Congress, second session on examining significant aspects </p>

<p> of the DEA's record of achievement during 1985, (April </p>

<p> 16, 1986. Washington: U.S. G. P. O., 1986. (S. hrg. ; </p>

<p> 99-862). </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Committee on the Judiciary. </p>

<p> Subcommittee to Investigate Juvenile Delinquency. </p>

<p> Stopping mother ships--a loophole in drug enforcement: </p>

<p> hearing before the Subcommittee to Investigate Juvenile </p>

<p> Delinquency of the Committee on the Judiciary, United </p>

<p> States Senate, Ninety-fifth Congress, second session on </p>

<p> S. 3437 ... (August 22, 1978. Washington: U.S. Govt. </p>

<p> Print. Off., 1978. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Department of Defense Support for </p>

<p> Drug Interdiction. Hearing before a Senate Appropriations </p>

<p> subcommittee, 1985. #98-1285. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Hearings Before the Subcommittee </p>

<p> on Improvements in the Federal Criminal Code of the </p>

<p> Committee of the Judiciary Pursuant to S. Res. 67, 84th </p>

<p> Congress, 1st sess., (June 2 to December 15, 1955. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. Senate Caucus on International </p>

<p> Narcotics Control. Legislation aimed at combating </p>

<p> international drug trafficking and money laundering: a </p>

<p> staff report / prepared for the use of the Senate Caucus </p>

<p> on International Narcotics Control. Washington: U.S. </p>

<p> G.P.O., 1987. </p>

<p> United States. Senate. The U.N. Draft Convention against </p>

<p> Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic </p>

<p> Substances: a report on the status of the draft </p>

<p> convention, the U.S. negotiating position, and issues for </p>

<p> the Senate / prepared for the use of the Senate Caucus on </p>

<p> International Narcotics Control. Washington: U.S.G.P.O.: </p>

<p> 1987. 100th Congress, 1st session. </p>

<p> van de Bor, M. Decreased Cardiac Output in Infants of </p>

<p> Mothers Who Abused Cocaine. Pediatrics, (January 1, 1990) </p>

<p> 85:1, pp. 30-. </p>

<p> van de Bor, Margot, Walther, Frans J., and Sims, Maureen </p>

<p> E. Increased Cerebral Blood Flow Velocity in Infants of </p>

<p> Mothers Who Abuse Cocaine. Pediatrics. (May 1 1990) v 85 </p>

<p> n 5. pp. 733-. </p>

<p> Van Vunakis, Helen, Tashkin, Donald, and Rigas, Basil </p>

<p> Relative Sensitvity and Specificity of Salivary and Serum </p>

<p> Cotinine in Identifying Tobacco-Smoking Status of </p>

<p> Self-Reported Nonsmokers and Smokers of Tobacco and/or </p>

<p> Marijuana. Archives of Environmental Health, 44:1 </p>

<p> (January 1, 1989), pp. 53. </p>

<p> Van Wert, J. W. Government of Mexico Herbicidal Opium </p>

<p> Poppy Eradication Program: A Summative Evaluation, </p>

<p> Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation in political science, </p>

<p> University of Southern California, 1985. </p>

<p> Van Wert, James W. The US State Department's Narcotics </p>

<p> Control Policy in the Americas. Journal of Interamerican </p>

<p> Studies and World Affairs, 30:2-3 (Summer 1988), pp. 1-. </p>

<p> Vandegaer, Frieda. Cocaine--the deadliest addiction. How </p>

<p> to help victims of this widespread, but little understood </p>

<p> addiction. Nursing. (February 1 1989) v 19 n 2 pp. 72. </p>

<p> Vargas Haya, Hector. Defraudadores y contrabandistas. 2a </p>

<p> ed. Lima, Peru: Editorial Nueva Educacion, 1980. </p>

<p> Vaughn, J. R. Conbatting the Drug Problem in the United </p>

<p> States. Police Chief (October 1988), pp. 17-20. </p>

<p> Vereby, Karl, and DePace, Ann. Rapid Confirmation of </p>

<p> Enzyme Multiple Immunoassay Technique (EMIT)Cocaine </p>

<p> Positive Urine Samples by Capillary Gas-Liquid </p>

<p> Chromatography/Nitrogen Phosphorus Detection(GLC/NPD). </p>

<p> Journal of Forensic Sciences. (January 1 1989) v 34 n 1 </p>

<p> pp. 46. </p>

<p> Villacrez Riquelme, Eloy. Nuestra guerra civil: Ayacucho </p>

<p> 80--. Lima, Peru: Graphos 100 Editores, 1985. </p>

<p> Vitullo, John C. Cocaine-Induced Small Vessel Spasm in </p>

<p> Isolated Rat Hearts. The American Journal of Pathology. </p>

<p> (July 1 1989) v 135 n 1 pp. 85. </p>

<p> Volkow, Nora D., Fowler, Joanna S., and Wolf, Alfred P. </p>

<p> Effects of Chronic Cocaine Abuse on Postsynaptic Dopamine </p>

<p> Receptors. The American Journal of Psychiatry. (June 1 </p>

<p> 1990) v 147 n 6. pp. 719-. </p>

<p> Walker, William O. III. Control Across the Border: The </p>

<p> United States, Mexico, and Narcotics Policy, 1936-1940, </p>

<p> Pacific Historical Review 47 (1978), 91-106. </p>

<p> Walker, William O. III. Drug Control and National </p>

<p> Security, Diplomatic History 12:2 (Spring, 1988). </p>

<p> Walker, William O. III. Drug Control in the Americas. </p>

<p> Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1981. </p>

<p> Wang, Ging Kuo. Cocaine-induced closures of single </p>

<p> batrachotoxin-activated Na+ channels in planar lipid </p>

<p> bilavers. The Journal of General Physiology. December 1 </p>

<p> 1988) v 92 n 6 pp. 747. </p>

<p> Ward, B. Guns, Drugs, and Violence: An Unholy Alliance. </p>

<p> Police Chief (March 1988), pp. 52-53. </p>

<p> Watts, W. David, and Wright, Lloyd S. The Relationship of </p>

<p> Alcohol, Tobacco, Marijuana, and Other Illegal Drug Use </p>

<p> to Delinquency Among Mexican-American, Black, and White </p>

<p> Adolescent Males. Adolescence, 25:97 (Spring 1990), pp. </p>

<p> 171-. </p>

<p> Watzl, Bernhard, and Watson, Ronald R. Minireview: </p>

<p> Immunomodulation by Cocaine--A Neuroendocrine Mediated </p>

<p> Response. Life Sciences. 1990) v 46 n 19 pp. 1319-. </p>

<p> Weatherford, J. McIver. Narcoticos en Bolivia y los </p>

<p> Estados Unidos. 1a ed. La Paz, Bolivia: Editorial Los </p>

<p> Amigos del Libro, 1987. </p>

<p> Weber, Richard J., and Pert, Agu, The periaqueductal gray </p>

<p> matter mediates opiate-induced immunosuppression. </p>

<p> Science, 245:188-90 (July 14 1989). </p>

<p> Weinberger, Caspar. Our Troops Shouldn't be Drug Cops, </p>

<p> Washington Post, (May 22, 1987, c2. </p>

<p> Weisman, C.P., Anglin, M.D., and Fisher, D.G. The MMPI </p>

<p> Profiles of Narcotics Addicts: II. Ethnic and Criminal </p>

<p> History Effects. The International Journal of the </p>

<p> Addictions, 24:9 (1989), pp. 881-. </p>

<p> Weiss, Roger D., Mirin, Steven M., and Griffin, Margaret </p>

<p> L. Psychopathology in Cocaine Abusers. Changing </p>

<p> Trends.Journal of nervous and mental disease. December 1 </p>

<p> 1988) v 176 n 12 pp. 719. </p>

<p> Wenger, G.R., and Wright, D.W. Behavioral effects of </p>

<p> cocaine and its interaction with d-amphetamine and </p>

<p> morphine in rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and </p>

<p> Behavior. (March 1 1990) v 35 n 3. pp. 595-. </p>

<p> Whitaker, Ben. The Global Connection: the Crisis of Drug </p>

<p> Addiction. London: J. Cape, 1987. </p>

<p> White, Peter T. Coca--An Ancient Herb Turns Deadly. </p>

<p> National geographic. (January 1 1989) v 175 n 1 pp. 3. </p>

<p> Summary: Used for centuries by South America's highland </p>

<p> Indians, a mild stimulant has been transformed into </p>

<p> today's international killer drug: cocaine. </p>

<p> Wiley, Harvey W. Another Soothing Syrup Victim, Good </p>

<p> Housekeeping 60 (June 1915), 709-10. </p>

<p> Wiley, Nena. Airborne drug hunters, Air Progress. </p>

<p> 51:6-12+ Sep 1989). </p>

<p> Wilkerson, R. Douglas. Cardiovascular Effects of Cocaine: </p>

<p> Enhancement by Yohimbine and Atropine. The Journal of </p>

<p> Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics. (January 1 </p>

<p> 1989) v 248 n 1 pp. 57. </p>

<p> Willis, Dawn, and Harbit, Maryanne D. A Fatal Attraction: </p>

<p> Cocaine Related Subarachnoid Hemorrhage. Journal of </p>

<p> Neuroscience Nursing. (June 1 1989) v 21 n 3 pp. 171. </p>

<p> Wise, R.A., Murray, A., and Bozarth, M.A. Bromocriptine </p>

<p> self-administration and bromocriptine-reinstatement of </p>

<p> cocaine-trained and heroin-trained lever pressing in </p>

<p> rats. Psychopharmacology, 100:3 (March 1, 1990), pp. 355. </p>

<p> Wisotsky, Steven. Breaking the impasse in the war on </p>

<p> drugs. New York: Greenwood Press, 1986. </p>

<p> Woods Jr., James R., and Plessinger, Mark A. Pregnancy </p>

<p> increases cardiovascular toxicity to cocaine. American </p>

<p> Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. (February 1 1990) </p>

<p> v 162 n 2. pp. 529-. Summary: This study, which </p>

<p> demonstrated that pregnant sheep are more sensitive to </p>

<p> the cardiovascular effects of cocaine than nonnregnant </p>

<p> sheep, suggests that pregnant women may be at increased </p>

<p> risk of cocaine-related cardiac or vascular </p>

<p> complications if they continue cocaine abuse during </p>

<p> pregnancy. </p>

<p> Woolverton, W.L., and Virus, R.M. The effects of a D1 and </p>

<p> a D2 dopamine antagonist on behavior maintained by </p>

<p> cocaine or food. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior. </p>

<p> (March 1 1989) v 32 n 3 pp. 691. </p>

<p> Working Group on Comparison and Evaluation of Methods of </p>

<p> Treatment and Rehabilitation for Drug Dependence and </p>

<p> Abuse (1973: Frankfurt am Main). Comparison and </p>

<p> evaluation of methods of treatment and rehabilitation for </p>

<p> drug dependence and abuse; report on a working group </p>

<p> convened by the Regional Office for Europe of the World </p>

<p> Health Organization,... Copenhagen, Regional Office for </p>

<p> Europe, World Health Organization, 1973. </p>

<p> Working Group on Measures for the Prevention and Control </p>

<p> of Drug Abuse and Dependence (1971: Hague). Measures for </p>

<p> the prevention and control of drug abuse and dependence. </p>

<p> Report on a Working Group convened by the Regional Office </p>

<p> for Europe of the World Health Organization, The Hague, </p>

<p> 14-17 (April 1971. Copenhagen, World Health </p>

<p> Organization, 1971. </p>

<p> Wrobleski, Ann B. Presidential Certification of Narcotics </p>

<p> Source Countries, U.S. Department of State Bureau of </p>

<p> Public Affairs, Current Policy . 1061, Washington, D.C., </p>

<p> 1988). </p>

<p> Yang, J. Congress Passes Anti-drug Bill Including a Death </p>

<p> Penalty, Wall Street Journal, (October 24, 1988). </p>

<p> Young, James Harvey. The Medical Messiahs: A Social </p>

<p> History of Health Quackery in Twentieth Century America. </p>

<p> Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967. </p>

<p> Young, James Harvey. The Toadstool Millionaires: A Social </p>

<p> History of Patent Medicines in America Before Federal </p>

<p> Regulation. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961. </p>

<p> Zimanyi, I., Wang, E., and Lajtha, A. Effect of Cocaine </p>

<p> and Cocaine Congeners on Veratridine-Induced </p>

<p> Depolarization in Mouse Cerebrocortical </p>

<p> Synaptoneurosomes. Journal of Neuroscience Research. </p>

<p> (February 1 1989) v 22 n 2 pp. 201-. </p>

<p> Zubrycki, E.M., Giordano, M., and Sanberg, P.R. The </p>

<p> effects of cocaine on multivariate locomotor behavior and </p>

<p> defecation. Behavioural Brain Research. (January 1 1990) </p>

<p> v 36 n 1 / 2. pp. 155-. </p>

<p> Zuckerman, Barry, Amaro, Hortensia, and Bauchner, Howard. </p>

<p> Depressive symptoms during pregnancy: Relationship to </p>

<p> poor health behaviors. American Journal of Obstetrics and </p>

<p> Gynecology, 160:5 (May 1, 1989), pp. 1107-. Summary: </p>

<p> Results of this investigation demonstrate a significant </p>

<p> association between depressive symptoms during pregnancy </p>

<p> and these health behaviors: alcohol consumption, </p>

<p> cigarette and marijuana use, cocaine use, and lower </p>

<p> weight gain during pregnancy. </p>

<p> Zuckerman, Barry, Amaro, Hortensia, and Cabral, Howard. </p>

<p> Validity of Self-reporting of Marijuana and Cocaine Use </p>

<p> Among Pregnant Adolescents. The Journal of Pediatrics, </p>

<p> 115:5 (November 1, 1989), pp. 812-. </p>

<p> Zuckerman, Barry. Effects of Maternal Marijuana and </p>

<p> Cocaine Use on Fetal Growth. The New England Journal of </p>

<p> Medicine. (March 23 1989) v 320 n 12. pp. 762-. Summary: </p>

<p> Accumulating evidence documents the adverse effects of </p>

<p> cocaine, even in small amounts, upon the fetus. </p>

<p> Zurer, Pamela. Illicit drug making destructive to two </p>

<p> chemists. Chemical &amp; Engineering News. 67:31 (September </p>

<p> 25, 1989). <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>