
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B24-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000655-B040-219</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/nc/nc1k.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122113304 text/html 26347
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 11:32:56 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:57:15 GMT
Content-length: 26129
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Marihuana and Sexual Behavior</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<h1>Marihuana and Sexual Behavior</h1>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>Since the mid-1930's, Americans have, at one time or another,
either acclaimed or decried marihuana as an aphrodisiac, lauded
its ability to intensify and enhance enjoyment of sexual
experiences and accused it of heightening sexual aggression and
inciting the commission of sexual offenses. Even today, there is
no consensus among Americans regarding what they consider to be
the effects of marihuana on sexual desire, arousal and
performance. Rather, what evidence exists on the subject
continues to reveal the existence of diverse and often
inconsistent beliefs and experiences. </p>

<p>Society's concern about the effects of marihuana on sexual
behavior, however, does not generally center on the drug's
inherent ability to produce or heighten sexual arousal per se but
on the relationship between sexual arousal and the likelihood of
sexual excess on the part of the user. The key question is the
extent to which and the conditions under which marihuana acts as
a catalyst to sexual aggression, profligacy, promiscuity and
other aberrant sexual behavior. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>MARIHUANA AND PSYCHOSEXUAL STIMULATION</b> </p>

<p>The numerous medical and clinical observations, experimental
investigations and survey studies reviewed by the Commission show
that the belief regarding the stimulant effects of marihuana and
the use of hemp drugs to achieve sexual arousal, the improvement
of sexual powers and the prolongation of coition have existed for
centuries and have be-en documented (Chopra and Chopra, 1939;
Bouquet, 1950; Robinson, 1967; Grinspoon, 1971) ; The proportion
of the population actually aroused sexually by marihuana,
however, is difficult to assess. Relevant research findings are
based on widely divergent research procedures, differing criteria
of arousal, and variations in the amount of arousal experienced.
Nonetheless, it is fair to state that marihuana produces
heightened sexual interest, desire and arousal in substantial
proportions of both male and female users (Bromberg, 1934;
Allentuck, 1944; Johnson, 1968; Goode, 1969; Hochman and Brill,
1971). It is equally accurate to state, however, that marihuana
does not increase and in fact may decrease sexual desire or
stimulation in significant proportions of users (Walton, 1938;
Chopra and Chopra, 1939; Taylor, 1963; Brenner, Coles and
Meagher, 1970; Goode, in press). At best, the available evidence
is inconclusive. </p>

<p>In a study of regular marihuana users conducted by three
physicians, for example, &quot;heightened sexual feeling&quot;
and &quot;increased sexual arousal&quot; while under the
influence of the drug were reportedly experienced
&quot;usually&quot; by one-third of the subjects (34%, and 33%,
respectively) and each of these effects was experienced
&quot;occasionally&quot; by 59% of the sample (Halikas, Goodwin
and Guze, 1971). </p>

<p>In another more recent study by physicians, &quot;increased
sexual appetite&quot; was reported by 60% of the chronic users
and 43% of the occasional users of marihuana. Responses to a
similar question regarding &quot;decreased sexual appetite,&quot;
revealed that 75% of the chronic users and 70% of the occasional
users reported that this never occurred (Hochman and Brill,
1971). </p>

<p>The Mayor's Committee on Marihuana (1944) likewise attempted
to assess the effects of marihuana on sexual interest and sexual
stimulation. Its clinical studies of 72 male prisoners conducted
at the Welfare Hospital in New York City revealed that
&quot;although there was an undeniable increase in overt sex
interest following the ingestion of marihuana, . . . This sex
interest seems to have been due primarily to the fact that these
men have been imprisoned for various periods and had not had
access to women&quot; (p. 130). With respect to marihuana's
effect on sexual stimulation the Committee indicated that
although &quot;some evidence of eroticism&quot; was reported (in
about 10% of the 150 instances in which marihuana was
administered), there was no &quot;frank expression of sexual
stimulation&quot; despite the presence of female nurses,
attendants and others associated with the experiment (p. 38). </p>

<p>More recently, Professor Goode published the results of an
informal survey of about 200 marihuana users in which he inquired
about the relationship of marihuana to both sexual desire and
sexual activity. To the question, &quot;Do you think that being
high on marihuana stimulates your sex interest, or not?&quot;,
38% said that their interest in sex while high was no different
in degree from their normal interest in sex; 5% stated that being
high on marihuana had a negative effect, i.e., that &quot;it
tended to turn them off sexually&quot;; 13% replied that the
effect depended on either their mood, their partner or both; and
44% (39% of the men and 50% of the women) reported that it
&quot;definitely increases their sexual desire&quot; (1970: 162).
</p>

<p>Perhaps the most conclusive and consistent finding to emerge
from studies of the effects of marihuana on psychosexual
stimulation is that the degree of sexual interest, desire and
arousal induced by marihuana is dependent on the characteristics
of the user and the extent to which he comes to expect or
anticipate such an effect. Research shows that women are more
likely to report heightened sexual desire than are men (Goode,
1969) ; that young people more frequently report arousal than do
older persons (Bloomquist, 1968; Brenner, Coles and Meagher,
1970) ; 2 that frequent users are more likely to report increased
sex interest than infrequent users (Goode, 1970) ; that persons
who are more sexually experienced are more likely to be sexually
aroused by marihuana than are those less sexually experienced
(Brenner, Coles and Meagher, 1970; Hochman and Brill, 1971; Goode
in press) and that those who expect to be sexually aroused by the
drug are more likely to be so aroused than those who do not
(Goode, 1969; Fort, 1970; Grinspoon, 1971). </p>

<p>There is nothing inherent in the drug itself which produces
heightened sexual interest, desire or arousal, nor is there any
physiological evidence to show that marihuana directly or
specifically acts on either the, sexual centers of the brain or
the sexual organs. As one observer has noted, marihuana &quot;is
not a sexual stimulant; that is, in the, sense that it will not
excite mindless, laboratory-located animal tissue&quot; (Goode,
1969: 20). In short, marihuana is not an aphrodisiac. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>HOW MARIHUANA INFLUENCES SEXUAL RESPONSE</b> </p>

<p>It has already been stated that marihuana is not, in itself,
an aphrodisiac although a substantial number of persons report
increased sexual interest, desire and arousal following use of
the drug. To what, then, are these effects attributable? Research
hearing on this question suggests that to the extent that
marihuana influences these respouses, it does so indirectly by
acting on the higher centers of the brain to relax inhibitions
and reduce, the usual restraints on behavior. By so doing, the
user is placed in the position of being freer to respond to his
sexual needs and desires (Walton, 1938; Allentuck and Bowman,
1942; Ausubel, 1958; Brown, 1961; McGothlin, 1966; Rosevear,
1967; Bloomquist, 1968; Oursler, 1968; Goode, 1969; Fort, 1970).
The extent to which these responses occur, however, are dependent
upon individual expectation and knowledge (Fort, 1970) and the
social situation (set and setting) in which the marihuana use
takes place (Goode, 1969). As Professor Goode has stated, Man's
somatic responses are often influenced more by what he thinks
than by biological and chemical imperatives; in fact, it can
happen that what he thinks actually becomes his biological and
chemical imperative (1969, p. 20). </p>

<p>In addition to its effects on sexual inhibition and restraints
(the extent and consequences of which will be examined later),
marihuana is also reported to intensity aesthetic experiences and
to enhance sensual activity. As one observer has noted, it is
perhaps the principal effect of marihuana to take one more
intensely into whatever experience - .&quot; (Trocchi, 1967:
108). </p>

<p>One observer points out, however, that most of the users of
marihuana in this country are youths between the ages of 14 and
25 and that &quot;this age span needs no aphrodisiac to stimulate
either interest or capacity to perform&quot; (Bloomquist, 1968:
183). </p>

<p>It is this fact (which probably explains why substantial
proportions of marihuana users characterize their sexual
experiences under the influence of the drug as particularly
intense, prolonged, sensuous and pleasurable (Johnson, 1968;
Goode, 1969; Brenner, Coles and Meagher, 1970; Hochman and Brill,
1971; Tart, 1971; Abelson, et al., 1972). </p>

<p>In one study of marihuana users conducted by a psychologist,
65% reported a heightened sense of touch, 55% stated that
&quot;touch takes on new qualities,&quot; and 56% replied that
&quot;sexual orgasm was very often or usually more exciting than
when &quot;straight&quot;' (Tart, 1971). Of the approximately 500
marihuana users surveyed by Goode, 68% (74% of the men and 62% of
the women) reported that marihuana &quot;Generally acted as a
pleasure enhancer (and) usually increased their sexual
enjoyment&quot; (Goode, in press, pp. 8-9). </p>

<p>In still another study of marihuana users, both occasional and
chronic, &quot;increased sexual pleasure&quot; was the second
most common response, by the chronic users and the eighth most
commonly reported effect by the occasional users; 83% of the
former and 50% of the latter reported that increased sexual
pleasure was often or always experienced after smoking
marihuana.' Interesting too, was the finding that 85% of the
chronic users and 78% of the occasional users reported never
experiencing &quot;decreased sexual pleasure&quot; following use
of the drug (Hochman and Brill, 1971:7). </p>

<p>In the Commission's National Survey, respondents were asked to
indicate whether or not they believed that marihuana increases
sexual pleasure. Of those adults admitting they had tried
marihuana at least once (15%), 52% thought that the drug does
increase sexual pleasure. Both adults and youth in general,
however, seem to be less certain of this effect. Only about
one-fourth of all respondents (24% of adults and 26% of youth)
indicated agreement with the statement while slightly tinder
one-half of those surveyed (48% of the adults and 49% of the
youth) expressed uncertainty about marihuana's ability to
increase sexual pleasure (Ableson, et al., 1972: 25-33). </p>

<p>3 The students were also asked to assess the degree of
importance attached to a number of possible motivations for using
marihuana. As might be expected from the findings regarding
marihuana and sexual enjoyment, significantly more of the users
than the nonusers attached at least some degree of importance to
marihuana's perceived ability to enhance sexual experiences. To
the item: &quot;for better sexual experiences,&quot; 12% of the
non-users, 40% of the occasional users and 70% of the chronic
users felt that it was of some importance or &quot;very&quot;
important in motivating use of the drug (Hochman and Brill,
1971). </p>

<p>The research bearing on the effects of marihuana on sexual
pleasure suggests that marihuana is not usually perceived by the
general public to increase sexual enjoyment, that users are
significantly more likely to believe that marihuana has this
effect than are non-users, that those who expect to receive
increased sexual pleasure are more likely to experience it than
those who do not, and that frequent or regular users are
significantly more likely to have actually experienced this
effect than are those who use the drug less frequently. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE EFFECTS OF MARIHUANA ON OVERT SEXUAL BEHAVIOR<br>
</b></p>

<p>As noted at the beginning of this discussion, society in
general and policy makers in particular are primarily concerned
about the extent to which and the conditions tinder which
marihuana is likely to generate or increase, the likelihood of
sexually aberrant or aggressive behavior. Marihuana has already
been shown to increase psychosexual stimulation in substantial
proportions of users and to serve as a relaxer of inhibitions and
restraints. The questions as yet unresolved, however, relate to
(a) the importance of sexual arousal in generating sexual
activity-particularly deviant sexual acts, and (b) the extent to
which inhibitions and restraints, which normally serve to protect
the individual and society from sexual excess and abuse, are
lowered by marihuana to the point of being inoperative. </p>

<p>The available evidence suggests that (a) although marihuana
users are more sexually active and sexually permissive than are
nonusers, marihuana does not generally stimulate sexual activity,
appreciably alter established patterns of sexual behavior or
serve as a catalyst to sexual promiscuity; (b) the marihuana user
is rarely sexually aggressive; and (c) persons arrested for
marihuana law violations generally do not have previous or
subsequent criminal records for the commission of sexual offenses
(Walton, 1938; Brown, 1961; White House Conference on Narcotic
Drug Abuse, 1962; Blunt et al., 1969; Bremner, Coles and Meagher,
1970; Goode, 1972; Goode, in press). </p>

<p>Before summarizing the research forming, the basis of these
assertions, however, it should be noted that there, are several
contradictory research findings with respect to (a) above. In one
recent study, for example, two Philadelphia physicians
investigating the effects of marihuana on adolescents and young
adults reported that the drug was directly responsible for sexual
promiscuity in 13 of their female patients. In the words of these
clinicians: </p>

<p><i>This group is singled out because of the unusual degree of
sexual promiscuity, which ranged from sexual relations with
several individuals of both sexes, and, sometimes, individuals of
both sexes on the same evening. In histories of all of these
individuals, we were struck by the loss of sexual inhibitions
after short periods of marihuana smoking. Seven patients of this
group became pregnant (one on several occasions), and four
developed venereal diseases. . . . In no instance was there
sexual promiscuity prior to the beginning of marihuana smoking. .
. . We take these results to indicate marihuana's effects on
loosening the superego controls and altering superego ideals</i>
(Kolansky and Moore, 1971: 491). <br>
</p>

<p>During 1970, another researcher (Goode, in press) distributed
questionnaires on drug use to between 500 and 600 undergraduates
in a large lecture course at a State University. Four measures of
sexual activity were employed: (1) engagement in premarital
intercourse, (2) the respondent's total number of different
sexual partners, (3) the age of first intercourse and (4) the
average frequency of intercourse during the six months prior to
the study. The three indices of drug use employed were whether or
not the respondent had ever smoked marihuana, the frequency of
marihuana use during the six months prior to the survey, and the
total number of drugs or drug types ever used by the respondent.
The researcher found that &quot;all measures of sexual activity
correlated significantly -and powerfully with all measures of
drug use&quot; (p. 12). More specifically, marihuana users were
far more likely to have engaged in premarital intercourse (72%)
than were non-users (34%) ; the greater the frequency of
marihuana use and the greater the number of drugs ever tried, the
earlier was the first intercourse, the greater was the frequency
of intercourse and the greater was the number of sexual partners.
</p>

<p>As the researcher suggests, one might be tempted to conclude
from these findings that marihuana, as well as other drugs,
causes early sex, frequent sex and sex with a number of different
partners were it not for the fact that similar findings point to
a relationship in the opposite direction. That is, not only were
marihuana users and drug experimenters more likely to experience
sex early in their lives, but &quot;it is also the sexually
precocious who are more likely to use drugs, including
marihuana&quot; (p. 14). Of all respondents reporting intercourse
by age 16, for example, 7% stated that they had never tried any
illegal drug, but total absence of illicit drug use was found in
47% of the virgins (p. 14). </p>

<p>Professor Goode concludes that &quot;using marihuana or other
illegal drugs no more 'causes' sexual behavior than sexual
behavior 'causes' drug use&quot; (p. 14). Rather, he suggests, </p>

<p><i>Both sexual permissiveness and marihuana use as well as, to
some extent, experimentation with certain other illegal drugs-are
indicators of the young person's involvement in and with a
subculture which is tolerant toward a wide range of
nontraditional values and activities . . . Quite clearly,
marihuana use grows out of a specific life style, which is, in
turn, partly dependent on specific sociocultural background
factors and permissive sexual behavior (branded as
&quot;promiscuous&quot; by those who disapprove of it) is a part
of this life style</i> (pp. 14, 16). </p>

<p>Similar to Goode's findings are those obtained from a mail
survey of 1400 undergraduate students at UCLA (Hochman and Brill,
1971). The data show that marihuana users have their first sexual
experience earlier than do non-users (50% of the users and 30% of
the non-users had their first experience before age 18) ; have
more sexual experience than non-users; have a greater number of
sexual partners than do nonusers (twice as many users as
non-users had five or more sexual partners) ; and have more
liberal attitudes toward sex than do non-users. </p>

<p>One of the questions asked of the students was: &quot;In your
experience or opinion, do you think that marihuana usage over a
long period results in sexual promiscuity?&quot; Over half of the
non-users (54%) and almost three-fourths (73%) of the users
believed this happened rarely or not at all while 12% of the
nonusers, 3% of the occasional users and 2% of the chronic users
believed that extended use of marihuana frequently leads to
sexual promiscuity. </p>

<p>Although the users more often suffered from venereal disease
than did the nonusers (7% vs. 2%), there were no differences
between the groups in the average frequency of sexual
intercourse, the number of concurrent sexual partners, the number
of pregnancies, miscarriages and illegitimacies, or the incidence
of homosexuality. </p>

<p>A more middle-of-the-road position regarding the association
between use of marihuana and sexual promiscuity was revealed in a
Commission sponsored mail survey of 781 judges, probation
officers and court clinicians (InTech, 1971). In an effort to
develop a profile of the regular marihuana. user, respondents
were asked: &quot;In light of your professional experience, do
you, think all, most, some or just a, few of the people who
regularly use marihuana are sexually promiscuous?&quot; </p>

<p>Tabulation of the responses revealed, among all three groups,
considerable uncertainty and ambivalence as manifested in the
findings that 23% of the total sample either did not answer the
question or stated that they did not know, and that three-fifths
of those who responded (70%) would answer no more categorically
than to say that only some&quot; could be characterized in this
manner. The percentages of each of the three groups of
respondents stating that all or most, some and few or none of the
regular marihuana users are sexually promiscuous are shown in
Table 4. </p>

<p>The Commission has found several studies dating from 1939
which support the assertions that the marihuana user is rarely
sexually aggressive and that he rarely has a criminal record for
the commission of sexual offenses. </p>

<p>A survey of the criminal records of 379 Greek offenders either
sentenced or arrested for the public use of hashish between 1919
and 1950 (Gardikas, 1950) revealed no link between the use of
hashish and the commission of sexual offenses. </p>

<p>Lambo (1965) compiled a list of crimes which occurred during a
recent two-year period in three West African countries. Of the
472 &quot;offences against women&quot; committed during the
period of study, 26% were claimed to have been committed by users
of cannabis. </p>

<p>In a, study conducted by the Kinsey Institute for Sex
Research, 1500 incarcerated sex offenders were interviewed about
their sexual offenses. The researchers found that in marked
contrast to the role of alcohol in the commission of their
offenses, particularly aggressive sex crimes, marihuana was a
very insignificant factor. While the presence of alcohol was
reported in relation to 67% of all sexually aggressive acts
against children and 39% of such aggressive acts against adult
women, marihuana was mentioned in only eight sexual offenses out
of a total of 2,022 such offenses committed by the respondents
(Gebbard, Gagnon, Pomeroy and Christenson, 1967: 761-819). </p>

<p>Two recent systematic studies of rape cases recorded by the
police in Philadelphia (Amir, 1971) and Denver (MacDonald, 1971)
gave no indication that marihuana was specifically linked to
these offenses. It should be noted, however, that the involvement
of marihuana in these cases, unlike the involvement of alcohol,
was not specifically explored.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Table 4--JUDGES, PROBATION OFFICERS AND COURT CLINICIANS
WHO BELIEVE THAT REGULAR MARIHUANA USERS ARE SEXUALLY PROMISCUOUS</b>
</p>

<p>(Figures in Percentages) </p>

<p>All or Some Few or </p>

<p>most none<br>
</p>

<p>Judges (N =408) 23.8 58.3 17.9 </p>

<p>Probation Officers (N=87) 21.9 58.6 19.5 </p>

<p>Clinicians (N = 106) 11.3 65.1 23.6 </p>

<p>Total (N=701) 21.3 59.6 19.1<br>
</p>

<p>In two Commission-sponsored studies of the relationship
between marihuana and crime, no evidence was found to suggest
that marihuana is a significant factor in or contributor to the
commission of sexual offenses. A study of 1,776 youthful
offenders (16 to 21 years of age) arrested for marihuana law
violations in five New York counties between 1965 and 1969
revealed that none of the offenders had either a previous or
subsequent criminal record for the commission of sexual offenses
(Weitzner, et. al., 1971). </p>

<p>In another study sponsored by the Commission, interviews with
559 male residents (16 to 34 years of age) of West Philadelphia,
revealed that six respondents, or about one in 100, admitted to
having committed the offense of &quot;forcing sexual
intercourse,&quot; three having reportedly committed it more than
once but none having been apprehended for these offenses (Goode,
1972; 29a). </p>

<p>In an effort to assess the role of marihuana in these
offenses, respondents were asked whether or not they had used the
drug within the 24 hours preceding the commission of both their
first and most recent offenses. In contrast to alcohol, which was
reported to have been consumed within 24 hours prior to one-third
of the first and most recent offenses of forcing sexual
intercourse (two out of six and one out of three, respectively),
none of the offenders reported smoking marihuana within 24 hours
of either the first or most recent time they committed this
offense (Goode, 1972: 29a). </p>

<p>Research findings which are available lend little support to
the thesis that marihuana either causes or is a significant
factor in the heightening of sexual aggression or the commission
of sexual offenses.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>