
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-80</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B018-159</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/taxact/canncon.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122044404 text/html 63400
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:43:55 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:54:51 GMT
Content-length: 63182
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Conference on Cannabis Sativa L. January 14, 1937</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->

<h1>Conference on Cannabis Sativa L. </h1>

<p><b>January 14, 1937 -- Room 81 Treasury Building, 10:30 AM</b></p>

<hr>

<p>Present: </p>

<p>Dr. Lyster F. Dewey (retired) Department of Agriculture. </p>

<p>Dr. James C. Munch, Professor of Pharmacology, Temple
University </p>

<p>Dr. Herny C. Fuller </p>

<p>Dr. Carl Voegtlin, Chief, Division of Pharmacology, National
Institute of Health </p>

<p>Mr. Arthur F. Sievers, Division of Drug and Related Plants,
Department of Agriculture </p>

<p>Mr. Peter Valaer, Alcohol Tax Unit Washington Laboratory </p>

<p>Dr. John Matchett, Chemist, Bureau of Narcotics </p>

<p>Mr. P. W. Simonds, Alcohol Tax Unit Laboratory </p>

<p>Mr. John F.; Williams, Chief, Division of Laboratories, Bureau
of Customs </p>

<p>Mr. H. J. Wollner, Consulting Chemist to the Secretary of the
Treasury. </p>

<p>M. H. J. Anslinger, Commissioner of Narcotics </p>

<p>Mr. A. L. Tennyson, Legal Division, Bureau of Narcotics </p>

<p>Mr. S. G. Tipton, General Counsel's Office </p>

<p>Mr. R. L. Pierce, General Counsel's Office<br>
</p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> As I understand the problem we've got
here, and according to Commissioner Anslinger, it is a question
of trying to set up a definition of terms with reference to what
we generically refer to as the marihuana problem, in a
sufficiently clear style and sufficiently competent as to be
significant from an enforcement point of view. Is that as you see
it, Mr. Tennyson? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Yes. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> And at the same time be mindful of the
legitimate uses of the product. In going through the literature
on marihuana in pursuit of an answer to this general problem of
defining terms, you get very little satisfaction. For every
negative statement made there is a positive one made to
counteract it. One reference will tell you definitely there is no
active principle in the seed -- a dozen will -- and one will cast
a shadow of doubt. Dr. Munch is rather certain there is an active
principle in the seed. I spoke to Dr. Munch in Philadelphia this
week, and put this question to him this way: &quot;Can you take
the position that there is no resin in the male plant?&quot; He
said, &quot;No, because I have found some in the small glands
that secrete the resin so copiously on the leaves of the female
and are found in the male plant, though not to so large an
extent.&quot; Cannabis, in the Uniform Narcotic State Act, is
defined as follows: (reading from the Act) &quot;Cannabis
includes the following substances under whatever names they may
be designated: (a) The dried flowering or fruiting tops of the
pistillate plant Cannabis Sativa L., from which the resin has not
been extracted, (b) the resin extracted from such tops, and (c)
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such resin, or of such tops from which the resin
has not been extracted.&quot; That obviously doesn't meet our
requirements.<br>
</p>

<p>In an effort to clarify the situation in anticipation of a
possible attempt to set up a more satisfactory legal program, the
technical division in the Treasury, the Narcotics Bureau, and the
Legal Division, have gotten together and asked themselves some
questions, which were distributed. I dare say that a duplicate or
triplicate set of questions might have been asked with equal
effect.<br>
</p>

<p>We haven't a problem akin to the morphine or opium problem. We
knew the chemical reactions of morphine and its behavior before
laws were passed. That state of definitive knowledge does not
obtain with regard to cannabinol, which, again, some people
dispute the existence of. In trying to define these terms we are
not privileged, I am afraid, to be too emphatic about this
compound known as cannabinol, especially since there may be
contributive active ingredients in the plant. It has been an
accepted situation in the past that all trouble derives from the
female plant. That has been thrown over. First of all it was
thought to be only the flowering tops; then, later, the leaves,
but that is questioned at the present time. There isn't very much
we can hang our hats on to. The problem is her of defining this
for purposes of legislation. I wonder whether we can take each of
these questions in turn and discuss them, in an attempt to
clarify the picture somewhat. (Reading first question):
&quot;What is the constituent in Cannabis Sativa which is
definitely know to produce deleterious physiological effects upon
the human body?&quot;<br>
</p>

<p>We, I think, can assume for the moment we refer to those
effects which are recognized as being the concomitant off smoking
the substance. How do you feel about that, Dr. Voegtlin?<br>
</p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> I think we can say that the substance
called cannabinol contains the chief specific pharmacological
principle or principles of the plant.<br>
</p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Is that a fact?<br>
</p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> As far as we can tell. Recently a
crystalline substance has been isolated from the oil. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> It is active in that form? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> As far as I know the pharmacological
activity has not been tested. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> We separate cannabinol from the plant and
crystallize it. If we give an animal an injection from that, will
we get the same sort of reaction as it if were smoked? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> The work of Cahn on the crystalline
substance was published in 1932, but apparently it has not been
investigated as to its pharmacological action. Straub has made
partially purified preparations -- not crystalline -- and has
studied their pharmacological action on animals and humans. He
come to the conclusion that the products give essentially the
same response in humans as does the crude drug. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Could we have that reference, Doctor,
again? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> Professor Walter Straub, University of
Munich, on &quot;Bavarian Hashisch&quot;. They tested Cannabis
grown locally and found it contained a much mower percentage of
resin -- about one-tenth, if I am right -- as compared with the
Persian product. The crude resin was partially purified. After
calling attention to the lack of reliability of the bio-assay of
Cannabis, they tested their products on rabbits and determined
the dose which was just sufficient to produce anesthesia taken by
human volunteers was found to produce definite symptoms
characteristic of Cannabis. Two doses produced more marked
symptoms. These are described in detail, especially from the
psychiatric standpoint. This is the first careful psychiatric
study of Cannabis. The doses used in terms of weight were very
small. Whether to toxic symptoms were due to one substance or
more than one, it is hard to say. Is it essential to attribute
the action to one definite constituent? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> It would be preferable. We might be able
to exempt certain parts definitely as coming within the purview
of the law. If you can't do that you have to include everything.
What do you think, Mr. Tennyson? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> That's the way I feel. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> What do you think, Mr. Anslinger? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> I think so to. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> If it weren't used sometimes in legitimate
industry we wouldn't care. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> May I ask whether you have carried out
any tests here on the presence of active principles in the
different parts of the plant? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> No. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> Testing say, the leaves, the seeds etc.? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Matchett and Valaer: Have you tried these?
</p>

<p>Negative response. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> </p>

<p>The only one who has done work of that kind is Dr. Munch. He
will be here shortly. His results, working with the seed, showed
two principles, one excitant and one depressive. Of course, the
work has not been confirmed yet. If you accept the possibility of
that, that is what you run into. That is why I asked that
question. Is it possible that you have here the same situation as
in opium, where you have a series of bi-alkaloids? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Just to clarify the situation, I would
like to ask, from the standpoint of the layman, the difference
between cannabin, cannabinol, and resin? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Dr. Voegtlin, can you clarify that point? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> The resin is the crude secretion
expressed from the plant. Cannabinol is a partially purified
preparation of the resin. Resin and cannabinol are usually
considered as containing the specific principles of Cannabis. As
I said before, Cahn has applied the name Cannabinol to his
crystalline substance, but this has not as yet been shown to be
physiologically active. The word Cannabin is loosely used by
different authors for impure products obtained from the resin. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Is the drug principle only from the
resin? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Williams:</b> I believe Cannaben is the name applied to
the alkaloid. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Isn't it true, that on the nether side of
the leaves there are long hairs among which are sacs which
secrete this resin analogous to opium? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Can that be obtained from the seed or the
stalk? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> That is the question. It can be obtained
from the flowering tops like opium. Can we define it as coming
from the leaves and the flowering tops, when later we may find it
comes also from the seeds and the stalk? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Can you identify it? If a substance
contains cannabinol, can you by some process tell it is there? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> If it is present in certain quantities and
in a certain state. That to a layman is no answer at all. If it
exists in the form Dr. Voegtlin has mentioned, we can identify it
if tit is there in sensible quantities. We do not know whether we
can identify it if it were in a form generically on either side
of it. We do not know what it is converted into if it stays in
the open. Specifically, from your point of view, we do not know
whether if you dehydrated the flowering tops for two years you
could reactivate it. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> As I understand it, Dr. Voegtlin, the
resin is not designated as cannabinol. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> Cannabinol is an extract made from the
resin. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> The point is, we could not start with
cannabinol as the fundamental of this drug for purposes of
legislation, could we? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> No, you could not. </p>

<p>Mr. Valaer: I would like to make a practical suggestion. In
growing the two kinds, male and female plants, in my back yard, I
extracted a green resin from both plants. It looked exactly
alike. There was not enough material to make fine extractions fur
they appeared to be the same. There are more leaves on the female
plant. In the male, there is hardly anything to really make a
cigarette out of, but those leaves had the same sort of green
resin that was described by various authors as being found in the
female plant. Whether the physiological characteristics might be
different or not, I do not know, but they certainly look the same
and both gave the same Beam reaction. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> To confirm your work, Dr. Munch has done a
microscopic examination of the male plant and found exactly the
same sacs there as in the female, though many less of them. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> As a matter of fact the cannabis from Indian
seed grown in this country 35 or 40 years ago produced a plant
with both male and female flowers on the same plant. That's not
uncommon with plants taken out of their ordinary habitat. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Valaer:</b> The seeds in my little investigation were
furnished by Dr. Dewey, and it seemed there were as many male as
female seeds. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> You never can tell by the seeds which they
are. They range from 60 percent to 40 percent always. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> Did the male plant mature earlier than
the female? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Valaer:</b> Yes. I brought specimens of both kinds
over. The male plant was dry while the female plant was still
green and pliable. Some of the green pollen formed early in the
male plant, and in order to get some seeds with it I shook some
onto the female plants. Evidently I did fertilize them, because
this is the third year, and I had volunteers this spring. It was
three years ago I made the test, and last year and this year they
showed up again. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Do you see what we are up against, Mr.
Tennyson? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Yes. I would like to ask Dr. Dewey a
question if I may, to bring out the possibility off varieties in
this plant. A question has been raised as to the difference
between Cannabis Americana and Cannabis Indica. My impression,
according to past talks over the telephone with Dr. Dewey, was
that they are all the same. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> Three are many forms or types which are
quite different, but the differences are only in degree. There
are no distinct differences permitting a specific description I
brought an illustration of the plants as they grow. There is the
Cannabis Indica described by La Marsh in 1788, and in 1901; if he
had my own plants he could not have made a more accurate
description. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> What can we be sure of? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> The danger in a definition would be to
describe one species like Indian hemp or Cannabis Sativa L. or
Cannabis Indica. We've got to be all-inclusive. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Is there a generic title? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> There is only one species, but different
forms. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> What would be the term under which we
would be certain of including all forms? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> Cannabis Sativa L. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Sievers: </b>Unless you want to say Cannabis Sativa and
all varieties, if that would help any. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> We discovered a field in Massachusetts,
which has a law prohibiting the raising of Indian hemp, and the
man said he was raising Cannabis Americana. It raised a nice
question and might have availed him something in court if there
is any distinction between Indian hemp and American. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> This is a basis we can all agree upon,
then, that the designation be Cannabis Sativa L. That would
include the plant in any stage off growth or development from the
seed onward. Or would we have to further define that, Dr. Dewey? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> I don't think so. Cannabis will cover the
plant in all forms. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Is there any question as to identification
of the seed? Suppose the possession of the seed were proscribed
by law and a man were found with a parcel of it. Is there any
possibility of error? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> I don't think so. The seed is very
characteristic. there are varieties in size ranging from 50 to
75% in different forms. I don't know of any seed that can be
mistaken for it though. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Would we have to actually plant the seed
and see what happens to definitely establish that this is the
seed? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Valaer:</b> I would like to quote Dr. George L. Keenan:
&quot;The most characteristic seed that I have ever examined is
the cannabis seed.&quot; It is the easiest part of the plant to
identify. I don't believe that difficulty will ever come up. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Have you had any experience, Mr. Tennyson?
</p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Not in seed. From what I can learn from
Mr. Valaer and Mr. Simonds, it occurred to us that some one might
take this abstract and impregnate tobacco, and we wonder whether
it would be possible to identify that? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> I think that is an enforcement problem
which would have to be predicated on present methods of
identification and what can be developed. My thought was to first
define the subject we are dealing with. Let's agree on the
terminology with reference to this plant marihuana, Cannabis
Indica, or Cannabis American. There seems to be no question that
if we call it Cannabis Sativa we include all forms of the plant.
The question is this: Can the plant in any of its forms be
mistaken for any other plant? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> I don't know of any other plant. The leaf is
very characteristic. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Dr. Sievers, how do you feel? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Sievers: </b>I want to confirm what Mr. Valaer said; it
is very easy to identify and there is no other seed known that
could be mistaken for it. Some of the nettles come the closest, I
believe. As to the character of the seed, Mr. Keenan told me just
the other day that there was no other seed known that would be
mistaken for it. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Dr. Munch, we are at the present time on
the question of defining terms in reference to this problem. We
have reached the point where all of us agree that if we refer to
this species as Cannabis Sativa L. we refer to it in all stages
of growth and development, and all the related members of the
same family. The question has come up as to whether there is any
possibility of confounding the seeds or the leaves separated from
the stalks, or the flowering tops of any of the plants
generically listed under this title, with any other type of
plant. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> In our experience, as far as the microscopic
examination goes, we think we can distinguish Cannabis Sativa
from any other plant that has been submitted. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> What is the reason for the doubt implied
by your statement? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> We have only examined about fifty different
species of plants. There might be something we don't know about.
Thus far, we have not had any difficulty in distinguishing
Cannabis. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Regardless of the state of dehydration? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> Regardless. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Is that purely visual, or is a chemical
test included? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> Only microscopic tests have been conducted
in detail. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> In aging the plant, is there any
likelihood of what you refer to as the source of the resin being
destroyed or in any way hidden or assimilated in the body of the
leaf in such a manner you could not recognize it? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> I would have to qualify my answer to that. I
haven't examined material less than three or four months old, and
the literature states that these glandular cells do not appear
until the plant is at least two months old. Under a variety of
conditions, our microscopic examinations have always shown the
presence of the typical glandular cells. The microscope seems to
work under all conditions. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Could we add to our definition that,
regardless of the state of the plant, we could always identify
any portion as belonging to this family? I was just wondering
whether we could back up anything we could say. Could we do
anything to the plant which would prevent us from identifying it?
Let's say it had the age of about one year. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> You are thinking about the leaf of the
plant? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Yes. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> I think we can answer that in the
affirmative. I think that under ordinary conceivable conditions
we could identify it. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Dr. Voegtlin, how do you react? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> I'm not a botanist. Suppose you only had
fragments or leaves or seeds, could you identify them? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> You could microscopically. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> That's right. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Valaer:</b> At one time I had to examine a cigarette
which was a mixture of tobacco and marijuana. It did not seem
difficult at all to distinguish between ordinary tobacco
structure and the other. It was a coarse yellow structure. It was
just like picking out a pea from a bean, almost, under the
microscope. In this first experience it seemed a very simple
matter. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> There are other characteristics of the
leaves besides the glands. I was looking at the pictorial
microscopic fragments of Karma yesterday, and there are twenty
things that might be concerned in distinguishing them. Cannabis
is easy in one way, because there is only one species for the
whole family. No other plant answers that description. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> It was the oldest plant described -- at
least 2700 BC. That description has come down without question to
the present time. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> They have references of its use in India
for the purposes we are discussing. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Is there any part of the plant we can
exempt from any official cognizance? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Sievers: </b>I could suggest something, but in view of
Dr. Munich's work I am not so sure. It was always my
understanding that the mature seed was harmless, but I would like
to hear what Dr. Munch says. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Would you mind telling us, Dr. Munch, what
your recent experience has been? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> I would be very glad to. We became
interested in connection with the study of the possibility of
developing biochemical methods for detecting materials in the
saliva of animals, particularly men and horses. We studied two
lots of hemp seed bought from feed stores, and a third lot which
I separate by have from Cannabis Sativa plants grown under my
personal observation in Glenolden, Pennsylvania. All three lots
behaved in the same way. Ether removed the fat. Alcohol extracts
of the de-fatted material had either a depressive or stimulating
effect on mice, cats, dogs, and horses. We went a step further
and added norite to the alcohol solution. After norite treatment
the solution was lighter in color and contained the principle
giving the stimulating reaction. We next eluted with chloroform,
which gave us a cheesy-like material soluble in alcohol, and
producing only a depressant effect. When we took extracts of
commercial material (consisting of the leaves and fruit) and
tried them on our mice they showed either a depressive or
stimulating reaction; when we carefully removed all the fruits,
then the extracts of the leaves had a depressant effect only. Our
suggestion is that the stimulating principle of the fruit may go
in with the depressant of the leaves and the resultant extract
may show either stimulating or depressing effects, or nothing. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> Did you try it on dogs? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> No. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> There was no ataxia? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> No. The extracts of the fruit do not produce
ataxia. In fact, they do not produce a typical cannabis reaction.
</p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> I think the depressing effect would be
similar to that of the barbiturates. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> In terms of seed used, what is the dose
as compared with the flowering tops? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> For the depressive type of effect? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> Yes. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> Approximately ten times as large as the
leaves, on mice. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Matchett:</b> Isn't it true that the extract from the
leaves would be different from cannabinol in this case? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> We did not do any chemical work, but I
expect they would differ. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> It would appear there are at least three
principles we have to deal with. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> There is this to be said. We know that the
principle won't stand rigorous treatment. Is it definitely known
that cannabis does the job? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> I evade answering that by saying I have
never seen cannabinol. I have attempted to duplicate some of the
work reported in the literature, but have not gotten satisfactory
results. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Wollner:</b> I would like to see reference to this:
where a man has taken cannabinol, purified it and found it to be
active. Did Fraenkel do any tests? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> Yes. His work was with a certain product
&quot;Cannabinol&quot; -- an oil -- which he found to be active.
The work of Straub and the more recent chemical work of Cahn and
Casparis shows that his suggested chemical constitution was not
right. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> The doses Straub used were small, getting
powerful effects in man, which would indicate that he dealt with
a highly potent material. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Dr. Fuller, I think you have something to
say. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> I think I can add one or two points, from
the experimental work I did covering about four years, some time
ago, working with the plant on a rather extensive scale. We grew
it by the acre -- fifteen or twenty acres at a time -- and
concentrated on the bushy plant and from seed selection we got
plants that would not grow over eight feet tall but were very
bushy. That is, in the female. The male is more scraggly. </p>

<p>In the work I was doing we attempted to root up the male
plants as fast as the blossoms became apparent so there would be
no fertilization. I think, in planting as we used to, ten to a
hill, we never get less than eight plants to come up and until
the reached a certain stage we could not tell them apart. Some of
these groups --- I don't know whether it is atmospheric
conditions, soil conditions, or what -- seemed to develop more
resin than others. One year we might get tops and leaves very
sticky, and again they did not seem to be so much so. </p>

<p>After it is harvested and dried all you have to do is cut and
shuck it like corn. There are always a certain number of seeds
that will remain on the tops, especially where the plants are
quite resinous. </p>

<p>Whether they can be gotten off by some process not known to
the seed men I don't know, but it appears to me that the effect
Dr. Munch has described probably came from a lack of thoroughness
in removing that last portion of the resin, rather than any
inherent substance in the interior of the seed itself. I am not
saying that is the case, and don't want to cast any doubt on Dr.
Munch's work, but am giving it as a suggestion. The plants I
worked with were carried down to as ultimate a point as possible
in the experiments that were conducted . This was done during the
war. We were working with Dr. Sievers' office and trying to
develop a drug industry. I found it was a very simple matter to
concentrate the active principle, and I believe there is more
than one as we got more than one effect-- depression,
uncoordination, and a narcosis on dogs. </p>

<p>The experiment I carried out was done with an extract from the
leaf and the seed and tops down to a point where we had a very
sticky deep green extract, soluble in petroleum either and that,
in turn, was treated with alkali which removed a great deal of
resinous material which I assumed was inert and, carrying down
further, we found this oily residue which was extremely active.
The fact that the product had been obtained using a strong
alkali, say 10 percent, would indicate to me that this substance
cannabinol is not very phenolic in character. If it had been, it
was my opinion it would have stayed in the alkali and not gone
into the petroleum either. All this petroleum either extract was
extremely active, and I was very anxious to go on with that to
see if I could not get out some things to which activity could be
actually ascribed, but, unfortunately, the people backing the
work died and my experiments ended at that point. The points I
want to make are these: </p>

<p>You will get drugs, cannabis, off probable different strength,
depending on the season, and the development of this resinous
matter. It is possible that what we consider as an active
principle in the seeds is due to the adherent resinous matter
which is difficult to abrade. I believe nobody knows definitely
what, in a chemical way, the active principle of cannabis is, and
I am almost of the opinion that there is more than one. I worked
with the leaves from the male tops before being dried, and they
are active, containing some resin. There is an active constituent
there, and there is no reason why, if anybody wanted to raise a
crop of cannabis they could not gather the male tops for that
purpose. The female contains more because of the bunchy
conditions of the tops. In other words, I believe both plants
contain active material but, of course, the female is the more
lucrative source. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> This confirms a lot you have said, Dr.
Munch. You confirmed that fact with the male plant. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> Yes. Exception is taken to only one point of
Dr. Fuller's discussion. I set my hard-working assistants to work
picking off the shells, and we still got both the reactions from
the decorticated plants. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Mr. Anslinger, I think that answers some
doubts in your mind as to the Uniform State Act. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> Yes. At this point, with regard to what
Dr. Fuller had to say about several constituents, I think we
might consider the experiments made by the Medical Division of
the War Department in Panama. They took ten or twenty soldiers,
gave them cigarettes to smoke and observed them over a given
period. It seems every man got a different reaction. Some were
depressed, some stimulated, some morose, some hysterical, some
slept, and some became wild. It bears out what Dr. Fuller had to
say about the possibility of there being a number of active
principles. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> I don't know whether that necessarily
follows. The way I understand the action of cannabis is that it
does away with cerebral inhibitions. Now, that might produce any
sort of reaction, according to the individual who is exposed to
the drug. I think that's the reason we get these different
manifestations. For instance, in this paper, (referring to
Bavaran Haschish by Straub.) scientific people would have a very
keen perception of their scientific problems, but they did not
develop mania as some people do. It s the psychological
constitution of the individual which determines the response. I
agree there is a good chance we are dealing with different
principles, though this has not be proven or disproven. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Wollner:</b> I think I am inclined to agree with Dr.
Voegtlin. The thing has not been sufficiently investigated to say
definitely that there is only one or that there is more than one.
From the legal point of view we cannot tie up any legislation
with the term cannabinol. I am afraid that has to be out until we
know more, and that may take thirty or forty years. There is a
concomitant to that, since we do not know the active ingredient
or ingredients, we are not in a position to say one chemical
treatment or another might not produce those active ingredients
from that portion of the plant which at the present time is
believed to be totally innocuous. We might be able to take the
stalk which is today a harmless part of the plant and generate it
from copious quantities of the active ingredient. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> That bears directly on the discussion we
had on limiting this for the purpose of a workable piece of
legislation to flowering tops, seeds, and leaves of the plant.
Our idea was to attempt to help the hemp industry if we could do
it. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> We might, among ourselves, compromise the
situation. That situation must be acknowledged in the same way
you have to accept the fact that morphine can be extracted from
the stalk of the opium plant. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> We might be in a bad position if we
eliminated the stalks and later found it to be present in them. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> My experience with it was that the active
principle was tied up in the resin -- whether this was gathered
up and held there mechanically and did not exist in the more
cellular portions of the plant I do not know. That was my only
experience. I made no tests on the stems. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> We could make those tests, couldn't we? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> I wonder whether our botanist friends
could help us? What is the history of plants of this type? Are we
likely to have them behaving as morphine and present in all parts
of the plants? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> I can tell you our experience with
belladonna, which is easily identified. The succulent parts, that
is, the leaves toward the ends of the lateral stems and tops were
always the most potent. We grew some that were over 2 percent
alkaloid. As you come down to the big leaves which grew to
maturity early and were beginning to disappear, there was very
little alkaloid. The main stem and lateral stems that were woody
were devoid of alkaloid. Toward the ends -- in the top stems --
we got alkaloid. Where they were more or less woody there was
none. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Wouldn't that be predicated on the
sensitivity of your tests? Wouldn't it be reasonable to assume
that at any one time you would find it in the pipe lines? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> Yes, the pipe lines contained it all the
way through as long as they were succulent. The root as well as
the leaves of the belladonna contains the alkaloid. The woody
stem did not contain it. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Sievers: </b>The resin is probably parallel to
essential oils which are present in leaves or flowers more than
in the woody part. The stems as a rules contain a great deal
less. Occasionally you will find it in the root. I hardly think
the seed would contain much resin and at this time I would like
to be put clear on what Dr. Munch has developed -- whether he
really thinks the seed will produce any effects as the resin
does. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> The active material from the fruits does not
produce the same type of pharmacological response as the active
material from the leaves. We have instances recorded in the
literature of narcotic effects on children from the fruits. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> When you speak of fruits, do you include
seed? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> Technically this is a fruit and not seed. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> The words are more or less synonymous in
the way they are used. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> There is a case on record, I believe, of
a prisoner who had a canary bird in the cell and the warden found
he was taking the seed brought in to the bird. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> May I offer for the record several lines of
French? In a publication by Dardanane, on page 20, he is
referring to some work done by Bouquet. The essence of it is that
physiological tests upon the twigs of Indian hemp showed 0.40
percent, whereas the inflorescences showed 7.20 percent of resin.
</p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> That sounds to me as if it was an immature
plant. </p>

<p>Mr. Anslinger. Bouquet is working on this now. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> It says the young shoots here showed a very
high percentage in comparison with the old shoots. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Sievers:</b> The old stems would still contain less. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> Yes. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> It occurs to me, Dr. Wollner, that if we
get a law we have to support it and everything in it when we go
before the committee. We have here some other uses -- I don't
know whether I am anticipating one of these questions or not.
There is a use for fiber, for bird-seed, and for oil in the
varnish industry. Those people will probably come in and complain
about what they consider a foolish attempted control if we try to
make this all-inclusive. If we are going to cast suspicion on
every part of the plant we certainly will have to be fortified. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> I would offer this question to that,
although we think it is well taken. It does not follow that
because the seeds or the stalks are potential sources that we
wish legislation to control their use. I do feel that we should
be in a position to know what the situation is. I think that
would be a preferred position to be in -- to be able to say that
there is a possibility, but if it is existing, it is in amounts
not sufficient to warrant its inclusion. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> We had a complaint from the
Sherwin-Williams Company who wanted to start a farm. We tried to
discourage that. The point was raised in connection with this
tentative act we have drafted. We are faced, on account of
constitutional limitations, with the necessity of drafting this
as a tax measure, with lessening of application of the tax to the
legitimate articles of commerce which are innocent. In that phase
of the situation we have quite a problem to qualify the
exemptions, say seed, where there is apparently such a use for
it. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> One thing would help us a great deal. It
would be relatively simple, I imagine, to delete certain portions
of the plant if we could say how much of the active principle was
available in those parts of the plant. I turn to Dr. Voegtlin on
this. Is it possible to use a bio-assay? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> No, I don't think it is characteristic
enough. We are interested in the psychic manifestations which are
produce by this product. These are, of course, not recognized in
dogs or rabbits. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Dr. Voegtlin, you mentioned that article
by Straub in which he created this active principle in terms of
the corneal effect. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> The criticism of the bio-assay on dogs
holds also for the bio-assay on rabbits. both methods are based
on the degree of cerebral depression produced. The symptoms in
dogs and rabbits are not specific for cannabis, but occur also
after alcohol and other drugs having a similar pharmacological
action. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Cannabis Sativa is included in the U.S.
Pharmacopoeia in unit doses? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> Yes. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> How are they measured? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> By the bio-assay method. I was a member
of the Standardization Committee of the League of Nations and
that is one thing we discussed and we came to the conclusion it
was not reliable. Most pharmacopoeias do not contain a bio-assay
for cannabis, although the American one does. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> If I may intrude, that bio-assay was in the
10th, but is not in the 11th edition of the U.S. Pharmacopoeia.
When the American Drug Manufacturers Association submitted
samples they obtained such inconsistent results that the
bio-assay was deleted from U.S.P. XI. Qualitatively, the
procedure was all right. We found, in our dog tests, that only
about one dog in a hundred had a sufficiently developed brain to
be useful. I made a detailed study of the rabbits corneal
anesthesia method. We were unable to obtain any quantitative
results with fluid extract. We do think it is qualitatively
valuable. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Could you answer this question: Has an
active principle ever been separated from Cannabis Sativa, which
was not associated with cannabinol? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> If, by cannabinol, you refer to a particular
product mentioned in the literature by Fraenkel, then I can
answer the question. I believe that if the material reported by
Fraenkel is considered as an entity, there may be another
constituent in the leaf of Cannabis. Subsequent work has not
confirmed the original cannabinol, and there are possibly three
or four active principles at the present time, depending on the
author. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> We are after limiting specifications. It
is not necessary that the active principle be cannabinol or that
it be the one and only, but if we could definitely establish that
the active principle has been found then we could say &quot;a
substance which contains less than a certain amount of cannabinol
is exempt.&quot; Do you see what I mean? How do you feel,
Commissioner? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> I would like to ask Dr. Munch a
question. I thought you had found one other principle? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> I believe there are at least three active
principles. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> What would the legal aspect of this be,
Mr. Tennyson? Would it be legally sound to measure the activity
of the product by the amount of a material which is present and
always associated with the material? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> This is a taxing measure, you know. We
like to think of it as some standard definite term that can be
referred to that everybody knows about. If you are going to tax
something on the basis of its strength, you have a lot of
trouble. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> You tax liquors by nature of their content
and material. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> Wouldn't that place a colossal burden on
your division, Dr. Wollner, when we get these cases into court? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> I think the Beams reaction would give
evidence of cannabinol. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> If the Commissioner finds a field of
fifteen acres growing will it be necessary to test ever plant to
determine that, or can you, when you have tested one strain, say
the rest of the field is the same? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> That would not be necessary, would it? If
you find a man with one hundred heroin pills it is not necessary
to test the hundred. We are trying to exempt the usable parts of
the plant. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Valaer:</b> At the present time the chemist has an easy
time identifying. I would rather see us go further and say,
identify a green resin which is apparently in both male and
female plants. If you have to find a definite crystalline
substance it is going to put a burden on the chemist. I believe
we are going far enough to keep within practical grounds. If it
is not a definite structure we could say it is a green resin. We
have been very successful in court. I don't know of any case
where anybody has fallen down. If we go too far I am afraid we
are going to get into trouble. On this data here of the League of
Nations on which some of the best minds in Europe have expressed
themselves one man calls Cannabis one thing and one another
thing. They all agree that there is a crude green substance. If
you want to get into effect within the next year or so, if we get
as far as a green resin characteristic of the plant, we will
accomplish something. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> I am afraid of making it too
complicated. The agents out in the sticks would be confused. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> What's wrong with Mr. Valaer's approach? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> That would make the question easier
constitutionally to defend I think, than if you were to link it
with some constituent part. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Suppose Dr. Matchett, as a result of his
investigations in the laboratory, finds he is able to recover a
certain amount of this green resin from the stalks, what is
Commissioner Anslinger supposed to do then? For the purpose of
this act could we define the substance first as a resin,
secondly, as the leaves of the male and female plant, third, as
the tops of the plants? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> Would that include bird seed? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> No. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> If Sherwin-Williams wants to put in an
acreage then they could do it. </p>

<p>Mr. Fuller: They can winnow the seeds out of the flowering
tops. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> The reason I am after the seed is the
preventive measure. Getting the seed out will make our trouble
disappear. </p>

<p>Mr. Sievers: Isn't that the same situation you have with
regard to poppy? You can grow them in this country for seed
legally, can't you? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> What you say is probably true, but we
like to discourage that as far as possible. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Sievers: </b>There is no law at present that would
prohibit me from growing poppy as a seed poppy. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> In every case I know of where it was
done we got the defendant. </p>

<p>Mr. Sievers: We had a project years ago where the scheme was
to grow the poppy and let it mature and have the seed as a side
crop, and we extracted morphine and other products. We did not go
far with it because the Secretary did not approve. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> Can't you have some provision in your
legislation for destroying the seed after the oil has been taken
out? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> I would like to pursue this definition
further. That sounds pretty good if you can define this greenish
substance. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> I don't know whether it would be necessary
to define it beyond stating its generic state: &quot;The resin
which is derived from this plant.&quot; </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> Given a batch of greenish resin, you can
determine that? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Yes, I think that can be done. That is a
question of laboratory technique. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> Can you say that the active principle is in
the resin? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Yes, we can definitely say that the active
principle is in the resin. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> Your suggested definition is the flowering
tops, the leaves, and the greenish resin? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> But that doesn't satisfy Commission
Anslinger because potentially every seed is harmful. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> Our experience has been that in almost
every large seizure made we got a large quantity of the seed from
the defendant for growing purposes. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> What would happen if we proscribed the use
of seed for bird seed? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> Dr. Munch told me it would stop the
birds from singing. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> The difficulty in Philadelphia now may be
illustrated by one of these photographs. The individuals
testified that this crop had been grown from bird seed scattered
on the ground. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> If we proscribe the use of this stuff as
bird seed we could eliminate that. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> Does ordinary commercial bird seed have any
particular effect on its use? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Bird seed only in part contains the
Cannabis Sativa seed. I do not think our state of knowledge on
that is sufficient. Not enough work has been done to say that it
is detrimental tot the birds. The idea would be to license the
growing of this stuff and to rule out the use of it for bird
seed. If anybody else had it after that they would be guilty of a
violation. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> The tentative idea was to place a
transfer tax on whatever we should cover, for instance,
marihuana, or a general term which would be recognized -- a
moderate tax for recognized purposes and a prohibitive transfer
tax for any other purpose. What was the first amount? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> $1.00 to register. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> The use of hemp seed for bird seed costs
about $1.00 per hundred pounds. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> I don't see that it would present any
difficulties from the point of view of our technical side to
include all the parts of the plants we know to contribute to the
drug. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce: </b>We have excluded transfers to certain
users. We would like to know if it would be safe to exclude
transfers to persons just selling bird seed and who do not plant
tit? Can any ill effect come from this? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Suppose a man said he just discarded some
bird seed and threw it out his window? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> If it is growing he is liable for the tax. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Suppose he plants it on someone else's
property? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> Practically all of our wild hemp is from
bird seed. I don't know of a single instance in America where the
fiber type has become wildly grown. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> Is hemp seed indispensable from bird seed?
If Commissioner Anslinger would agree to cut out bird seed it
would certainly help the bill and enforcement. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> Can they prove that the birds need this
food? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Matchett:</b> Two people told me the hemp seed had
potentialities for evil for the bird if the husks were not
removed; furthermore, that the seed is an oily seed and is
dangerous especially if the oil is rancid. I gathered that the
hemp would not be indispensable, but did not ask it directly. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Can we start setting up a definition for
the purposes of the legal division? We include in that the resin
derived from the plant Cannabis Sativa. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> Would you want to include the solid extract
too? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Any extract or derivative thereof. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> You would not need to do that. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> In other words, the usual terminology
would obtain with reference to this. Can't we get away from the
use of the term marihuana? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> We just happened to mention it as a
general term. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> I think we would be on sounder ground if
we left t in the scientific name Cannabis Sativa Linne. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> In a statute you can pick a term and define
it as you please. Marihuana struck us as a good short form. Its
meaning in any other regard would be of no consequence. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> But don't you think, in order to be a
little more scientific, we might call it Cannabis? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> Certain state laws prohibit the use of
marihuana. If your Federal law defines marihuana, will that
strengthen your state laws? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> One of the purpose of the conference is
to give the States a better definition. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> We can say that Cannabis Sativa means
Cannabis Sativa Linne. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> Isn't there some advantage in using the
popular term marihuana? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> It is technically unsound and wrong, but
that's up to you men to decide. Whatever you call it, it means
Cannabis Sativa L, and any preparations, derivatives, etc. --
what else should there be? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> &quot;The salts, derivatives and
preparations&quot; or &quot;any resin, salt, derivative and
preparation thereof.&quot; Do you want to give that? Marihuana
means Cannabis Sativa L. and any resin, compound, mixture, salt,
preparation, etc.&quot; Would that mean everything? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> Yes. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Cannabis means the flowering tops, the
leaves and any resin, compound, mixture, salt, derivative or
preparation of the plant Cannabis Sativa L. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> That will include the fiber, won't it? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> We can exclude the fiber. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> In the Mexican Pharmacopoeia it says that
marihuana refers to the feminine inflorescence of Cannabis
Sativa. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Can we deliberately exempt the stalks? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> I think it would be better to say
&quot;Marihuana is the resin, and the flowering tops and leaves
of the plant Cannabis Sativa L., the preparations, etc.&quot;
That will eliminate the stalks yet include the resin. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Is the &quot;flowering top&quot;
sufficient to include the seed. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> It is not quite specific: </p>

<p><b>Mr. Valaer:</b> Let me give you a rough idea of what I have
in mind. For the purposes of this act marihuana shall include all
of the species of Cannabis Sativa Lynne, Noraceae and its
synonyms: Cannabis eradica paludosa endrs; Cannabis indica
Lamarck; Cannabis macoosperma stokes; Cannabis chinensis, delile;
Cannabis giganta, delile; and by all other designations known.
The provisions of this act shall pertain to all parts of the
pistillate (female plant) and all parts of the staminate (male
plant) and all parts that have been found to secrete the
characteristic resin of Cannabis Sativa L. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> That throws it wide open again. We would
have you out in the field looking for secretions. I don't think
you give us enough leeway for exempting the stalks. The
suggestion of Mr. Tipton fortifies us in this respect. The stalks
as such cannot be smoked. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Matchett:</b> Could it be possible that the young
plants might have the resin in their stalks? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> Put in the word mature. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> I think that's a good point. The only
thing you want to exclude are the mature stalks. I don't see any
reason why that should not be done. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> I can't think of any. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Would you be authorized to issue specific
regulations interpreting this? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> You have to be pretty definite in your act.
</p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Would you be undertaking too much if you
exempted the oil? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> In ou transfer tax we could make exceptions
for the paint companies. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> If you are going to take care of these
things in your transfer tax why not take care of your stalk there
too? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> We could. We are attempting to thrust the
marihuana traffic into legal channels where it could be taxed
some. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> What is that predicated on? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Physical transfer: </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Suppose I grew the stuff myself. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> You are taxed as a producer. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Would the tax on that be prohibitive? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> No, by paying $25.00 I think you can grow
and smoke all the marihuana you like, yourself. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Is it incumbent upon you to see that no
one else smokes it? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> There is a transfer tax which is
prohibitive, and, of course, criminal penalties. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> And the responsibility rests on the
enforcement officer to show that there was a transfer? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> yes. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Mr. Pierce, would you try to re-word that
definition? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> How would it be if you let us work out the
definition. We have pretty well in mind what you wish to have
exempted. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Commissioner Anslinger, have you any
suggestions? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> No, I think that's going to be a great
improvement over the definition we started with. I wanted to show
the extent of the traffic and give some of the gentleman an idea
of this problem to show we are not on a fishing expedition. Last
year there were 296 seizures we know about. The illicit traffic
has shown up in almost every state. </p>

<p>There was a question about the forms of Cannabis derivatives
employed medicinally. This will take care of that trade, won't
it? Is the tax to be prohibitive as to the trade? We prepared for
the legal division a statement as to what was used. We had a list
of about three hundred compounds. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> We have allowed exemptions in another part
of the law for medical or veterinary uses. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Even that's going to be awfully
expensive, <b>Mr. Pierce:</b> </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> I was surprised to hear some medical
experts at Geneva recently say that is has absolutely no medical
use. I think that the Indian delegate wanted to know what he was
going to do for his corn plaster, and one of the medicos said it
wasn't the cannabis, but something else, that had the analgesic
effect. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Munch:</b> We have shown that Cannabis has no local
analgesic effect. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> (Reading the 14th question.) &quot;What
are the proofs that the use of marihuana in any of its forms, are
habit-forming or addicted, and what are the indications and
positive proofs that such addiction develops socially undesirable
characteristics in the user?&quot; We have a lot of cases showing
that it certainly develops undesirable characteristics. We have a
case of a boy, about 15, (reads from report of case). This took
place in a community playground in Finely, Ohio. The playground
supervisors were the men who were selling the stuff. It all
developed from the case of this youngster who was evidently going
crazy. That's only one of the many cases we have. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> Have you a lot of cases on this--horror
stories -- that's what we want. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Isn't there some literature on the
effects, Dr. Voegtlin? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> Oh, yes. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Anslinger:</b> And it leads to insanity? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Voegtlin:</b> I think it is an established fact that
prolonged use leads to insanity in certain cases, depending upon
the amount taken, of course. Many people take it and do not go
insane, but many do. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> At the League of Nations they whitewashed
the whole thing. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> Colonel Crane wrote me it did cause trouble
over there. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> the Commission inquired into the fact and
said there was no more reason to control the hashish than to
control alcohol. If it leads to insanity, and we have a lot of
horror stories, we can build it up. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> There was a report given out by Wilbert in
1910 in which he claimed, as one of his conclusions, that there
was no evidence of a habit-forming nature from the use of
Cannabis by the Anglo-Saxon race. I just mention that because it
may be pulled on you in opposition some time. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Dewey:</b> Dr. Patrick, of the Bureau of Chemistry,
definitely stated it was the most dangerous habit-forming drug he
had taken, and he tried all of them. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Are there any other questions? </p>

<p>Mr. Sievers: I would like to ask what the situation is with
regard to the seed. What about a person who wants to import the
seed for bird seed or hemp oil? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> That's something still to be determined
when we consider this new definition. I am not quite sure myself
just how that will be handled. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> The only thing I had in mind was that we
would endeavor, by the use of exemptions, to protect the use for
oil-producing hemp, and to discourage the use of bird seed,
because bird seed, as the Commissioner remarks, results to a
great extent in illicit usage. </p>

<p>Mr. Seivers: Will there be a tax on the seed when used for oil
purposes? </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tipton:</b> The transfer tax will be exempted there. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Pierce:</b> I think we can work out the tax on
medicinal uses so that it won't be prohibitive. The bird seed
industry will be wiped out probably as far as hemp seed is
concerned. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Dr. Munch, you are quite familiar with
Sharpe &amp; Dohme's method of manufacture, aren't you? I was
thinking that this transfer tax would have to be appreciable at
least, and if it were at the rate of $1.00 an ounce on the raw
material and another dollar an ounce on the transfer of extract,
it would be rather expensive. </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> I think you will find that, while a great
many preparations may use a small quantity, there won't be a
great deal of it used medicinally. Bauer and Black, in Chicago,
used a great deal in making a plaster at one time. the rest of it
might use a few pounds a year and, perhaps, somebody making corn
plaster would use some. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Tennyson:</b> Veterinarians use a great deal, don't
they? </p>

<p><b>Dr. Fuller:</b> I don't think you will find the volume is
very great. I think the ue of Cannabis is diminishing as a
legitimate use. that is just my opinion. from the point of view
of one who has studied the situation for a good many years. </p>

<p><b>Mr. Wollner:</b> Gentlemen, I want to thank Dr. Fuller, Dr.
Dewey, Dr. Veogtlin, Mr. Sievers, and Dr. Munch for their very
kind assistance. I wonder if you gentlemen would be in a position
to confer with us further after this have been given more
consideration? <br>
</p>

<p>Assent.<br>
<br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_mj_taxact_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="taxact.htm">Marihuana Tax Act of 1937</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="2109" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>