
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-3</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B008-167</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Other/review1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122040114 text/html 14834
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:01:05 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:12:37 GMT
Content-length: 14616
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>A Review of Drug Legalization, For And Against</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->

<h1>A Review of Drug Legalization, For And Against </h1>

<hr>

<p>I was honored (?) with the task of reviewing the book
&quot;Drug Legalization, For and Against&quot;. For publishing
the review they let me have the book. So here it is,
&quot;published&quot; on the net. </p>

<p>[in paper: ISBN-0-8126-9169-5 in cloth: ISBN-0-8126-9168-7] </p>

<p>The book is published by Open Court Publishing Company,
(LaSalle IL, 61301 (c) 1992) edited by Rod L. Evans and Irwin M.
Berent with a forward by Linus Pauling and a redundant
introduction by Hugh Downs. The editors are appologetic for being
biased in favor of some form of legalization and given the
arguments they picked favoring the status quo of prohibition it's
easy to see why. I think they tried hard to find good arguments
for continuing prohibition but it really boils down to accepting
a paternalistic government versus a free society. Out of 11
articles favoring prohibition, only 2 were consistent: given
their basis of argument you could logically reach the same
conclusion. I just happen to disagree with their basis. </p>

<p>So there's no confusion, both the editors and reviewer agree,
legalization (of some form) is the way to go. </p>

<p>In general, the legalizers used facts and talked much about
marijuana and the prohibitionists used rhetoric and polls (nobody
believes the other side so don't listen to them) and talked much
about heroin and cocaine. Given the skew argument, maybe
legalizing hemp really is possible? All other drugs are just a
matter of changing a few polls. To this reader, the best
prohibitionist argument was &quot;we have helmet laws, therefore
we can control your mind too.&quot; This is true. We ought not
have helmet laws! </p>

<p>What follows are my notes of each contributing author. </p>

<p>Their efforts were culled from various journals and
proceedings from 1988 to 1992. Only one article has never been
published before. It was actually my favorite piece. </p>

<p>Linus Pauling opens the book with the concept of
*orthomolecular substances* as things which the human body has
adapted to over the past million years or so and *drugs* as
substances not normally present. He figures distilled alcohol is
only a few hundred years old so that falls in the category of
drugs but he says &quot;marijuana and cocaine, and perhaps also
peyote&quot; should be as available as beer. I hope he meant coca
leaf and not processed cocaine because that would make him a
hypocrite, calling distilled alcohol a drug but not processed
cocaine! </p>

<p>Hugh Downs asks the readers to think about legalization and
suggests a few questions to have in mind while reading the book.
The editors then spell out their rational for putting the book
together the way they did. The book is laid out in 11 chapters of
various types of arguments with the first chapter a list of
questions that Charles Rangle (chairman of the select Committee
on Narcotics Abuse and Control) asked his committee to consider
at the behest of Kurt Schmoke's request to investigate
legalization. They are really good questions and he obviously
ignored the answers to stay a prohibitionist. All in all the book
starts out interesting. Next up was a very abridged version of
Nadelmann's 1989 Science article arguing for legalization. I'd
read the original so I skipped this. </p>

<p>James Wilson (prof. of mang. and public policy at UCLA) mounts
a personal attack on Nadelmann and tries to use history of drugs
starting in 1970. Very unconvincing. </p>

<p>Then comes Milton Friedman's famous letters to Bill Bennett
and the reply. Bennett says &quot;I advocate a larger criminal
justice system to take drug users off the streets.&quot; And
&quot;drug use is a threat to the individual liberty and domestic
tranquillity guaranteed by the constitution.&quot; Friedman
replies with a quote from Justice Brandeis: </p>

<p>&quot;The greater dangers to liberty lurk in insidious
encroachment by men of zeal, well meaning, but without
understanding.&quot; </p>

<p>At this point I'm wondering if the prohibitionists have
anybody who can articulate their viewpoint at all with reason. </p>

<p>Fortunately Ed Tully and Marguerite Bennett of the FBI show up
with the most consistent argument for the prohibitionists. They
start out making good points about individual rights versus
social safety. They feel that laws which &quot;protect the
individual&quot; (seat belt and helmet laws) are good things.
Using this as a basis they argue well for prohibition. They also
use several specious arguments about the dangers of marijuana
which are blatantly false but this does not affect their
arguments. Proves to me that paternalistic society is a bad
thing. </p>

<p>Merrill Smith (U.S. Chief Probation Officer) gives lots of
quotes from professors and medical doctors. Lots more facts than
the FBI argument and an excellent review of history of how drugs
went from the medical domain to the criminal starting from the
1890's. </p>

<p>John Hill (Law prof. and Ph.D. philosophy) then comes along
with a really nice libertarian perspective. The book might be
worth getting for this article alone. Hill argues for the
principle of a &quot;zone of privacy&quot;. He defines
&quot;'privacy' in the jurisprudential sense is that which is
beyond the legitimate concern of the government and its
laws.&quot; A couple of quotes I really liked are:
&quot;Similarly, monarchists, Marxists, and fascists of various
brands reject the notion of a private realm of individual choice
as a chimera of modern Liberalism.&quot; And &quot;Defenders of a
zone of privacy, on the other hand, recognize the logical and
moral primacy of the individual over the state. The individual is
not, as it was for Aristotle, a part of the state. Rather, the
state is the creation of the individual and, as such, the servant
of individual ends.&quot; Right on dude! </p>

<p>Hill goes on to study supreme court rullings about privacy and
covers 4 specific areas. He then quotes Mill's definition of
'harm to others' and relates all this to drug use. He does not
venture a direct opinion towards legalization and tosses out bits
for debate such as &quot;prohibition might also be warranted in
the case of certain specified drugs that pose a threat to the
continued autonomy of the individual user.&quot; An ivory tower
argument but a great place to get definitions and a basis for
legalization. </p>

<p>Mark Moore (Harvard Prof. of Criminal Justice) starts off with
&quot;In this Article, I note that the 'drug problem' is
primarily a cocaine epidemic.&quot; Sets up 6 straw men
'alternatives' of legalization and then knocks them down. Very
unconvincing. He blames all of societies problems on drug use.
Actually it's kind of sad. </p>

<p>Todd Brenner (Lawyer, Notes Editor for Capital Law Review) is
very repetitive of the legalization side. Nadelmann covered the
facts and Hill covered the logic. I didn't finish reading it. It
seemed like 50 pages of the book could have been saved leaving
Moore and Brenner out. </p>

<p>I then skipped Wisotsky (Law prof. at Nova University) as just
another boring lawyer. [That's part of the reason I'm running for
office on the Libertarian ticket. I'm sick of lawyer's telling me
how to live my life.] </p>

<p>Kurt Schmoke gives a short, succinct and powerful message for
legalization. Bill Bennett (again!?) rantingly replies &quot;law
enforcement works&quot;. Is this bias of editors or is there
really no rational explanation of prohibition? </p>

<p>Dr. Gazzaniga (psychiatry prof. Dartmouth Med. school) is
published in interview format. This was interesting to read after
the previous boring rants and gave a useful counter to the
&quot;drugs create crime&quot; falicy. Compares alcohol, tobacco
to crack and cocaine addictions. </p>

<p>Gabriel Nahas (pharmacologist and known liar) claims alcohol
&quot;does not impair mental acuity&quot; but marijuana does
&quot;even in minute quantities&quot;. Seeming to admit he has no
facts he says &quot;Only when the vital grass-roots forces of
America feeling their existence threatened, become determined to
fight drugs will they be able to wage a war and win it.&quot; He
basically believes propaganda and lies will work forever. Made me
want to puke. </p>

<p>Thomas Szasz (psychiatrist prof. from SUNY) follows in typical
great style. He has a sharp wit but uses few real facts. He gives
a high level abstract argument with some of the best legalization
propaganda I've seen. He directly ties Hitler's argument of the
'dangerous jew' to WoD's 'dangerous drugs'. He says: &quot;The
perennial confrontation between authority and autonomy, the
permanent tension between behavior based on submission to
coercion and the free choice of one's own course in life - these
basic themes of human morality and psychology are now enacted on
a stage on which the principal props are drugs and laws against
drugs.&quot; Kind of made me wonder if the human race is worth
the effort I expend on it. </p>

<p>David Musto (psychiatry prof. Yale) gives an accurate
historical perspective. He argues public opinion polls be used to
determine what to do with drugs: &quot;My belief is that the
popular attitude which is growing so powerfully against drug use
in this country is in the long run more determinative than
profits or even foreign supply.&quot; He does think &quot;we must
not again revert to extreme punishments, silence or
exaggeration&quot; when discussing drug use. He suggests that the
war should plow ahead as usual because it is working. He ignores
his own arguments but it ranks up there with the FBI paper as the
best of the prohibitionists. </p>

<p>William Buckly (editor National Review) complains that
&quot;no politician can be elected who recommends the one thing
that hasn't been tried.&quot; They could have picked a better
piece. I think this could have been left out also. </p>

<p>Morton Kondracke (senior editor New Republic) claims that
&quot;drugs have been the rage in America only since about
1962&quot;. He makes the amazing assumption that because alcohol
kills 200,000 people per year that legalizing marijuana would do
the same thing and including all drugs he says &quot;the number
of deaths actually could go as high as 500,000 a year.&quot; He
concludes &quot;in the name of health, economics, and morality,
there seems no alternative but to keep drugs illegal.&quot; The
'liberals' are more dangerous than the 'conservatives'! </p>

<p>Ms. Taylor Branch (freelance writer) comes at it with a
literary attack. She compares Prohibition to today. She comments
on the connection between racism and drugs and why doctors did
not defend use of opium or cocaine. She argues for a &quot;Koop
model&quot; of legalization: no advertising, no sales to minors,
but legal to purchase with warnings that it's bad for you. She
ends with &quot;To fight the entire drug war by Everett Koop's
rules would require disciplined courage within individual
citizens and enormous trust between them. But so does the
practice of democracy itself.&quot; </p>

<p>The book ends with Arnold Trebach (law prof. American
University and head of Drug Policy Foundation) throwing a self
promoting rah-rah. He gives a few good points on how activists
should push for medical marijuana and heroin and asks that users
be left alone but dealers still be punished. Argues for political
reason on the part of legalizers and suggests taking things one
step at a time. </p>

<p>The lawyers were definitely boring. Too many words and not
enough said. If you've been in the WoD for awhile, this book does
you no good at all. But their market is the &quot;public&quot;
and for that it may be too thick. If the market is libertarians
it may sell ok. I just have the feeling that there must be more
to the prohibitionist argument. If there isn't then it should be
really easy to legalize hemp. The major argument is that the
government has the power to control individual behavior. This is
absurd. Government can not control its own behavior let alone
that of individuals. This is observed historical fact. I'll be
suprised if the book gets wide circulation because it is biased
in favor of legalization. The powers that be are biased against
it. </p>

<p>Nahas is right about one point: &quot;Only when the vital
grass-roots forces of America feeling their existance
threatened&quot; will they fight oppression. If this book really
represents the prohibitionists then they are planting the seeds
of their own destruction. And this book documents their demise. </p>

<p>Patience, persistence, truth, reality: mgr@anhep2.hep.anl.gov </p>

<p>Dr. mike UUCP: uunet!pyramid!cdp!mrosing </p>

<p>IMI, P.O. BOX 2242, Darien IL 60559 bitnet: mrosing@igc.org </p>

<p>. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_debate_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../debate/debate.htm">The Drug Legalization Debate</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="39015" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>