
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B09-210</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA008-000077-B039-161</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://www-mtnforum.igc.org:80/mtnforum/resources/chp13.htm 198.94.7.182 19970222072022 text/html 20266
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Sat, 22 Feb 1997 07:20:39 GMT
Server: Apache/1.1.1
Content-type: text/html
Content-length: 20094
Last-modified: Thu, 20 Feb 1997 22:17:12 GMT
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE> 
Report of the 1992 UN Conference on The Environment and Development, Chapter 13 of Agenda 21</TITLE>
</HEAD>

<BODY bgcolor="#ffffff" TEXT="#000000">



                                           Distr.<br>
                                          GENERAL<p>

                                          A/CONF.151/26 (Vol. II)<br>
                                          13 August 1992<p>

                                          ORIGINAL:  ENGLISH<p>

<CENTER>
REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE 
ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT<p></CENTER>

           <CENTER>         (Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992)   </CENTER> <p>

                           <CENTER>    Chapter 13</CENTER><P>

<CENTER>MANAGING FRAGILE ECOSYSTEMS:  SUSTAINABLE 
MOUNTAIN DEVELOPMENT</CENTER>


                          <CENTER>    INTRODUCTION</CENTER><P>

13.1.  Mountains are an important source of water, energy and
biological diversity.  Furthermore, they are a source of such key
resources as minerals, forest products and agricultural products
and of recreation.  As a major ecosystem representing the complex
and interrelated ecology of our planet, mountain environments are
essential to the survival of the global ecosystem.  Mountain
ecosystems are, however, rapidly changing.  They are susceptible
to accelerated soil erosion, landslides and rapid loss of habitat
and genetic diversity.  On the human side, there is widespread
poverty among mountain inhabitants and loss of indigenous
knowledge.  As a result, most global mountain areas are
experiencing environmental degradation.  Hence, the proper
management of mountain resources and socio-economic development of
the people deserves immediate action.<p>

13.2.  About 10 per cent of the world's population depends on
mountain resources.  A much larger percentage draws on other
mountain resources, including and especially water.  Mountains are
a storehouse of biological diversity and endangered species.<p>

13.3.  Two programme areas are included in this chapter to further
elaborate the problem of fragile ecosystems with regard to all
mountains of the world.  These are:<p>

 (a)  Generating and strengthening knowledge about the ecology
and sustainable development of mountain ecosystems;<p>

    (b)  Promoting integrated watershed development and
alternative livelihood opportunities.<p>


                           <CENTER>  PROGRAMME AREAS</Center>

      A.  Generating and strengthening knowledge about the
ecology and  sustainable development of mountain ecosystems<p>

Basis for action<p>

13.4.  Mountains are highly vulnerable to human and natural
ecological imbalance.  Mountains are the areas most sensitive to
all climatic changes in the atmosphere.  Specific information on
ecology, natural resource potential and socio-economic activities
is essential.  Mountain and hillside areas hold a rich variety of
ecological systems.  Because of their vertical dimensions,
mountains create gradients of temperature, precipitation and
insolation.  A given mountain slope may include several climatic
systems - such as tropical, subtropical, temperate and alpine -
each of which represents a microcosm of a larger habitat
diversity.  There is, however, a lack of knowledge of mountain
ecosystems.  The creation of a global mountain database is
therefore vital for launching programmes that contribute to the
sustainable development of mountain ecosystems.<p>

Objectives<p>

13.5.  The objectives of this programme area are:<p>

    (a)  To undertake a survey of the different forms of soils,
forest, water use, crop, plant and animal resources of mountain
ecosystems, taking into account the work of existing international
and regional organizations;<p>

    (b)  To maintain and generate database and information systems
to facilitate the integrated management and environmental
assessment of mountain ecosystems, taking into account the work of
existing international and regional organizations;<p>

    (c)  To improve and build the existing land/water ecological
knowledge base regarding technologies and agricultural and
conservation practices in the mountain regions of the world, with
the participation of local communities;<p>

    (d)  To create and strengthen the communications network and
information clearing-house for existing organizations concerned
with mountain issues; <p>

    (e)  To improve coordination of regional efforts to protect
fragile mountain ecosystems through the consideration of
appropriate mechanisms, including regional legal and other
instruments; <p>

    (f)  To generate information to establish databases and
information systems to facilitate an evaluation of environmental
risks and natural disasters in mountain ecosystems.<p>

Activities<p>

<STRONG>(a)</STRONG> Management-related activities<p>

13.6.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should:<p>

    (a)  Strengthen existing institutions or establish new ones at
local, national and regional levels to generate a
multidisciplinary land/water ecological knowledge base on mountain
ecosystems;<p>

    (b)  Promote national policies that would provide incentives
to local people for the use and transfer of environment-friendly
technologies and farming and conservation practices;<p>

    (c)  Build up the knowledge base and understanding by creating
mechanisms for cooperation and information exchange among national
and regional institutions working on fragile ecosystems;<p>

    (d)  Encourage policies that would provide incentives to
farmers and local people to undertake conservation and
regenerative measures;<p>

    (e)  Diversify mountain economies, inter alia, by creating
and/or strengthening tourism, in accordance with integrated
management of mountain areas;<p>

    (f)  Integrate all forest, rangeland and wildlife activities
in such a way that specific mountain ecosystems are maintained;<p>

    (g)  Establish appropriate natural reserves in representative
species-rich sites and areas.<p>

<STRONG>(b) </STRONG>Data and information<p>

13.7.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should:<p>

    (a)  Maintain and establish meteorological, hydrological and
physical monitoring analysis and capabilities that would encompass
the climatic diversity as well as water distribution of various
mountain regions of the world;<p>

    (b)  Build an inventory of different forms of soils, forests,
water use, and crop, plant and animal genetic resources, giving
priority to those under threat of extinction.  Genetic resources
should be protected in situ by maintaining and establishing
protected areas and improving traditional farming and animal
husbandry activities and establishing programmes for evaluating
the potential value of the resources;<p>

    (c)  Identify hazardous areas that are most vulnerable to
erosion, floods, landslides, earthquakes, snow avalanches and
other natural hazards;<P>

    (d)  Identify mountain areas threatened by air pollution from
neighbouring industrial and urban areas.<P>

<STRONG>(c)</STRONG> International and regional cooperation<P>

13.8.  National Governments and intergovernmental organizations
should:<P>

    (a)  Coordinate regional and international cooperation and
facilitate an exchange of information and experience among the
specialized agencies, the World Bank, IFAD and other international
and regional organizations, national Governments, research
institutions and non-governmental organizations working on
mountain development;<P>

    (b)  Encourage regional, national and international networking
of people's initiatives and the activities of international,
regional and local non-governmental organizations working on
mountain development, such as the United Nations University (UNU),
the Woodland Mountain Institutes (WMI), the International Center
for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), the International
Mountain Society (IMS), the African Mountain Association and the
Andean Mountain Association, besides supporting those
organizations in exchange of information and experience;<P>

    (c)  Protect Fragile Mountain Ecosystem through the
consideration of appropriate mechanisms including regional legal
and other instruments.<P>

Means of implementation<P>

<STRONG>(a) </STRONG>Financing and cost evaluation<P>

13.9.  The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total
annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing the activities of this
programme to be about $50 million from the international community
on grant or concessional terms.  These are indicative and
order-of-magnitude estimates only and have not been reviewed by
Governments.  Actual costs and financial terms, including any that
are non-concessional, will depend upon, inter alia, the specific
strategies and programmes Governments decide upon for implementation.<P>

<STRONG>(b)</STRONG> Scientific and technological means<P>

13.10.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should
strengthen scientific research and technological development
programmes, including diffusion through national and regional
institutions, particularly in meteorology, hydrology, forestry,
soil sciences and plant sciences.<P>

<STRONG>(c) </STRONG>Human resource development<P>

13.11.  Governments at the appropriate level, and with the support
of the relevant international and regional organizations, should:<P>

    (a)  Launch training and extension programmes in
environmentally appropriate technologies and practices that would
be suitable to mountain ecosystems;<P>

    (b)  Support higher education through fellowships and research
grants for environmental studies in mountains and hill areas,
particularly for candidates from indigenous mountain populations;<P>

    (c)  Undertake environmental education for farmers, in
particular for women, to help the rural population better
understand the ecological issues regarding the sustainable
development of mountain ecosystems.<P>

    <STRONG> (d)</STRONG> Capacity-building<p>

13.12.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should
build up national and regional institutional bases that could
carry out research, training and dissemination of information on
the sustainable development of the economies of fragile ecosystems.<P>

        B.  Promoting integrated watershed development and
alternative livelihood opportunities<P>

Basis for action<P>

13.13.  Nearly half of the world's population is affected in
various ways by mountain ecology and the degradation of watershed
areas.  About 10 per cent of the Earth's population lives in
mountain areas with higher slopes, while about 40 per cent
occupies the adjacent medium- and lower-watershed areas.  There
are serious problems of ecological deterioration in these
watershed areas.  For example, in the hillside areas of the Andean
countries of South America a large portion of the farming
population is now faced with a rapid deterioration of land
resources.  Similarly, the mountain and upland areas of the
Himalayas, South-East Asia and East and Central Africa, which make
vital contributions to agricultural production, are threatened by
cultivation of marginal lands due to expanding population.  In
many areas this is accompanied by excessive livestock grazing,
deforestation and loss of biomass cover.<P>

13.14.  Soil erosion can have a devastating impact on the vast
numbers of rural people who depend on rainfed agriculture in the
mountain and hillside areas.  Poverty, unemployment, poor health
and bad sanitation are widespread.  Promoting integrated watershed
development programmes through effective participation of local
people is a key to preventing further ecological imbalance.  An
integrated approach is needed for conserving, upgrading and using
the natural resource base of land, water, plant, animal and human
resources.  In addition, promoting alternative livelihood
opportunities, particularly through development of employment
schemes that increase the productive base, will have a significant
role in improving the standard of living among the large rural
population living in mountain ecosystems.<P>

Objectives<P>

13.15.  The objectives of this programme area are:<P>

    (a)  By the year 2000, to develop appropriate land-use
planning and management for both arable and non-arable land in
mountain-fed watershed areas to prevent soil erosion, increase
biomass production and maintain the ecological balance;<P>

    (b)  To promote income-generating activities, such as
sustainable tourism, fisheries and environmentally sound mining,
and to improve infrastructure and social services, in particular
to protect the livelihoods of local communities and indigenous people;<P>

    (c)  To develop technical and institutional arrangements for
affected countries to mitigate the effects of natural disasters
through hazard-prevention measures, risk zoning, early-warning
systems, evacuation plans and emergency supplies.<P>

Activities<P>

<STRONG>(a)</STRONG> Management-related activities<P>

13.16.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should:<P>

    (a)  Undertake measures to prevent soil erosion and promote
erosion-control activities in all sectors;<P>

    (b)  Establish task forces or watershed development
committees, complementing existing institutions, to coordinate
integrated services to support local initiatives in animal
husbandry, forestry, horticulture and rural development at all
administrative levels;<P>

    (c)  Enhance popular participation in the management of local
resources through appropriate legislation;<P>

    (d)  Support non-governmental organizations and other private
groups assisting local organizations and communities in the
preparation of projects that would enhance participatory
development of local people;<P>

    (e)  Provide mechanisms to preserve threatened areas that
could protect wildlife, conserve biological diversity or serve as
national parks;<P>

    (f)  Develop national policies that would provide incentives
to farmers and local people to undertake conservation measures and
to use
environment-friendly technologies;<P>

    (g)  Undertake income-generating activities in cottage and
agro-processing industries, such as the cultivation and processing
of medicinal and aromatic plants;<P>

    (h)  Undertake the above activities, taking into account the
need for full participation of women, including indigenous people
and local communities, in development.<P>

   <STRONG> (b) </STRONG> Data and information<P>

13.17.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should:<P>

    (a)  Maintain and establish systematic observation and
evaluation capacities at the national, state or provincial level
to generate information for daily operations and to assess the
environmental and socio-economic impacts of projects;<P>

    (b)  Generate data on alternative livelihoods and diversified
production systems at the village level on annual and tree crops,
livestock, poultry, beekeeping, fisheries, village industries,
markets, transport and income-earning opportunities, taking fully
into account the role of women and integrating them into the
planning and implementation process.<P>

<STRONG>(c) </STRONG>International and regional cooperation<P>

13.18.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should:<P>

    (a)  Strengthen the role of appropriate international research
and training institutes such as the Consultative Group on
International Agricultural Research Centers (CGIAR) and the
International Board for Soil Research and Management (IBSRAM), as
well as regional research centres, such as the Woodland Mountain
Institutes and the International Center for Integrated Mountain
Development, in undertaking applied research relevant to watershed
development;<P>

    (b)  Promote regional cooperation and exchange of data and
information among countries sharing the same mountain ranges and
river basins, particularly those affected by mountain disasters
and floods; <P>

    (c)  Maintain and establish partnerships with non-governmental
organizations and other private groups working in watershed
development.<P>

Means of implementation<P>

<STRONG>(a) </STRONG>Financial and cost evaluation<P>

13.19.  The Conference secretariat has estimated the average total
annual cost (1993-2000) of implementing the activities of this
programme to be about $13 billion, including about $1.9 billion
from the international community on grant or concessional terms.
These are indicative and order-of-magnitude estimates only and
have not been reviewed by Governments.  Actual costs and financial
terms, including any that are non-concessional, will depend upon,
inter alia, the specific strategies and programmes Governments
decide upon for implementation.<P>

13.20.  Financing for the promotion of alternative livelihoods in
mountain ecosystems should be viewed as part of a country's
anti-poverty or alternative livelihoods programme, which is also
discussed in chapter 3 (Combating poverty) and chapter 14
(Promoting sustainable agriculture and rural development) of
Agenda 21.<P>

<STRONG>(b) </STRONG> Scientific and technical means<P>

13.21.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should:<P>

    (a)  Consider undertaking pilot projects that combine
environmental protection and development functions with particular
emphasis on some of the traditional environmental management
practices or systems that have a good impact on the environment;<P>

    (b)  Generate technologies for specific watershed and farm
conditions through a participatory approach involving local men
and women, researchers and extension agents who will carry out
experiments and trials on farm conditions;<P>

    (c)  Promote technologies of vegetative conservation measures
for erosion prevention, in situ moisture management, improved
cropping technology, fodder production and agroforestry that are
low-cost, simple and easily adopted by local people.<P>

   <STRONG> (c) </STRONG>
 Human resource development<p>

13.22.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should:<P>

    (a)  Promote a multidisciplinary and cross-sectoral approach
in training and the dissemination of knowledge to local people on
a wide range of issues, such as household production systems,
conservation and utilization of arable and non-arable land,
treatment of drainage lines and recharging of groundwater,
livestock management, fisheries, agroforestry and horticulture;<p>

    (b)  Develop human resources by providing access to education,
health, energy and infrastructure;<p>

    (c)  Promote local awareness and preparedness for disaster
prevention and mitigation, combined with the latest available
technology for early warning and forecasting.<P>

 Capacity-building<P>

13.23.  Governments at the appropriate level, with the support of
the relevant international and regional organizations, should
develop and strengthen national centres for watershed management
to encourage a comprehensive approach to the environmental,
socio-economic, technological, legislative, financial and
administrative aspects and provide support to policy makers,
administrators, field staff and farmers for watershed development.<P>

13.24.  The private sector and local communities, in cooperation
with national Governments, should promote local infrastructure
development, including communication networks, mini- or
micro-hydro development to support cottage industries, and access
to markets.<P>


END OF CHAPTER 13<P>
.



</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>