
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B26-12</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B027-177</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/murd3.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095427 text/html 15406
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:54:17 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:38:48 GMT
Content-length: 15188
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp Around Their Necks by Harry Anslinger</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<h1>Hemp Around Their Necks</h1>

<p> From The Murderers </p>

<p> THE STORY OF THE NARCOTIC GANGS </p>

<p> By HARRY J. ANSLINGER </p>

<p> U. S. Commissioner of Narcotics </p>

<p> and WILL OURSLER </p>

<p> FARRAR, STRAUS AND CUDAHY, NEW YORK, 1961 </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif"><br>
</p>

<p> In 1930 there was no federal law against smoking marijuana,
and the average American citizen in an average community had
probably never heard of &quot;reefers&quot; or &quot;tea&quot; or
other words in the argot of marijuana users. But by the middle
thirties we began to see the serious effects of marijuana on our
youth. An alarming increase in the smoking of marijuana reefers
in 1936 continued to spread at an accelerated pace in 1937.
Before this, use of reefers had been relatively slight and
confined to the the Southwest, particularly along the Mexican
border. </p>

<p> Seizures by state officers in these two years, however, had
increased a hundred percent and by hundreds of pounds. Reports I
received from thirty states showed an &quot;invasion&quot; by
this drug, either by cultivation or underworld importation. </p>

<p> Marijuana was something new and adventuresome. The angle-wise
mobsters were aiming their pitch straight at the most
impressionable age group-America's fresh, post-depression crop of
teenagers. </p>

<p> One adolescent gave a picture to an agent of a typical
&quot;smoker&quot; in an apartment or &quot;pad&quot;: </p>

<p> &quot;The room was crowded. There were fifty people but it
seemed like five hundred. It was like crazy, couples lying all,
over the place, a woman was screaming out in the hall, two,
fellows were trying to make love to the same girl and this, girl
was screaming and crying and not making any sense. Her clothes
were mostly pulled off and she was snickering and blubbering and
trying to push these two guys away.... The place was nothing but
smoke and stink and these funny little noises I could hear but
they were way out, that far I could hardly hear them and they
were right there in the room, that laughing and crying and the
music and all that stuff. It was crazy wild. But I didn't want to
do anything, I didn't want to sleep with those women or like
that. I just wanted to lie down because the room seemed big and
Eke a great tremendous crowd like at a ball game or something. .
. .&quot; </p>

<p> Made from the hemp plant known as Cannabis sativa americana,
marijuana is almost a twin brother to Cannabis sativa indica,
otherwise called hashish. There are said to be almost three
hundred names for the varieties of the hemp weed. In some parts
of Asia it is called bhang; in South Africa it is called dagga.
It is also challed chira and ganja. And many other names. </p>

<p> The hemp weed grows best in warm climates but has also been
found along roadsides north of Boston. It grows to heights of
from five and a half to fifteen or sixteen feet. Its leaves,
seeds and flowers contain a substance which when chewed or smoked
produces hallucinatory effects. </p>

<p> Elaborate technical processes have been developed for the
manufacture of Cannabis cigarettes from the resin in the plants.
Although pharmacists have never been able to isolate completely
the nature of the Cannabis &quot;principal&quot; that produces
the narcotic effect, it is known to exist in the fringes or hairs
on the leaves and in the flowers, and in the thick resin that
flows through the stalk and other parts of the plant. </p>

<p> Cannabis grows wild in many parts of the world, and is
cultivated in India, and illegally in certain areas of Africa,
Mexico, Brazil and the United States. It also grows wild in parts
of the United States, although we have been able to root the wild
Cannabis out of most communities. </p>

<p> Origins of hemp weed are ancient. Rites that go back
thousands of years, in temples long vanished, may wen have
evolved around the effects of some variant of the hemp weed.
Worshipers of the Hindu god Siva were said to use Cannabis
indica. In the eleventh century A.D., the Mohammedan sect called
the Assassins, used hashish in so-called religious observances.
They made homicide a high ritualistic art. Their name itself is
today a synonym for murder. </p>

<p> Marijuana effects on the average user are described in a
brochure we published in the Bureau for the information of lay
groups. &quot;The toxic effect produced by the active narcotic
principle of Cannabis sativa, hemp, or marijuana,&quot; the
report states, &quot;appear to be exclusively to the higher nerve
centers. The drug produces first an exhaltation with a feeling of
well being, a happy, jovial mood, usually; an increased feeling
of physical strength and power, and a general euphoria is
experienced. Accompanying this exaltation is a stimulation of the
imagination followed by a more or less delirious state
characterized by vivid kaleidoscopic visions, sometimes of a
pleasing sensual kind, but occasionally of a gruesome nature.
Accompanying this delirious state is a remarkable loss in spatial
and time relations; persons and things in the environment look
small; time is indeterminable; seconds seem like minutes and
hours like days. </p>

<p> &quot;Those who are accustomed to habitual use of the drug
are said eventually to develop a delirious rage after its
administration during which they are temporarily, at least,
irresponsible and prone to commit violent crimes. The prolonged
use of this narcotic is said to produce mental
deterioration.&quot; </p>

<p> One of the great difficulties with Cannabis is its
unpredictability. Physicians who have made hundreds of tests with
Cannabis report that there is no way to predict what effect it
have on the individual, both under controlled and noncontrolled
conditions. One man has no reaction at all; the next may go
berserk and try to stab somebody or harm himself. The medical
profession after many such experiments was forced to drop the
narcotic as a possible analgesic because of this unpredictable
quality. </p>

<p> Much of the most irrational juvenile violence and that has
written a new chapter of shame and tragedy is traceable directly
to this hemp intoxication. A gang of boys tear the clothes from
two school girls and rape the screaming girls, one boy after the
other. A sixteen-year-old kills his en tire family of five in
Florida, a man in Minnesota puts a bullet through the head of a
stranger on the road; in Colorado husband tries to shoot his
wife, kills her grandmother instead and then kills himself. Every
one of these crimes had been proceeded (sic) </p>

<p> by the smoking of one or more marijuana &quot;reefers.&quot;
As the marijuana situation grew worse, I knew action had to be
taken to get the proper legislation passed. By 1937 under my
direction, the Bureau launched two important steps First, a
legislative plan to seek from Congress a new law that would place
marijuana and its distribution directly under federal control.
Second, on radio and at major forums, such that presented
annually by the New York Herald Tribune, I told the story of this
evil weed of the fields and river beds and roadsides. I wrote
articles for magazines; our agents gave hundreds of lectures to
parents, educators, social and civic leaders. In network
broadcasts I reported on the growing list of crimes, including
murder and rape. I described the nature of marijuana and its
close kinship to hashish. I continued to hammer at the facts. </p>

<p> I believe we did a thorough job, for the public was alerted
and the laws to protect them were passed, both nationally and at
the state level. We also brought under control the wild growing
marijuana in this country. Working with local authorities, we
cleaned up hundreds of acres of marijuana we and uprooted plants
sprouting along the roadsides. </p>

<p> The 1937 law does not prohibit the sale of marijuana b puts a
tax of $100.00 an ounce on any sale or transfer of drug and makes
such sale or transfer illegal without proper registration and
approval from the Bureau. Possession without proper authorization
can bring a prison term. </p>

<p> The Marijuana Tax Act is patterned in general after the
Harrison Act, but with some major technical variations,
principally based on the fact that while marijuana is used in
laboratory tests it is not used for medical purposes. </p>

<p> There were still some WPA gangs working in those days and we
put them to good use. just outside the nation's capital, for some
sixty miles along the Potomac River, on both banks, marijuana was
growing in profusion; it had been planted there originally by
early settlers who made their own hemp and cloth. The workers
cleaned out tremendous river bank crops, destroying plants, seeds
and roots. AR through the Midwest also, WPA workers were used for
this clean-up job. The. wild hemp was rooted out of America. </p>

<p> During the Second World War, after Axis powers in the Far
East and Europe cut off our access to countries where hemp was
grown for the making of cord and cloth, we developed, under
strict controls, our own hemp growing program on the rich
farmlands of Minnesota. Less than one thousandth of one percent
was ever diverted into illegal channels. After the war this
production stopped and the fields went back to ,corn and wheat.
With the war's end, however, the narcotic branch of the
underworld was given a new lift by the publication of an
extraordinary document which has come to be known as the La
Guardia Report. </p>

<p> The title was a misnomer, it was actually a report of a
committee on marijuana which had been appointed by the
&quot;Little Flower&quot; of New York to give an objective
picture of marijuana from a scientific point of view. La Guardia
was always not only an honest official who warred against the
syndicate &quot;tin horns,&quot; as he called them, but was also
a good friend of Bureau of Narcotics. In Congress he fought
consistently for increases for our Bureau to help us to achieve
the power needed to do our job. </p>

<p> The men who issued this document were men of science doctors,
technicians, authorities Published as a book by the Jacques
Cattell Press in 1945, the report bore the tide: The Marijuana
Problem in the City of New York: Sociologic Medical,
Psychological and Pharmacological Studies, by the Mayor's
Committee on Marijuana. </p>

<p> This report declared, in effect, that those who had been
denouncing marijuana as dangerous, including myself and experts
in the Bureau, were not only in error, but were spreading
baseless fears about the effects of smoking Cannabis. I say the
report was a government printed invitation to youth and
adults-above all to teenagers-to go ahead and smoke all the
reefers they felt like. </p>

<p> Relying solely on a series of experiments with a group of 77
prisoners who volunteered to make the tests, the Mayor's experts
asserted that they found no major menace in the use of this
narcotic, which they termed &quot;a mild drug smoked by bored
people for the sake of conviviality.&quot; </p>

<p> The report further claimed that there was &quot;no
apparent&quot; connection between &quot;the weed&quot; and crimes
of violence, that smoking it did not produce aggressiveness or
belligerence as a rule, that it could be used for a number of
years without causing serious mental or physical harm and that
while it might be habit forming it could be given up abruptly
without causing distress; in other words, it did not produce the
bodily dependence found in heroin, cocaine, morphine and other
drugs. </p>

<p> Finally, the report suggested that the drug is so mild that
it might well be used successfully as a substitute in the process
of curing addiction to other drugs, or even in the treatment of
chronic alcoholism. </p>

<p> Doctors and other authorities who studied the effects of this
drug, however, tore the report apart for its inaccuracies and
misleading conclusions. The Journal of the American Medical
Association joined the. Bureau in condemning it as unscientific. </p>

<p> &quot;For many years medical scientists have considered
Cannabis a dangerous drug,&quot; the Journal's editorial of April
26, 1945 stated. &quot;Nevertheless. . . . the Mayor's Committee
on Marijuana submits an analysis by seventeen doctors of tests on
77 prisoners and, on this narrow and thoroughly unscientific
foundation, draws sweeping and inadequate conclusions which
minimize the harmlessness of marijuana. Already the book has done
harm. One investigator has described some tearful parents who
brought their 16-year-old boy to a physician after he had been
detected in the act of smoking marijuana. . . . The boy said he
had read an account of the La Guardia committee report and this
was his justification for using marijuana.. </p>

<p> A criminal lawyer for marijuana drug peddlers has already
used the La Guardia report as a basis to have defendants set free
by the Court. </p>

<p> &quot;The value of the conclusions,&quot; continued the
editorial, &quot;is destroyed by the fact that the experiments
were conducted on 77 confined criminals. Prisoners were obliged
to be content with the quantities of drug administered.
Antisocial behavior could not have been noticed, as they were
prisoners. At liberty some of them would have given free rein to
their inclinations and would probably not have stopped at the
dose producing 'the pleasurable principle. . . .' Public
officials will do well to disregard this unscientific, uncritical
study, and continue to regard marijuana as a menace where it is
purveyed,&quot; the Journal concluded. </p>

<p> There can be no doubt of the damage done by the report.
Syndicate lawyers and spokesmen leaped upon its giddy sociology
and medical mumbo-jumbo, cited it in court cases, tried to spread
the idea that the report had brought marijuana back into the
folds of good society with a full pardon and a slap on the back
front the medical profession. </p>

<p> The lies continued to spread. They cropped up on panel
discussions, in public addresses by seemingly informed
individuals. They helped once again, in a new and profitable
direction, to bewilder the public and make it unsure of its own
judgments. This carefully nurtured public doubt was to pay off
with extra millions in the pockets of the hoods. One killer who
helped to nourish that doubt-a hoodlum called Lepke took a
multi-million-dollar cut in exchange for the terror inspired by
the mere mention of his name.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
<br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>