
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-78</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B021-30</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/history/slavery.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122103458 text/html 15807
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:34:47 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 11:03:31 GMT
Content-length: 15591
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Slavery in the Hemp Industry - History of the Hemp
Industry in Kentucky</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="13264" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">The following is excerpted from _A History of
the Hemp Industry in Kentucky_ (Lexington: University of
Kentucky, 1951), pp. 4, 24-30, 132-40, 196. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">SLAVERY IN THE HEMP INDUSTRY</font></p>

<p><font size="3">James F. Hopkins</font></p>

<p><font size="3">... Without hemp, slavery might not have
flourished in Kentucky, since other agricultural products of the
state were not conducive to the extensive use of bondsmen. On the
hemp farm and in the hemp factories the need for laborers was
filled to a large extent by the use of Negro slaves, and it is a
significant fact that the heaviest concentration of slavery was
in the hemp producing area. Perhaps the nearest approach in
Kentucky to the plantation on the southern scale was the large
Bluegrass farm upon which hemp was one of the major crops and
where virtually all manual labor was performed by slaves. On the
other hand, since hemp does not require as much attention as must
be given to cotton, the number of Negroes on a Kentucky farm was
usually far less than the number necessary on a cotton plantation
of comparable size. Consequently, owing to their high birth rate,
the slaves increased faster than they were needed. Sale of
surplus blacks to the lower South brought welcome revenue to
Kentucky and led to the unwelcome charge that peopled in the
state were engaged in the breeding of Negroes for market. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Kentuckians sometimes referred to hemp as a
&quot;nigger crop,&quot; owing to a belief that no one understood
its eccentricities as well or was as expert in handling it as the
Negro. A Lexingtonian stated in 1836 that it was almost
impossible to hire workmen to break a crop of hemp because the
work was &quot;very dirty, and so laborious that scarcely any
white man will work at it,&quot; and he continued by saying that
the task was done entirely by slave labor. Among the slaves, the
men held a monopoly on all the tasks connected with the
production of fiber because, in the words of this observer,
&quot;Negro women cannot labor at hemp at all, and are scarcely
worth anything.&quot; Another commentator a few years later
concluded that &quot;none but our strong able negro men can
handle it to advantage.&quot; To a considerable extent that
belief was based on fact, for the tasks connected with hemp
culture were for the most part laborious and sometimes
unpleasant, and such work was given to the slave or, after the
Civil War, to the Negro tenant or &quot;hired hand.&quot; As long
as hemp was produced in the state, at least certain types of
work, such as breaking the stalks, were largely reserved for the
Negro. After years of repetition of these tasks, he did become
expert at their performance, though the complaint was sometimes
made that he was undependable. Among the slaves most in demand in
Kentucky were those who were able to work in manufacturing
establishments where hemp was turned into bale rope and bagging,
but the agricultural skill which most contributed to the value of
the Negro was the ability to hackle hemp fiber in preparing it
for market.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">On many farms, of course, neither slaves nor,
later, freedmen were available or desired, and in such cases the
men of the family performed all tasks for themselves. If a
landowner was not willing to do this work and would not depend on
slaves, he could follow the example of Nathaniel Hart of Woodford
County, who explained his decision as follows: For several years
I turned my attention to the raising slaves were slight from 1830
to 1860. . . . </font></p>

<p><font size="3">THE FACTORIES IN OPERATION</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In the 1830's new machinery was introduced in
the manufacturing of bale rope and bagging in Kentucky, though
for years afterward many establishments continued using more
primitive methods, depending on hand labor to do most of the
work. Rope-making, before the industry was mechanized, was
performed in a long, narrow building called a
&quot;ropewalk,&quot; whose dimensions varied from one
establishment to another. A description written in 1873, possibly
referring primarily to the walks found in New England, stated
that they were &quot;twelve or thirteen hundred feet in
length.&quot; John B. McIlvaine's cordage factory in Carlisle,
Kentucky, extended across &quot;the whole square on Water street,
from Main Cross to Second Cross,&quot; and Charles W. Turston's
walk in Louisville was about 26 feet wide and 570 feet long in
1837 and seems to have been extended to 770 feet by 1849.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The method of manufacturing has been described
as follows:</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The first part of the process of rope making by
hand, is that of spinning the yarns or threads, which is done in
a manner analogous to that of ordinary spinning. The spinner
carries a bundle of dressed hemp round his waist; the two ends of
the bundle being assembled in front. Having drawn out a proper
number of fibers with his hand, he twists them with his fingers,
and fixing this twisted part to the hook of the whirl, which is
driven by a wheel put in motion by an assistant, he walks
backwards down the rope walk, the twisted part always serving to
draw out more fibers from the bundle around his waist. . . . The
spinner takes care that these fibers are equably supplied, and
that they always enter the twisted parts by their ends, and never
by their middle. As soon as he has reached the termination of the
walk, a second spinner takes the yarn off the whirl, and gives it
to another person to put upon a reel, while he himself attaches
his own hemp to the whirl hook, and proceeds down the walk. When
a person at the reel begins to turn, the first spinner, who had
completed his yarn, holds it firmly at the end, and advances
slowly up the walk, while the reel is turning, keeping it equally
tight all the way, till he reaches the reel, where he waits till
the second spinner takes his yarn off the whirl hook, and joins
it to the end of that of the first spinner, in order that it may
follow it on the reel.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The next step in ropemaking was to
&quot;warp&quot; the yarns or to stretch all of them to the same
length and at the same time to put a &quot;slight turn or
twist&quot; in them. If the cordage was intended for marine use,
it was wound from one reel to another, meanwhile passing through
a vessel containing boiling tar. If &quot;white work&quot; was
desired, the tar was omitted. Finally, the last step, called
&quot;laying the cordage,&quot; was carried out: </font></p>

<p><font size="3">For this purpose two or more yarns are attached
at one end to a hook. The hook is then turned the contrary way
from the twist of the individual yarn, and thus forms what is
called a strand. Three strands, sometimes four, besides a central
one, are then stretched at length, and attached at one end to
three contiguous but separate hooks, but at the other end to a
single hook; and the process of combining them together, which is
effected by turning the single hook in a direction contrary to
that of the other three, consists in so regulating the progress
of the twists of the strands round their common axis, that the
three strands receive separately as their opposite ends just as
much twist as is taken out of them by their twisting the contrary
way, in the process of combination.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">During the first third of the nineteenth
century most of the rope made in Kentucky was spun and twisted by
hand and by the use of horse power at one end of the walk. In
1838 David Myerle, formerly of the firm of tiers and Myerle,
Philadelphia, established upon a new principle a large
steam-driven factory at Louisville. The method of manufacture had
been invented earlier by Robert Graves of Boston, from whom
Myerle had bought the patent right, and it: </font></p>

<p><font size="3">consisted, in part, in winding the threads upon
revolving spools, from which they were conducted through a
cast-iron tube of a diameter suitable for the size of rope
required. In the opinion of officers of the United States navy
and others the cordage made by the Graves machinery was stronger
than that made by the old method.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Myerle's establishment, called the Washington
Steam Patent Cordage Factory,&quot; included several buildings
and was valued by him at $28,650. The ropewalk, housed in a frame
building one story high, was 1,100 feet long and 25 feet wide.
Down the length of the walk ran tracks on which the patented
machinery operated as it spun the yearns and twisted them into
rope. Three tons of cordage per day, or at least 600 tons
annually, could be manufactured by this machinery. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">A factory for making bagging by machinery was
established in Newport in 1832. Prior to that time most of the
bagging had been made upon the old hand looms, but the new
machines turned out a product that was claimed to be superior to
that woven by manual labor. The cloth was strong, compact,
uniform in texture, and consistently weighed twenty-six ounces to
the yard. As first set up, the manufactory could process 450 tons
of hemp annually, and the owners stated their intention shortly
to add other machinery for making Kentucky jeans. The writer who
described this plant said that &quot;no doubt is entertained now
of the practical success of this mode of manufacturing bagging of
hemp, though heretofore it has been considered as a visionary
speculation.&quot; In 1835 this enterprise employed two hundred
workmen and was manufacturing wool and cotton in addition to
hemp. Its total annual output was valued at over a quarter of a
million dollars. At the same time a factory located at Covington
was producing $25,000 worth of finished hempen goods each year.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Andrew Caldwell of Lexington invented, and in
1841 began the operation of, machinery which received raw fiber,
hackled it, spun it into thread, and then wove it into bagging.
He claimed that its output was thirty yards per hour, which was
far more than any other loom of the time could produce. Caldwell
also professed to be able to manufacture bagging for three cents
a yard, or at a saving of five or six cents over the cost of
other methods of manufacturing. Most of the innovations in the
manufacturing of hemp were adopted slowly by those engaged in the
industry, probably because most of the changes did not yield the
results claimed for them. Even in 1860 only a few factories were
run by steam, most of them relied on horse power, and a few were
still operated by hand.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Only a comparatively few manufacturers
specialized in either bale rope or bagging, and the majority of
them produced both in their factories. One of the larger
establishments, operated by Gratz and Bruce in Lexington,
included for the manufacture of bagging a &quot;Calender and Hemp
House, capable of storing 60 tons of Hemp;&quot; a hackling house
18 feet wide and 30 feet long; a &quot;Factory&quot; 195 feet
long, 50 feet wide, and two stories high, &quot;calculated for 12
spinners each story;&quot; and, attached to the factory, a
weaving house which contained spindles and looms. For making rope
the company had a brick hemp house 40 feet long, 50 feet wide,
and two stories high, capable of storing 200 tons of hemp, a
brick spinning house 180 feet long and 32 feet wide, and a
ropewalk &quot;extending 100 fathom,&quot; or 600 feet. </font></p>

<p><font size="3">Slave labor was used to a large extent in the
manufacture of hemp, the Negroes being owned by the operator of
the business or hired by him for a period of time. In either case
the task work plan was used to promote diligence, and the slave
who applied himself could earn in the 1850's two or three dollars
per week which he was free to spend as he chose. The price paid
for the hire of such laborers varied according to the ability of
the slave. In Louisville in 1834 one Negro, George, was hired for
$30 per year, whereas Henry cost his employer $80 for the same
period of time. Two years later the extremes were George, at $40,
and Sullivan, at $180. &quot;The exceedingly low price of
twenty-five cents per day,&quot; was the figure set in 1836 by
the Nicholasville manufacturer who, wishing to retire from
business, offered to sell his factory and hire out his
&quot;thirty old hands well skilled in the manufacture of
Hemp.&quot; Wishing to protect insofar as possible the valuable
property he was hiring to another man, the owner of a slave
sometimes required a contract which obligated the employer to
treat the laborer well, clothe and feed him, &quot;pay his taxes
&amp; physician Bill Should the Same be necessary, &amp; return
the Boy as usual well clothed at the End of the time&quot; for
which he was hired. Early in the nineteenth century Thomas Bodley
and Company of Lexington wanted to hire ten Negro boys, from 12
to 15 years of age, and five men, from 17 to 25, &quot;the boys
to spin &amp; the men to weave and heckle in a Coarse Linen
Manufactory.&quot; In the same year Tom, a ropemaker by trade,
ran away from his master in Danville, and shortly afterward
Thomas H. Pindell advertised a desire to purchase or hire several
Negro boys, age 14 to 18, to work in a ropewalk. When John W.
Hunt of Lexington decided to retire from the manufacture of
bagging, he advertised an auction sale of 60 men, boys and women.
</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_history_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="history.htm">Historical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="13264" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>