
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B20-140</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000631-B009-52</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/HEMP/IHA/V1N2/iha01211.html 206.61.184.43 19970122074754 text/html 29733
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:47:46 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:23:33 GMT
Content-length: 29517
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp research and market development in Germany</title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF" text="#000000" link="#0000FF"
vlink="#FF00FF" alink="#FF0000">
<center>

<p>52 </p>

<h1></h1>

<hr size="1" noshade>

<p>Hemp research and market development in Germany <font size="5">A
status report for 1994</font></p>

<p> <font size="4">Michael Karus1 and Gero Leson2</font></p>

<p> <font size="2">1. nova - Institute for Political and
Ecological Innovation, Thielstrasse 35, 50354 Hürth/Cologne,
Germany <br>
2. nova - Institute for Political and Ecological Innovation,
Santa Monica, USA</font></center></p>

<hr size="1" noshade>

<h2>Historical overview</h2>

<p>The cultivation and use of hemp in Germany has a long history
(Körber-Grohne 1988). The earliest findings of hemp-based ropes
and fabrics in Europe were made in the Stuttgart area and can be
dated back to the pre-Roman period (800-400 BC). Fabrics were not
yet made from processed hemp fibers, but from the bast stripped
from the plant's stem. During the early Middle Ages, retting, a
biological process for the separation of plant fibers which had
been used for flax, was transferred to hemp. The nutritious hemp
seeds have been used as a food staple since the Middle Ages and
early descriptions of the plant's medical applications date back
to the 16th century. To this day, traditional hemp dishes are
prepared in some of the former German provinces, such as the
Silesian hemp soup made from hemp seeds and millet (Pelz and
Kretschmer 1977).</p>

<p> In the 14th century, the traditional Chinese art of making
paper arrived in Germany <i>via</i> Italy. Exclusively used as
raw material were rags from flax and hemp textiles. Wood based
paper came into use only after mechanical and chemical pulping
was developed in the mid eighteen hundreds in Germany and
England, respectively. Because of the significantly lower costs
of wood, often obtained by clear-cutting, flax and hemp as
resources for the pulping industry were rapidly displaced.</p>

<p> Hemp experienced its heyday in Germany in the 17th century.
Because of the high tensile strength of its fibers and their
tolerance of moisture, essentially all sails, tows, nets, flags,
and uniforms for the growing fleet of sailing ships were made
from hemp. Within the boundaries of what later became Germany,
hemp was grown on an area of approximately 150,000 hectares (ha).</p>

<p> The decline of hemp in Germany began in the 18th century,
when technical improvements simplified the processing of cotton.
This subsequently displaced flax and hemp from the textile market
because their processing remained labor intensive. The concurrent
decline in sailing caused the loss of yet another important
market for hemp fibers.</p>

<p> </p>

<hr size="4">
<b>

<p>Figure 1.</b> Hectares of hemp grown in Germany from 1880
until the present day; DDR = German Democratic Republic (East
Germany), BRD = Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany). </p>

<hr size="4">

<p>In the 19th century, jute and sisal, novel fiber plants from
the colonies, were introduced to Germany. Jute in particular
competed with hemp in its traditional domains at only half the
price because of the pittance paid to workers in the colonies. At
the same time, German hemp came under pressure from cheaper hemp
imports from Russia. The already mentioned displacement by wood
in the pulping sector resulted in the loss of yet another market
for hemp fibers. Figure 1 demonstrates the steady decrease in
acreage used for hemp cultivation in Germany during the 19th and
20th century, before it essentially ceased in 1915. </p>

<h2>During the world wars</h2>

<p>Hemp became a war profiteer during the two world wars. Cut off
from its overseas supplies of cotton, jute, sisal and ramie, the
German governments reconsidered hemp and supported improvements
to cultivation, harvesting and processing technologies. For
example, the development of the so-called cottonization process
allowed production of a short-fiber, high-quality cotton
substitute from hemp fiber. During the 1920s, the substitution of
all cotton imports by cottonized domestic hemp was seriously
discussed. It would have required an area of approximately one
million hectares (Gminder 1924). While these considerations were
driven mainly by a desire for self-sufficiency, they still
demonstrate the potential which was attributed to hemp fiber.
Towards the end of World War II, hemp was grown in Germany on
about 21,000 ha, which supplied approximately 20% of the demand
for hemp fiber. Most of the balance was imported from Italy.</p>

<p> Of high relevance today are the various fiber separation and
processing technologies, which were intensively developed and
tested in Germany after the turn of the century in order to
expand the range of applications for hemp fiber and to lower
production costs. A comprehensive summary of these developments
can be found in the book <i>Hemp and Hard Fiber</i> by Herzog <i>et
al.</i> (1927). </p>

<h2>Post war developments</h2>

<p>After World War II, the cultivation of hemp in Germany rapidly
shrank to insignificant levels, mainly due to the competition
from imported natural fibers and the newly developed synthetic
fibers. In the former GDR (East Germany) the cultivation of hemp
survived through the late 1960s. Despite the concurrent decline
of German hemp research, researchers were able to breed several
varieties which combined a high fiber yield with a low content of <i>delta</i>-9-tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), the main psychoactive ingredient of hemp (Bredemann 1952,
Bredemann <i>et al.</i> 1961). These varieties are now considered
lost in Germany, but their existence elsewhere (e.g., Russian
gene banks) is conceivable.</p>

<p> The final blow to the cultivation of fiber hemp in West
Germany was dealt by the 1982 amendments to the federal narcotics
act (BtMG) which outlawed the cultivation of hemp, regardless of
its THC content. Exemptions may only be granted for scientific
purposes or in the case of public interest. To this day, these
amendments effectively ban the commercial cultivation of hemp in
Germany. In 1981, they also forced the last West German hemp
farmer, Martin Butter, to give up his production (Karus <i>et al.</i>
1994). At the time, he employed 15 persons involved in the
cultivation of hemp on 150 ha of land. Fibers were sold to
manufacturers of ropes, textiles and cigarette paper. The woody
core (shives or hurds) of the stems was used locally to produce
building materials, such as particle board and pellets for
thermal insulation. The leaves were used as litter in stables.
Instead of taking his case to the European Court (the European
Community had already permitted the cultivation of low-THC
varieties at that time) Butter accepted a DM 800,000 settlement
from the German government.</p>

<p> Subsequently, agricultural research on hemp essentially
ceased. One of the few exceptions is the work of Prof. Megnet who
investigated, in the early 1980s, whether hemp could be grown on
soils contaminated with heavy metals. Initial results indicated
that the fibers remain virtually free of heavy metals. However,
Megnet soon had to abandon his work because of governmental
requirements he could not comply with.</p>

<p> When renewable bioresources, such as flax, were rediscovered
in Germany in the 1980s, hemp was simply ignored. The knowledge
of its potential uses had largely been lost within just a few
decades. Younger agricultural scientists and engineers knew hemp
merely as an exotic drug plant, not as a traditional, domestic
fiber resource.</p>

<p> At this point, only one agricultural use of hemp in Germany
has been exempted from this general prohibition: as a pollen
insulator in the commercial breeding of beets. No other plant
forms such impermeable hedges and minimizes undesirable outside
pollination. </p>

<h2>Current research</h2>

<p>In the early 1990s, even this remaining application came under
attack from a Bavarian politician. In this context, the late
Prof. Dambroth at the Agricultural Research Laboratory (FAL) in
Braunschweig was asked to investigate the variability in the THC
content of low- THC varieties and the development of the THC
content during the plant's growth period. Hemp has been grown at
the FAL for research purposes since 1992. Dambroth added to this
program the investigation of the impact of chemical (nitrogen)
fertilizer and plant density on fiber quality, and fiber and seed
yield. Delayed by his death in 1993, the results are now
scheduled for publication in early 1995. Preliminary findings
indicate hemp's comparatively low nitrogen demand and the high
fiber yield of the Hungarian Kompolt variety. </p>

<h2>Rediscovery of the &quot;new &quot; bioresource, hemp</h2>

<p>The rediscovery of hemp in Germany as a promising,
ecologically benign resource was largely triggered by the
publication of <i>The Rediscovery of the Resource Hemp Cannabis
Marihuana</i> in September 1993 (Herer, Bröckers, KATALYSE
1993). The book became an immediate bestseller. It contains, in
addition to the German translation of Jack Herer's popular book <i>The
Emperor Wears no Clothes</i>, a historical review of the use of
hemp in Europe by Mathias Bröckers and a current scientific
evaluation of the industrial crop hemp by the KATALYSE Institute,
Cologne (Karus <i>et al.</i> 1993, 1994a).</p>

<p> The book was well received by the German media and general
public and caused a downright hemp &quot;avalanche&quot;.
Following a decade-long period of neglect, numerous dissertations
covering a broad range of subjects in the areas of cultivation,
processing and use of hemp are now under way or have already been
published. At the same time, numerous domestic firms are
developing technologies and product lines based on imported hemp.
A number of professionally manufactured products entered the
market in 1994 with good initial success. Total sales in 1994 of
these products are estimated at DM 20-40 million, up from
essentially zero in 1993. Much of the enthusiasm of these firms
is due to hemp's positive marketing image. It results from the
ecological advantages of the bioresource hemp, as well as from
its modern, fresh image caused by the association with its sister
plant, marihuana.</p>

<p> In January 1994, &quot;Die Hanfgesellschaft&quot; (The Hemp
Society) was founded in Berlin as an association of hemp
protagonists in the areas of agriculture, processing, industry
and marketing. Its goal is to promote the reintegration of hemp
into the economic cycle by creating a network of major players,
providing public education and supporting specific projects. The
society's most visible venture is the &quot;Hanfhaus&quot; (Hemp
House) chain. In addition to its Berlin headquarters, it operates
retail outlets in six major German cities which market, under
considerable attention by the media, a wide range of hemp-based
products.</p>

<p> This rapid development in the areas of research, development
and marketing had to manage essentially without public funding.
The federal agencies in charge, the Ministry of Agriculture (BML)
and the Agency for Renewable Bioresources (FNR) are not willing
to fund hemp projects for the time being. Their main objections
are that the cultivation of hemp is still illegal in Germany and
that they do not want to sponsor a plant which would compete with
flax, the promotion of which has received DM 60 million of public
funding to date, without the hoped-for breakthrough.</p>

<p> Meanwhile, the general ban on the cultivation of hemp and its
main supporter, the newly created federal drug administration,
Bundesinstitut f&#159;r Arzneimittel und Medizin-produkte (BAM),
have come under intense public criticism. The debate centers
around the question of whether even low-THC varieties may somehow
be used for the production of marihuana and can therefore not be
tolerated. In this context, the validity of the EU-wide accepted
limit of 0.3% THC content in the upper one third of the leaves is
questioned by BAM. A publication which demonstrates the
irrelevance of the arguments used by the supporters of the ban is
being prepared by the nova-Institute. Results from another recent
study (Karus <i>et al.</i>, 1994b) also suggest that low-THC
varieties cannot be misused as a drug and that the EU limit of
0.3% is sufficient.</p>

<p> Prior to presenting potential solutions for this somewhat
muddled situation, the major ongoing R&amp;D activities in
Germany in the various sectors will be summarized in the
following. </p>

<h2>Cultivation tests</h2>

<p>In addition to the already mentioned tests at the FAL
Braunschweig, several cultivation tests have been approved in
1994 by the authorities as scientifically useful, and are now
being carried out at various universities. Worth mentioning are
tests at the Humboldt University, Berlin aimed at the cultivation
of low-THC varieties, and an investigation of the suitability of
hemp as boiler fuel at the Gesamthochschule Kassel. </p>

<h2>Harvesting and fiber separation</h2>

<p>Innovative harvesting and fiber separation processes for flax
plants have been researched and developed on a laboratory scale
in Germany for the last decade. Various public and private
institutions were involved in this program, supported by
considerable amounts of public funding (approximately DM 60
million). The primary goal of this program is the development of
ecologically benign processes which produce fiber material with
high yields and standardized quality, particularly for industrial
fiber use, at a competitive price. A detailed understanding of
the product characteristics demanded by industry, and the
identification and quantification of their respective fiber
parameters are essential for the achievement of this goal. This
approach was based on the desire to eliminate the dependence of
flax sales on short-lived trends in textile fashion and to create
stable markets in the industrial sector. Studies carried out
under this program suggest that market potentials for short flax
fibers exist, particularly as substitute for glass and mineral
fibers and in the production of press-molded parts.</p>

<p> Various fiber separation processes, based on the use of steam
explosion, detergents, or ultrasound have now been developed on
the laboratory scale. While the quality of the produced fibers
has been met with keen interest from industry, these technologies
still lack demonstration on the pilot and production scales. Most
advanced at this point are purely mechanical methods which
combine harvest and separation. They provide a limited range of
product qualities or serve as preprocessing step for the already
mentioned biochemical or physical processes.</p>

<p> Despite this favorable starting position, the implementation
of innovative flax technologies has been slowed down considerably
due to the virtual elimination of public funding.</p>

<p> These initial results from the R&amp;D program for flax are
highly relevant for the use of hemp as well. For a fraction of
the funds spent to date on flax, the results could also be
applied to the use of hemp fiber. These favorable starting
conditions raise the hope that hemp, with its players being fresh
and not yet involved in quarrels, and its modern marketing image,
may bring about the breakthrough for both domestic fiber
resources, flax and hemp. Consequently, major players in the flax
domain, most notably the Institute for Applied Research (IAF) at
the Fachhochschule Reutlingen, have begun in 1994 to apply these
newly developed technologies to hemp. This includes a detailed
analysis of the fiber's characteristics. However, to get off the
ground at a pace that could satisfy the rapidly growing demand,
demonstration projects are essential. Obtaining adequate public
or private funding of such projects is difficult as a result of
the recent funding priorities in post-reunification Germany. The
implementation of a modern facility for the separation and
processing of hemp and flax fibers should be the natural focus of
these efforts. </p>

<h2>Pulp and paper</h2>

<p>In 1993, Schneidersöhne, Germany's largest paper
manufacturer, introduced its first hemp-based paper products, and
presently markets a complete line of hemp paper. The collection
includes basic paper for the production of books, as well as four
different varieties of graphical papers under the names
Sativaprint (stationery) and Luxosativa (art paper). The papers
are based on mixtures of bleached hemp pulp and de-inked recycled
paper, most commonly 50/50 blends. Since the fall of 1994, paper
based on 100% hemp pulp is also available. Sales of 500 (metric)
tons are anticipated for 1994, corresponding to revenues of DM
4-5.5 million.</p>

<p> The hemp pulp is provided by the Spanish firm Celesa,
currently the sole supplier in Western Europe. The comparatively
high prices for hemp pulp, approximately DM 4,000/ton, are due in
part to its monopoly position. However, ongoing developments in
the pulp supply will soon break this monopoly, resulting in lower
prices and improving the cost competitiveness of hemp pulp.</p>

<p> A remodeled pulp mill is scheduled for startup near Dresden
in early 1995. It will be capable of producing 6,000 tons per
year of pulp based on hemp, flax and linseed. Both unbleached and
hydrogen peroxide bleached pulp will be offered. Hemp tow,
initially imported from Eastern Europe, will be the raw material
for the hemp pulp. Prior to pulping it will be cut to a fiber
length of 2-6 millimeters. Schneiders&#154;hne will not remain
the sole buyer of hemp pulp produced in Germany. Several German
firms are also interested in the use of hemp pulp for
manufacturing technical and household filters. Their main
motivation is the development of product lines which provide
ecological benefits compared to wood pulp based products. For
example, hemp-based filter papers are more resistant to moisture
and can meet quality requirements without the addition of
synthetic resins. The first of these products will likely be
introduced in early 1995.</p>

<p> The major German producer of cigarette paper, EFKA-Werke,
introduced 100% hemp based paper for the first time in the summer
of 1994. These Cañuma hemp papers were introduced successfully
by a smart marketing campaign. The paper is manufactured in
France where all of the hemp pulp produced is converted
domestically to paper. </p>

<h2>Textiles</h2>

<p>The market for hemp-based textiles has grown much faster than
was expected based on the results from previous studies. Since
early 1994, the Hemp House chain has successfully marketed
various kinds of hemp textiles, such as denim-type jackets and
pants. The textiles are predominantly manufactured in Hungary.
Over the last several months, ecologically minded textile
companies have shown an increased interest in the bioresource
hemp. It can be expected that fabrics and garments, some of them
probably produced in Germany, will soon be available on the
market, sold not only by outlets specializing in hemp products
but also by ecologically oriented mail-order businesses and
boutiques.</p>

<p> Apparently, the German market is particularly open for
natural hemp fiber because the ecological aspects are taken more
seriously in the textile sector there, and because natural
fiber-based textiles, well suited for a strict eco-labeling, are
rare and expensive. The positive marketing image of hemp will
further contribute to the development of markets which are not as
accessible to flax.</p>

<p> A frequently heard argument is that hemp fiber is not well
suited for the production of soft and easy-care textiles, which
provide the familiar cotton comfort. However, initial tests in
the textile industry have shown that certain environmentally
friendly, predominantly mechanical processes allow improvements
in the everyday-wear characteristics of hemp textiles. Additional
processes are currently being developed. The already mentioned
use of cottonized short fibers, instead of the traditional long
fiber, will create further opportunities for hemp, once the
process is established on the full-scale level. This may allow
hemp to make inroads into the market now held by cotton-based
textiles in the not too distant future. </p>

<h2>Building materials</h2>

<p>Following publication of the &quot;Hanf&quot; book in Germany,
the already strong domestic ecologically-oriented building
movement developed a high level of interest in the use of hemp
shives as a material for construction. Most popular to date has
been the French product ISOCHANVRE which is used as a building
and thermal insulation material. In 1994, ISOCHANVRE was first
used in Germany, in combination with lime, as an insulating
plaster in the remodeling of older buildings. A German company
has been using hemp shives for the construction of floors since
1957. Current efforts to use shives in the production of
ecological particle boards and building blocks are also
promising.</p>

<p> In the long-term, the use of hemp fiber may become more
important for the building industry. Potential products include
light-weight construction boards, fiber-cement boards and
fiber-reinforced plaster. Earlier this year, a German firm
introduced flax fiber-based insulating mats which substitute for
rock wool mats and provide the same level of thermal insulation.
The company is also developing hemp tow based mats but will
suspend their release until domestic hemp is available, since
they deem the necessary long-distance transport of the tow
ecologically unacceptable. </p>

<h2>Hemp oil</h2>

<p>The characteristics and potential uses of hemp seed oil are
the subject of several ongoing studies in academia and industry.
Initial results show that hemp oil is one of the most valuable
vegetable oils, both for food and technical applications. The
research focuses on various aspects which had been investigated
previously for oil seeds other than hemp. This includes, for
example, the composition of the fatty acid spectrum of hemp oil
from various sources, shifts in this spectrum during plant
growth, the biodegradability of hemp oil based detergents, and
taste and durability of hemp oil.</p>

<h2></h2>

<p>It can be expected that the application for registration of
hemp oil as an edible oil will be initiated in early 1995. In
1994, an Austrian firm surprised the public with the presentation
of a complete line of hemp oil-based personal care products, such
as soap, shampoo, bubble bath etc. A German firm recently
introduced a hemp oil perfume which is based on a 19th century
recipe. </p>

<h2>Medical uses</h2>

<p>The potential medical applications of hemp, or rather
cannabinoids, have been under a taboo in Germany for a long time
and cannabinoid research is virtually non-existent. This
situation is now changing, due in part to the translation of the
well-known book &quot;Marihuana - the forbidden medicine&quot; by
Grinspoon and Bakalar (1993), which was complemented by a review
of the results from recent medical research and a summary of the
legal and medical situation in Germany (Grotenhermen and Karus
1994). This and a concurrent modification of the federal
narcotics act (BtMG) which simplified clinical tests with <i>delta</i>-9-THC
are likely to result in an increase in the research of
cannabinoids in the near future. </p>

<h2>Forecast</h2>

<p>At this point, it can only be speculated how the current
German prohibition on the cultivation of low-THC hemp will
eventually be overcome. Ongoing legal activities include a law
suit filed by the agricultural association GAIA against BAM with
a Berlin court. The subject is permission to cultivate hemp on a
110 ha plot near Berlin. While filing a suit with the European
Court is another promising strategy, this route has not been
taken because of the costs and time involved. Administratively
the easiest way to eliminate the prohibition is a modification of
the BtMG to EU guidelines as part of its routine adjustment, a
process which is carried out almost annually without much
publicity. The fact that a majority of political players in the
agricultural and environmental arenas, such as the German
Association of Farmers, have already come out in support of the
re-admission of hemp for cultivation suggests that such a change
will probably occur once the cultivation and use of fiber hemp
become more established in other European countries.</p>

<p> Until such time, it is advisable to press forward with the
development of hemp technologies and products and to benefit from
the current favorable technological and marketing conditions in
Germany. Such a strategy would allow hemp to be processed by
modern and ecologically sound technologies and turned into
innovative products as soon as the prohibition on cultivation is
ended. This would effectively close the value-adding chain
between cultivation and marketable product. Thus, the primary
tasks ahead are to overcome the existing lack of funding for hemp
R&amp;D through the use of scientifically founded arguments, and
then to integrate the numerous ongoing activities, undertaken
with much enthusiasm and little financial support, into
professionally coordinated, interdisciplinary projects.</p>

<p> The first steps in this direction are currently being taken.
Only a few examples can be mentioned here. The Hanfgesellschaft
is currently in the planning stages for a large scale
German-Polish hemp cultivation and processing project. Co-funding
from the EU's Eastern Europe Incentive program will be applied
for. The nova-Institute, Cologne, is coordinating the planning
for a major technology project which would focus on research,
development and pilot-scale implementation of innovative,
ecological product lines based on hemp. Finally, the BIOROHSTOFF
HANF (Bioresource Hemp) trade fair and conference will be held in
March 1995 in Frankfurt. BIOROHSTOFF HANF combines the first
international product and technology exhibit with the first
technological-scientific symposium on the subject of hemp as a
bioresource. Scientists, farmers, and developers and vendors of
technology and products from around the world will present the
status of their research, concepts and products. For more
information on this event refer to the announcement on page 64. </p>

<h2>References</h2>
<font size="2">

<ul>
    <li>Bredemann G., K. Garber, W. Huhnke and R. von Sengbusch,
        1961. Die Züchtung von monözischen und diözischen,
        faserertragsreichen Hanfsorten (Fibrimon und Fibridia). <i>Zeitschrift
        für Pflanzenzüchtung</i> 46: 235-245. </li>
    <li>Bredemann G., 1952. Weitere Beobachtungen bei Züchtung
        des Hanfes auf Fasergehalt. <i>Der Züchter</i> 22 (9):
        257-269. </li>
    <li>Gminder E., 1924. Die Kotonisierung deutscher Bastfasern
        und ihre Auswirkungen auf Ackerbau, Technik und
        Volkswirtschaft. <i>Die Technik in der Landwirtschaft</i>
        5: 64-68. </li>
    <li>Grinspoon L. and J. B. Bakalar, 1993. Marihuana, the
        forbidden medicine. Yale University Press, New
        Haven/London. </li>
    <li>Grotenhermen F. and M. Karus, 1994. Marihuana. Die
        rechtliche Situation in Deutschland. Der Stand der
        medizinischen Forschung. Pages 211-271 <i>in</i>:
        Marihuana. Die verbotene Medizin, L. Grinspoon and J. B.
        Bakalar, Verlag Zweitausendeins, Frankfurt. </li>
    <li>Herer J., M. Bröckers, KATALYSE, 1993. Die
        Wiederentdeckung der Nutzpflanze Hanf. Verlag
        Zweitausendeins, Frankfurt. </li>
    <li>Herzog R. O. <i>et</i> <i>al</i>., 1927. Hanf und
        Hartfasern, Julius Springer Verlag, Berlin. </li>
    <li>Karus M., W. Linden, Ch. Murr and F. Waskow, 1994a. Über
        die universelle Nutzpflanze Hanf. Pages 297-372 <i>in</i>:
        Die Wiederentdeckung der Nutzpflanze Hanf, J. Herer, M.
        Bröckers, KATALYSE (from the 21st Edition), Verlag
        Zweitausendeins, Frankfurt. </li>
    <li>Karus M., F. Grotenhermen and H. Schaaf, 1994b.
        Mißbrauchspotential THC-armer Faserhanfsorten als
        Rauschdroge, KATALYSE-Institut, Köln. </li>
    <li>K&#154;rber-Grohne U., 1988. Nutzpflanzen in Deutschland,
        Konrad Theiss Verlag, Stuttgart. </li>
    <li>Pelz H. and D. L. Kretschmer, 1977. Schlesisches Kochbuch
        - Schlesisches Himmelreich, Bergstadtverlag, München. </li>
    <li>Sandermann W., 1992. Papier, eine spannende
        Kulturgeschichte, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. </li>
</ul>
</font>

<hr size="4">

<p><img src="../../../images/bigbud.gif"> <center>Male <i>Cannabis</i>.</center>
Illustration taken from: N. Ceapoiu, 1958. Cînepa. Studiu
Monografic. Academia Republicii Populare Romîne, Institutul de
Cercetari Agronomice, Editura Academiei Republii Populare
Rom&quot;ne, Bucuresti, 734 p. </p>

<hr size="4">

<hr>
<a href="iha01212.html">

<p>Next</a> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>