
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B35-25</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B033-168</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/peyote.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122063641 text/html 46031
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:36:33 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:22:01 GMT
Content-length: 45812
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Peyote Night by Humphry Osmond</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="microsoft word">
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif"> <br>
</p>

<h1>PEYOTE NIGHT <img
src="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/lsd/cactus20.jpg"
align="BOTTOM"> </h1>

<h4>HUMPHRY OSMOND </h4>

<p> This article originally appeared in <i>Tomorrow</i> magazine,
Spring 1961. </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif"> <br>
</p>

<p> The Native American Church is a religious movement which
originated among the Indians of the Southwestem United States.
Its main features involve the use of peyote, a psychedelic, or
mind-manifester, drug obtained from the dried tops of a cactus
that contains mescaline, in a ceremony combining Indian religious
motifs with certain Christian themes. The drug and the ceremony
are fused together in a manner acceptable to many Indians today.
My interest in this church was a professional one, springing from
my researches into psychedelics, the vision-producing drugs the
Indians use in a group setting. So far as our research group
could make out, the Indians were the first people who used these
substances together with certain aspects of Christianity. We had
heard about them in different ways. Religious people who wanted
this sect suppressed had published complaints in various
newspapers. In my country, Canada, there had been questions and
statements from a Minister in the House of Commons at Ottawa. A
police report we read suggested that peyote was both a dangerous
poison and a drug of addiction. Professor Charles Seevers of Ann
Arbor, one of the world's leading authorities on both peyote and
mescaline, one of its active principles, has frequently stated
that it was of low toxicity and that he had no evidence of anyone
becoming addicted to it. The U. S. Public Health Service
Narcotics Section at Fort Leavenworth have never treated a peyote
addict. </p>

<p> One of the clearest and kindest accounts of them and their
religion came from the late Professor J. S. Slotkin of the
University of Chicago. He had visited the Canadian branches of
the Native American Church of North America in the summer of
1956. He told us they were being persecuted, not very obviously,
thoroughly or determinedly, but although it was mild and
intermittent, it was persecution all the same. Some of these
persecutors did not deserve the label, for they were good people
genuinely concerned about the Indians, who had been misinformed
about the nature of the peyote rite. They were naturally worried
by reports that the Indians were obtaining a dangerous and
addictive substance and engaging in wild orgies. There was reason
to be concerned after the damage liquor has done to some Indians
in the past. Along with these people who had a real interest in
the Indians, there were others who never lose an opportunity to
meddle in other people's affairs. There is not too much scope for
this hobby in western Canada today, but the Indians, being
government wards and a special minority group, are particularly
susceptible to this sort of interference. As the scholarly
Slotkin explained to us, &quot;Their conditions are wretched.
They are demoralized. Many of them hate and despise farming. The
Native American Church is something of their own, born of their
misfortunes and developed from their pre-Columbian traditions. It
has grown and flourished in spite of white men, and this makes it
even more precious to the Indians.&quot; </p>

<p> Slotkin thought we could do no harm by attending one of their
services, and we might help. It would at least show them that all
white men were not hostile. Their services have been described as
orgies only by those who have never attended them. It is curious
that the early Christians had much the same accusations leveled
at them by the Romans, whose staid, formalized, official religion
had become little more than an annex to politics, devoid of
enthusiasm and feeling. Any young religion (Quakers in Fox's day
or the Methodists in Wesley's are examples) usually manages to
offend longer-established churches, just as young lovers are
something of a reproach to long-wed people, for they reflect a
vision of love that time has more or less dimmed. Long-married
people in whom time does not produce this dimming can be
embarrassing to their more habituated contemporaries. </p>

<p> We corresponded in a desultory way with the Indians of the
Red Pheasant Band, from among whose members most of the
congregation of the Native American Church of Canada was drawn.
The Church had been duly registered as a religious body and so
was safe from direct persecution. But the supply of peyote, their
ceremonial cactus, came from the United States, and this made
them vulnerable to administrative pressure, as later events have
shown. </p>

<p> In September 1956, we learned that Mr. Frank Takes Gun,
President of the Native American Church of North America, was
planning to come north from his home in Montana to see how his
fellow church members were faring in Canada. Shortly after this,
we were invited to North Battleford. We drove north, picking up
Dr. Abram Hoffer in Saskatoon, armed with a tape recorder,
blankets, and lots of notebooks. Two members of the Saskatoon
Star Phoenix staff traveled with us. It was a glowing early fall
day, and the stubble was still live enough to give the land a
blond, crew-cut look. We arrived in North Battleford late in the
afternoon of the sixth of October, 1956. Mr. Takes Gun and his
companion, Mr. Russell, came to see us in our hotel. They had had
a harassing time getting the hard-pressed Red Pheasant Band to
organize the ceremony. They are poor Indians. Mr. Takes Gun had
helped them to get permission to pitch a tepee for the meeting in
the grounds of old Fort Battleford. He was also inquiring into
the legal help the Indians were getting in Canada. The Indians'
way of conducting business is still not very like that of the
white man, and there is much misunderstanding. </p>

<p> I was tired and a little apprehensive on at least two counts.
My colleagues and I had decided that, while they would watch and
record the ceremony, I should take part in it, and observe from
the inside, as it were. I did not wholly enjoy the idea of taking
peyote, although I have used a variety of mind-changing
substances in the past few years. These have included taking
harmola, the seeds of Syrian rue, which has a disgusting taste;
kavakava, the roots and leaves of a South Sea Island pepper
plant; ololiuqui, the seeds of Rivea corymbosa, a vinelike plant
from Mexico, once the chief and sacred narcotic of the Aztecs. I
had also taken chemically pure mescaline, one active principle of
peyote, and the immensely powerful Lysergic Acid Diethylamide,
both derived from plants. In addition, we had worked with a new
group of substances derived from adrenalin, whose use in this
field had been discovered in Saskatchewan. I had, however, never
taken peyote before. I found its dried, shriveled, and furry
appearance uninviting, and reports said it frequently produced
nausea and vomiting. I did not relish the idea of vomiting in
public. My second worry was a more serious one. I had much
sympathy for the Indians and wanted to assist their cause, but as
an honest observer I would have to report everything that
happened. I was concerned lest the service should be
ill-conducted. </p>

<p> Mr. Takes Gun was clearly worried about me. He told me
repeatedly that they would have good, clean city water and that
the cups would be personal and hygienic. The peyote, he assured
me, would not be difficult to take, but would be made soft with a
coffee grinder and wrapped individually in Kleenex. He is of
medium height and very solidly built, of that almost pure
mesomorphy that one finds often among the Plains Indians. His
face might have been carved from old, oiled, highly polished
teakwood. He glistened in the afternoon sun-for he was nervous.
His eyes and hair were black. He had the longest ears I have ever
seen. His face was impassive. This made one notice the eloquence
of his hands all the more (one finger was missing from the left
one); his gestures were as expressive as a Latin's. </p>

<p> Mr. Takes Gun left us to make the final preparations for the
ceremony. We agreed to be at North Battleford a little after
sundown, and, before he left, he gave me a final reassurance
about the purity of the water. We crossed the golden valley of
the South Saskatchewan River and drove up the hillside to the old
fort. They had set the tepee on the short grass inside the
stockade. It was small and pale, its ventilator flapping in the
breeze. The clear night sky with the stars appearing and the
faint swirl of nothern lights seemed about to engulf us. Outside
the tepee there was a great stack of small logs. </p>

<p> The ceremonial fire in the center of the tepee was ready for
lighting. It was between the horns of the low, crescent-moon
altar shaped from molded earth. Only the fire tender occupied
this middle space. The rest of us, eight observers, including two
journalists, and fourteen Indian worshipers, were ranged around
the circumference of the tepee. Apart from Mr. Takes Gun, and Mr.
Russell, who had driven up from Montana, our hosts came from
Saskatchewan, mostly from the Red Pheasant Band, though a few had
driven over from Alberta. The elders of this group were Mr.
Nicotine and Mr. Stone. There were several younger men and two
Indian ladies. All looked spruce and neat. They had clearly put
on their best clothes for the service. I sat on Mr. Takes Gun's
left so that I could learn about the ceremony from him. He was
the leader, and Mr. Russell, on his right, was his drummer. </p>

<p> In a tepee, one sits with one's back slightly bent and one's
head forward. However one places the legs, they get stiff, the
long hamstring muscles in particular. Cramping pains can be a
nuisance. Mr. Russell played the fire taps on his drum, and the
fire tender lit the prepared wood. Sparks rose up and fluttered
in the darkness above us before vanishing. The tepee was filled
with the pleasant, acrid smell of sage, thyme, and burning logs.
Mr. Takes Gun put a single leaf and then a large peyote button on
the moon altar. The rest of us remained seated, and he was
silent. He consulted his watch from time to time. At eight-thirty
he began to read a written address he had with him. He asked for
&quot;Religious freedom for the Indian form of
Christianity.&quot; He quoted the Declaration of Independence
with its inalienable rights, which include religious freedom and
the pursuit of happiness. The long Indian faces, dark in the fire
glow, expressed melancholy, dolor, tragedy. &quot;We want to be
let alone to worship our God as we wish.&quot; He then addressed
the observers directly: &quot;I trust you will tell the truth and
nothing but the truth so help us God.&quot; It is no easy matter
even to observe accurately enough to be sure what the truth might
be, and having done this, how should one convey the truth so that
it will mean something to someone else? I wondered how I would be
able to communicate the solemnity of that frail tepee. It was
like being inside a lighted Japanese lantern, suspended in
eternity. </p>

<p> The smoke started the ceremony proper. The Indians are
masters of symbolism; a few eagle feathers, a pinch of sweet
herbs, a little water drum, a gourd rattle, a fire, and little
more, are all the aids they need for worship. For them,
everything that is, is holy. They have no written prayers, but as
among the Quakers, everyone prays according to his conscience. So
a cigarette made from cornhusks symbolizes for them the
purification and dedication of the human spirit to a greater
spirit. The tobacco was handed around in a soft leather pouch. It
was runny, with many small grains. I am not a smoker. I fashioned
my cigarette clumsily and the tobacco leaked out, and the result
was rather emaciated. A glowing brand was passed around for
lighting the cigarettes. Shortly after mine was lit, I choked.
The fire felt very hot on my face, almost scorching, while behind
I was chilly. It did not seem a good start for the evening. </p>

<p> While Mr. Russell beat the drum, Mr. Takes Gun chanted and
shook the rattle. Sometimes he used English and sometimes his own
tongue. The wind noises were lost in the chanting and the
drumming. His voice rose effortlessly from a firm baritone to a
high, clear falsetto. </p>

<blockquote>
    <p>Dear Heavenly Father, </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>We are representing our folks under this tepee. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Dear Heavenly Father, Dear Heavenly Father </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Bless these men that are observers here. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Dear Heavenly Father, </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>These poor people surrendered all their lands </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>To the Government of Canada---their conditions </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Are pitiful. </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
    <p>Dear Heavenly Father---bless my people back home. </p>
</blockquote>

<p> Then he continued in his own tongue, which seemed made for
rhetoric, for declamation, and his voice rose in searching
falsetto. The Indians maintained a low background of song in
their three different languages. The faces of his fellow
worshipers were angry, resigned, supplicating, shifting with the
changes of rhythm and the flickering fire. The chorus ceased from
time to time and the leader continued alone, his voice cascading
and dying away, the song of a bird fluttering against a great
storm. The fire glowed. An Indian wept. We placed our cigarettes
around the base of the moon altar. </p>

<p> At about 9 P.M. the peyote was brought in. It was carried in
a little white cloth sack, which was handed from person to
person. Mine came separately; it had been macerated in a coffee
grinder and each button wrapped in a white tissue, so courteous
are the Indians. They themselves crunched the hard, dry, furry
cactus tops determinedly, as one cracks nuts with one's teeth. I
nibbled cautiously at my soft, damp residue. It has a sharp
taste, which lingers in the mouth. It is bitter and sour on the
stomach. It repeats on one. It is not as bad as ololiuqui, and is
pleasant compared with the sour, oily, rancid seed of the Syrian
rue. Mr. Takes Gun belched a little after swallowing his. Peyote
takers, making a virtue of necessity, sometimes allege there is
something especially valuable about the nausea it induces in some
people. As in other religions, rationalizations are always ready
to help out anything unpalatable. I was glad when I swallowed the
last bit of peyote. My apprehensions about vomiting were
unnecessary. </p>

<p> The drumming and singing continued. The water drum is made of
blackened iron covered with hide. Seven knobs on the side
represent the dipper stars. Behind the singing there is always
drumming and rattling. The drum beat in the brain and wearied me;
every drummer seemed much the same. The fire tender moved the
ashes into the space between the horns of the moon, so that it
gradually filled up with fine wood ashes. I had respect for the
ceremony. It was reverent and well conducted. But I was still not
of the group, even though I was among them. I scribbled away at
my note pad and often watched my observing colleagues, who were
at the other side of the tepee. </p>

<p> At about nine-fifteen I wrote, &quot;The young man with the
superb face, puzzled by his fate---he has a kingly face,&quot;
and again, &quot;if feeling gets to God, this must.&quot; By nine
forty-five there was a ghost of brilliant color in my eye grounds
when I closed my lids. I felt remote and slightly depressed. The
roof flap fluttered like a lost soul. The tepee is a microcosm, a
tiny mirror of the universe. The fire glowed red and smokeless;
the fire tender handed around a smoldering brand for those who
wanted to smoke. Mr. Takes Gun recited prayers in his
language---as he smoked, his hands moved with extraordinary
delicacy. It was an unorgiastic orgy. The Indians sing without
opening their mouths much, and often they hardly move their lips.
They sing with their sound box and chest, while we use our lips,
tongue, and sound box. I was never quite sure where the singing
was coming from, and it was sometimes almost impossible to decide
who was singing and who was not. </p>

<p> By about ten I had become more aware of what was happening,
and recognized that peyote was starting to affect me. My sight
was sharper and my hearing more acute. Looking around the tepee,
it struck me that we white men, outnumbered in this tiny world,
were an even smaller fraction of the larger one. I found it hard
to write and did so reluctantly because, as I noted, &quot;. . .
it broke the chain of feeling.&quot; I got nothing down on my pad
for the next hour and a half. Visual changes continued and
increased during this time. They never became very marked, but at
times the Indians seemed hostile. Their faces became distorted
with anger. I realized that this was probably the effect of
peyote and so did not become panicky. I felt that I was an
intruder whom the Indians did not trust-they had no special
reason to. I did not seem close to them. Peyote works slowly and
subtly. It is well suited for a gathering of this sort, where
people of differing temperaments, who do not necessarily share a
common language, worship together and explore reality without the
cushion of words and supported mainly by ritual. </p>

<p> A photographer took some flash pictures at about ten or
fifteen minutes before midnight, and then I started writing
again. The Indians chanted, drummed, and used the gourd rattle.
Only their faces were impassive. The ceremonial swept me along
with it. </p>

<p> At midnight, water was brought in. This was the pure city
water Mr. Takes Gun had promised me earlier. It was in a new,
white enamel pail with a swan transfer on the outside. It was
passed around, and we drank from individual paper cups. It could
have been depressingly hygienic, but the intention was a generous
one to put me at ease. He then said, &quot;Pray to God and ask
him to bless the water.&quot; He explained that the Indians held
their services at night, while the white man sleeps, because God
would have time to spare for his Indian friends. He urged his
fellow Indians to bring up their children to be intelligent and
progressive, adding, &quot;We are representing our lives
here.&quot; Then he left us and, walking around the outside of
the tepee, blew piercing blasts on an eagle's-bone whistle at the
four compass points. The sound shrilled through aeons of space
and corridors of time. It echoed to eternity. When he came back
to us, he prayed, &quot;. . . that the Universe may
prevail.&quot; </p>

<p> Shortly after this my fellow observers left for what must
have been twenty minutes or so, but it could have been as many
centuries. I stayed behind with the Indians, and I became part of
the worshipers. I entered their world, where for generation upon
generation they had hunted the buffalo. They had lived with and
on the buffalo. They were of one piece. They were the buffalo.
Their lives were part of those shaggy lumbering herd beasts whose
myriads roamed the great plains. On these wide prairies, where
trees and hills are almost equally scarce, sound often conveyed
as much as sight. So the Indians call up their past with song,
with drum, and with rattle. For them, minute alterations of
rhythm and pace evoke ever-changing images. Because we cannot
hear as they do, the drumming and rattling seem endlessly
repetitive to us. The drumming was the steady running of a man
with his dog padding beside him. It was the pawing and thudding
of buffalo hooves crescendoing in thunder. It was the gentle
crumpling of dung falling or the soft plop of a calf dropping on
turf, soundless, yet heard by the hunter. The gourd evoked the
endlessly sifting wind, catching at scrub and grass as it passed.
It was the hissing of an arrow as it leaves the bow or snakes by
one's head in battle. It was the sizzling of buffalo meat
grilling on the campfire and the creak of a hide tepee as the
blizzard twists and whirls around it. The drumming was life and
death, scarlet blood spurting from a stricken buffalo or from a
fallen warrior. Yet it was also the first fluttering of a child
inside its mother. As he sang, a young man wept, and Frank Takes
Gun said, &quot;Shed tears on mother earth that the Universal God
may take pity on him.&quot; </p>

<p> When my friends returned, I felt that the Indians and I were
one and that, for a little time, or more accurately, a different
sort of time, I was of their world rather than that of my
colleagues, their conquerors. It was not simply that I realized
they had a point of view I could respect, but that I felt in my
bones as they felt in theirs. Looking back, I do not believe that
this was an illusion, for I continued to be much more aware of
their way of looking at things. But how could one prove such an
opinion-without fine instruments for measuring a man's system of
values. </p>

<p> The women did not drum, sing or use the gourd rattle, but
they smoked, took peyote, and played a large part in the morning
ceremony. They also prepared the feast for the next day. Women
only very rarely enjoy their highest status among nomadic people.
</p>

<p> The Indians must have begun to filter down from Siberia about
ten thousand years ago, and as they reached the great central
plains they spread out in the wake of the buffalo. For some
mysterious reason, horses, which had once lived in America, died
out long before man arrived. So the newcomers hunted on foot.
Unlike our forebears, who were harassed and pushed west by waves
of horsemen from Central Asia, many tiny Indian societies grew up
far apart from each other, isolated by vast distances. There were
occasionally brief, savage, and ceremonious wars on the prairies,
in which little groups of men raided the enemies. In these,
courage counted more than killing. Apart from this, their whole
lives, their very existence, was at the heels of those heavy
monsters. Pursuing them, they had endured drought and cold,
furious rainstorms and blinding blizzards. For a very short time,
a few generations only, they had horses, which, escaping from the
Spaniards, bred splendidly on the grasslands. Few people accept
an innovation so quickly and successfully as the Indians took to
the horse. They were centaurs. The drumming told of that age of
glory when, to the beat of horses' hooves, they swept across the
prairies like wildfire and hunted with a splendor never
surpassed. Then the white settlers invaded the prairies, and the
unequal struggle between hunting peoples who lived in space
without time, and the season-bound rapacity of the cultivators of
the soil, began. The hunting grounds were eroded. Finally the
buffalo were slaughtered wantonly by the million. With that
holocaust, their traditions, their way of life, their world,
their universe collapsed, and the veil of their souls was rent.
Braves became bums, for there was nothing manly left to do. Their
women mourned for them. </p>

<p> I was drenched in that world of sound, of singing, drumming,
and the subtly changing rhythms of drum, rattle, and voice. We
are a more visual people than the Indians, and this is perhaps
why they seem impassive to us. We watch, in particular, for
changes in facial expression and do not notice the auditory
signals with which the Indians communicate their feelings. Those
long silences during which they let the unspoken flow between
people simply make us tense, embarrassed, uneasy, and ready to
burst into nervous chattering. </p>

<p> The blue-shirted young man who had been weeping said,
&quot;Frank, can I have some more medicine?&quot; and the little
sack was passed along to him. He crunched two more buttons and
began to sing and use the gourd rattle while his companion
drummed. His song rose above the drumming, was drowned by it, and
rose again and again, faltering but struggling still. It was an
agony. The drumbeats were strides of fate. Life must go on, pain
or no pain. There could be no concessions. The young man wept and
sang for himself, for his people, for every human being who has
ever quailed before the harshness of life. After singing, he was
easier, and the rhythm of his drumming reflected this. There was
in it a little of that cosmic beat of Tchaikowsky's great Second
Movement of the Fifth Symphony, when, for a brief while, he heard
and transcribed what must surely be the pulsing of the galaxies.
I watched the young man, and I think I experienced some of the
queasiness that peyote induced in him. Like most young men, he
longed for a life that meant something-a life of action, danger,
pain, defeat, torture, and death at the hands of his enemies if
necessary. A life like that of his ancestors who lived on the
prairies for centuries before. Anything rather than the
humiliating meaninglessness of the present. But the drumming told
him, &quot;You cannot go back. You can go forward. It will be
rough, but it can be done.&quot; It is sad to be a warrior from
generations of warriors with nothing warlike to do-an Achilles
without Troy, staying at home among his mother's spinning women. </p>

<p> The fire tender kept the hearth meticulously, and the moon
altar, which had started as a thin crescent, filled up steadily.
When a singer had sung his song, the Indians sat in silence and
absorbed it. They applauded with a low guttural noise that might
be a hum. They were polite, sensitive, and seemed very courteous
and alert toward each other and to their guests. By now it was
almost three in the morning, and most of the observers were
asleep; one snored loudly and had to be prodded by his neighbor.
The visual imagery I usually experience with psychedelic
substances was much reduced in this setting, and the auditory
imagery very much increased. I responded to every nuance of their
drumming. They use a tiny range of sound with which to express
themselves, and this is saturated with emotion. </p>

<p> The sparks spangled the upper darkness of the tepee every
time the fire was stoked. The tepee was the universe. It had not
increased in size nor changed its shape, but the sound had
expanded it beyond thought. The young man still cannot bear his
fate. All the warrior in him is assailed by it and revolts
against it. But he must listen to the voice of the music, which
is greater than man. He sings again, this time in high falsetto.
There is a note of triumph in it, and perhaps peyote has
dissolved the aching in his heart---for a little while. </p>

<p> The tepee smelled of wood and wood smoke, burning herbs,
sweat. I noticed the tanginess of the smoke, like in a kippering
room. It clung to my hair and clothes for days afterward. The
Indians are creatures of sound and smell, with auditory symbolism
predominating. We are creatures of sight and sound, with visual
imagery predominating. Every drum tap has a meaning for them. </p>

<p> Through the small hours they sang of fleet horses and
tireless riders, of unwearying runners and faithful dogs padding
beside them. The stories are woven into the drum rhythms. They
fanned themselves with a few eagle's feathers, evoking arrow, war
bonnet, and battle club-endless parleys, powwows, and ceremonial
meetings. They had few songs of war, and they returned always to
the death of the buffalo, their banishment from the prairies, and
so their unmanning and loss of their warrior status. The buffalo
hoofbeats are in them as the sound of the sea is in me from
generations of seafarers. The Indians may be poor and defeated,
but they are not contemptible. They reveal themselves to each
other with peyote in humility, but also in pride. For although
they revere the Universal Spirit, they do not cringe. They are
not ashamed of being men, for so they were created. They do not
ascribe their misfortunes to sin, and are thus saved from much
futile self-blame. </p>

<p> Mr. Russell's drumming was splendid. Frank sang of the long
winter nights and their hopes of endless buffalo herds. He sang,
too, of that brief time when they tamed horses, molding
long-maned and long-tailed wildings to their will. This reminded
me that the Trojan hero Hector, tamer of horses, was exercizing
with his chariots on the windy plain of Ilium when their
ancestors were hunting the buffalo on foot, over these same
prairies. The service was very simple and drew the participants
into it. Once I lost my fear and unsureness, the Indians accepted
me with dignity, as an equal. I was impressed by their economy of
gesture, the faultless taste of their religious art; like a very
dry sherry, it is not for every palate. The prairies have molded
them over the centuries---they are a people of the open spaces;
their God is an open one of the wide earth and the limitless
sky---not a shadowy, hidden god of the forests and thickets.
Their Universal Spirit is mysterious in its immensity and
omnipresence. Man's problem is not to find God, for it is
impossible not to be aware of Him, but to relate oneself to Him
in the best possible way. </p>

<p> By four-thirty I was becoming more aware of my hosts as
individuals. We had experienced something together that cannot be
contained in language. Poetry or music would come closer, but I
am not a poet or a composer. The wind fretted around the tepee.
The singing was like voices calling in the dark, calling for dawn
to come, for winter to go, for the buffalo to return, for a child
to be born. </p>

<p> Mr. Russell had the black drum passed to him. He sucked a
little water from it, tautened the hide, and smoothed it with a
caress. Frank Takes Gun explained the next part of the ceremony.
&quot;You have only seen three last night-the leader, the
drummer, and the fireman. Now you will see the fourth. Thank God
we have lived to see another day. We represent our lives: we
don't imitate anything. The foundations of human life rest with
our mothers who delivered us into this world.&quot; The Mother
stepped into the tepee through the door flap, announced by the
shrilling of the eagle's-bone whistle. She sat down by the white
enamel waterpot. The tepee was dim, the fire was low, but some
wisps of smoke rising from it seemed to surround her. She had a
red blanket around her shoulders, a blue dress, smooth black
hair, and her face seemed very broad. She was greeted by a song
of welcome with voices, drum, and rattle. With the singing, she
became superb mother earth, mother prairie, grass, cow buffalo,
mare, and doe, the epitome of motherhood. The drum beating was
not restful or sleep inducing. It was the fecund pulsing of sex,
passion, generation, and death, sung without guilt and without
self-consciousness. The mother was weary, patient, tender, but
enduring. She stood behind all the men---drummer, fire tender,
leader. In front of her were the waters of life and death. </p>

<p> Frank addressed her in the highest falsetto, a tearing,
almost noiseless scream, the cry of the tiniest baby or of an old
man breathing his last. It was unbearable. The mother could have
been any age---maid, mother, or crone, from sixteen to a hundred
sixteen. </p>

<p> &quot;You have been good to us while we were here. You worked
hard and made this possible. God knows we worship Him. God knows
we respect the mothers of our children.&quot; </p>

<p> Mr. Dave Stone, the oldest man present, spoke to the mother
in his high, light voice. His voice was very clear and would
carry over great distances. The wind had risen, and the day was
being born with a storm. The old man called upon the mother and
sprinkled dried Sage on the fire, sweetening the air in her
honor. She took a cigarette and lit it from the fire tender's
brand. The smoke she exhales is the life she gives. Above her
head, the dawn lightened the tepee flap. The fire was low. She
drew on a cigarette. Its glowing tip was as evanescent as a man's
life, almost aflame one moment, out the next. She prayed and
smoked. </p>

<p> This is the mother who bears the baby, who nurses and cossets
the infant, who rears the child and watches him grow into a young
warrior, drummer, fire tender, or leader, who is possessed by him
and who laments him when he dies. She is indomitable. Warriors
die, but the mother, slave or matriarch, she is always there. Her
voice was low and clear. She dominated the tepee---the mother who
bears and the mother who buries her children. Her prayers were
followed by rumbles of agreement. She reaffirmed the will to
endure, to live on. The worshipers were deeply moved. Frank
whispered to me, &quot;That is how much they respect their
mothers.&quot; But it was more than respect. It was awe. She
conveyed the sorrow of a woman's lot in a destitute people. The
dawn caught the pointed top of the tepee, but below where we were
sitting, the fire was so low that I could hardly see to write. </p>

<p> Mr. Russell whispered to me, &quot;Praying with the
smoke---something good---something lasting forever.&quot; The
Plains Indians were a Dionysian, an apocalyptic people, frugal
but generous; no middle way existed for them---conquerors or
conquered, no in-between, no compromise. The smoke breath was
caught up with the warm air over the fire and twisted up into
dawnlight. It struck me that with another turn of the wheel of
history we Caucasians who, by means of gunpowder and printing,
have gained so much authority in the world, might find ourselves
subject to peoples who possess skills we do not have. No one who
had been with the Indians as I had been could feel superior to
them. The blue-shirted warrior is almost reconciled to living an
unheroic, undionysiac life. It is against his whole being. But
the drumming, the singing, and peyote have worked their magic.
The buffalo are no more; the dawn is coming; there is a life to
face now. </p>

<p> The observed were awake and alert, the observers mostly
sleeping. At six, dawn came to us as the tepee flap was opened.
We had wrestled with the angel. We had grappled with the Heavenly
Father. </p>

<p> Water was poured into the hygienic cups again, and a little
more was put into the drum. I was asked to say a few words, the
stranger whom they had made welcome and allowed to enter into
their mystery. I thanked them for their kindness to me and told
them that I would do my best to tell people about their worship
clearly and honestly. I also said that it would be no easy matter
to convey to those who had not shared our experience and who do
not have the Indian sense of oneness with life. </p>

<p> A child had come into the world again. Dawn lit the stockade,
and the wind was chilly. Life had begun again and must be faced.
The voice of the singers rose clear and high---a child's cry of
delight at buffalo hooves thundering far away. The fire flared a
little as if trying to hold back the morning, but it failed. The
center of the tent floor was covered by a great, grayish-white
half-moon of charred wood ashes. The mother left us. The barrier
of everyday life began to return. </p>

<h5>Aftermath </h5>

<p> The sun was just coming up when we left them at about half
past six. We felt that our Indian hosts would be easier if they
could have their morning feast without us. There were handshakes
and promises that we would do our best to tell our people about
their religion. As I left the tent, I took a last look at the
whitish-gray expanse of the moon altar: the three young men,
including blue-shirt, were singing and drumming together by the
door flap. They were very blithe. Outside, Mr. Nicotine and Mr.
Stone stood by the mother and waved to us as we left. The tepee
seemed too small and frail to have contained so much, but the
drumbeats surged out of it as evidence of the extraordinary power
concentrated there. I slept a little and thought much when I
returned to the hotel. I felt relaxed and happy. I felt that I
had seen the Indians, and what I had seen had cheered me. I wrote
at this time, only a few hours after the ceremony, &quot;We
cannot ape them, but we can learn from them and perhaps gradually
adapt their religion to our needs, as they have adapted
ours---feel tired, at peace, an enlarging of the spirit.&quot; A
little later, on my way back from North Battleford, I noted,
&quot;Peyote simply reveals what is the potential in all of us.
The Indians, whose gifts have for so long been run down by the
whites, have found that in spite of being poor Indians, the
spirit of God is still with them. This is an immense advance. It
is a new hope, a new humility, a new pride.&quot; </p>

<p> A day later I wrote, &quot;Indian singing is incomprehensible
to most white men simply because they have never learnt the fine
discrimination of the Indian in matters of sound. Clearly a
people who have lived in an almost soundless country (and the
prairies are almost soundless to the city ear even now) would
learn to pick up a different range of sounds and would use these
sounds in their music. Grasses, grasshoppers, dust sifting, the
wavelets on little rivers splashing, the shushing of wind among
low bushes, and wind sounds infinitely varied with the seasons.
Then, in great contrast, the very loud sounds---the sounds inside
one, the heart thudding, etc., particularly loud when one is
surrounded by great stillness; hooves stamping or clopping
regularly; the drubbing stampede of the buffalo---again
infinitely varied by terrain and weather, and the crash of
thunder reverberating over the endless prairies. Birds few in
number compared with the space, and therefore all the more
memorable. Color on the prairies in great general masses with
very small changes. The Indians would be used to the very large
and the very small. Also the effect of six months or so of
snow.&quot; </p>

<p> Then there was the matter of the resemblance between liquor
and peyote that has been raised so often in the press. I made a
special note about this: &quot;Alcohol and peyote (psychedelics
generally) are antithetical. Alcohol produces a downward
transcendence, peyote an upward one---the difference between
leveling up and leveling down. Alcohol allows one to relate to
others by being more sure of one's self. This, in small doses, is
much better than not being able to relate at all, but it is a
very precarious business, and selfishness may soon end in
brawling and ill temper. Peyote acts not by emphasizing one's own
self but by expanding it into the selves of others, with a
deepening empathy or in-feeling. The self is dissolved and, in
being dissolved, enriched. It becomes aware of the nobility of
other selves and so of itself.&quot; </p>

<p> I tried repeatedly in the next few months to organize my
experience, but it would not be organized. I carried my notes
around with me and made many drafts of papers that were never
completed, because they did not seem to carry out my obligation
to Frank Takes Gun and my fellow worshipers of that little band.
It was not until three years later, when I was quite unexpectedly
asked to give a short broadcast about the peyote ceremony, that I
began to see how I might be able to convey something of that
night in the tepee to people who had not been there and who had
never taken peyote or other psychedelics. </p>

<p> How does it look three years later? Has the wonder and beauty
of those astonishing ten and a half hours receded so that they
now seem unreal? Did my difficulty in writing about the
experience of that strange night arise from a growing feeling
that my notes were muddled and that I was as muddled as they? I
do not think so. </p>

<p> That night in the tepee has resulted in many studies by my
colleagues and me. We have observed the effects of psychedelic
substances on groups of people taking them together---for various
reasons, we did not use peyote. The Indians have been very
skillful in structuring their ceremony so that it best meets
their needs. They are such masters of symbol, ceremony, and
ritual, that this is hardly surprising. It would be unwise and
impertinent to ape their religion, which developed from their
agony when they lost their hunting grounds at the end of the
nineteenth century. Our needs are very different from theirs. So
we must follow a different route. </p>

<p> We have suggestive evidence that psychedelics, properly used,
can increase communication and understanding between those who
take them together, and this is not simply a drug-induced
delusion. It seems to persist long after the effects of the
chemical have disappeared. This has not yet been proved. Proof in
such a matter is not easy, and so for the moment we have to rely
on personal opinion. We have to find some way of showing these
effects so that they can be easily understood. But we have to
recognize that we are dealing with aspects of the human mind that
are even more elusive and mysterious than the depths of space and
time. </p>

<p> Due to the interest and generosity of Mrs. Eileen Garrett,
President of the Parapsychology Foundation, several of us have
taken part in two international conferences about psychedelics.
One was held in New York in November 1958 and the other in Le
Piol, France, in July 1959. Both these conferences were attended
by scientists of international repute. At both of them there was
general agreement that these experiences induced by psychedelics,
which fall into the category of what William James called
&quot;unhabitual perception,&quot; call for sustained inquiry and
research. It was encouraging that the impetus for these meetings,
which drew contributors from many countries, arose in a frail
tepee raised by members of the Native American Church, mostly
from the Red Pheasant Band, above the South Saskatchewan River
three years ago. </p>

<p> In one respect, however, we have failed, at least so far. We
have not been able to help members of the Native American Church
of Canada to obtain peyote, which is the sacrament of their
faith. Its importation is banned by the federal government
department concerned with these matters, by means of a legal
technicality. So far as we know, this has never been disputed in
a court of law or debated in Parliament. The attitude of
government, &quot;We are doing this for your own good; we can't
explain why because you wouldn't understand,&quot; is
infuriating, unwise, and unnecessary. Among its other objectives,
we hope that this article will lead others to question seriously
such well-meaning but arbitrary attempts to do good. The Native
American Church and the religion its members practice, far from
demoralizing them, is likely to help them in their struggle to
adapt to a very unfamiliar world. </p>

<p> Surely we can be fair-minded enough to pay respectful
attention to this bold attempt by the Indians to develop a new
way of coming closer to the source of all things. They do not
want to convert us to their ways. They do not claim that the
peyote road is the only way of reaching out toward their Great
Spirit and Heavenly Father. In Frank Takes Gun's words, &quot;We
just want to be let alone to worship our God as we wish.&quot;
Must we obstruct and attempt to crush a new religion, which is
beautiful and has never been shown to do any harm, simply because
it is unfamiliar and because we can't imagine that it would work?
Can we not let them tread their peyote road and see what
happens---provided they conduct their services decorously and
account properly for the peyote used? They would, I believe,
welcome observers from time to time. Those observers could see
and experience for themselves the form of worship that the
aboriginal inhabitants of these lands developed when their world
was tottering. The loss of the hunting grounds and the slaughter
of the buffalo was for them an even greater catastrophe than that
appalling event one early morning at Hiroshima in August 1945. </p>

<p> I shall not forget my Indian hosts, who took me back to a
life through which all mankind has passed. A harsh, fierce,
dangerous, passionate life where hunter and hunted are one. A
life rich in beauty and meaning. Little more than eighty years
ago, this was their life and had been so beyond the memory of
man. In a few short, terrible years it was torn from them, and
they are still bewildered at the world in which we are clumsily
trying to find a place for them. But then perhaps we share some
of that bewilderment, for our new world is unimaginably strange.
Should we not join them in their prayer that &quot;. . . the
Universe may prevail&quot;? <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>