
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-116</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA088-000636-B024-31</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/ciaopium.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122104739 text/html 62810
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 10:47:26 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:18:26 GMT
Content-length: 62592
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The CIA and Opium</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<h1>The CIA and Opium</h1>

<p>Some notes from Bo Gritz </p>

<hr>

<p>This video transcript has been posted and reposted to usenet
during the last several years. It was originally transcribed by
Jim Burnes and has been reposted primarily by John Dinardo. This
present version was compiled by me from the nine part usenet
series archived at etext.archive.umich.edu. I have stripped the
usenet headers and eliminated the breaks and headings between
parts of the series, but it is otherwise unchganged from John's
postings of last 11/93. The contact info given at the end may no
longer be current. -Steve </p>

<p>Part 1, A NATION BETRAYED: CIA Sacrifices American POWs for
Drug Profits </p>

<p>~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
</p>

<p>The following is a transcript of the video, &quot;A NATION
BETRAYED&quot;. It documents alleged CIA involvement in covert
drug running activities and how they supposedly interfered with
the nation's attempts to recover American prisoners of war and
those missing in action. You may find it unbelievable. You may
not be surprised at what it says. I have several comments which I
will append to end of the document. Suffice it to say that
information of this type is its own shocking kind of pornography.
As far as I can see Gritz's, arguments are more or less sound.
The evidence from three separate sources is even more compelling.
As I watched this video I felt thoroughly violated. It is not
enjoyable reading, but it may well be true. </p>

<p>Be careful when you seek the truth. Upon finding it you may be
forced to change your view of the world. </p>

<p>Jim Burnes </p>

<p>_______________________________________________________________________
</p>

<p>(apologies to the original quote) </p>

<p>(Transcriber's note: The following is a transcription of
spoken English and as such can be difficult to read, much less
transcribe. I have tried to preserve exactly as was spoken except
for a few places where I have organized the language used to
clarify meaning. I am not an English major so don't slam me for
not using perfect English punctuation in the sometimes rather
strange usages.) </p>

<hr>

<p>Colonel Bo Gritz Addressing the American Liberty Lunch Club: </p>

<p>What I want to tell you very quickly is something that I feel
is more heinous than the Bataan death march. Certainly it is of
more concern to you as Americans than the Watergate. What I'm
talking about is something we found out in Burma - May 1987. We
found it out from a man named Khun Sa. He is the recognized
overlord of heroin in the world. </p>

<p>Last year he sent 900 tons of opiates and heroin into the free
world. This year it will be 1200 tons. (video showing discussion
at Khun Sa's headquarters -- some translation of Burmese to
English going on..Bo Gritz still talking to Lunch club in the
foreground) </p>

<p>On video tape he said to us something that was most
astounding: that US government officials have been and are now
his biggest customers, and have been for the last twenty years. I
wouldn't believe him. We fought a war in Laos and Cambodia even
as we fought whatever it was in Vietnam. The point is that there
are as many bomb holes in those two other countries as there are
in Vietnam. Five hundred and fifty plus Americans were lost in
Laos. Not one of them ever came home. We heard a president say,
&quot;The war is over, we are out with honor - all of the
prisoners are home.&quot; and a few other lies. Now we got rid of
that president, but we didn't get rid of the problem. We ran the
war in Laos and Cambodia through drugs. The money that would not
be appropriated by a liberal congress, was appropriated. And you
know who we used for distribution? Santos Trafficante, old friend
of the CIA and mobster out of Cuba and Florida. We lost the war! </p>

<p>Fifty-eight-thousand Americans were killed. Seventy-thousand
became drug casualties. In the sixties and seventies you saw an
infusion of drugs into America like never was before. Where do
you think the Mafia takes the heroin and opiates that it gets
through its arrangement with the US government? It doesn't
distribute them in Africa or Europe. </p>

<p>This is the big money bag here. We're Daddy Warbucks for them.
So I submit to you that the CIA has been pressed for solutions.
Each time they have gone to the sewer to find it. And you can't
smell like a rose when you've been playing in the cesspool. We've
been embracing organized crime. Now you've all looked and heard
about Ollie North, about the Contras, about nobody knowing
anything. (cut to part of Iran Contra hearings with Ollie North
explaining the flow of funds from Iran to the Contras) </p>

<p>North: </p>

<p>And Mr. Gorbanifar suggested several incentives to make that
February transaction work. And the attractive incentive for me
was the one he made that residuals could flow to support the
Nicaraguan resistance. </p>

<p>Legislator: </p>

<p>Even Gorbanifar knew that you were supporting the Contras. </p>

<p>North: </p>

<p>Yes he did. Isvestia knew it. The name had been in the papers
in Moscow. It had been all over Danny Ortega's newscasts. Radio
Havana was broadcasting it. It had been in every newspaper in the
land. </p>

<p>Legislator: </p>

<p>All our enemies knew it and you wanted to keep it from the
United States Congress. </p>

<p>North: </p>

<p>We wanted to be able to deny a covert operation. </p>

<p>(back to Bo at the Luncheon Club) </p>

<p>We have a constitution that says that the laws will be made by
the Congress, enforced by the executive branch, interpreted by
the judicial branch. But in reality we have an executive branch
that has for more than a twenty years operated in what what Ollie
North called a parallel government. When the Congress says no, it
makes no difference. They're gonna do it anyway. And it is
special intelligence - top secret. Why? Not because the
communists don't know what were doing, it's to keep it a secret
from you. You're not capable of making those kinds of decisions
according to those in parallel government. The reason I know ...
I was there. I've been a product of parallel government myself. </p>

<p>(Narrator) </p>

<p>Lieutenant Colonel James 'Bo' Gritz is the most decorated
Green Beret commander of the Vietnam Era. General William
Westmoreland, in writing his memoirs, singled out Bo Gritz as the
&quot;American Soldier&quot; for his exemplary courage in combat
and outstanding ingenuity in recovering a highly secret black-box
the Viet-Cong had taken from a crashed U2 spy plane. The feature
films &quot;Rambo&quot;, &quot;Uncommon Valor&quot; and
&quot;Missing in Action&quot; were based in part upon his
real-life military experiences. </p>

<p>(Back to Bo) </p>

<p>Dick Secord, General, United States Air Force, a man I know
well, said it best. Before the senate investigating committee
Dick Secord was asked - if we were supporting the Contras, why
were we selling them arms bought from a communist block nation at
exorbitant profit rates. </p>

<p>(skip to scene from hearings) </p>

<p>Senator: </p>

<p>If the purpose of the enterprise was to help the contras, why
did you charge Colero a mark-up? </p>

<p>Secord: </p>

<p>We were in business to make a living, Senator. We had to make
a living. I didn't see anything wrong with it at the time. It was
a commercial enterprise. </p>

<p>Senator: </p>

<p>Oh..I thought the purpose of the enterprise was to aid
Colero's cause. </p>

<p>Secord: </p>

<p>Can't I have two purposes? I did. </p>

<p>Senator: </p>

<p>Oh..allright. </p>

<p>(back to Bo) </p>

<p>And then Dick Secord said in his playboy interview: &quot;I
think I deserve the eight million that we made from the Iran arms
sale for all the hard work I did.&quot; If you've got to pay a
patriot, you've got the wrong guy. </p>

<p>(applause from audience) </p>

<p>These are patriots for profit. There has been a guise of
patriotism that a lot of people have been hiding behind. War is
their business. Business has been good. </p>

<p>(fade to shots of the Vietnam 'conflict' - Narrator takes over
again) </p>

<p>Bo Gritz risked his life a thousand times in combat in Vietnam
before he was sent by a national security council staffer Tom
Harvey in the White House to Burma in November of 1986 in search
of American prisoners of war. He discovered instead a heroin
highway and a nation betrayed by high level American officials
involved in narcotics trafficking. Tom Harvey and his superiors
in the White House were not pleased with Bo's report. </p>

<p>(fade to scene of Bo - now with beard in a field obviously
somewhere in Southeast Asia - palm trees and oxen indigenous to
the area abound - I assume its in either Burma or Thailand) </p>

<p>The thing that I was most concerned about was - and I thought
was fantastic - was the general's offer to stop the flow of opium
and heroin into the free world. When I asked him (assume he's
talking about a conversation with Tom Harvey now) he said
&quot;that's fantastic&quot;. There was a pause, then he said,
&quot;Bo, there's no one here that supports that.&quot; And I
said, &quot;What?! Vice-President Bush has been appointed by
president Reagan as the Number One policeman to control drug
entry into the United States. How can you say there's no interest
and no support when we bring back a video tape with a direct
interview with a man who puts 900 tons of opium and heroin across
into the free world every year and is willing to stop it?&quot;
And he said, &quot;Bo, what can I tell you? </p>

<p>All I can tell you is there is no interest in doing that
here.&quot; </p>

<p>Well that made me wonder. That's because it doesn't sound
American and it doesn't sound right. Thats when we began to do
our own investigation because for about three years people had
told me, both in Washington DC and, interestingly enough, in
Oklahoma city that the whole POW situation was being undermined
by US government officials involved in drug trafficking. I
wouldn't believe it. I said, &quot;You guys aren't playing with a
full deck... you've got yourselves strung out too thin.&quot; And
they said, &quot;Bo, you better listen, because for three years
we've had prisoners literally within our grasp and something has
happened at the last minute.&quot; (I said), &quot;Each time I've
made every effort to cooperate with government officials. I can't
believe that people in the US government would actually, either
overtly or covertly, do anything to undermine a rescue operation.
&quot; </p>

<p>Well, we're still without Prisoners of War and there is no
interest, we're told at the White House, in stopping the flow of
drugs coming in from the Golden Triangle into the free world. </p>

<p>(fade to front-page articles about Bo Gritz in Parade magazine
and Soldier of Fortune...narrator picks up here) </p>

<p>Lieutenant Colonel Bo Gritz is no stranger to controversy. In
thirty years of devoted service to the US Army and to the
recovery of American prisoners of war, he has encountered plenty.
The making of this American warrior began early. He was five
years old when his father, a B-17 pilot, was shot down over
Europe during World War II. His mother, a pilot with the women's
Air Force, would later marry a master sergeant and remain with
the occupation forces in Germany after the war. Raised by his
maternal grandparents in Oklahoma, young Bo Gritz began training
at Fort Union Military Academy in Virginia. He was named Corps
Commander in his senior year when he chanced upon a recruiting
poster that changed his life. In short order, Gritz won his green
beret in the Army Special forces by passing all courses in the
unconventional warfare training. After graduating from officer's
candidate school, the newly-commissioned second lieutenant then
insisted on Ranger training. Assigned to the command of the first
mobile South Vietnamese gorilla forces to be organized, Gritz
also operated secretly in Cambodia and Laos with his force of
Cambodian mercenaries, or &quot;Bos&quot;, as he called them. By
official body-count, over 450 of the enemy died as a result of
Gritz's actions. His wartime records are replete with examples of
Bo's concern for keeping Americans alive in a war gone mad. </p>

<p>As recon chief of the supersecret delta-force, Bo was cited
for Valor in saving the lives of 30 US Infantrymen from the
BigRed-One division. More often than not, his valor was in
placing himself between the enemy and his men. According to an
official military report dated 31 July 1967 submitted on then
Major Gritz, &quot;His personal bravery is legendary exemplified
by the fact that he has been awarded five silver stars and
numerous other decorations for valor.&quot; In all Bo Gritz was
awarded 62 citations for valor, five silver stars, eight bronze
stars, two purple hearts and a presidential citation. </p>

<p>Bo was ready to sign up for a fifth tour of duty when he had a
talk with General Fred Weiyan (sp?), the &quot;daddy-rabbit&quot;
in Vietnam. As Gritz described it, &quot;I was a major and
special operations chief. I'll never forget that day. I stood
there and heard that man say. Bo, your not going to win the war
and neither am I.&quot; That was the most disillusioning moment
of my life. It meant that every man who had ever lost his finger
or his life had lost it for nothing. I decided, on the spot, to
leave Vietnam. I would not kill another enemy or risk another
comrade's life.&quot; </p>

<p>(back to Bo at the luncheon) </p>

<p>I've had the opportunity to do a lot of things that other
officers have not. I was the first recon chief and intelligence
officer for delta-force. Commanded the first gorilla forces that
went behind enemy lines. When I commanded special forces in Latin
America, we did it exactly right. And we did exactly what men in
camoflage are supposed to do. It was very natural that Harold R.
Aaron (sp?) would single me out because, besides having a
sixth-degree black belt in karate, I have established an ability
to operate on my own. And I think when Aaron said, &quot;Bo, we
want you to do this&quot;, he understood that I'm also hard
headed enough that I wouldn't cave in. He said, &quot;I want you
to consider retiring. It would only be temporary. We have
overwhealming evidence now that people are still there, being
held in communist prisons.&quot; Mr. H. Ross Perot had been asked
by Eugene Tighe, director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, to
back a private mission that would look into the POW situation.
Perot said, &quot;Bo, I want you to go there. I want you to do
everything you have to do. You come and tell me there aren't any
prisoners of war left alive.&quot; </p>

<p>(narrator) </p>

<p>Bo returned from Indo-China with extensive evidence that there
were indeed American prisoners of war in captivity, including a
solid report of 47 at one particular camp. Perot turned the
project back over to General Tighe who wrote to Secretary of
Defense, Harold Brown asking that the source, a Nguyen Dok Jong
(sp?) be brought to the United States for a polygraph test. Brown
repeated the request to Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. One month
later, Vance finally responded that the commissioner of
immigration would not permit Jong into the United States for
further questioning. As Bo puts it, &quot;Think about it. One
man, not a thousand and the defense intelligence agency chief and
secretary of state can't get him into the country. That was a
pretty clear signal that the military was politically handcuffed
on the prisoner of war issue.&quot; </p>

<p>For eight years Gritz sought to find and free American POW's.
He crossed five times behind enemy lines into communist Laos and
Vietnam. Three times he was within moments of embracing those
American heroes our government had declared dead. Each time
something unexplained caused Gritz and his Operation Lazarus team
to fall short with freedom and victory in sight for the POWs. </p>

<p>There has never been a shortage of criticism from any number
of armchair generals such as Robert K. Brown of &quot;Soldier of
Fortune&quot; magazine who devoted an entire issue to condemning
Gritz's efforts. Even to the extent of publishing documents
stolen from Bo while he was on the mission in Laos. They have
even belittled his prayer before crossing enemy lines. (Gritz is
a devout Mormon...Ed) His critics said he should have looked more
like the Rambo in the movies, who actually avoided the draft in
an all-girls school in Switzerland. </p>

<p>More debilitating than the hundreds of miles on foot within
enemy territory has been the disinformation propagated by those
within our government who have covered up the plight of our
prisoners of war. Gritz has been accused of being a media hound.
He insists he has never sought the spotlight, but when confronted
has always been a positive voice for our prisoners of war and
will continue to be until they are home to speak for themselves. </p>

<p>Working as an agent for the Intelligence Support Activity
(ISA) in the CIA, it was fine for Gritz to travel at great peril
using false documents, as Ollie North and Bud McFarland did when
they traveled to Iran on phony Irish passports. On one occasion
he was stopped by US customs at Seattle-Tacoma airport with four
separate passports. He was quickly released when his intelligence
contact in Washington confirmed his mission. It was quite
acceptable with the US government for Bo Gritz to travel at such
great peril until he returned from Burma's infamous Golden
Triangle on December of 1986 with information concerning with
involvement of high-level US officials involved in large-scale
drug trafficking in Southeast Asia. His tremendous courage in
refusing to back down to their threats has lead to his current
indictment for misuse of a passport in order to keep him from
getting this information to the American public. </p>

<p>(back to Bo at the luncheon) </p>

<p>There a book out now called Secret Warriors, I think. Its
about an organization called the ISA. Congress never knew about
and everybody gives me credit for exposing it, but that's not
true. When I was called before congress in 1983, they said,
&quot;Bo, are you working as an official agent for the US
government?&quot; And I said, &quot;Yes&quot;. And they said,
&quot;For what organization?&quot; And I said, &quot;I will not
identify that organization, other than to call it the
activity.&quot; This is because even the initials I-S-A were top
secret. Because it wasn't an oversight. It was created by Carter.
Can you imagine that? He did one good thing that I know of.
(laughter) But it was parallel government. He created a secret
organization to do things that the CIA could not do and he didn't
dare let congress know about it. </p>

<p>Now ISA got Dosier back, the general that was captured by
terrorists in Italy. And ISA did a lot of other things. You can
read about them now because its in this book by some guy who
writes for the Wall Street Journal. The point is that Jerry King
was the head of ISA. Jerry King called me on the telephone and
said, &quot;Bo, we have been ordered to put operation Grand
Eagle...&quot;, which was the governments name for the prisoner
of war rescue mission. It certainly wasn't grand and it sure
wasn't an eagle 'cause it never got off the ground. But he said,
&quot;We've been ordered to put operation Grand Eagle on the
shelf as if it never existed.&quot; Hand before God he said,
&quot;there are still too many bureaucrats that don't want to see
American prisoners of war come back alive.&quot; Now I didn't
know what Jerry King meant then. I thought he was angry because
there was a bureaucratic tug-of-war going on between ISA, the CIA
and defense intelligence and maybe he was losing. But remember
Jerry King's words, 'cause they'll tie in here. I'm wondering why
that the Vietnamese intercept Colonel Richard Walsh (a POW..Ed)
moments before the turnover and capture not only him, but the
General also (unclear who the General is here ... Ed.) And I knew
that we still had him, because in the newspapers it appeared
that, &quot;The Vietnamese and Lao delegations of the United
Nations confirm that they are holding an American citizen in
custody.&quot; And I said, &quot;By golly, we in our state
department are going to press for an identity.&quot; Because
doesn't it say that the president is required to safegaurd
American citizens in hostile hands. And I knew when when we
pressed what would happen? Richard Walsh would be identified. Who
is he? A prisoner of war. Hooray! Now the log jam is broken. And
who can Walsh testify to? The other men he was with. And they can
testify. Were going to get them all out now, even though its
going to cost us something. Did you ever see Richard Walsh's name
identified? I didn't. </p>

<p>Mrs. Walsh showed me a newspaper article that said where an
Air Force casualty officer came to her at this time and said:
&quot;Your husband is alive. He's a prisoner of war. We have high
hopes he'll be coming home soon.&quot; They put it in the
newspaper there in Minneapolis. She was told that Air Force Two
was spooling up...who's that belong to?..George Bush...to go get
her husband. That's what she told me, but it never happened and I
thought again, &quot;What rotten luck and what a bunch of wimps
in the state department for not going and demanding that they
identify that citizen.&quot; They probably did. They found out
who he was and they said, &quot;lets forget it.&quot; Because
when I walked into the state department shortly thereafter, a
friend of mine said, &quot;Bo, we thought that you'd been
captured. Your passport turned up in a very unlikely place.&quot;
And I said, &quot;Yeah, I know all about it.&quot; (not sure what
he's referring to here ... Ed.) </p>

<p>Do you think that all of this has just been rotten luck. Well,
when you wear the uniform of the United States you have this
faith ... hope that the system will do it. Just like General
Aaron said, &quot;Let the system do the rest.&quot; Now comes
truth... </p>

<p>We were training Afghan freedom fighters in the deserts of
South Nevada near where I live and I was proud to do so. In
cooperation with the US State Department Office For Security
Assistance. We finished that mission. A man by the name of Tom
Harvey who is National Security Council Ollie North look-alike.
Ollie comes from Annapolis, Harvey comes from West Point. Tom
Harvey called me and said, &quot;We have information ...&quot;,
and here is a copy of the letter that's why I brought all these
documents. I hope some of you challenge them. I hope the White
House, the Pentagon would challenge them. Because if they would
publicly they would have to admit to the truth. This letter was
sent to Vice-President Bush by an American citizen by the name of
Aurthur Soucheck, it is dated 29 August 1986. It says that
General Khun Sa has American prisoners of war. It says that Khun
Sa tried to rescue four of them. It says his forces escorted the
four to the Mekong river. </p>

<p>While attempting to cross the rain-swollen river, the four US
personnel, three of Khun Sa's soldiers and two horses were swept
away by the raging water and all drowned. It goes on to say that
Khun Sa has repeated intelligence reports of location of US
prisoners being kept in Laos ... that he says that has seventy
prisoners of war. Tom Harvey said, &quot;This is getting TOP
priority.&quot; </p>

<p>Now in G. Gordon Liddy's book, &quot;Will&quot;, he says,
&quot;no American has ever come out of the Golden Triangle
alive.&quot; But that's what we were being asked to do. Tom
Harvey said, &quot;Bo, do you think you would be able to
infiltrate into Khun Sa's inner sanctum and determine if this
report is true or not?&quot; Do you think maybe somebody is
trying to get me bumped off? (laughter) It didn't make any
difference. Brothers and sisters, you and I are small compared to
this nation and the risk that we take if there is one American
there is worth it. God's will they'll be home while they're still
alive. I told Harvey, &quot;We didn't fight a war in Burma, why
should there be prisoners of war there?&quot; But you know a guy
like Khun Sa has got connections all over. And I said,
&quot;We'll try.&quot; </p>

<p>I speak Chinese. Khun Sa speaks Chinese. He's right along the
southern China border. Surrounded by communists, he's fighting
the communists. He has a forty-thousand man army. About
eight-million Shan people that make up the minority Shan state.
Burma is communist. </p>

<p>Every one of his weapons are M16s and M60 machine guns. All
the latest stuff that we have. I found out why later. Too make a
long story short, we got in to see Khun Sa and he didn't have any
prisoners of war. And let me caveat it by saying this. We
traveled three days going and three days coming by horse over
mountains that were literally vertical up and down. I made the
comment at that time to Scott Weekly (sp?) who was Ollie North's
classmate at Annapolis and went with me. </p>

<p>I said, &quot;I would hate to be an engineer that had to build
a highway through these mountains because they're virgin teak
forests ... rain forests .. tremendously beautiful.&quot; </p>

<p>Six days coming and going. Khun Sa didn't have any prisoners
of war. We gave Khun Sa the letter from the White House that I
had. Thats the only thing that let me get in there. You don't
walk in because the CIA has a seven digit figure on Khun Sa's
head and they haven't been able to collect. You think they're
gonna let somebody like me in there. </p>

<p>Say, &quot;Hi! I wanna go visit Khun Sa!&quot; Doesn't work!
But I guess they thought this guy is crazy enough because I gave
this letter ... I told Harvey, &quot;We got to have a credential,
guy.&quot; He said, &quot;We can't do that, Bo. We never do
that.&quot; I said, &quot;Harvey, has anyone ever gone to the
Golden Triangle and come out alive? I need something that will
convince Khun Sa were not there to kill him, we're there for
humanitarian purposes.&quot; So Harvey said, &quot;Well, this
will be the language. 'You are operating in cooperation with the
White House .. etc .. etc.'&quot; It worked! Khun Sa didn't have
one single prisoner of war, didn't know anything about prisoners
of war. (switch to a scene with Bo and Khun Sa talking at Khun
Sa's camp with Khun Sa's troops doing practice drills in the
background. Bo is discussing the letter from Soucheck with Khun
Sa. It is nearly impossible to decipher what is specifically
being discussed because Khun Sa's troops are incredibly loud and
drown out the conversation, so I will proceed to the next scene.
Don't worry...there are more Khun Sa meetings to come. The long
and short of it is Khun Sa says he will decrease or stop the drug
shipments and Gritz gets it on videotape. Now back to Bo at the
luncheon.) </p>

<p>Now with Nancy Reagan saying no to drugs and Judge Ginsberg
not allowed to sit on the supreme court because he smoked
marijuana .. and you're an accessory to murder if you ever smoke
marijuana, according to Nancy Reagan. I figured we'd get an
'attaboy'. We didn't have prisoners, but we had three video tapes
showing Khun Sa himself. And I thought, &quot;Boy, is George Bush
gonna be thrilled about this!&quot; (much laughter) </p>

<p>We delivered those tapes to Tom Harvey just before Christmas.
You try to call Tom Harvey now, because some news people did, and
he doesn't return your calls. We delivered those tapes just
before Christmas, Tom Harvey called me back and said, &quot;Bo,
Fantastic! You guys actually got in to see Khun Sa. The CIA said
he had been assasinated.&quot; Somebody needed some pocket
change. &quot;And there he is talking.&quot; And I said,
&quot;That's right, Tom. Harvey, what about the 900 tons?&quot; I
figured they were just bubbling over. They were all right, they
were dripping in their knickers. But it wasn't from joy. Harvey
said, &quot;Bo..&quot;, these are quotes ... hand on the square
.. he said, &quot;Bo, there's no interest here in that.&quot; You
be on the other end of the phone. You've just come out of Burma.
You've brought what you consider to be a way to stop 900 tons of
heroin, not marijuana and get rid of the cancer that has infected
the bureaucracy and there's &quot;no interest.&quot; I challenged
</p>

<p>Harvey because I'm pretty hard-headed. I said, &quot;Tom,
didn't President Reagan appoint George Bush the number one cop to
stop drugs before they come into the United States?&quot; I
wanted to remind him of these little things. And he said,
&quot;Bo, what can I tell you? There is NO INTEREST here in doing
that.&quot; Now that is White-House-ese for saying, &quot;Get off
this subject, leave us alone.&quot; I knew that we had trod upon
some very sensitive toes. I still didn't have a clue to what was
going on, but I knew that we were getting close to finding out
and I took off and went to Burma again. </p>

<p>Now I want to show you some things when I got back to Burma.
(he shows some newspaper headlines) The United States government
wanted Khun Sa killed quick and here's how they did it: </p>

<p>US CALLS FOR NO MERCY IN DRUG WAR </p>

<p>These are over-there newspapers... </p>

<p>AIRSTRIKES AGAINST KHUN SA's HEADQUARTERS </p>

<p>BURMESE AND THAI TROOPS MOVE ON KHUN SA </p>

<p>Finally it says, and there is a picture of Burmese and Thai
troops standing on top of a high mountain top: </p>

<p>KHUN SA'S STRONGHOLD SEIZED </p>

<p>Now many of you are soldiers, airmen, marines, sailors. You
know that airstrikes, troops mean war. There's hair, eyes and
teeth everywhere. </p>

<p>When I went back into Burma in May I took two other Americans
with me. </p>

<p>It was the most peaceful area. It was exactly like we left it
except for one big change. Remember I told you it took us three
days to ride by horse to get there in November and come out in
December. Well, when we went in May, we went by pickup truck.
Straight from the Thai border all the way right to the General's
front door. And on the other way coming back there were Thai
military 10 ton trucks covered and loaded. </p>

<p>There's only one thing that comes out of the Golden Triangle
and that's heroin. </p>

<p>When we got there General Khun Sa said, &quot;What took you so
long?&quot; I said, &quot;General, I was waiting for the war to
die down. I didn't want to get caught in all of this 26,000
troops and airstrikes&quot;, and he just laughed. He said,
&quot;That was a newspaper war!&quot; I said, &quot;What do you
mean newspaper war?&quot; He said, &quot;The Thai and Burmese
came to me and said that if they don't make it look like there
doing something, they stand to lose tens of millions of dollars
this year in drug supression funds from American taxpayers.&quot;
So Kuhn Sa said, &quot;Make it look like anything you want to,
but I want a road built here.&quot; They used the newspapers and
I want to show you something. This one here says, &quot;US
PROVIDES ANOTHER 1.8 MILLION TO FIGHT DRUGS&quot; So it worked!
And this guy is really smiling. This is a Thai receiving a check
from the US Ambassador. </p>

<p>Khun Sa got what he wanted. Now he began to assemble his
officers. It took him a week to get them all together because he
brought them from all over the place. And now I understand why. I
thought I was just going to talk to him, but he said no and put
me off for a week. He assembled officers from the entire Shan
territory from all over the Golden Triangle. They came in. He sat
everybody down. He brought his secretary out. He had his
secretary read from their log. </p>

<p>(Scene switches to Khun Sa's headquarters. All of Khun Sa'
officers are here along with Khun Sa. I'd say around twenty in
all. Bo and his companions are sitting with them. This is where
it gets VERY interesting. The following conversation was in
broken english from Khun Sa's end so some of the syntax may be a
bit wierd.) </p>

<p>Bo: </p>

<p>I cannot ask the General to cut your throat by revealing any
contact that would hurt your economy at this moment. But I pray
that he will reveal any connections from the older time or that
will not hurt you now. That if they are still in power, we might
be free of them. </p>

<p>Khun Sa: </p>

<p>Some of the connections I can expose to you. Some were in
Burma, some were in Thailand, some were in America. But I don't
remember all of their names and my secretary remembers them so he
will give you the information. </p>

<p>Secretary: </p>

<p>In 1965 to 1975 there is one CIA in Laos, his name was
Shackley. He was involved the narcotics business. And we know
that Shackley used one civilian to organize trafficking. His
civilian name was Santos Trafficante. He was the organizer of
trafficking for Shackley. This was financed by Richard Armitage
who stayed in Vietnam. After the Vietnam war Richard Armitage was
a prominent trafficker in Bangkok. </p>

<p>This was between 1975 to 1979 he was a very active trafficker
in Bangkok. He was one of the embassy employees. Then after that
in 1979 he quit from embassy and then he established a company
name the Far East Trading company. Then he used the name of his
company under the table for drug trafficking. He then used the
drug money to support the Lao anti-communist troops. </p>

<p>Bo: </p>

<p>So he used it in arms and munitions. </p>

<p>Secretary: </p>

<p>Yes. This Richard Armitage has a lot of friends in Laos and
Thailand. There is a lot of CIA personnel in Laos. One of the CIA
agents is named Daniel Arnold. This Arnold was a munitions
trafficker. There is another one Jerry Daniels who organized
trafficking for Richard Armitage. </p>

<p>(Now back at the luncheon with Bo) </p>

<p>One of the men named by Khun Sa, this is not me naming him.
This is Khun Sa, the drug overlord reading from his records,
named Richard Armitage as being a chief drug trafficker from 1965
through 1979. You know where Richard Armitage went in 1979? He
went to Dole's staff, then to Reagan's campaign staff and now he
is the Assistant Secretary of Defense right underneath Mr.
Carlucci. Richard Armitage has been responsible for recovery of
US prisoners of war way back before we actually got involved with
H. Ross Perot. He is still responsible for them. What I'm trying
to do is find you Khun Sa's letter because it will say it best.
Here it is. Letter from Khun Sa written to the US Justice
department dated 28 Jun 1987. I just want to read you a couple
sentences. &quot;During the period 1965 to 1975, CIA chief in
Laos Theodore Shackley, was in the Drug Business.&quot; Now
Theodore Shackley would have been director of intelligence of the
CIA if George Bush had not been appointed to that post. Theodore
Shackley was then posted as the deputy director for covert
operations. It said, &quot;Santos Trafficante acted as his buying
and transporting agent while Richard Armitage handled the
financial section with banks in Australia.&quot; </p>

<p>All of a sudden the words from Jerry King came back, &quot;Too
many bureaucrats don't want to see American prisoners returned
alive.&quot; Why? </p>

<p>Couldn't figure it out. Gunboat at midnight in the middle of
the Mekong with Voice of America saying we're there to abort our
attack. </p>

<p>Walsh and the General recaptured before turnover. Why? Now
I'll tell you why. If this is true it means Richard Armitage and
a lot of other people that are named here are the least men in
the world that want to see Americans come home. Because when
American prisoners of war do come home, whether we bring them
home or they drag themselves across that Mekong river somehow,
and report to the US Embassy and aren't destroyed there. When
they do come home, because they will, there will be one hell of
an investigation as to what took the greatest nation in the world
so long to bring home heroes that have been waiting for more than
fifteen years. When that investigation is conducted it will show
as Khun Sa says that these men, these bureaucrats, appointed not
elected, appointed, have broken the faith with you and this
country and its law. Have used their office as a cover to run
drugs and arms to promote covert operations that the United
States Congress did not approve of. Its the parallel government.
Now that may be allright, but I'll tell you something. It's not
allright to leave hundreds of Americans to die alone in the hands
of the enemy to a bunch of wimps that were never there. </p>

<p>When I came back here, I thought I was a lone ranger. I said,
&quot;Boy, I've got this information. Somehow we've got to get it
to the proper authorities and I'm all alone. Well, not so. Guess
who shows up in Time Magazine? H. Ross Perot ... and he's on page
18, May 4th and it says, &quot;Perot's Private Probes.&quot; H.
Ross Perot was not in Burma with me, but I know now where he got
his info. Four billion dollars opens a lot of doors for you. It
didn't open a couple of doors, however, as I'll let you in on
this story. H. Ross Perot had gained US agent investigation
reports of Richard Armitage. Perot didn't know I was over in
Burma. He was doing this on his own. This article said he pinned
Richard Armitage. Armitage is a fat broad. Literally. This is a
giant of a man. And demanded that Armitage resign because it says
that H. Ross Perot accused him of being an a drug smuggler and an
arms dealer. That takes pretty big cajones. (laughter) It says
that Perot then went to his friend, George Bush. It says that he
gave evidence of wrong doing by Armitage. I'm quoting. Bush told
Perot to go to the proper authorities. (sounds of shock and
dismay by audience) I'm still reading now. So the billionaire
called on William Webster. He's now head of the CIA. It says that
Perot made at least one visit to the White House carrying a pile
of documents, yet he has received no support from the Reagan
administration. In fact Frank Carlucci... </p>

<p>Who's he? He's the secretary of defense. And who was he
before? Deputy directory of Central Intelligence. Frank Carlucci
called him in to ask him to stop pursuing Armitage. Talk about
insulation! And when four billion dollars can't even get your
foot in the door even though the man is a good Texan from
Houston. Tell me there's no cover-up here. </p>

<p>Now H. Ross was working on his own. He didn't know what Khun
Sa had told us. Khun Sa doesn't have a television or a telephone.
He doesn't know who Richard Armitage is. He doesn't give a damn.
All he knows is the people who are on his records that he's dealt
with. This affadavit though by a man by the name of Daniel
Sheehan ... and you'll recognize Sheehan's name if you don't know
him already by the Silkwood case. He jumped on Kerr-Magee (sp?).
Kerr-Magee is pretty powerful. But they won the Silkwood case
there in Oklahoma and have done a few other things. </p>

<p>(switch to a talk-show interview with Daniel Sheehan, lead
attorney for the Christic Institute) </p>

<p>Sheehan: </p>

<p>There's little doubt at all that President Reagan was involved
in a conspiracy to violate the Neutrality Act. He's been directly
ordered by the United States Congress not to mount this military
operation against Nicaragua. They've cut off all funds for him to
do so, but he went to Saudi Arabia and various private citizens
to raise the money in total violation of the Federal Neutrality
Act. They're engaged in violations of the arms-export control
act. They're engaged in violations of the Federal Racketeering
Act. There is a whole federal racketeering syndicate that they
like to refer to as The Enterprise. </p>

<p>Richard Secord referred to it as. But what it is in fact, Jim,
is the off-the-shelf, stand-alone, self-financing, covert
operations capacity that Oliver North talked about Bill Casey
wanting to set up. Fact is, that it has been set up. Its been
operating for many years now. Out from under the control of any
president. Out from under the control of the director of central
intelligence. Out from under the supervision of any intelligence
committee. Its run by Theodore Shakley, the former director of
covert operations worldwide by the CIA under George Bush when
George Bush was the director of the Central Intelligence Agency
in 1976. And this crowd has set up the off-the-shelf operation
and is carrying out not only a partnership with the drug dealers
from Central America and from Southeast Asia, but also carrying
out a major political assasination program which was participated
in by William Buckley who was the Beirut section chief for the
CIA who was kidnapped in March of 1984 and who was the subject of
all the real negotiations for the sale of the TOW missiles to
Iran. It was not a sale to open any openings to the moderates in
Iran, nor was it in fact a negotiation to negotiate for the
general release of hostages. It was initiated solely and
exclusively to obtain the release of William Buckley because he
knew about the whereabouts of the off-the-shelf operation. It was
a criminal enterprise and they feared that if the American people
found out about that there would be a huge constitutional scandal
and the President of the United States would be impeached. </p>

<p>May I most respectfully ask that this matter not be touched
upon at this stage. If we wish to get into this I'm certain
arrangements can be made during executive session. </p>

<p>(cut to Jack Brook's summary) </p>

<p>.. involving the US government in military activity in direct
contradiction of the law, diverting public funds into private
pockets in secret unofficial activities, selling access to the
President for thousands of dollars, dispensing cash and foreign
money orders out of a White House safe, accepting gifts and
falsifying papers to cover it up, altering and shredding national
security documents, lying to Congress. </p>

<p>Now I believe that the American people understand that
democracy cannot survive that kind of abuse. </p>

<p>(back to Bo at luncheon) </p>

<p>I don't think it makes a hoot who you vote for for President.
The same people are gonna run this country. I stand before you
today. You gotta know who I am. I'm an indicted felon because
part of that phone call in Thailand said, &quot;Bo, if you don't
erase and forget, if you don't come to the apartment (that was a
safehouse in Washington, DC), you're gonna be charged with 15
years and your going to serve as a felon and we're going to bring
up aggravated charges and hostile witnesses.&quot; </p>

<p>That's not my kind of language. I said, &quot;Friend, that's
an insult to you, me and two hundred years of constitutional
government.&quot; He said, &quot;Bo, don't give me that. Bring
everything you've got to the apartment.&quot; I said, &quot;Who's
going to be there, Joe?&quot; And he said, &quot;You know me
better than that, Bo. It will just be me and Tom Harvey.&quot; I
said, &quot;OK, I'll bring this stuff dear citizen. I'll show it
to you then you tell me to erase and forget.&quot; When I got to
LA with the tapes he said, &quot;Bo, don't come.&quot; He was
that much of a friend. He said, &quot;Don't come. Hide those
tapes. Everybody's laying for you.&quot; He said, &quot;But
please destroy and forget. That's all the state department wants
you to do because otherwise you're going to jail as a
felon.&quot; You know what they charged me with? They did charge
me. Misuse of a passport. </p>

<p>Now that is a weeny charge for somebody thats been in
clandestine warfare for more than 30 years. That throws me in
league with Jane Fonda. She was cavorting with the enemy and
misusing her passport. </p>

<p>Ollie North and Robert McValium went to Iran on Irish
passports so they could do an illegal arms deal, but nobody has
charged them. Thats because they're cooperating. </p>

<p>Well, I'm not worried about that. The US attorney doesn't know
how hard to take it because I said, &quot;I don't deny I misused
a passport. I misused it many times. Every time in pursuit of US
prisoners of war.&quot; </p>

<p>You dear citizen, see if you would erase and go back to sleep
and forget. I don't think that you will. In my defense I got a
lawyer, he's the former US attorney for Nevada. He took my case
for free other than all the expenses it cost to bring in
witnesses. Were going to use this court as a forum for prisoners
of war and for government in drug dealing because you know you
can't sue the government, but when the government jumps on you
now you can turn it around on them. Thats exactly what were
doing. I got a plea the other day saying, &quot;Bo, just go ahead
and cop a plea it'll be a misdemeanor.&quot; No way Jose, were
going all the way with this one. </p>

<p>(Narrator) </p>

<p>The American Warrior has traveled a long road from the jungles
of Vietnam to the Pentagon to a hostile federal courtroom in Las
Vegas, but the commitment to God, country, honor and decency have
never wavered. It would be far easier to walk away from this
battle, but to do so would be impossible for this soldier. </p>

<p>Interestingly enough, the US attorney prosecuting this case
against a respected dissenting war hero is himself the former
road manager for a well-known 1960's antiwar rock group. The
irony is not lost on Las Vegans, but the issues behind the trial
demand nationwide attention. One can only wonder what the charges
will be against Oliver North.</p>

<p>The Christic Institue, on the other hand, is facing an uphill
battle in their current appeal of Judge King's dismissal of their
racketeering lawsuit against The Enterprise last June in Miami.
As Father Bill Davis, their chief investigator explains: </p>

<p>(cut to Fr. Bill Davis from The Christic Institute) </p>

<p>This is by far the most important case we've ever done. I
think for the kinds of forces that we're up against, as well as
for the broader public policy implications. If this crowd can get
away with what they have been getting away with: the arms
dealing, the drug dealing, the assasination programs and sell it
under the guise of some kind of blind anti-communism, having had
the revelations that we've had: the Hasenfus flight, the Iran
arms deal. If they still get away with it then I think democracy,
at least in this country, is in very very serious condition. I
don't think it will survive. We're either going to win against
these forces, this time or I am not optimistic about the survival
of democracy in this country. I think it's that serious. </p>

<p>(Narrator) </p>

<p>The seriousness of Gritz's discoveries during his first
mission to the Golden Triangle, however was brought home
immediately after his return. Scott Weekly, his Operation Lazarus
team member and veteran of several POW recovery missions, was
arrested and charged with a federal violation resulting from the
Afghan training program he helped Gritz conduct. Weekly was a
classmate of Oliver North's at Annapolis and has a PhD in
physics. After numerous forays into hostile enemy territory
neither he nor Gritz were prepared for the treachery that awaited
them at home. </p>

<p>(Bo filmed in Thailand or thereabouts) </p>

<p>The ambassador level person for the US government in charge of
narcotics control made a statement immediately following the
release of this tape to the White House that the United States
would never a agree to talk with General Khun Sa about drug
control because he was such a black-hearted criminal. I believe
that we can show through facts that have already been established
by the US Justice Department and on-going investigations that
there are people currently who saw that tape in the US government
that all that they could to stop this interview right here for
fear they would be exposed. Even to the point where they arrested
Scott Weekly for a minor technicality of transporting explosives
illegally on a commercial airliner. </p>

<p>Very briefly we were training a couple of Afghan freedom
fighters through the knowledge and request of the US state
department and other official agencies. The explosives were
procurred for us from Fort Sill, Oklahoma and were naturally
transported, because we were using them at a remote desert base,
by aircraft. There was no danger to the civilian aircraft. The
explosives were C4, plastic, frontline safe. You could shoot them
with a machine gun and they wouldn't go off. </p>

<p>There were no detonating devices with us. Federal agents told
Scott when he was taken into custody that it wasn't a
technicality and that the real target was me. They were under
pressure by the US attorney's office to find out whether or not I
was in kahoots with North and Poindexter since I had traveled to
Latin America and to the Middle East in pursuit of various
government associated projects. The fact is and the truth is that
I've had nothing to do with North and Poindexter or any illegal
activities either in South America or the Middle East. Now the
truth is that I believe that elements in the US government are
afraid that they will be exposed for their illegal activities and
drug trafficking. Through that exposure that this will cease and
they will lose their power. </p>

<p>If they had tried to put pressure by causing Scott Weekly even
to be adjudged guilty ... because he was told if he would plead
guilty that there would be no problem... that he would be given
probation... that there would be no more pursuit... that it would
be unsupervised probation which would allow him to continue to
travel overseas. In truth, he was sentenced. The fact is that
Scott was told that if he would plead guilty that there would be
no further investigation and that all would go well for him and
that if he did not plead guilty there would be a tether put on
all of us so that we would not be able to travel and at that time
we were very very close to negotiating the release of American
prisoners of war. The only reason that Scott plead guilty was so
that other members of the Operation Lazarus team, myself
included, would be free to continue the mission of liberating US
prisoners of war, which is ongoing now. </p>

<p>(Narrator Discussing Weekly's case) </p>

<p>Scott Weekly was made to serve fourteen months of a five year
sentence before it was demonstrated that the agents had removed
sensitive documents from his pre-sentencing file which would have
exonerated him. The sentence was simply dismissed. </p>

<p>Lance Trimmer, a former Green Beret communications specialist
with the Lazarus team, accompanied Gritz to Burma in Weekly's
place in May, 1987 where he witnessed Khun Sa naming the US
officials involved in drug trafficking. As a professional private
investigator, since returning he has spearheaded the effort to
document and publicize the team's findings and was instrumental
in obtaining Scott Weekly's release from LongPoke Federal Prison.
In the process he has been unjustifiably arrested and detained
three times by the police and federal authorities. </p>

<p>(Narrator introducing Barry Flinn) </p>

<p>Barry Flinn is the Bangkok station chief for Operation
Lazarus. In May of 1987 he served as the cameraman with Colonel
Gritz on his second trip to visit Khun Sa. Also during this time
he has made other trips into ShanLand. On one occasion he
accompanied a journalist from Australia who filmed the
proceedings and made this the subject of a news program in
Australia. Barry himself was arrested immediatly upon his return
to Bangkok from ShanLand on the first trip and has been several
times since then as has been Khun Sa. </p>

<p>(Khun Sa in interview with Australian journalist .. either he
himself or a translator is speaking... it sounds like Khun Sa
himself) </p>

<p>.. even if they kill me the opium will still be there. They
only use me as a money tree. Every time they want money, they
come and shake the tree just like a Christmas tree. </p>

<p>Journalist: </p>

<p>..spraying the opium crop with the poison 24-D (or
somesuch...Ed.) </p>

<p>(Narrator Again) </p>

<p>One of the problems that Khun Sa pointed out in the news
program in Australia is the extensive use of toxic herbicide
spraying over his territory not to kill the opium plants, but to
kill the food crops which is very very destructive of the culture
and the people and creating a very serious refugee problem. </p>

<p>(Khun Sa again...) </p>

<p>We have 300 families in the hills now who have no food. The
world body is doing something against humanity in the Shan state
and nobody knows about it. </p>

<p>(Bo talks about Khun Sa's offer) </p>

<p>General Khun Sa has extended an offer in writing to turn over
to the United States Government on March 15, 1988 one ton of
refined Asian heroin, that sells for $250,000 per pound to
distributors, as a show of good faith that he would stop 1200
tons of heroin from entering the free world in 1988. The response
of the State Department was, &quot;no interest.&quot; </p>

<p>(Bo talking in Southeast Asian Field) </p>

<p>There are personalities within the United States Government
who have, as early as the early 1960's, trafficked in opium and
heroin to finance assasination programs initially approved by the
Central Intelligence Agency, which didn't work then and aren't
working now. If these assasinations programs spread from Vietnam,
Cambodia, Laos and Thailand to Iran, to Nicaragua, to Libya and
have the potential of continuing to spread unless some exposure
is finally done to eliminate these high officials. </p>

<p>H. Ross Perot has said as a result of his investigation he has
found a, &quot;snake pit without a bottom.&quot; He says that the
people involved will do anything to keep their wrongdoings
covered up. He even says that a man that was responsible for the
Phoenix assasination program is now on the personal staff of
George Bush. </p>

<p>(Cut to Barry Flinn in Bangkok discussing his trip with Bo.) </p>

<p>My name is Barry Flinn and I live in Bangkok, Thailand. I have
been in Bangkok now for two years. I am a member of Operation
Lazarus and I am the station chief here in Bangkok. My function
for Operation Lazarus is to collect information from my agents in
Laos and in Vietnam on locating live Americans held captive in
these two countries. This last trip Colonel Gritz had asked me to
go into ShanLand, a territory of Burma, to be a witness and a
cameraman to record the conversation with him and General Khun
Sa. I agreed to go and I did witness, I did record the meeting
with Lt. Colonel James 'Bo' Gritz and General Khun Sa. Another
member of Operation Lazarus by the name of Lance Trimmer also
accompanied us. In Shanland I did record the meeting and the
facts are as follows: General Khun Sa's people, the secretaries
read from a document written in the Shan language about American
officials dealing in heroin from 1965 to the present. Some of the
names he had given us were a man by the name of Shackley, a man
by the name of Armitage and other American officials involved in
drugs. Now my job is strictly locating POWS. I am not involved
with the DEA or any other US Government agency. I am a private
citizen. It makes you angry when you hear of the drug problems in
America. Children taking heroin at twelve and high officials
supplying them the heroin and all the cover-ups they did in the
past, the present and probably in the future. </p>

<p>Now as a witness I definitely believe these men were involved
in the drug trade. General Khun Sa did say that, after giving us
the names, he wouldn't be surprised if B52 bombers started flying
over Shanland to destroy him and to kill him so that he wouldn't
testify to the other Americans involved in the drug trade. </p>

<p>I am staying in Bangkok, Thailand to locate POWs and if people
are interested in more information about the interview with Khun
Sa and Lt. Colonel James 'Bo' Gritz they know were to find me.
The American embassy knows were to locate me. Lt. Colonel James
'Bo' Gritz knows were to locate me and I'm sure the people
involved in the drug trade know where to locate me. </p>

<p>Alright. One more thing. I did here about the Americans
Shackley, Armitage and other Americans being named it sent a
chill up my spine and down my back. It made me angry. It made me
shocked. I couldn't believe it, but it was there: names, files of
old papers that the Lao agents and the Shan people have on our
Americans. Somebody has to do something. It will probably all be
covered up. I don't know. It's not my business. I was only a
witness and it will stay with me for the rest of my life about
the people in our government dealing drugs. It's nice to know,
isn't it? It's really nice to know... </p>

<p>(Bo gives summary) </p>

<p>In summary, the reason that American prisoners of war are not
at home as we speak, if what Khun Sa, the Christic Institute, and
H. Ross Perot are saying is true, is because Richard Armitage,
the one man responsible for their recovery is a heroin smuggler
and an arms dealer. He has misused his office in order to promote
covert operations through the sale of heroin and trading in arms
that bypasses the US Congress. When prisoners come home he will
be investigated. His wrongdoings and misuse of office will be
uncovered and exposed and he and the others will fall like a
house of cards. As an American citizen it is our responsibility
to wake up to the internal threat, the treachery that threatens
literally the life of this nation. </p>

<p>(Bo back at luncheon asks people to swear to do something) </p>

<p>It's time that we just became Americans. Here is what I would
ask you to do, because you can't just go back to sleep on this
thing like we did on 007, the Korean airline. One is, I would ask
that in your mind, if not physically here today be willing to
raise you hand to the square (?) and swear again before God and
witnesses your allegiance to this heavenly banner (points to
flag) and to the constitution of the United States because it
will die hermetically sealed in the National Archives if we don't
breath some life back into it. It is hanging by a thread. </p>

<p>The righteous people of this country, doesn't mean Democrat,
Republican, right, left, conservative, liberal, the righteous
people of this country need now to stand up and put a shoulder to
it to keep it stable. I want you to commit to yourself that
you're going to do something about it. Demand that an
investigation be made. </p>

<p>(Bo narrating here...) </p>

<p>Demand a thorough and true investigation of Richard Armitage.
Insist that The Christic Institute's charges go to trial and be
heard by a jury of Americans. That those in our government that
represent sewage, that clog the bureaucracy today might be
cleaned out. That the American way might continue. That our
children might grow up in liberty and freedom with same
opportunities that we have had. </p>

<p>(Gritz apparently is willing to run for Congress on the
Republican ticket. Back to the luncheon) </p>

<p>In the legislature you need to seek out, identify and draft
people that have the guts to stand up, because if you get the
legislature up there it can be through the people. It can be
pulled back from the brink. I think thats our saving grace. I
think that through the legislature we can do what no one else
would have done to Nixon. We can wash him away, we can wash away,
hopefully, it's going to be a hard fight, this cancer. I stand
before you and give you an order. You have got to do something
about this thing. We fought the enemy foreign. Can't we fight the
enemy domestic? </p>

<p>(much applause) </p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_misc_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="misc.htm"><font size="3">Miscellaneous Statements on Drug
Policy</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49651" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>