
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B33-1</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA031-000652-B047-185</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/library/studies/ota/ch7.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122132154 text/html 47174
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 13:21:43 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:49:59 GMT
Content-length: 46956
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>CHAPTER 7 ETHNOGRAPHIC DRUG STUDIES </title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>TECHNOLOGIES FOR UNDERSTANDING AND PREVENTING SUBSTANCE
ABUSE AND ADDICTION </b> </p>

<p> <b>US Government Office of Technology Assessment</b> </p>

<p> October 18, 1994 </p>

<p> <b>CHAPTER 7 ETHNOGRAPHIC DRUG STUDIES <br>
</b> </p>

<p> <img src="../../../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> Ethnographic techniques allow researchers to study how
environmental and cultural factors affect values, attitudes, and
behaviors of individuals and groups. Historically, ethnography
has roots in both anthropology and sociology (see box 7-1). </p>

<p> ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF ALCOHOL AND OTHER DRUG USE </p>

<p> Since the 1960s the number of drug ethnographies has grown
steadily. Many of the nation's social issues were in one way or
another associated with drug use: poverty, urban unrest among
minorities, counter culture, failure of social programs, AIDS
transmission, and urban violence. Research conducted by
anthropologists and qualitative sociologists was an important
part of understanding new drug-related social problems and
trends. By the mid-1970s, &quot;street ethnography&quot; or
simply &quot;ethnography&quot; were the terms commonly used to
describe the drug research they were conducting in the United
States (60). </p>

<p> Alcohol </p>

<p> Nineteenth century and early twentieth century
anthropologists conducted comprehensive community studies in
nonindustrial societies in which they recorded ritual and social
uses of alcohol. This extensive but generally unfocused
documentation provided data for later cross- cultural analyses
relating alcohol use patterns to other cultural variables. </p>

<p> The contribution of ethnographic studies conducted outside
the United States was to provide data on the social conditioning
of alcohol's effects. The findings from one such study conducted
in </p>

<p> Bolivia during 1958, alerted the alcohol research community
to the existence of culturally accepted alcohol use patterns
quite different from those customarily encountered in the United
States. For example, &quot;virtually all of the Camba (of eastern
Bolivia) drink to the point of passing out, at least twice a
month.&quot; Although the beverage they drink is stronger in
alcoholic concentration than that customarily drunk by other
populations, there appeared to be no major health or social
problems associated with their drinking (35). </p>

<p> These data along with findings from research on four other
societies (the Aritama of Colombia, the Ifaluk of Micronesia, the
Takashima of Japan, and the town of Juxtlahuaca in Oaxaca,
Mexico), support the view that the experiential effect of alcohol
is socially conditioned (37). Each of these societies possessed
distinct messages regarding the use of alcohol, which were clear
and consistent. In contrast, individuals in modern societies are
influenced by overlapping, and sometimes contradictory, social
messages based on religious, ethnic, occupational, generational,
regional, and class differences. Drinking habits and behaviors
within the United States vary enormously. </p>

<p> Since the 1970s, ethnographic research on alcohol use in the
United States has concentrated on specifying and explaining the
variations in American drinking patterns. Some ethnographers have
focused on specific subcultures defined by their problematic
alcohol use (53). Other ethnographers have focused on alcohol
beliefs and behaviors in ethnically, religiously, and
professionally constituted subcultures-- usually exploring the
adaptation of culturally sanctioned drinking patterns, passed on
through family and community modeling, to changing social
contexts (5). </p>

<p> Heroin </p>

<p> The majority of ethnography studies conducted in the 1960s
focused on heroin use. Several of these studies challenged the
accepted perception &quot;that heroin provides an escape for the
user from his psychological problems and from the
responsibilities of social and personal relationships--in short,
an escape from life&quot; (47). Researchers documented drug use
as a way of life, rather than just as an escape from life. Two
such articles, based on three years of field work in Oakland,
California, detailed several distinct patterns or styles among
heroin users. Varying levels of prestige were associated with
these different styles, and heroin users at the top of the
hierarchy were observed to work hard to maintain their lifestyles
(54,55). </p>

<p> Another study in New York City, New York, in the late 1960s,
asked why heroin use periodically mushroomed, in epidemic
proportions, in lower class communities. The data revealed that,
regardless of ethnic background, in poor neighborhoods
&quot;there are pressures on adolescent boys to live up to the
ideals of toughness, strength, daring, and the willingness to
challenge the bleak fate of being poor.&quot; Simply put,
&quot;movement into heroin use was one route to becoming a
`somebody' in the eyes of the important people who comprised the
slum social network&quot; (20). Later articles elaborated on the
idea of so-called street status. Based on 4 years of research, a
hierarchy of illicit drugs was defined by perceived risk
components, such as physical harm, addiction potential, parental
discovery, police, and intragroup dangers. The use of drugs
perceived by the group to be risky, increased a user's personal
status within that group. The researcher concluded that reliance
on legal sanctions and scare tactics to reduce the use of certain
drugs will only make the use of these drugs appear more daring
and hence to some, more attractive (21,23). </p>

<p> Cocaine and Crack </p>

<p> Although ethnographers noted that cocaine use was on the rise
among some middle-class professionals and drug experimenters by
the mid 1970s, it was not until the 1980s that extensive studies
on cocaine users were begun. </p>

<p> While some of these early users, many of whom were white,
progressed from experimental use of cocaine to heavy use with
subsequent biological and behavioral problems, many others did
not (57,58). Several years later, though, middle- class users
with cocaine-related problems were becoming more common,
prompting many would-be experimenters to steer clear of the drug.
During this same time period, cocaine smuggling escalated,
resulting in increased availability, lower prices, and higher
quality. Within low-income, minority communities, cocaine
smoking, first as free-base and then as crack, grew so
precipitously that it was commonly called an epidemic. In New
York City, ethnographers provided complementary perspectives on
the rapidly changing crack culture. </p>

<p> In a series of ethno-historical articles, Ansley Hamid
documented the history of cocaine smoking as it evolved in lower
income minority neighborhoods in New York City. Among the
elements identified as central to the widespread diffusion of
crack smoking was the interest shown by heroin injectors with
collapsed veins in the concentrated high of smoked cocaine; the
entry of Rastafarian marijuana distributors into the cocaine
trade; the emergence of young, nonusing street distributors able
to sell unit doses in vials at relatively low prices; and the
rise in crack prices due to increased demand combined with
suppliers who had greater control over the market. Hamid believes
the rise and fall of cocaine smoking to have followed a
developmental cycle similar to that of heroin use between 1964
and 1972 and marijuana use in the 1960s and 1970s (31,32,33,34). </p>

<p> A 1992 study of crack use focused on the children of crack
users. It found that the extended family networks in the African
American community, a major source of stability and support, were
being overwhelmed by the drug crisis as the number of children
whose mothers were no longer able to care for them because of
increased drug use. Further, children exposed to drug-taking
behavior by adults may be more likely to display similar
behavior. In one family headed by a 60- year-old woman, an adult
son was a crack dealer and a daughter was a crack-abusing
prostitute (18). </p>

<p> Hallucinogens </p>

<p> Most ethnographic studies of hallucinogens and mind-altering
drugs (e.g., peyote, mescaline, mushrooms) have focused on tribal
societies. Anthropologists have uniformly found that the use of
hallucinogens was socially approved and integrated into the
religious and social life of the community. If one defines abuse
as use of a drug in such a way that it interferes with physical,
economic, or social functions, then little if any evidence points
to drug abuse among tribally organized peoples (1,27,15,42). </p>

<p> Other than scattered studies of hallucinogenic drug use among
hippies (12,14,45,46), few ethnographic studies have been
completed on use of hallucinogenic substances in American
society. However, the persistent use of lysergic acid
diethylamide (LSD) by some young people, and concerns that its
use may be increasing, have sparked new interest among
ethnographers (30,38). </p>

<p> Marijuana </p>

<p> As with hallucinogens, most of the ethnographic research on
marijuana use has been conducted outside the United States. Much
of it was initiated in the 1960s and 1970s, when increasing use
of marijuana among American youth led researchers to question the
social and medical consequences of marijuana use, especially
long-term use. Research was conducted in countries in which
marijuana use was long standing and widespread, such as Brazil,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Egypt, Jamaica, Mexico, Rwanda, and South
Africa (11,16,17, 51). </p>

<p> In Jamaica, for example, anthropologists Vera Rubin and
Lambros Comitas directed a research team of 45 social scientists
and medical professionals to conduct original ethnographic
research at several field sites, in addition to medical,
psychological, and psychiatric testing in hospitals and clinics.
Their controversial findings were that none of the deleterious
social or medical consequences believed by many to be associated
with the drug in the United States could be found among Jamaican
users: </p>

<p> .?.?. There is no evidence of any causal relationship between
cannabis use and mental deterioration, insanity, violence or
poverty; or that widespread cannabis use in Jamaica produces an
apathetic, indolent class of people. In fact, the ganja complex
provides an adaptive mechanism by which many Jamaicans cope with
limited life chances in a harsh environment (52). </p>

<p> Other than a few studies of middle-class users (10,39) and
young African American dealers (24,25), substantial U.S.
ethnographic research on marijuana use in the United States has
been generally lacking, despite the fact that marijuana has been
the most commonly used illicit substance for decades. </p>

<p> Phencyclidine (PCP) </p>

<p> An ethnographic study in 1979 of PCP users is frequently
cited for its substantive findings and methodological
contribution as the first multisite ethnographic drug study.
Initiating the study when PCP use was believed to be spreading
among white working-class and middle-class young people, the
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) contracted for a
four-city ethnographic study of PCP users not in treatment. After
3 months of working in Miami, Florida, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, Chicago, Illinois, and Seattle, Washington,
ethnographers documented groups of users and the underlying
social processes. They found that it was relatively rare for a
young person to use PCP exclusively. Use occurred mainly within
socially distinctive groups of young people who displayed &quot;a
kind of restlessness, an orientation for action, and a sense that
life generally was boring, uninteresting, and lacked recreational
activities&quot; (22). </p>

<p> The young people studied were very knowledgeable about drug
effects and understood that the PCP drug experience varied
dramatically with dosage. Low doses of the drug were reported by
different user groups to be mildly euphoric and hallucinogenic
like LSD, or sedating like barbiturates. What concerned regular
PCP users was not the acute adverse effects reported in the media
(e.g., psychotic episodes, assaultive outburst, irreparable
harm), but rather &quot;burning out&quot;--a &quot;spacey&quot;
state accompanied by incoherent thoughts, forgetfulness, and
memory loss. As burnout became apparent, individual users and
groups of users consciously cut back their PCP use. Within this
group, violent episodes were found to be rare, mainly involving
efforts by law enforcement or hospital treatment staff to
restrain users, thereby seeming to set off panic reactions and
struggle. </p>

<p> The study suggested that a significant gap existed between
official agencies responsible for drug education and prevention
and street drug users. When PCP use increased dramatically in the
mid 1970s, there were no official responses because quantitative
national data sources, such as surveys of high school students
and hospital emergency reports, failed to include PCP as a
separate drug. When the official agencies recognized the
widespread use of PCP, their prevention efforts were viewed by
users as distorted and were discounted. Ethnographers attribute
the eventual decline in PCP use to &quot;the general consensus
among users themselves on the negative features of its long-term
effects rather than the kind of expert opinion that accompanies
legitimate efforts at prevention&quot; (22). </p>

<p> SOCIAL CONTEXT OF DRUG USE </p>

<p> Specificity in Drug Abuse Research </p>

<p> As more questions are asked about alcohol and other drug use,
it becomes clear that drug use is not one phenomenon, but many.
There is no generic pattern of drug use; rather, there is use of
specific drugs in specific situations. </p>

<p> Quantitative researchers frequently use ethnic categories to
increase study specificity. While studies on different ethnic
groups are useful, often the definitions of ethnicity vary and
the concept is employed uncritically. Moreover, most of the
quantitative researchers using the concept of ethnicity
implicitly assume what anthropologists call a &quot;static&quot;
concept of culture, viewing ethnicity as a trait one is born
with, an unchanging characteristic, like hair color or body type.
In contrast, most ethnographers view culture as &quot;a dynamic
process through which individuals and societies learn the sum
total of their society's behaviors and associated belief systems,
including those encompassing drug use practices and beliefs&quot;
(4). </p>

<p> Many recent ethnographic studies focus on socially meaningful
units in which members share social statuses, behaviors, and
attitudes. For example, a recent book on drug use among Hispanics
included ethnographic accounts of Cuban so-called streetside drug
use in Miami, Florida, drug use among male and female gang
members from the East Los Angeles, California, barrios, and drug
use and dealing among low-income Puerto Ricans in New York City,
New York, and Chicago, Illinois. (28). </p>

<p> Inclusiveness in Drug Abuse Research </p>

<p> One drawback of studying increasingly specific drug-using
communities is losing sight of the larger whole. Ethnographic
drug studies at times fail to link the customs of the specific
study communities to customs in other communities or to place the
customs in a larger framework. A way that both highlights and
critiques the contribution of ethnography in the field of drug
research is to focus on the social relationships around drug use,
specifically, on the pattern of use in relation to
self-identification with a social group. In the ethnographic
literature, four basic patterns appear: </p>

<p> o Individuals who use drugs with others who share an
identification with a lifestyle or subculture in which drug use
is the central component. </p>

<p> o Individuals who use drugs with others who share an
identification with a lifestyle or subculture in which drug use
is customary and openly accepted, but not the central component. </p>

<p> o Individuals who use drugs with friends and acquaintances,
but there is no self-identification with a drug-using lifestyle
or subculture. </p>

<p> o Individuals who use drugs by themselves while maintaining
self-identification with a group that stigmatizes drug use (see
table 7-1). </p>

<p> Drug Use Within a Drug Subculture </p>

<p> Numerous studies have documented that, for pragmatic and
social reasons, individuals whose lives have become oriented to a
drug often associate with others who use the drug in a similar
fashion. Over time a subculture develops with specialized
knowledge, norms, and expectations. Individuals think of
themselves as belonging to the subculture, and others define them
as such. &quot;Where subcultures exist, social-psychological
barriers separate participants from onlookers&quot; (13). It has
often been noted, for example, that for many heroin users, use of
the drug overrode background characteristics, such as race,
class, and national origin, to become the defining
characteristic. As one heroin user related: </p>

<p> I always refer to myself as a junkie, even when I'm not
hooked on anything. And when you're introduced to somebody for
the first time the first thing you find out is whether he's a
junkie or not. It's like belonging to some fantastic lodge, you
know, but the initiation ceremony is a lot rougher (57). </p>

<p> However, even within a drug-using subculture variations
exist, especially with regard to frequency and amount of use.
This difference was emphasized by a 38-year-old regular heroin
user from New York City: </p>

<p> .?.?. all heroin addicts are not heroin abusers, okay? And
you get the abuser, he's a dog, right? He's the one who sits in
the drug house and shoots all day long. That's an abuser. I'm a
visitor, you never catch me in the drug house. Not me, no (41). </p>

<p> A similar distinction was made by a female crack user, who,
although her life revolved around crack, was still attractive,
healthy, in a relationship, and the social center of a network of
users. In contrast, for her: </p>

<p> The crack addict is the person who's lost all sense of what's
going on. They are like zombies. They are out there standing in
the pouring rain. If it's cold and snowing, they'll be walking up
and down out there .?.?.?. They are .?.?. to the point of
desperation where they will take off [rob] people they know. They
will set you up. It comes to the point where they will set up
family, friends, anybody--the point where they don't care anymore
(61). </p>

<p> One ethnographer noted that these types of individuals were
attempting &quot;to become `visitors' in social networks of other
users, to establish a degree of contact and membership while
remaining somewhat detached from the network. Their attempts to
remain partially marginal to both street and straight society are
a central part of their strategies for controlling their use and
their own lives&quot; (41). </p>

<p> Drug Use as Part of a Lifestyle or Identity </p>

<p> Drug use often occurs within a lifestyle or subculture
inwhich drug use is common and accepted, but is not the defining
characteristic. The subculture may be professionally oriented.
For example, some of the earliest drug research was done among
jazz musicians (2,62). Anabolic steroid use was common among
professional and amateur athletes in certain sports (29). During
its peak, cocaine use was rampant among entertainers. </p>

<p> In one study, a waitress at a rock-and-roll bar called
cocaine use an &quot;occupational hazard.&quot; She and other
restaurant workers in the study described how groups of workers
would pool funds to purchase small amounts of cocaine for use
while working: &quot;For them. ?.?. hard work, constant activity,
and long, late hours seemed instrumental to their cocaine
use&quot; (59). </p>

<p> Recent research has documented that at times the nuclear or
extended family may act as the subcultural unit in which illicit
drug use is common and accepted. </p>

<p> We was with my mother over her girlfriend's house when Aunt
Jeannie came by and she had some coke. She cooked it up and told
Ma and Ruth to try it. After that things started goin' crazier. I
had to take care of my oldest sister's two sons, my son, and my
younger brother. I had to do everything. Most of the time we
didn't have nothin' to eat. We stayed hungry all the time. When I
washed clothes I'd find vials in her [mother's] pockets.. ?.?. I
`member comin' home one day and she'd been smokin' for awhile
then, but the house was full of people smokin' all over the
place. I went to go to my bedroom and close the door and it was
full too. I said to her, `what's happenin'? I just turned round
and left. I was tired, the house was dirty with vials on the
floor and the tables and I'd just had my son.. ?.?. I just wanted
to get away.. ?.?. At first I had smoked some crack to kill my
appetite, to keep me from bein' hungry. ?.?. I just felt like I
couldn't take it no more so I took my son to my sister and left </p>

<p> .?.?. I went on a binge and smoked for three months. Nobody
knew where I was, but I was out smoking crack and gettin' money
anyway I could get it (18). </p>

<p> Drug Use With Partners and Peers </p>

<p> Drug use can also occur when there is no subcultural support
or membership in a group that approves of drug use. In some
cases, an orientation toward, or acceptance of, drug use may have
been acquired earlier in life when the individual was part of a
drug-accepting subculture: former hippies, student drug users, or
participants in street life. Such individuals may continue their
drug use long after ending their other associations with the
subcultures. </p>

<p> Recently reported by ethnographers is the recreational use of
MDMA (Ecstasy) by some middle-class individuals. </p>

<p> Some professionals, particularly those whose ideas about
drugs were formulated during the 1960s, quietly view psychoactive
substances as one of many ways to relax, to relate, to &quot;kick
back.&quot; It is within this context, coupled with the need to
relax fast and relate quickly, that Ecstasy is used (50). </p>

<p> Drug Use in Social Isolation </p>

<p> Last, some individuals use illicit drugs primarily by
themselves. Often they identify themselves with a professional
subculture or social group that is opposed to drug use. One
well-documented pattern is that of physicians, nurses, and other
health workers who illicitly use psychoactive pharmaceutical
drugs, especially narcotics (63,64). </p>

<p> Other patterns of use in social isolation are known but
poorly documented in the ethnographic literature. Unsupervised
use of pharmaceutical drugs is fairly common and often the line
between licitly obtained and illicitly obtained drugs can be
blurred. Emergency room and family physicians, for example,
encounter suspected middle-class prescription drug abusers. One
middle-class housewife interviewed as part of a study of
emergency room drug episodes began her use of prescription pain
killers because of a back problem, and then continued chronic
(and essentially unsupervised) use of the drug for years by
obtaining prescriptions from multiple physicians (49). </p>

<p> Typology as a Whole </p>

<p> The ethnographic method of describing how and, to some
extent, why people use drugs differs from the purely quantitative
method that analyzes the association of drug use with the social
and demographic characteristics of the users. </p>

<p> To date, most of the ethnographic research has concentrated
on drug-focused subcultures or on crime-related subcultures.
There are few studies on other populations, and many of these are
now dated. For example, there have been no significant
ethnographic studies of student drug use in almost two decades.
The drug problem has been defined in the public mind and among
some funding sources as a problem of poor minority communities.
Some ethnographers acknowledge that, to some extent, their own
attitudes have contributed to the skewing of the drug research as
well. Ethnographic field work with drug-focused and criminal
subcultures is considered by some to be more adventurous and
professionally rewarding. Also, in its own way, it may be easier
than field work in the general population, since study
participants can be readily delineated from onlookers and
subjects can be relatively easily located on the street or
through their relationship with treatment and law enforcement
agencies. </p>

<p> One consequence of the absence of information concerning drug
use within the general population is that, like a self-
fulfilling prophecy, attention continues to be paid almost
exclusively to minority drug use. Drug use and drug users are
defined as the &quot;other,&quot; different from the rest of
society. Ethnographers have paid relatively little attention to
the relationship between culturally approved drug use (e.g.,
caffeine, nicotine, alcohol, psychoactive prescription drugs) and
illicit drug use. </p>

<p> Another consequence is that there are few data available on
which to base prevention programs for individuals who are
unlikely to become members of a drug or criminal subculture.
Virtually nothing is known about experimenters, casual users,
controlled users, or chronic users not associated with a drug
subculture. </p>

<p> POVERTY, RACISM, AND CYCLE OF ABUSE </p>

<p> The preceding section outlined a variety of drug using
contexts in the United States and documented the presence of drug
use and abuse among different social, racial, and ethnic classes.
Equally important, however, is the realization that the
consequences of drug abuse are especially devastating in
chronically poor, often minority, communities. While poverty as
an individual risk factor for substance abuse is described in
chapter 6, this section considers ethnographic observations on
the links between the poverty of the inner-city communities and
substance abuse. </p>

<p> The Social Context of Poverty </p>

<p> Drug ethnographers have noted that urban poverty means more
than lacking money. Often it means living in substandard housing
in communities that lack basic municipal services, and for young
people it usually means attending overcrowded, underfunded,
demoralized schools. Researchers regard illicit drug use,
especially the use of heroin, cocaine, and crack, as both a
result of oppressive social conditions and a cause of the
worsening of these conditions. </p>

<p> To cope with difficult social circumstances, ethnographers
have documented the effective utilization of extended family
networks and kin relationships. However, even with these
safeguards, it is not uncommon for children to encounter
alcoholism, other drug use, depression, physical abuse and
neglect, sexual abuse, and other traumatic experiences. </p>

<p> Lack of Opportunity </p>

<p> In ethnographic life histories of men and women who become
deeply involved with illicit drugs, the characteristic of
inner-city life most often mentioned is the lack of opportunity
for meaningful work. For example, an ethnographer studying heroin
addicts in the early 1970s noted: </p>

<p> Often in interviews with addicts I have thought that this
antiwork attitude was a sour-grapes defense because so few have
had meaningful work experiences and many do not consider
good-paying or creative jobs work, but I think that these
attitudes are more than psychological mechanisms. They are, I
believe, deeper in the fabric of our society and arise out of
poverty and the reality of poor, uneducated persons who can only
expect the most dull, stultifying, and meaningless work. Most, I
would expect, held these attitudes before their addiction and
when they became addicted simply added another good reason not to
pursue something that offered so little (56). </p>

<p> More recently, ethnographers studying the crack subculture,
have related changes in drug use patterns to structural changes
in the world economy. For many inner-city residents the difficult
economic situation of the 1950s and 1960s became impossible in
the 1970s and 1980s, as many of the secure semiskilled and
unskilled jobs shifted overseas. New York City, for example, lost
a half million manufacturing jobs and 100,000 jobs in wholesale
and retail trade between 1967 and 1987 (36). For individuals
without post secondary degrees, jobs that could support a family
became scarce. </p>

<p> Because of the structural shifts, basic expectations around
work have changed dramatically: </p>

<p> The option of a steady, legal job appears so distant for
inner-city high-school dropouts (and even graduates), that they
cease job searches after a few attempts or experiences in
low-wage jobs. Adult household members can rarely provide
concrete assistance in finding jobs or help in accessing networks
of employers (19). </p>

<p> Racism </p>

<p> Clearly a person need not be a member of a racial or ethnic
minority group to use drugs. Much of the early ethnographic
research was done on white heroin-using individuals (20,21,48) or
with mixed ethnic and racial backgrounds samples (47, 20,56).
Nonetheless, many ethnographers introduce race as an explanatory
element. It is not used in the genetic or biological sense but
rather that racial discrimination has shaped the social context
and opportunity structure for many people of color. Ethnographers
cite the indirect racism of some politicians who have been
unresponsive to the worsening social conditions of schools,
housing, and municipal services in many minority communities.
Also reported is the active racism encountered by many minority
people in daily life (9,8). </p>

<p> Ethnographers describe inner-city minority residents as
having a pervasive sense of not fitting into white mainstream
society. Within most poor inner-city communities, whites are
rarely encountered except as representatives of conventional
institutions such as police, teachers, and social workers. </p>

<p> Development of an Oppositional Culture </p>

<p> While oppressive social conditions, limited economic
opportunities, and racism are identified by ethnographers as
contributing to the high prevalence of drug abuse in the inner
city, in and of themselves they offer little insight into the
specific attitudes and behaviors of those involved in illicit
drug use. For this, ethnographers have often relied on the notion
of an oppositional culture, one of resistance or refusal. </p>

<p> Some ethnographers argue that amidst oppression and
exclusion, minorities, such as blacks, Hispanics, and American
Indians, develop &quot;a collective identity or sense of
peoplehood in opposition to the social identity of white
Americans.&quot; Developed in tandem with this oppositional
social identity is a cultural frame of reference that defines
&quot;certain forms of behavior and certain activities or events,
symbols, and meanings&quot; as not appropriate because they are
characteristic of white Americans while &quot;other forms of
behaviors and other events, symbols, and meanings [are defined]
as more appropriate because they are not a part of white
Americans way of life. To behave in the manner defined as falling
within a white cultural frame of reference is to `act white' and
is negatively sanctioned&quot; (26). </p>

<p> Many ethnographers studying inner-city communities argue that
illicit drug use is embedded in an oppositional culture, formed
in response to oppressive social conditions and lack of
opportunity. Ethnographer Terry Williams explains: </p>

<p> .?.?.?to some extent, it is possible to see the violence,
crime, and substance abuse that plague the inner city as
manifestations of resistance to a society perceived as white,
racist, and economically exclusive. This could be called a
culture of refusal. The young people in the crackhouses refuse to
be part of the system, refuse to obey their parents, reject
school or any adult-controlled education or training, spurn
prevailing social values and most authority. In the crackhouses,
teenagers and adults refuse to obey the law, refuse to stay
sober, refuse to engage in safe sexual practices--even though
this refusal leads them to behaviors that are manifestly harmful
both physiologically and psychologically (61). </p>

<p> Cycle of Abuse </p>

<p> Attraction of the Drug </p>

<p> Ethnographers have emphasized three factors to help explain
the use of illicit drugs, especially heroin and crack by poor,
inner-city, and minority populations. </p>

<p> First, ethnographers report that as the use of a drug begins
to spread through a community, its use is seen as a status symbol
within the street hierarchy. Many ethnographers attributed the
quick expansion of cocaine smoking that occurred in the middle
1980s to cocaine's reputation as a high-status drug, especially
when smoked or free based (23). </p>

<p> Second, initiation into drug use almost always occurred
through an established friendship or kin relationship. Virtually
every ethnographic study of drug use quotes users as saying: I
was at a party (or with a friend) and someone offered me some
heroin (cocaine, crack), so I tried it. </p>

<p> The third theme is simply that many people, when they try
heroin or crack cocaine, like it. For some individuals, at least
in the beginning, their drug experiences are more highly valued
than anything else in their lives (6,61). </p>

<p> Several ethnographers have suggested that once crack became
available at relatively low cost in the late 1980s, the sharp
rise in its use was due primarily to the intensity of the drug
experience, comparable in somatic effect to arterial injection.
The drug's effects attracted intravenous drug users with
collapsed veins or with concerns about HIV transmission, as well
as many nonintravenous drug users (23,40,43). </p>

<p> Slide Into Abuse </p>

<p> In explaining the slide of inner-city residents into drug
abuse, addiction, and dependency, ethnographers have highlighted
two complementary themes. One theme explains the function drug
dependency serves in simplifying and giving meaning to a drug
user's life. Stated succinctly: &quot;The euphoria of heroin and
the excitement of hustling serve many addicts in the same way
that jobs, sex, and consumption serve nonaddicts&quot; (56). </p>

<p> A similar conclusion was drawn by another ethnographer
studying crack use patterns: </p>

<p> Substance abuse in general, and crack in particular, offer
the equivalent of a millenarian metamorphosis. Instantaneously
users are transformed from being unemployed, depressed high
school drop-outs, despised by the world--and secretly convinced
that their failure is due to their own inherent stupidity,
&quot;racial laziness&quot; and disorganization-- into being a
mass of heart palpitating pleasure, followed only minutes later
by a jaw-gnashing crash and wide awake alertness that provides
their life with concrete purpose: get more crack--fast! (8). </p>

<p> The complementary perspective emphasizes the lack of a viable
lifestyle alternative to drug use. One researcher contends that
due to the unequal distribution of viable nonaddict social roles
in society, some groups will have more difficulty in recovery
than others: </p>

<p> For example, a white, middle-class, high-school-educated,
male addict will have more personal and social resources to draw
from when he decides to give up drugs than will a Chicano addict
living in a barrio. In fact, a relatively uneducated Chicano
addict may opt to retain the junkie- dealer role and identity
because it provides him with greater status and financial rewards
than any other social role available to him (7). </p>

<p> End of the Cycle </p>

<p> Despite little improvement in the social conditions of many
inner cities, recent journalistic accounts, ethnographic studies,
and reports from surveillance systems indicate that the
prevalence of crack use may be decreasing. Ethnographers report
that for many individuals, the initial appeal of crack use has
faded. &quot;Youths under 16 have made a new pastime of
ridiculing or beating up crackheads who they say disgrace
neighborhoods or are nuisances or thieves. Five years ago,
youngsters their age had initiated crack use after first becoming
distributors, as youngsters had previously been drawn into heroin
use&quot; (34). </p>

<p> Ethnographers present several possible explanations for this
downturn. Epidemiologically, a parallel could be drawn to the
decrease seen in bacteria-based epidemics, where all individuals
most likely to be infected have been. Economically, it could be
argued that all possible wealth to be extracted from the inner
city has been. There are simply fewer resources for drug
traffickers, smugglers, and importers. </p>

<p> A complementary explanation is based on concepts put forward
25 years ago (3). It was argued that the social consequences
resulting from a drug's use could be related to the historical
stage of the drug's introduction in society. Most importantly,
over time, a subculture of drug users develops &quot;.?.?.
material on how to obtain and ingest the drug, definitions of the
typical effects, the typical course of the experience, and the
permanence of the effects.. ?.?.&quot; In the case of marijuana
and LSD, this type of shared information may have accounted for
the sharp decrease in reported psychotic reactions even though
the actual number of users was increasing. </p>

<p> This subculture can also define certain drugs or styles of
use as dangerous. For example, ethnographers argue that the
downturn in cocaine use in the late 1980s among middle- and
working-class individuals was due to the belief that
&quot;cocaine can mess you up,&quot; and that this subculture of
users understood this warning as more than just propaganda of
prevention proponents (59). </p>

<p> This same process may be occurring in inner-city communities
among the subculture of crack users. Researchers note that the
crack epidemic has followed a predictable developmental cycle,
previously seen with heroin use, &quot;characterized by periods
of onset, incubation, widespread diffusion, peak, and decline.
The final stage is stabilization at reduced levels of use&quot;
(34). </p>

<p> In exploring the devastation caused by crack epidemics on
inner-city communities, ethnographers have called attentionto the
process through which harm-reducing information develops within a
subculture of users. For example, among middle-class,
cocaine-using individuals, many users gained information from
conventional sources (such as books, magazines, and even
scholarly journals) on the progression of cocaine dependence,
long-term negative consequences, danger signals, and methods to
control or end use. This information then spread through the
wider user community. In contrast, researchers note that the
inner-city subculture of crack users paid little attention to
conventional information sources and were ideologically
predisposed to discount what information did reach them. While
there was no deficit of warnings about the dangers of crack use
in the popular media, ethnographers observed that little effort
was made to translate prevention information into more
appropriate media messages for inner-city communities. </p>

<p> FUTURE RESEARCH </p>

<p> Over the past 30 years, ethnographers have contributed to the
understanding of substance abuse research through their work
among different countries and among different subpopulations in
the United States. However, some additional contributions could
be made in the following areas. </p>

<p> Filling in the Gaps </p>

<p> The earlier sections on the social contexts of drug use
emphasized that drug use in the United States is much more than
heroin and cocaine in the inner cities and LSD in the suburbs.
Research is needed, for example, on middle-class prescription
abusers, substance abusers in rural areas, and hidden populations
(e.g., homeless, runaways, dropouts); since many of these
individuals are either excluded from, or under sampled in, the
national drug abuse surveys. To further complete the matrix of
substance use and abuse in the United States, future research
could address not only those individuals whose use is
unmanageable, but individuals and communities who do not use, or
whose use is moderate and controlled. </p>

<p> Expanding Research Hypotheses </p>

<p> The documentation that cultural and societal norms, to a
large degree, shape individuals' and groups' behaviors toward
drugs use, could be used to formulate new substance abuse
research hypotheses, or expand on existing hypotheses. For
example, understanding the etiology of drug use through studies
of children will help explain initiation of drug use and provide
guidance for prevention efforts. Basic studies that document how
children come to perceive drugs are lacking. &quot;...when it
happens, how it happens. How they conceptualize, for example,
what is a drug and what is a poison, and how that changes when
they begin experimenting with drugs&quot; (44). </p>

<p> Planning Prevention Programs </p>

<p> The insight gained by ethnographic research on a community's
or subculture's view on substance use could be incorporated to a
greater degree in the needs assessment, planning, implementation,
monitoring, and evaluation components of substance abuse
prevention research. The information gained from ethnographic
research could help assure that the prevention information is
culturally appropriate not just in a generic ethnic sense, but in
terms of the specific cognitive framework and concerns of the
target audience. Additionally, the qualitative tools used in
ethnography can assist quantitative researchers in the
interpretation of substance abuse data in varying contexts. </p>

<p> Identifying Emergent Trends </p>

<p> Ethnographic research is also useful in its ability to
relatively quickly document changes in existing drug use patterns
or identify the use of new drugs by a particular subculture. This
timely information could assist in the planning of appropriate
prevention strategies. </p>

<p> SUMMARY </p>

<p> Studies on drug-using subcultures have provided a wealth of
knowledge on why, how, and who uses and abuses drugs.
Experience-based methods of data collection, such as ethnography,
provide the field of substance abuse research with unique
information on drug abuse among individuals, groups, and
communities. Some of the contributions discussed in this chapter
have been theoretical, substantive, and programmatic. </p>

<p> Ethnographic studies have documented drug use patterns
worldwide and in so doing have assisted the understanding of
societal influences on drug use. These insights have, for
example, been utilized in the planning, implementation, and to
some extent, evaluation of drug prevention programs in a variety
of different social contexts. </p>

<p> Researchers have also utilized ethnographies to follow
constantly changing drug use patterns. Moreover, ethnographers
provide valuable data on new drug use such as who is using it,
how the drug is being used, and where the probable epicenters of
the drug use are. </p>

<p> While not without methodological limitations, ethnography and
other experience-based research provide new insights into
substance abuse, as well as complimenting more quantitative
methods of data collection. </p>

<p> BOX 7-1: What is Ethnography? Ethnographic research is
descriptive, subjective, analytical, and comparative. The focus
on context is central to the ethnographic approach, explaining
how a particular behavior, institution, or process is acted on by
larger forces outside of the control of the participants. It
describes how events happen and the social life of the study
individuals. While qualitative interviewing and other more formal
methodologies are usually part of an ethnographic study,
participant observation (i.e., informally interacting with
participants and observing events as they naturally occur) is a
hallmark of ethnographic research. Studies are subjective in that
they focus on the understandings, interpretations, and world
views of the participants. Ethnographic accounts describe not
only what occurs, but also the multiple levels of distinctions by
which individuals and groups make sense of and purposively act in
the world. Ethnographic studies are also analytical. The
observations, interviews, and documents are raw data, as forms
and responses are raw data for survey statisticians. The
ethnographer's analytic responsibility is to condense and order
these data. The analytic work can include the identification of
nonobvious patterns, associations, and themes, as well as the
construction of typologies, process models, or explanatory
frameworks. Finally, ethnographic research is comparative in two
senses of the term. First, it often explores how attitudes and
behaviors are shaped by social forces in two or more contexts.
The contexts are at times spatial (two different cultures or
subcultures), at other times temporal (the same culture or
subculture at different times). Ethnographic studies are also
conducted within a research tradition, so that each new project
draws on the methods and findings of previous research. Over
time, a corpus of work develops regarding a particular cultural
community (e.g., Samoans, inner-city drug users) or a particular
topic (e.g.,witchcraft, ethnic boundaries). As new work appears
it is scrutinized for fit with the existing corpus. Lack of fit
may be attributed to differing circumstances, methodologies,
theoretical concerns, or possibly to inferior research or
analysis._ <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>