
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B19-2</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B026-284</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/MEDICAL/cbd.html 206.61.184.43 19970122061157 text/html 7207
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:11:50 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 18:04:01 GMT
Content-length: 6992
</DOCHDR>
<HTML>
<HEAD><TITLE>type_Document_Title_here</TITLE>
</HEAD>
<BODY BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF" LINK="#0000FF" VLINK="#FF0000" ALINK="#FF00FF">
<PRE>
Date: Sat, 25 May 1996 14:08:40 -0400
From: "ERIC E. SKIDMORE" <<A HREF="mailto:104413.3573@compuserve.com">104413.3573@compuserve.com</A>>
Subject: CBD
To: Carl Olsen <<A HREF="mailto:carlolsen@mail.commonlink.com">carlolsen@mail.commonlink.com</A>>,

            Cannabidiol:  The Wonder Drug of the 21st Century?

The traditional use of Cannabis as an analgesic, anti-asthmatic, 
and anti-rheumatic drug is well established.  This British study 
also suggests that cultivation of Cannabis plants rich in 
Cannabidiol (CBD) and other phenolic substances would be useful 
not only as fiber producing plants but also for medicinal 
purposes in the treatment of certain inflammatory disorders.  CBD 
was found to be more effective than aspirin as an anti-
inflammatory agent.  "Analgesic and Anti-inflammatory Activity of 
Constituents of Cannabis Sativa L.," E.A. Formukong, A.T. Evans, 
and F.J. Evans, Inflammation, Vol. 4, 1988, pp. 361-371. 

Cannabidiol, CBD, a non-psychoactive cannabinoid of Marijuana, 
was given to 5 patients with dystonia disorders.  Improvement 
occurred in all 5 patients by 20-50%.  "Open Label Evaluation of 
Cannabidiol in Dystonic Movement Disorders," Consroe, et al, 
International Journal of Neuroscience, 1986, Vol. 30, pp.277-282.  

Three patients with Huntington's Disease who had been previously 
unresponsive to therapy with neuroleptics, were given 
Cannabidiol, (CBD), a non-psychoactive cannabinoid of Marijuana.  
After the second week improvement in choreic movement occurred by 
20-40%.  Except for transient, mild hypo-tension no side effects 
were recorded."Effects of Cannabidiol in Huntington's Disease," 
Sandyk, Consroe, Stern, and Snider, Neurology, 36   (Suppl. 1) 
April, 1986, p.342.

In this Brazilian study of 8 Epileptic patients receiving 
Cannabidiol, (CBD), 4 were free of convulsions, 3 had partial 
improvement, and 1 was unchanged.  No serious side effects were 
found.  This is quite important, as complex partial seizures with 
secondary generalization are difficult to treat with currently 
used drugs.  The potential use of CBD as an anti-epileptic drug 
and its possible potentiating effect on other drugs are 
discussed.  "Chronic Administration of Cannabidiol to Healthy 
Volunteers and Epileptic Patients," Pharmacology, 21: 1980, J.M. 
Cunha, et al,  pp.175-185.

Subjects receiving 160 mg. Cannabidiol reported having slept 
significantly more than those receiving placebo; seven out of 
eight epileptics receiving Cannabidiol had improvement of their 
disease state.  (Brazil) "Hypnotic and Antiepileptic Effects of 
Cannabidiol," Carlini, E.A., and Cunha, J.A., Journal of Clinical 
Pharmacology 1981: 21: pp. 417S-427S.

Three patients with TS who experienced incomplete responses to 
conventional anti-TS drugs but noted a significant amelioration 
of symptoms when smoking marijuana.  The effects of marijuana on 
TS may be related to its anxiety-reducing properties, although a 
more specific antidyskinetic effect cannot be excluded.  
Eliminating the psychoactive properties of marijuana while 
retaining the antidyskinetic effects (Cannabidiol) could prove 
beneficial.  "Marijuana and Tourette's Syndrome," (letter), 
Sandyk and Awerbuch,  Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 
Vol. 8, No. 6, Dec. 1988, pp.444-5.

"Anti-dyskinetic effects of cannabidiol," Conti, L.H., 
Johannesen, J., Musty, R.E., Consroe, P., Proceedings of the 
International Congress on Marijuana. 1987: 21. Melbourne, 
Australia.

This Brazilian study Investigates the possible anti-psychotic 
activity of CBD by studying the effect of this cannabinoid on 
animal models used in research with potential anti-psychotic 
properties. CBD seems to compare favorably with haloperidol as an 
anti-psychotic.  "Effects of CBD in animal models predictive of 
anti-psychotic activity," Zuardi, A.W., Rodrigues, J.A., Cunha, 
J.M., Psychopharmacology 1991: 104: pp. 260-264.

CBD blocks some of the effects of THC in mice but potentiates 
some other effects.  (Brazil)"Pharmacological Interaction between 
Cannabidiol and Tetrahydrocannabinol," Karniol, I.G., Carlini, 
E.A., Psychopharmacologia  1973: 33: pp. 53-70.

CBD was effective in blocking most of the effects of THC, 
increased pulse rate, disturbed time tasks, and psychological 
reactions.  CBD also decreased the anxiety components of THC.  
(Brazil) "Cannabidiol Interferes with the effects of 
Tetrahydrocannabinol in Man," Karniol, I.G., Shirakawa, I., 
Kasinski, N., Pfeferman, A., Carlini, E.A., European Journal of 
Pharmacology 1974: 28: pp. 172-177.

One of the first studies that clearly shows that hemp grown for 
fiber is very low in THC, the psychoactive component that gets 
people high.  The drug-type marijuana is very high in THC.  
Cannabidiol (CBD) which is not psychoactive, is very high in 
fiber-type hemp but low in drug-type marijuana.  This is 
important as CBD is known to block the effects of THC.  This 
makes the hemp doubly useless for drug effects.  "Chemistry of 
Marijuana," Coy Waller.  Pharmacological Reviews, Vol. 23, No. 4, 
1971.

Wild 'marijuana' growing in Riley County Kansas was found to be 
very low in THC content.  (Below the European threshold for fiber 
hemp.)  The leaves and flowering tops averaged from 0.01-0.49% 
THC with a mean of 0.14% THC.  CBD which blocks the psychoactive 
effects of THC was as high as 1.7%.  "Seasonal Fluctuations in 
Cannabinoid Content of Kansas Marijuana," R.P. Latta, and B.J. 
Eaton.  Economic Botany, 29: April-June, 1975, pp. 153-163.

Researchers for the Canadian Department of Agriculture tested 
over 350 varieties of Cannabis in Ottawa, Ontario.  They 
determined that there were two basic types of Cannabis based on 
genetic characteristics:  a drug-type which originates in hot 
climates such as India and is high in THC but low in CBD and a 
fiber-type which originates in temperate climates and is low in 
THC but high in CBD and is used industrially for fiber and food.  
This awareness of the separateness of the two phenotypes has vast 
agronomic potential.  It means fiber hemp can be grown without 
the drug effect of 'marijuana.'  "The Evolution of Cannabinoid 
Phenotypes in Cannabis," Ernest Small, H.D. Beckstead, and Allan 
Chan, Economic Botany, 29: 1975, pp. 219-232.

Ten mg. of THC is required to get a psychoactive effect from 
'marijuana.'  It would require 50-100 cigarettes of the French 
hemp cultivated for paper to get a psychoactive high. "Paper-
making type of hemp (Cannabis sativa L.) cultivated in France:  
Constituents compared to those of marijuana,"  Fournier and 
Paris, (French) Plantes Medicinales et Phytotherapie, Vol. 13(2) 
April, 1979, pp. 116-121.


</PRE>
</BODY>
</HTML>
</DOC>