
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B38-44</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B013-347</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/alcohol/HOBSON.HTM 206.61.184.43 19970122042310 text/html 15753
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:23:03 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:36:25 GMT
Content-length: 15535
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Richmond P. Hobson argues for prohibition</title>
<meta name="AUTHOR" content="K. Austin Kerr">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_alcohol_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="alcohol.htm">Alcohol</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="45071" -->

<hr>

<h2>Richmond P. Hobson Argues for Prohibition</h2>

<p>Richmond P. Hobson, a Representative from Alabama, voiced his
support for a prohibition amendment on the floor of the House of
Representatives on December 22, 1914. The proposed amendment
received a majority of votes, but not the necessary two-thirds
majority to proceed with the process. The following is scanned
from K. Austin Kerr, <i>The Politics of Moral Behavior:
Prohibition and Drug Abuse</i> (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley,
1973): 97-102 [long out of print]. </p>

<p>Hobson: </p>

<p>What is the object of this resolution? It is to destroy the
agency that debauches the youth of the land and thereby
perpetuates its hold upon the Nation. How does the resolution
propose to destroy this agent? In the simplest manner.... It does
not coerce any drinker. It simply says that barter and sale,
matters that have been a public function from the semicivilized
days of society, shall not continue the debauching of the youth.
Now, the Liquor Trust are wise enough to know that they can not
perpetuate their sway by depending on debauching grown people, so
they go to an organic method of teaching the young to drink. Now
we apply exactly the same method to destroy them. We do not try
to force old drinkers to stop drinking, but we do effectively put
an end to the systematic, organized debauching of our youth
through thousands and tens of thousands of agencies throughout
the land. Men here may try to escape the simplicity of this
problem. They can not. Some are trying to defend alcohol by
saying that its abuse only is bad and that its temperate use is
all right. Science absolutely denies it, and proclaims that
drunkenness does not produce one-tenth part of the harm to
society that the widespread, temperate, moderate drinking does.
Some say it is adulteration that harms. Some are trying to say
that it is only distilled liquors that do harm. Science comes in
now and says that all alcohol does harm; that the malt and
fermented liquors produce vastly more harm than distilled
liquors, and that it is the general public use of such drinks
that has entailed the gradual decline and degeneracy of the
nations of the past. </p>

<p>[The wets] have no foundation in scientific truth to stand
upon, and so they resort to all kinds of devious methods. </p>

<p>Their favorite contention is that we can not reach the evil
because of our institutions. This assumes that here is something
very harmful and injurious to the public health and morals, that
imperils our very institutions themselves and the perpetuity of
the Nation, but the Nation has not within itself, because of its
peculiar organization, the power to bring about the public good
and end a great public wrong. They invoke the principle of State
rights. As a matter of fact, we are fighting more consistently
for State rights than they ever dreamed of. We know the States
have the right to settle this question, and furthermore our
confidence in three-quarters of all the States to act wisely does
not lead us to fear that if we submit the proposition to them
they might establish an imperialistic empire. We believe that
three-quarters of all the States have the wisdom as well as the
right to settle the national prohibition question for this
country. </p>

<p>Neither can they take refuge about any assumed question of
individual liberty. We do not say that a man shall not drink. We
ask for no sumptuary action. We do not say that a man shall not
have or make liquor in his own home for his own use. Nothing of
that sort is involved in this resolution. We only touch the sale.
A man may feel he has a right to drink, but he certainly has no
inherent right to sell liquor. A man's liberties are absolutely
secure in this resolution. The liberties and sanctity of the home
are protected. The liberties of the community are secure, the
liberties of the county are secure, and the liberties of the
State are secure. </p>

<p>Let no one imagine that a State to-day has the real power and
right to be wet of its own volition. Under the taxing power of
the Federal Government by act of Congress, Congress could make
every State in the country dry. They need not think it is an
inherent right for a State to be wet; it is not; but there is an
inherent right in every State and every county and every township
to be dry, and these rights are now trampled upon, and this
monster prides himself in trampling upon them. </p>

<p>Why, here to-day Member after Member has proclaimed that
prohibition does not prohibit, and I have heard them actually
tell us that prohibition could not prohibit. They tell us that
this interstate liquor power is greater than the National
Government.... </p>

<p>I say now, as I said before, I will meet this foe on a hundred
battlefields. If the Sixty-third Congress does not grant this
plain right of the people for this referendum to change their
organic law, to meet this mighty evil, the Sixty-fourth Congress
will be likewise invoked. I do not say that we are going to get a
two-thirds majority here tonight ... because we have not yet had
a chance to appeal to Caesar: but I do say that the day is coming
when we shall have that referendum sent to the States, nor is
that day as far distant as some may imagine. Unless this question
has been made a State matter, as we are asking now for it to be
so made by being removed from national politics, and referred to
the States-if this is not done by the intervening Congresses, I
here announce to you the determination of the great moral, the
great spiritual, the great temperance and prohibition forces of
this whole Nation to make this question the paramount issue in
1916, not only to gain a two-thirds majority in the Houses of
Congress, but to have an administration that neither in the open
nor under cover will fight this reform, so that in the spring of
1917 with an extraordinary session of the Sixty-fifth Congress we
will have a command from the * masters of men and of Congress to
grant this right to the people. My appeal is to each one of you
now, be a man when the vote is taken and do your duty.
[Applause.] </p>

<p><i>A Habit-Forming Drug</i> </p>

<p>Alcohol has the property of chloroform and ether of
penetrating actually into the nerve fibers themselves, putting
the tissues under an anesthetic which prevents pain at first, but
when the anesthetic effect is over discomfort follows throughout
the tissues of the whole body, particularly the nervous system,
which causes a craving for relief by recourse to the very
substance that produced the disturbance. This craving grows
directly with the amount and regularity of the drinking. </p>

<p><i>Undermines the Will Power</i> </p>

<p>The poisoning attack of alcohol is specially severe in the
cortex cerebrum-the top part of the brain-where resides the
center of inhibition, or of will power, causing partial
paralysis, which liberates lower activities otherwise held in
control, causing a man to be more of a brute, but to imagine that
he has been stimulated, when he is really partially paralyzed.
This center of inhibition is the seat of the will power, which of
necessity declines a little in strength every time partial
paralysis takes place. </p>

<p><i>Little Less of a Man After Each Drink</i> </p>

<p>Thus a man is little less of a man after each drink he takes.
In this way continued drinking causes a progressive weakening of
the will and a progressive growing of the craving, so that after
a time, if persisted in, there must come a point where the will
power can not control the craving and the victim is in the grip
of the habit. </p>

<p><i>Slaves in Shackles</i> </p>

<p>When the drinking begins young the power of the habit becomes
overwhelming, and the victim might as well have shackles. It is
estimated that there are 5,000,000 heavy drinkers and drunkards
in America, and these men might as well have a ball and chain on
their ankles, for they are more abject slaves than those black
men who were driven by slave drivers. </p>

<p><i>Present-day Slave Owners</i> </p>

<p>These victims are driven imperatively to procure their liquor,
no matter at what cost. A few thousand brewers and distillers,
making up the organizations composing the great Liquor Trust,
have a monopoly of the supply, and they therefore own these
5,000,000 slaves and through them they are able to collect two
and one-half billions of dollars cash from the American people
every year. </p>

<p><i>Liquor Degenerates the Character</i> </p>

<p>The first finding of science that alcohol is a protoplasmic
poison and the second finding that it is an insidious,
habit-forming drug, though of great importance, are as
unimportant when compared with the third finding, that alcohol
degenerates the character of men and tears down their spiritual
nature. Like the other members of the group of oxide derivatives
of hydrocarbons, alcohol is not only a general poison, but it has
a chemical affinity or deadly appetite for certain particular
tissues. Strychnine tears down the spinal cord. Alcohol tears
down the top part of the brain in a man, attacks certain tissues
in an animal, certain cells in a flower. It has been established
that whatever the line of a creature's evolution alcohol will
attack that line. Every type and every species is evolving in
building from generation to generation along some particular
line. Man is evolving in the top part of the brain, the seat of
the will power, the seat of the moral senses, and of the
spiritual nature, the recognition of right and wrong, the
consciousness of God and of duty and of brotherly love and of
self-sacrifice. </p>

<p><i>Reverses the Life Principle of the Universe</i> </p>

<p>All life in the universe is founded upon the principle of
evolution. Alcohol directly reverses that principle. Man has
risen from the savage up through successive steps to the level of
the semisavage, the semicivilized, and the highly civilized. </p>

<p><i>Liquor and the Red Man</i> </p>

<p>Liquor promptly degenerates the red man, throws him back into
savagery. It will promptly put a tribe on the war path. </p>

<p><i>Liquor and the Black Man</i> </p>

<p>Liquor will actually make a brute out of a negro, causing him
to commit unnatural crimes. </p>

<p><i>Liquor and the White Man</i> </p>

<p>The effect is the same on the white man, though the white man
being further evolved it takes longer time to reduce him to the
same level. Starting young, however, it does not take a very long
time to speedily cause a man in the forefront of civilization to
pass through the successive stages and become semicivilized,
semisavage, savage, and, at last, below the brute. </p>

<p><i>The Great Tragedy</i> </p>

<p>The spiritual nature of man gives dignity to his life above
the life of the brute. It is this spiritual nature of man that
makes him in the image of his Maker, so that the Bible referred
to man as being a little lower than the angels. It is a tragedy
to blight the physical life. No measure can be made of blighting
the spiritual life. </p>

<p><i>The Blight Degeneracy</i> </p>

<p>Nature does not tolerate reversing its evolutionary principle,
and proceeds automatically to exterminate any creature, any
animal, any race, any species that degenerates. Nature adopts two
methods of extermination-one to shorten the life, the other to
blight the offspring. </p>

<p><i>The Verdict</i> </p>

<p>Science has thus demonstrated that alcohol is a protoplasmic
poison, poisoning all living things; that alcohol is a
habit-forming drug that shackles millions of our citizens and
maintains slavery in our midst; that it lowers in a fearful way
the standard of efficiency of the Nation, reducing enormously the
national wealth, entailing startling burdens of taxation,
encumbering the public with the care of crime, pauperism, and
insanity; that it corrupts politics and public servants, corrupts
the Government, corrupts the public morals, lowers terrifically
the average standard of character of the citizenship, and
undermines the liberties and institutions of the Nation; that it
undermines and blights the home and the family, checks education,
attacks the young when they are entitled to protection,
undermines the public health, slaughtering, killing, and wounding
our citizens many fold times more than war, pestilence, and
famine combined; that it blights the progeny of the Nation,
flooding the land with a horde of degenerates; that it strikes
deadly blows at the life of the Nation itself and at the very
life of the race, reversing the great evolutionary principles of
nature and the purposes of the Almighty. </p>

<p>There can be but one verdict, and that is this great destroyer
must be destroyed. The time is ripe for fulfillment. The present
generation, the generation to which we belong, must cut this
millstone of degeneracy from the neck of humanity.... </p>

<p><i>The Final Conclusion</i> </p>

<p>To cure this organic disease we must have recourse to the
organic law. The people themselves must act upon this question. A
generation must be prevailed upon to place prohibition in their
own constitutional law, and such a generation could be counted
upon to keep it in the Constitution during its lifetime. The
Liquor Trust of necessity would disintegrate. The youth would
grow up sober. The final, scientific conclusion is that we must
have constitutional prohibition, prohibiting only the sale, the
manufacture for sale, and everything that pertains to the sale,
and invoke the power of both Federal and State Governments for
enforcement. The resolution is drawn to fill these requirements. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_alcohol_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="alcohol.htm">Alcohol</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="45071" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>