
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-16</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA086-000619-B005-201</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/LIBRARY/studies/nc/nc2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122033438 text/html 95497
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 03:34:24 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:54:47 GMT
Content-length: 95279
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="49253" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->

<p><b>The Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug
Abuse</b> </p>

<p><b>I. Control of Marihuana, Alcohol and Tobacco</b> </p>

<h1>History of Marihuana Legislation*</h1>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>

<p>This chapter traces the legislative histories of marihuana,
alcohol, and tobacco. </p>

<p>In the first section, &quot;History of Marihuana
Legislation,&quot; the origins of the intoxicant use of cannabis
in this country during the early 20th century are noted along
with the subsequent state and federal statutes enacted
prohibiting use, distribution, production and sale. </p>

<p>Proscriptions began appearing on the books after about 1914
and continued through 1971, which brings the reader to the point
subsequently covered by the rest of this Appendix. </p>

<p>Early colonial laws regarding alcohol are described in the
beginning of the next section, &quot;History of Alcohol
Prohibition.&quot; From that point in history, the national
movements which spread over the next two centuries, culminating
in the enactment of National Prohibition from 1920 to 1933, are
described. </p>

<p>The various state modes of control which appeared after Repeal
are then briefly enumerated along with a discussion of the
present state controls over production, distribution, and sale of
intoxicating beverages. </p>

<p>The introduction of tobacco cultivation in 1613 in the colony
of Virginia opens the third section, &quot;History of Tobacco
Regulation.&quot; The widespread use of tobacco in the latter
1800's into the first half of the 20th century is traced along
with the increasing pressure from groups fearful of tobacco's
deleterious effects on health. </p>

<p>Federal sumptuary regulations are outlined along, with a
discussion of the impact further federal controls might have on
the tobacco economy. </p>

<hr>

<h2>History of Marihuana Legislation*<br>
</h2>

<p><i>*This section is drawn from the manuscript of The Marihuana
Consensus: A History of American Marihuana Prohibition, in press
1972, by Professors Charles H. Whitebread, 11, and Richard J.
Bonnie of the University of Virginia Law School.<br>
</i></p>

<p>&quot;Marihuana&quot; or Indian hemp, labeled Cannabis Sativa
L. by Linneas in 1753, has been used for centuries in Asia and
Africa for its intoxicant properties. It was cultivated as a
source of fiber in North America in the early 17th century. Yet,
cannabis was not used as an intoxicant in North America until the
late 19th century, and in the United States until the early 20th.
</p>

<p>Cannabis use was prevalent in Mexico by 1898. Widely
cultivated and growing wild, the drug was readily available for
eating, drinking, or smoking, the latter being by far the most
common method of ingestion. Soldiers in Pancho Villa's army are
reputed to have used the drug freely. The path of the
introduction of marihuana smoking for pleasure into the United
States was not via Europe, which transmitted the fiber, oil, and
medicinal uses of hemp, but via Mexico and the West Indies. </p>

<p>The plant and its intoxicant use in the United States in the
first decades of the 20th century encountered a political and
social climate which was not particularly conducive to hearty
growth. Gradually criminal prohibitions appeared on the statute
books of nearly every state where the drug was used. </p>

<p>Well into the thirties, however, marihuana smoking attracted
little attention from the national policy and opinion apparatus
which was deeply ensnared in drug matters of much wider social
impact than the limited, regional use of this new drug. </p>

<p>The &quot;villain&quot; theory of American marihuana
prohibition - attributing the drug's illegal status to the
Federal Bureau of Narcotics and its longtime head, Harry J.
Anslinger - has been particularly popular in recent years. </p>

<p>Although the federal narcotics bureaucracy, with Commissioner
Anslinger at the helm, was to become marihuana's leading
antagonist in the mid-thirties, a restrictive, public policy
toward the drug was well-rooted locally before that time. During
the &quot;local&quot; phase of marihuana prohibition, lasting
roughly from 1914 to 1931, practically every state west of the
Mississippi, except for two, had prohibited use of the drug for
non-medical purposes.<br>
</p>

<p>The real story of marihuana policy in the United States begins
as a series of distinctly local tales.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>STATE PROHIBITION: 1914-1930</b> </p>

<p>Marihuana use was a familiar phenomenon in the border towns of
Texas and New Mexico after 1910. First to note the use of the
drug were El Paso law enforcement officials who quickly secured a
local ordinance in 1914 banning sale and possession of the drug.
El Paso officials and local representatives of the Customs and
Agriculture Departments of the Federal Government agitated for
state and federal legislation to combat the &quot;killer
weed.&quot; </p>

<p>After an official request by the Secretary of Agriculture, the
Secretary of the Treasury issued a decision under the Food and
Drug Act prohibiting importation of cannabis after 1915 for other
than medical purposes. </p>

<p>On the state level in Texas, legislation was slow in coming.
Marihuana use was still a local problem in the 'border towns and
it attracted little statewide interest. The Texas Legislature
included marihuana when it passed a general narcotics statute in
1919, prohibiting transfer of listed narcotics except for medical
purposes (Texas, 1919: 278). In 1923, the statute was tightened
to prohibit possession with intent to sell (Texas, 1923:
156-157). The legislature's failure to prohibit simple possession
or use reflected an objection to interfering with private
conduct. </p>

<p>The degree of public interest in narcotics and marihuana is
well-illustrated by the limited newspaper coverage. In its only
direct reference to the 1923 marihuana legislation, the Austin
Texas Statesman, which had given the legislature extensive
coverage, stated:<br>
</p>

<p><i>The McMillan Senate Bill amended the anti-narcotic law so
as to make unlawful the possession for the purpose of sale of
marihuana or other drugs. Marihuana is a Mexican herb and is said
to be sold on the Texas-Mexican border</i> (Austin Texas
Statesman, 1923). <br>
</p>

<p>Even more surprising is the fact that the El Paso Times did
not mention the McMillan bill before or after its passage. </p>

<p>New Mexico in the same year prohibited sale, cultivation and
importation of cannabis. Mere possession was not expressly
prohibited but anyone found in possession was presumed to have
imported the marihuana illegally (New Mexico, 1923: 58-59). The
Santa Fe New Mexican, hometown newspaper of the bill's sponsors
paid scant attention, noting only that:<br>
</p>

<p><i>The Santa Fe representative, however, had better luck with
his bill to prevent sale of marihuana, cannabis indica, Indian
hemp or hashish as it is variously known. This bill was passed
without any opposition. Marihuana was brought into local
prominence at the penitentiary board's investigation last summer
when a convict testified he could get marihuana cigarettes
anytime he had a dollar. The drug produces intoxication when
chewed or smoked. Marihuana is the name commonly used in the
Southwest and Mexico </i>(Santa Fe New Mexican, 1923).<br>
</p>

<p>In addition to coming in via Mexico, marihuana was being
smuggled in by sailors from Cuba and other points in the Indies
via New Orleans. Dr. Frank Gomila, Commissioner of Public Safety
of New Orleans, began his campaign for federal legislation which
would later bear fruit. He observed that the traffic was quite
organized amounting to thousands of kilograms a year:<br>
</p>

<p><i>... [T]he custom was to keep [marihuana] In warehouses or
storerooms for further distribution. It was sold by the
wholesaler to the retailer who In turn put the 'weed' through a
process known as 'sweating.' The dried leaves and stems were
soaked in sugar water and dried on butcher's brown papers </i>(Gomila
and Lambow, 1938: 29).<br>
</p>

<p>According to Dr. Gomila and the newspapers, the demand in New
Orleans in the mid-twenties was so great that the
&quot;peddlers&quot; were able to become exceptionally prosperous
by dividing the market. One had exclusive jurisdiction over the
blacks unloading the fruit boats, another over the lobby in a
certain hotel, and so forth. It should be noted that marihuana
was also available at the local pharmacy without a prescription
before 1923 in Texas and 1921 in Louisiana. After that marihuana
had to be bought on the street unless the user could successfully
forge a prescription. </p>

<p>Different pictures emerge, of the marihuana user in El Paso
and San Antonio on the one hand and New Orleans and Galveston on
the other. In the border towns, he was a Mexican laborer,
indolent to some, volatile to others. Local authorities were, by
and large, unable to generate any significant public or political
interest, although there were no political objections to making
the Mexican weed illegal. </p>

<p>In the port cities, however, the marihuana user was a
&quot;dope fiend,&quot; the basest element of American society.
He was a narcotics addict, a pimp, or a gambler; she was a
prostitute. In New Orleans, marihuana was simply another narcotic
in a city with a major narcotic problem. It was always open to
sensationalism. </p>

<p>Even before public attention was excited, however, the
prevalence of marihuana use came to the attention of the
President of the Louisiana State Board of Health, Dr. Oscar
Dowling. On August 21, 1920, he advised the Governor of the
increasing availability of marihuana, a &quot;powerful narcotic,
causing exhilaration, intoxication, delirious hallucinations, and
its subsequent action, drowsiness and stupor. . .&quot; (Jones,
1920). </p>

<p>At the same time, Dr. Dowling wrote to the Surgeon General of
the United States, Dr. Hugh Cummings, to advise him of the
increasing traffic in morphine, opium, and marihuana, and to seek
federal cooperation. </p>

<p>An interesting sidelight of this request for assistance from
Washington is that four months later Dr. Dowling was to become
embroiled in a bitter battle with the Federal Government over an
order to close his pet project, the New Orleans morphine clinics
(Dowling, 1920). Ultimately he would lose, and one of the
earliest attempts to deal with narcotics addiction would be
suppressed for a half century (Lindesmith, 1967: 135-161). </p>

<p>Very little, however, was done about the marihuana issue until
the press seized upon it. In the fall of 1926, the New Orleans
Item dispatched an army of reporters among the smoking and
selling population. </p>

<p>A series of articles published by the more widely circulated
Morning Tribune (both the Item and the Tribune were owned by the
same publishing company) exposed the immense profits being made
and commented upon the volatile effects of the drug upon its
&quot;addicts.&quot; It was reported that marihuana: </p>

<p><i>Numbs the sense, creates wild fancies and has a hypnotic
effect upon the user, making his will easily subordinated to that
of others.<br>
</i></p>

<p>What emerged from these articles, however, was not a vision of
addicts on the streets and pushers on the docks but rather
peddlers who lurked on playgrounds seeking to entrap young minds.
&quot;Over two hundred children under fourteen are believed to be
addicted to the marihuana habit,&quot; the paper reported, and
&quot;at least 44 schools were definitely being infected&quot;
(Gomila and Lambow, 1938: 29-31). </p>

<p>Local policy-makers wasted no time. The New Orleans Police
Department immediately launched a round-up. They arrested more
than 150 persons for violation of a law which had lain dormant
for two years (Gomila and Lambow, 1938: 29-31; WCTIT, 1928). </p>

<p>Dr. Dowling soon circulated &quot;a warning to parents,
guardians, and teachers of children against this menace&quot;
(WCTIT, 1928: 1). The Women's Christian Temperance Union jumped
on the bandwagon, focusing its attacks on the &quot;soft
drink&quot; bars which had sprung up all over New Orleans during
Prohibition: </p>

<p><i>The soft drink stand and the corner drug store have taken
the place of the saloon as a social meeting place. Here is where
marihuana and liquors can sometimes be bought </i>(WCTU, 1928:
3). <br>
</p>

<p>Beyond these immediate effects, a more substantial impact of
the local policy reaction in New Orleans was the formation of a
tightly knit coterie of New Orleans law enforcement, public
health, and social welfare officials who would carry their
campaign to Washington, with ultimate success. </p>

<p>The drug and the practice of smoking it spread during the
mid-twenties from the Gulf Coast and border town points-of-entry
in two directions north and west from the border together with
its ethnic identity and north and east from New Orleans with its
identity as a narcotic and enslaver of youth. </p>

<p>Practically every state west of the Mississippi River
prohibited the possession or sale of marihuana during the period
1915 to 1930. Most of them acted by 1930: California (1915), Iowa
(1921), Nevada (1923), Washington (1923), Arkansas (1923),
Nebraska, (1927), and Wyoming (1929). </p>

<p>The Bureau of Immigration records the entry of 590,765
Mexicans during this period, two-thirds of them remaining in
Texas, the others settling in states in the Rocky Mountain area,
most of them as farm laborers (U.S. Bureau of Immigration, 1915
to 1930). </p>

<p>Whether motivated by outright ethnic prejudice or by simple
discriminatory disinterest, the proceedings before state
legislatures resembled those in Texas in 1923. There was little,
if any, public attention and no debate. Pointed references were
made to the drug's Mexican origins and sometimes to the criminal
conduct which inevitably followed when Mexicans ingested the
&quot;killer weed.,&quot; </p>

<p>The Colorado Legislature first prohibited possession,
cultivation and sale of the drug in 1927, the year after the use
of marihuana noticeably increased (Colorado, 1927: 309). At that
time., according to a subsequent newspaper report, the drug was
&quot; used almost exclusively . . . by the Mexican population
employed in the beet fields&quot; (Rocky Mountain News, 1931). </p>

<p>Similarly, in 1929, the Montana Legislature amended its
general narcotic law to marihuana, prohibiting use, sale or
possession without a prescription (Montana, 1929: 5). On seven
different days from June 24 to February 10, the date of the
bill's passage, the Montana Standard succinctly noted the
progress of the bill through the legislature. The legislature's
attitude was characterized in the January 27 issue:<br>
</p>

<p><i>There was fun in the House Health Committee during the week
when the marihuana bill came up for consideration. Marihuana is
Mexican opium, a plant used by Mexicans and cultivated for sale
by Indians. &quot;When some beet field peon takes a few rares of
this stuff,&quot; explained Dr. Fred Fulsher of Mineral County,
&quot;he thinks he has just been elected President of Mexico so
he starts out to execute all his Political enemies. I understand
that over in Butte where the mexicans often go for the winter
they stage imaginary bullfights in the 'Bower of Roses' or put on
tournaments for the favor of 'Spanish Rose' after a couple of
whiffs of marihuana. The Silver Bow and Yellowstone delegations
both deplore these international complications.&quot; Everybody
laughed and the bill was recommended for passage </i>(Montana
Standard, 1929: 3).<br>
</p>

<p>About the same time, Mexican laborers bad begun to appear in
Idaho and the mayor of Boise remarked:<br>
</p>

<p><i>'The Mexican beet field workers have introduced a new
problem-the smoking in cigarettes or pipes of marihuana or grifo.
its use is as demoralizing as the use of narcotics. Smoking grifo
is quite prevalent along the Oregon Short Line Railroad; and
Idaho has no law to cope with the use and spread of this
dangerous drug </i>(WCTU, 1928: 3).<br>
</p>

<p>Idaho passed a law in 1927 (Idaho, 1927: 98). </p>

<p>By 1931, the Texas Legislature finally got around to
prohibiting possession of marihuana. By now alcohol prohibition
had withdrawn any philosophical barrier to making possession
illegal. The San Antonio Light reported that: </p>

<p><i>At last the state legislature has taken a definite step
toward suppression of traffic in a dangerous and
insanity-producing narcotic easily compounded of a weed
(marihuana) indigenous to this section. This newspaper has urged
the passage of prohibitory legislation and is gratified that the
solons at Austin have acted, even if tardily, in the suppression
of traffic in a drug which makes, the addict [read Mexican]
frequently a dangerous or homicidal maniac</i> (San Antonio
Light, 1931).<br>
</p>

<p>In the East, appearance of the practice was not a necessary
prerequisite for prohibition. That Maine (1913), Massachusetts
(1914), Vermont (1915), and Rhode Island (1918) barred the sale
of cannabis without a prescription before 1920 does not indicate
that marihuana smoking had appeared there on any significant
scale. Rather, in the course of anticipating and implementing the
national anti-narcotics policy declared by the Harrison Act in
1914, medical representatives on the drafting committees
recommended the inclusion of &quot;another narcotic&quot; to
which addicts could resort once the other opiates became
difficult to obtain. </p>

<p>The New York Times in 1914 described cannabis as a
&quot;narcotic [having] practically the same effect. as morphine
and cocaine,&quot; (New York Times, 1914: 6) and it noted in an
editorial that:<br>
</p>

<p><i>[T]he inclusion of cannabis indica among the drugs to be
sold only on prescription is only common sense. Devotees of
hashish are now hardly numerous enough here to count, but they
are likely to increase as other narcotics become harder to obtain
</i>(New York Times, 1914: 8).<br>
</p>

<p>By 1923, the New York Times referred to marihuana as the
city's &quot;latest habit-forming drug&quot; when reporting its
exhibition at a Women's Club meeting (New York Times, 1923: 24).
Finally, in 1927, whether responding to an increase in use or to
the substitution admonition, the legislature included marihuana
in its definition of &quot;habit forming drugs&quot; in a
comprehensive narcotics bill (New York, 1927: 1695). </p>

<p>The situation in Chicago paralleled that in New York until
1927. Large Mexican communities developed in Chicago and Gary,
Indiana, during the twenties and marihuana smoking became common
in these areas and among journeymen musicians as well. As in New
York, there was little public concern. The New Orleans pattern
took over around 1927, however, when the attention of local law
enforcement officials was suddenly drawn to the Mexicans and
their &quot;muggles.&quot; One law enforcement official reported
that:<br>
</p>

<p><i>There are about 7,000 Mexicans in Gary, 10,000 in Indiana
Harbor and 8,000 in South Chicago.... The Mexicans depend on the
steel mills, railroads, and construction gangs for employment.
Many are drifters when slack labor conditions prevail....
[T]wenty-five percent of these Mexicans smoke marihuana. In fact,
many of them make their living by raising and peddling the drug </i>(Paul,
1929: 4).<br>
</p>

<p>A situation perceived to be so widespread was naturally
considered likely to infect the rest of the community. As in New
Orleans, reports started to appear that high school students were
smoking the weed (Paul, 1929: 1; Chicago Tribune, June 3, 1929). </p>

<p>Since there was then neither state nor federal legislation
prohibiting sale of marihuana, the local United States attorney
declared war armed with an Internal Revenue statute prohibiting
production and transfer of &quot;a cigarette substitute&quot; on
which tax had not been paid. In June 1929, he raided wholesale
houses &quot;believed to have disposed of large quantities of
marihuana cigarettes, sold to school pupils and other youthful
thrill seekers.&quot; He arrested nine men &quot;most of them
Mexicans&quot; (Chicago Examiner, June 22, 1929). At the same
time, local officials began to use a statute which prohibited
transfer of &quot;any cigarette containing any substance
deleterious to health&quot; (Chicago Examiner, June 19, 1929). </p>

<p>The Chicago Tribune, lobbying heavily for anti-marihuana
legislation then pending before the Illinois Legislature,
reported that day-to-day progress of the enforcement activity
(Chicago Tribune, July and October, 1929). Every stall in the
legislature earned a banner headline such as: </p>

<p>BAN ON HASHISH BLOCKED DESPITE RAVAGES OF DRUG </p>

<p>In an article appearing in June, 1929, the paper noted: </p>

<p><i>The number of addicts is growing alarmingly according to
authorities, because of the ease with which [marihuana] can be
obtained. The habit was introduced a dozen years ago by Mexican
laborers . . . but it has become widespread among American youths
and girls even among school children.</i> </p>

<p>The legislation, however, was killed. </p>

<p>Marihuana prohibition had become widespread. In states where
either Mexicans or the drug had appeared, its use was quickly
suppressed. </p>

<p>Soon after being apprised of its presence, local lawmakers
invoked the criminal law. In New Orleans, Denver, and Chicago the
spectre of a doped school population was the cornerstone of the
prohibitory effort. </p>

<p>And, during alcohol prohibition, paralleled by the local phase
of marihuana prohibition, it was naturally imperative to suppress
a drug which frustrated alcohol users might substitute, for their
customary intoxicant.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><b>THE UNIFORM NARCOTIC DRUG ACT</b> </p>

<p>Following the ad hoc local phase of marihuana legislation in
the United States was the nationalization phase. During this
period marihuana became integrated at both the state and federal
levels with the nation's narcotics policy which had been
manifested forcefully in Congress' adoption of the Harrison
Narcotics Act in 1914. </p>

<p>The Harrison Act, a taxing measure, required registration and
payment of an occupational tax by all persons who imported,
produced, dealt in, sold or gave away opium, cocaine or their
derivatives. The Act required all legitimate handlers of these
narcotics to file returns setting forth in detail their use of
the drugs. </p>

<p>Since the Act also provided that only legitimate users could
register and no one but a registered user could obtain the
specified form, any transfer by an illegitimate user was a
violation of the Act. For those failing to comply with its
registration requirements, the original Harrison Act provided
penalties of not more than $2,000 in fines or more than five
years imprisonment, or both. </p>

<p>Drafted as a tax law rather than an outright criminal statute,
the Act was intended to do indirectly what Congress believed it
could not do directly: regulate possession and sale of the
opiates. However, because the Act essentially was a
revenue-raising measure imposing a tax on transfers of narcotics,
it could not effectively prohibit the possession of drugs. </p>

<p>This indirect regulation of narcotics traffic had a number of
significant consequences. First, since the Act could not penalize
users of addiction directly, there was an immediate need for
complementary residual state legislation in order to deal
effectively with the drug problem. </p>

<p>Second, the enforcement of the Act was as signed to the
Internal Revenue Service in the Treasury Department. The first
enforcement agency for the Harrison Act was the Narcotics
Division of the Prohibition Unit of the Internal Revenue Service
created in 1920 (Schmeckebier, 1929: 143). This division was
incorporated in the Prohibition Bureau which was created in 1927
(Act, 1927:1381). </p>

<p>In 1930, the enforcement of the narcotics laws was severed
from the Bureau of Prohibition and established as the separate
Bureau of Narcotics in the Treasury Department (Act, 1930: 585).
The existence of this separate, agency has done as much as any
single factor to influence the course of drug regulation from
1930 to 1970 (King, 1953: 736). </p>

<p>Although the impact of the Bureau on the passage of the
Uniform Narcotic Drug Act and the Marihuana Tax Act will be
explained in detail in subsequent sections, it is important here
to note that the existence of a separate bureau having
responsibility only for narcotics enforcement and for educating
the public on drug problems inevitably led to a particularly
prosecutorial view of narcotics addiction and the use and abuse
of all drugs. </p>

<p>After the passage of the Harrison Act in 1914, there remained
a considerable lack of uniformity regarding the offenses
prohibited and the penalties imposed by the several states. </p>

<p>In 1919, the American Medical Association asked the
Commissioner of Internal Revenue to call a conference, to
consider better control of traffic in narcotic drugs. The
profession was uncertain of its obligations in the matter because
they were faced with an amalgam of conflicting laws. The A.M.A.
asked that the wholesale, retail, and manufacturing drug
interests be among those attending, along with delegates from the
medical profession in each state. The proposal received no
official or unofficial response either from the Commissioner of
Internal Revenue or the Bureau of Prohibition. </p>

<p>Nevertheless, the American Medical Association, through its
own Council on Health and Public Instruction, did hold a
conference in early 1922 during which a uniform state narcotic
control law was presented. At the November meeting of that
conference, there were present 15 representatives of 10
pharmaceutical organizations and two representatives of the
medical profession. </p>

<p>The draft of a uniform law was approved unanimously by all
present. The American Medical Association set out to codify the
draft and to send it for approval to each of the constituent
organizations (White, August 3, 1932; Woodward, August 6, 1932).
After securing approval, all the associations agreed to pursue
enactment first in New York.<br>
</p>

<p>The general lack of uniformity in anti-narcotics legislation,
the weakness of state enforcement procedures, and the growing
hysteria about dope fiends and criminality converged in several
requests outside the medical community for a uniform state
narcotic law (Anslinger and Tompkins, 1953: 159).<br>
</p>

<p>The drafting of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act must also be
viewed against the background of two larger movements: (1) the
trend toward the creation and dissemination of uniform state laws
by the National Commissioners on Uniform State laws, a group to
which each state sent two representatives appointed by the
governor; and (2) the general concern in the late 1920's and
early 1930's with interstate crime, manifested , for example, by
the creation in 1930 of the nearly autonomous Federal Bureau of
Investigation. Because the concept of states' rights and narrowly
construed federal power was then so powerful, an appeal to the
National Commissioners was the inevitable recourse for those
pressing for uniform anti-narcotic regulation. </p>

<hr>

<p><b>DRAFTING THE UNIFORM ACT<br>
</b></p>

<p>By 1924, the Commissioners had appointed Committee to draft a
uniform narcotic drug act At the 1925 meeting of Commissioners,
the chair man of the Committee reported that he himself had
prepared a first tentative draft based on the New York Act, the
Washington state legislation, the Harrison Act, and a bill then
before the New York Legislature. Presumably this was the on
drafted by the A.M.A. Conference after its 192 meeting. </p>

<p>The chairman noted, however, that Dr. William Woodward, head
of the A.M.A.'s Bureau of Legal Medicine and Legislation, with
whom he had only recently conferred, had made &quot;some very
valuable suggestions.&quot; Because the tentative draft had
already been printed before these suggestions, he requested that
it &quot;not be read but be re-committed to the Committee&quot;
(1925 Handbook: 977-985). This first draft included cannabis in
the list of &quot;habit-forming drugs,&quot; although all such
drugs could be distributed and used for medical purposes (1925
Handbook: 978). </p>

<p>A second tentative draft was presented in 1928 and again the
draft was not discussed at the conference but recommitted for
further study. The second draft was essentially an exact copy of
the 1927 New York Statute. It also included cannabis in the class
of habit-forming drugs (1928 Handbook: 75-78,323-333). </p>

<p>There was a lack of concern on the part of the Commissioners
themselves with the whole narcotics problem between 1924 and
1928. The President of the Conference, introducing Dr. Woodward,
said:<br>
</p>

<p><i>In view of the importance of the act I think it would not
be amiss to listen to the Doctor for a few minutes, that he may
point out to us why it is important. In some of the states we do
not recognize the importance because it has not been called to
our attention </i>(1928 Handbook: 76-77).<br>
</p>

<p>Nor was the Bureau of Prohibition particularly concerned at
this time with the cannabis provision. Lack of official concern
and interest continued to be the Bureau's attitude toward the
second tentative draft (Nutt, June 13,1929). </p>

<p>Since neither the Commissioners nor federal narcotics
officials were particularly concerned about state and local
control of narcotics generally and marihuana in particular, it
seems clear that neither was responsible for the inclusion of
marihuana in the category of &quot;habit-forming drugs. Rather,
it would appear that it was included in the first draft because
that had been drawn from the 1923 Washington statute which had
listed cannabis. </p>

<p>Insofar as the second draft was a copy of the 1927 New York
Act, inclusion of cannabis in this draft is not unusual. Few, if
any, of the persons involved in the drafting were concerned about
marihuana smoking or even aware of its use. </p>

<p>Two third drafts were submitted, the first in 1929 and the
second in 1930. The initial one closely resembled the second
tentative draft, and once again it included cannabis in the
category of &quot;habit-forming drugs.` Again, the growth,
distribution, and possession of cannabis was prohibited except
for medical purposes. </p>

<p>The nascent Congressional interest in marihuana in 1929 and
the Bureau of Prohibition's subsequent resistance to amending,
and thereby endangering, the Harrison and Export and Import Acts,
caused the Bureau to take full notice of this 1929 third draft.
Like its predecessors, however, the initial third draft was
recommitted for further study (1929 Handbook : 43, 332-346). </p>

<p>The second third tentative draft, submitted in 1930, was the
first to remove cannabis from the definition of
&quot;habit-forming drugs&quot; and to include only a
supplemental provision for dealing with the drug (1930 Handbook:
485,97). </p>

<p>When the Conference of Commissioners met to consider the
second third tentative draft, Judge Deering, the Chairman of the
Committee on the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act, recommended its
recommission for further study because the Committee had not yet
had an opportunity to consult the newly created Bureau of
Narcotics. </p>

<p>At the time of this conference, August 14, 1930, no one had
yet been appointed Commissioner of the Bureau, although Harry J.
Anslinger was Acting Commissioner (1930 Handbook: 126-127). The
Senate confirmed Anslinger's appointment as Commissioner on
December 18, 1930. </p>

<p>The Bureau of Narcotics their became actively involved in the
drafting process. Commissioner Anslinger was pressing for
inclusion of the cannabis provision. He stated that he felt the
limited medical use for cannabis was far outweighed by the need
to control potential cannabis addiction (Anslinger, July
28,1930). </p>

<p>Dr. Woodward and the pharmaceutical industry advocated
optional inclusion of marihuana on the one hand, and federal
narcotics representatives urged not only inclusion but
elimination of medical use, on the other. </p>

<p>The fourth tentative draft retained the optional cannabis
provision. At a session before the convening of the full
Conference of Commissioners from September 9-12, 1931,
Commissioner Anslinger and A. L. Tennyson of the Bureau met with
Judge Deering to discuss the Bureau's feelings about the fourth
tentative draft. </p>

<p>At this time Commissioner Anslinger stated that the Bureau
felt strongly that inclusion of cannabis in the state law ought
to be mandatory. Moreover, the Bureau urged that the only
successful way to deal with the marihuana drug traffic, because
of its domestic nature and the easy availability of the weed, was
to prohibit the cultivation of the plant altogether and to find
some substitute for the limited medical use (Tennyson, September
16, 1931). However, the fourth tentative draft presented to the
Conference of Commissioners included the optional marihuana
provision. And, the Conference tentatively approved the fourth
tentative draft and directed the Committee to prepare a final
draft (1931 Handbook: 127-128, 390-402). </p>

<p>The American Medical Association played a key role in the
drafting process prior to 1931. Their efforts had been largely
responsible for consideration of the Uniform Drug Act in the
first place. From the beginning in 1925, Dr. William Woodward,
the Director of the A.M.A.'s Bureau of Legal Medicine and
Legislation, actively assisted in the drafting of the Act and
widely circulated the drafts to interested persons for their
comments. </p>

<p>It appears, however, that Dr. Woodward's personal style and
the preeminent position of the American Medical Association in
the drafting process were resented by the two remaining interest
groups-the Federal Bureau of Narcotics and the retail and
wholesale pharmaceutical associations. The Bureau had been
commenting on drafts only after they had been drawn by the A.M.A.
and did not feel it was playing an active role in the drafting
process. The pharmaceutical industry felt that their interests
were considered only peripherally and that they had been excluded
from the heart of tire, drafting process. </p>

<p>As a result of the dissent, a conference of interested parties
was scheduled before the final draft was to be presented to the
Conference of Commissioners. </p>

<p>Present at this preliminary conference on September 15, 1932,
were representatives of the Drug Committee the Federal Bureau of
Narcotics, the Department of State, the Public Health Service,
the American Medical Association, and delegates from the drug
industry and other medically related industries and
organizations. The final version of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act
was hammered out at this session. The Bureau was central to the
drafting process and Commissioner Anslinger made a major effort
to involve the drug manufacturers and the wholesale and retail
drug trade in it to protect the Act from possible subsequent
political disagreement (Anslinger, August 1, 1932): Finally, the
conference agreed on a draft to be presented to the National
Conference. </p>

<p>The manufacturers of drug products were strongly opposed to
the inclusion of cannabis under any criminal regulatory scheme.
Representatives of the industry opposed a mandatory cannabis
provision. The final conclusion reached by all the parties
present was:<br>
</p>

<p><i>After considerable comment, it was decided to eliminate
Section 12 (Cannabis) and leave it to the Conference of
Commissioners as to whether it should be included under the
general provisions of the Act </i>(Report of Preliminary
Conference, 1932: 23).<br>
</p>

<p>The Bureau was no longer insisting on the mandatory inclusion
of in absolute marihuana prohibition; it did not want to risk the
opposition of the drug industry to the, entire Act. </p>

<p>The fifth tentative draft did, however, include a significant
change in form which would have important consequences in the
decades to come. Although the marihuana provision remained
supplemental to the main body of the Act, any state wishing to
regulate the sale and possession of marihuana was instructed,
simply, to add cannabis to the definition of &quot;narcotic
drugs.&quot; All the, other provisions of the, Act would their
apply to marihuana as well as to the opiates and cocaine. The
Commissioners adopted this form as it had been prepared at the
September 15, 1932, preliminary Conference. </p>

<p>The only recorded opposition to the adoption of the final
draft came from some Commissioners who objected to tying the
Uniform State Law to the terms of the federal Harrison Act. This
last obstacle was over-come by the argument that a number of
states already had passed such legislation so that the states'
rights problem need not stand in the way. The Act was adopted 26
to 3 (1932 Handbook: 107).<br>
</p>

<p><b>ENACTMENT OF THE UNIFORM ACT BY THE STATES</b> </p>

<p>After final acceptance of the Uniform Act, the Bureau set to
work at once to secure state enactment-including an adequate
marihuana provision. A comprehensive campaign was undertaken in
the press, in legislative chambers, and in any other forum to
gain public support for the Uniform Act. </p>

<p>In addition, perceiving the absence of public awareness of
marihuana and needing to encourage positive action to overcome
the drug's optional status, the Bureau also sought to arouse
public interest in marihuana through &quot;an educational
campaign describing the drug, its identifications and its evil
effects&quot; (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1937 : 59). </p>

<p>That there was little general knowledge about cannabis is
illustrated by the fact that as late as 1934, it was necessary to
show marihuana to the New York police so that they could
recognize it growing or in dried, smokable form (New York Times
1934: 6). </p>

<p>The Bureau's district supervisors and local agents were
campaigning actively in the legislatures before which the Act was
pending. A press campaign was conducted across the country to
gain the support of civic groups and other interested parties.
Mr. Anslinger sought editorial support in newspapers (Anslinger,
October 22, 1936) and assisted in the, drafting of articles for
popular magazines (Anslinger, December 23, 1936). To mobilize the
Bar, Bureau officials wrote an article for law journals
explaining the need for the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act (Anslinger,
1932: 52; Tennyson, 1932: 55). </p>

<p>Despite these efforts, it appears that the Uniform Act had a
rough time in state legislatures during its early life. By April
26, 1933, only two states had enacted it in full. As late as
March 1935, only 10 states had enacted the Uniform Law. </p>

<p>A number of significant objections had emerged in the state
legislatures considering the passage of the Uniform Narcotic Drug
Act. First among these was the potential cost to the state of
enforcing the Act. Second, there was concern over the number of
registrants who would have to be licensed due to the belief that
the Uniform Act would require special licensing of doctors,
dentists, and veterinarians. Third, the limit on the amount of
exempt preparations which could be sold caused a great deal of
technical difficulty with the Act. Fourth, many criticized the
right of the court to revoke or suspend the license to practice
medicine or pharmacy. And finally, there seemed to be widespread
misunderstanding of the record-keeping requirements of the Act. </p>

<p>Although these objections were largely administrative, they
nevertheless posed what appeared to be serious stumbling blocks
to the successful passage of the Uniform Law in all the states. </p>

<p>The combination of public apathy and administrative resistance
necessitated a new approach in generating public interest.
Beginning in late 1934, Commissioner Anslinger gradually shifted
the focus of the FBN's educational campaign away from the
liability of federal law enforcement agencies to deal effectively
with the local drug problems to the need to cope with the new
drug menace-marihuana. </p>

<p>The clearest reflection of the, change in Bureau policy is
found in two official statements of Commissioner Anslinger, one
made in 1933 and the other in 1936. </p>

<p>One 1933 statement explains the need for a Uniform Narcotic
Drug Law and emphasizes United States international obligations,
the need for more effective coordination in law enforcement, and
the impact the law will have on the dangers of morphine, cocaine,
and opium addiction (FBN Paper, July 1933). In the later
statement, however, more than half of the time is devoted to a
discussion of the &quot;worst evil of all&quot; the marihuana
problem. </p>

<p>To aid the new approach's objective, Commissioner Anslinger
made speeches and contributed articles to journals. The most
influential of his efforts was &quot;Marihuana Assassin of
Youth&quot; which appeared in the widely circulated American
Magazine in July 1937 (Anslinger and Cooper,1937). </p>

<p>The FBN files contain more than 50 letters addressed to the
Commissioner which say: &quot;Your article was the first time I
ever heard of marihuana.&quot; </p>

<p>Among the most effective proponents of the Uniform Act was the
Hearst newspaper chain. These papers began editorializing in
favor of enactment within days after the Act had been approved in
1932. </p>

<p>The Hearst chain was not alone. A Birmingham, Alabama, paper
on August 22, 1935, emphasized the need to control marihuana as a
reason for adopting the Act (Birmingham Age Herald, August 22,
1935). A Washington Post columnist in September, 1934, devoted
three quarters of his article to marihuana with quotes from
Anslinger and Stanley urging adoption of the Uniform Act
(Washington Post, September 29, 1934).<br>
</p>

<p>Other large-city newspapers such as the Cleveland Plain,
Dealer and the St. Louis Star Times kept a steady, if
intermittent, stream of anti-marihuana articles flowing in the,
period just before the passage of the Uniform Act in those areas.
In Missouri, especially, local concern generated by the extensive
coverage in the Star Times speedily pushed the legislature to
adopt the Uniform Act. </p>

<p>Often it has been supposed on the basis of this increased
coverage that the use of marihuana increased around 1935. Since
there was some larger design involved, however, a firm conclusion
is unwarranted. At the same time, it is possible that use, did
spread after the publicity campaigns, especially among the young.
</p>

<p>Judging from the tremendous expansion in coverage by the New
York Times beginning in 1935, the evidence supplied by the
LaGuardia Commission in its 1944 Report and the, leap in
enforcement activity, marihuana, finally came to New York City in
the 1930's, though then probably on a smaller scale than in
Denver land the, border towns of Texas. </p>

<p>Apart from the press, another influential participant in the
marihuana campaign, especially after the Repeal of Prohibition,
was the Women's Christian Temperance Union. Although the WCTU had
distributed a pamphlet on marihuana as early as 1927, their
publication, the Union Signal, does not reflect any significant
interest either in the Uniform Act or marihuana, until 1934.
Before that year the &quot;narcotic&quot; receiving the most
attention was nicotine. Beginning in 1936, however, the Union
Signal had a direct line to the FBN national office, and from
then on every issue contained material on marihuana (WCTU bound
volumes, yearly). </p>

<p>The World Narcotic Defense Association and its head, Richmond
P. Hopson, were also involved in the drive for state enactment.
They were continually in postal contact with almost every state
legislator in the country (WNDA, 1937). The most well-financed
group in the campaign, the Association underwrote national
broadcasts and distributed a lengthy pamphlet on marihuana, in
1936. </p>

<p>The General Federation of Women's Clubs also contributed
energetically. The Federation educated its membership about the
need for the Uniform Act and about the evils of marihuana in
particular. The Chairman of the Federation's department of
legislation noted: <br>
</p>

<p><i>The situation concerning club women particularly is the
accessibility of the frightening degenerating marihuana weed,
which is rolled in cigarettes ... and has been playing such havoc
with young high school boys and girls</i> (WCTU, 1936: 285).<br>
</p>

<p>The state and local clubs immediately began to unite local
legislators and to conduct educational campaigns for parents,
teachers and children (WCTU, 1937: 36; Wood, January 13, 1936).
An FBN agent appeared at a New York meeting of the local
Federation with two marihuana plants. They were exhibited at a
local flower show: </p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><b>Marihuana Plant exhibit at Flower Show</b> </p>

<p align="center"><b>of Katrina Trask Garden Club</b> </p>

<p align="center"><b>Tomorrow, 3 P.M. on at the Casino</b> </p>

<p align="center"><b>This plant is the cause of a dread menace
which in being fought by the State Department of Health.</b> </p>

<p align="center"><b>Public Invited to Show-25 cents (Saratogian,
1936: 5)<br>
</b></p>

<hr>

<p>Other groups such as the YWCA , the National PTA and the
National Councils of Catholic Men and Women were all in touch
with the Bureau and were made, aware of the Bureau's dual aims of
&quot;influencing and creating public opinion in favor of the
passage of the Uniform Narcotic Drug Act and awakening the
parents of the country to the increasing danger of the use of
marihuana.&quot; (Anslinger, March 28, 1935). </p>

<p>However, arousing public opinion alone was not the ultimate
goal of the campaign. The FBN was interested in the enactment of
the Uniform Act along with prohibitory marihuana legislation in
all the states. </p>

<p>By early 1935, only 10 states had adopted the Uniform Act.
And, three of these states had not included marihuana (Anslinger,
March 1, 1935). The Bureau embarked upon its marihuana strategy
in 1935, the turning point in state enactment. Whether or not
public interest actually existed, public opinion-makers
influenced legislative opinion and created a &quot;felt
need&quot; for legislation. </p>

<p>Within the next year, 18 more states adopted the Act and every
one of them which did not have previous legislation included
marihuana (Anslinger, January 13, 1936; WCTU, 1937: 75).<br>
</p>

<p><b>ENACTMENT OF THE MARIHUANA TAX ACT<br>
</b></p>

<p>Despite the public opinion campaign conducted in the early
1930's the general public was largely unaware of the drug, its
use, or its alleged effects; only regional interest was aroused. </p>

<p>A change seems to have occurred after 1935. The increased
national awareness played a significant role in the decision of
the Treasury Department to seek federal legislation. On April 14,
1937, the &quot;Secretary of the Treasury, on behalf of the
Commissioner of Narcotics,&quot; submitted the
&quot;administration proposal to Congress to impose an excise and
transfer tax on dealings in marihuana&quot; (Schaller, 1970: 70).
</p>

<p>The scheme of the Marihuana Tax Act was threefold: a
requirement that all manufacturers, importers, dealers, and
practitioners register and pay a special occupational tax; a
requirement that all transactions be accomplished through use of
written order forms; and the imposition of a tax on all transfers
in the amount of $1 per ounce for transfer to registered persons
and a prohibitive $100 per ounce for transfers to unregistered
persons. </p>

<p>The key departure of the marihuana tax scheme from that of the
Harrison Act is the notion of the prohibitive tax. Under the
Harrison Act, a person not required to register, that is, a
non-medical user, could not legitimately buy or possess
narcotics. To the dissenters in the Supreme Court decisions
upholding the Act, this clearly demonstrated that Congress'
motive was to prohibit conduct rather than to raise revenue. </p>

<p>The seemingly bizarre legal formulation of this tax measure
was precipitated by the recognized need for the Federal
Government to take action forbidden to it under prevailing
constitutional doctrine. </p>

<p>Hearings on the proposed marihuana taxation were held before
the House Ways and Means Committee. During five mornings of
testimony by FBN officials, government witnesses, and industry
representatives, the Bureau presented the following four-fold
argument: (1) marihuana was a disastrous drug; (2) its use was
increasing alarmingly and had generated public hysteria; (3)
state legislation was incapable of meeting the threat posed by
the drug, thus, federal action was required; and (4) the
government might best act through separate legislation rather
than through an amendment to the Harrison Act. </p>

<p>No definite scientific study of the effects of marihuana was
presented to substantiate the position that marihuana was a
dangerous drug. No synthesis of available scientific information
was submitted nor was there any statement by the Public Health
Service. Neither of the government's own public health experts,
Assistant Surgeon General, Dr. Walter Treadway, and Dr. Lawrence
Kolb, testified, nor did Drs. Walter Bromberg or J. F. Siler who
had recently published scientific articles on the effects of
cannabis in humans (Siler, et. al., 1933: 269-280; Bromberg,
1934). </p>

<p>Instead, the scientific aspects were presented by a law
enforcement agency, the FBN:<br>
</p>

<p><i>Despite the fact that medical men and scientists have
disagreed upon the properties of marihuana, and some are inclined
to minimize the harmfulness of this drug, the records offer ample
evidence that it has a disastrous effect upon many of its users.
Recently we have received many reports showing crimes of violence
committed by persons while under the influence of marihuana. </i></p>

<p><i>The deleterious, even vicious, qualities of the drug render
it highly dangerous to the mind and body upon which it operates
to destroy the will, cause one to lose the power of connected
thought, producing imaginary delectable situations and gradually
weakening the physical powers. Its use frequently leads to
insanity. <br>
</i></p>

<p><i>I have a statement here, giving an outline of cases
reported to the Bureau or in the press, wherein the use of
marihuana is connected with revolting crimes</i> (U.S. Congress,
1937: 30). <br>
</p>

<p>Instead of having one of the few researchers who had done any
significant research into the effects of cannabis on humans, the
Bureau chose a Temple University pharmacologist, Dr. James Munch,
whose experience was confined to experimentation of the effects
of cannabis on dogs. </p>

<p>The second component of the Bureau's case was the contention
that marihuana use had spread alarmingly in recent years,
provoking a public outcry. To demonstrate this, the Bureau
submitted, for the record, the Gomila article cited earlier, and
a 1936 letter from the city editor of the Alamoosa Daily Courier
(U.S. Congress, 1937: 32-37). The letter described an attack by a
Mexican-American, allegedly under the influence of marihuana, on
a girl of his region.: <br>
</p>

<p><i>I wish I could show you what a small marihuana cigarette
can do to one of our degenerate Spanish-speaking residents.
That's why our problem is so great; the greatest percentage of
our population is composed of Spanish speaking persons most of
whom are low mentally, because of social and racial conditions </i>(Baskette,
September 4, 1936).<br>
</p>

<p>The third component of the Bureau's case was that even though
every state now had marihuana legislation, local authorities
could not cope with the marihuana menace. To support this
proposition editorial pleas from the Washington newspapers were
offered along with Bureau testimony that officials of several
states had requested federal help. </p>

<p>Senator Brown asked Commissioner Anslinger &quot;to make clear
the need for Federal legislation.&quot; He continued: </p>

<p><i>You say the states have asked you to do that. I presume it
is because of the freedom of interstate traffic that the states
require the legislation. </i></p>

<p>Anslinger agreed: </p>

<p><i>[W]e have had requests from the states to step in because
they claimed it was not growing in that state, but that it was
coming in from another state </i>(U.S. Congress, 1937:16).<br>
</p>

<p>Nothing was presented to support that statement; no letters
from local authorities and no investigative reports by FBN agents
describing the trafficking apparatus. </p>

<p>The congressmen and senators participating in the hearings
accepted the Bureau's argument. In fact, Senator Brown, Chairman
of the subcommittee which considered the legislation in the
Senate, and Chairman Doughton of the Ways and Means Committee,
had been thoroughly briefed by the Bureau in advance of the
hearings. There was no probing of the Government witnesses. In
fact, the Government made its case in the House in one session,
and the next three sessions were devoted to countering the
technical objections of the oilseed, birdseed, and hemp
industries (U.S. Congress, 1937:59-65 67-86 .<br>
</p>

<p>On the last morning of scheduled hearings, Dr. William C.
Woodward appeared on behalf of the AMA to oppose the bill. Dr.
Woodward objected to H.R. 6385 because he believed that its
ultimate effect would be to so restrict medical use by red tape
that any medical use would be impossible. He admitted that there
were currently few therapeutic applications but he observed that
the bill inhibited further research which might bear fruit. He
went even further to imply that the bill was designed with this
objective in mind. He noted that if federal legislation was
considered necessary, it could be achieved without sacrificing
medical usage by simply amending the Harrison Act. </p>

<p>Dr. Woodward's most pointed attack was directed against the
assumption that federal legislation was needed to control the
marihuana habit. He argued that existing state legislation was
more than sufficient if properly enforced and that if lack of
coordination was the problem, that was the FBN's fault. </p>

<p>Noting that the FBN already had the authority to &quot;arrange
for the exchange of information concerning the use and abuse of
narcotic drugs in [the] states and for cooperation in the
institution and prosecution of suits . . .,&quot; he asserted
that the Bureau had not done its job:<br>
</p>

<p><i>If there is at the present time any weakness in our state
laws relating to cannabis or to marihuana, a fair share of the
blame, if not all of it, rests on the Secretary of the Treasury
and his assistants who have had this duty imposed upon them for 6
and more years</i> (U.S. Congress, 1937: 93).<br>
</p>

<p>Dr. Woodward also contended that the law would be a useless
expense to the medical profession and unenforcible. He noted:
&quot;Since marihuana grows so freely, and every landowner was a
potential producer, whether wittingly or unwittingly, full
enforcement would require inspection of the entire land area of
the country, a task which would be unseemly for the Federal
Government to undertake&quot; (U.S. Congress, 1937: 94-95). </p>

<p>Finally, Dr. Woodward wondered why, if federal legislation was
considered necessary, the Congress did not simply amend the
Harrison Act. To the Bureau's argument that such a course would
be unconstitutional, he inquired how Treasury's counsel could
argue that the present bill was constitutional since the
technique was identical. Dr. Woodward's own view was that the
amendment of the Harrison Act would be constitutional and that
such a course would dispel the professional objections which he
raised (U.S. Congress, 1937:97). </p>

<p>After accusing Dr. Woodward of obstructionism, evasiveness,
and bad faith, the Committee did not even thank him for his
testimony (U.S. Congress, 1937: 121). When the Senate Finance
Committee conducted hearings on the bill, now styled H.R. 6906,
two months later, Dr. Woodward submitted instead a short letter
which stated the AMA's reasons for opposing the bill (U.S.
Congress, 1937: 33-34). </p>

<p>Both Committees reported the bill favorably despite Woodward's
objections. The Ways and Means Report stated:<br>
</p>

<p><i>Under the influence of this drug the will is destroyed and
all power of directing and controlling thought is lost.
Inhibitions are released. As a result of these effects, it
appeared from testimony produced at the hearings that many
violent crimes have been and are being committed by persons under
the influence of the drug Not only is marihuana used by hardened
criminals to steel them to commit violent crimes, but it is also
being placed in the hands of high-school children in the form of
marihuana cigarettes by unscrupulous peddlers. Cases were cited
at the hearings of school children who have been driven to crime
and insanity through the use of the drug. Its continued use
results many times in impotency and insanity </i>(U.S. Congress,
1937: 1-2).<br>
</p>

<p>The Marihuana Tax Act passed the House of Representatives very
late in the afternoon of a long session on June 14, 1937; the
only opposition came from congressmen who had no idea what
marihuana was and desired further information before voting
(Congressional Record, 1937: 5575, 5689). Instead of a detailed
analysis they received a statement of one of the members of the
Ways and Means Committee, which repeated uncritically the lurid
criminal acts attributed to marihuana users at the hearings.
After less than two pages of debate, the Act passed without a
roll call (Congressional Record, 1937: 5575).<br>
</p>

<p><b>TIGHTENING THE LAW<br>
</b></p>

<p>After the passage of the Marihuana Tax Act, the FBN began with
a four-pronged enforcement policy:<br>
</p>

<ol>
    <li>Control of cultivation of the plant for legitimate
        purposes and eradication of wild growth; </li>
    <li>Pacification of marihuana-sensationalism in the press; </li>
    <li>Education of the federal judiciary toward strict
        application of the law; and </li>
    <li>Allocation of federal enforcement resources toward major
        trafficking rather than petty possession offenses.<br>
    </li>
</ol>

<p>The scope of the plant's growth, the transportability of the
seeds, the dormancy of the seeds, and the lack of a highly
efficient herbicide militated against a comprehensive eradication
program. The cost of such a program would have been substantial
even if success were assured. No active effort was undertaken to
conduct an acre-by-acre survey of the United States. </p>

<p>The eradication &quot;program&quot; became simply a matter of
reaction to routine information-letters from farmers who had
identified the plant and discoveries of acreage by law
enforcement agents. </p>

<p>As the Bureau's interest in marihuana subsided during the
1940's, so did the effort to eradicate the wild growth. In fact,
the Federal Government encouraged the cultivation of hemp during
the war, even though an inactive strain had not been developed,
because sources of sisal rope had been severed by Japan's
occupation of the Philippines. All over the United States, the
weed remained plentiful and largely undetected. </p>

<p>After passage of the Act, Commissioner Anslinger directed his
agents to discourage local officials from playing up any alleged
involvement of marihuana with crime to the press. On April 11,
1938, the Commissioner told his New York District Supervisor
that: <br>
</p>

<p><i>Our present policy is to discourage undue emphasis on
marihuana for the reason that in some sections of the country
recently press reports have been so exaggerated that interest in
the subject has become almost hysterical and we are therefore
trying to mold public opinion along more conservative and saner
lines </i>(Anslinger, April 11, 1938).<br>
</p>

<p>Immediately following passage of the Act, the FBN also
directed an &quot;educational&quot; effort toward the federal
judiciary to emphasize the need for severe sentences for
marihuana offenders. The Bureau also concentrated on the stifling
of suppliers, large interstate traffickers, and smugglers. Small
possession cases were to be left to local authorities. </p>

<p>Several factors, however, served to frustrate this policy.
First, marihuana traffic was highly disorganized and there was no
national or regional network as such (New York City, 1945).
Second, use was still concentrated geographically and
socioeconomically and was not a major enterprise. Finally, during
the war years, the Bureau abandoned responsibility for most
marihuana law enforcement to the states, where the disorganized
traffic and regional use could be most effectively controlled.
The FBN chose instead to concentrate on the opiates. </p>

<p>After the relative quiet of the war years there was apparently
a significant increase in narcotic drug abuse in the late, 1940's
and the public began to be concerned with the spread of narcotic
addiction, particularly among young persons. Congressional furor
was aroused by the assertion that the use of marihuana inevitably
led to the use of these harder drugs, particularly heroin.<br>
</p>

<p>The new legislation came in two waves. In 1951, Congress
passed the Boggs Act (Boggs Act, November 2, 1951: 767) which
increased penalties for all drug violators. For the first time in
federal drug legislation marihuana and the narcotic drugs were
lumped together, since the Act provided uniform penalties for the
Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act (Boggs Act, November 2,
1951: 767) and the Marihuana Tax Act (21 USC 1964). The states
followed the federal lead. Then, in 1956, Congress passed the
Narcotic Control Act, escalating the penalties still further.
Once again the states responded in kind. </p>

<p>The hearings before the Subcommittee of the House Ways and
Means Committee and the floor debate indicate that the Boggs Act
was motivated by a. perceived increase in narcotic use in the
period 1948 to 1951 (Kefauver Committee Hearings, 1951: 240-241;
New York Times, 1951). </p>

<p>Representative Boggs, speaking during the Congressional debate
on his bill, enunciated a concern which was reflected in many
other quarters. After noting that there had been a 24% increase
in arrests for narcotic violations between 1949 and 1950 and a
70% increase between 1948 and 1950, Representative Boggs stated: <br>
</p>

<p><i>The most shocking part about these figures is the fact that
there has been an alarming increase in drug addiction among
younger persons. In the first six months of 1946, the average age
of addicted persons committed . . . at Lexington, Kentucky, was
37.5 years. Only three patients were under the age of 21. During
the first six months of 1950, only four years later, the average
had dropped to 26.7 years and 766 patients were under the age of
21... </i>(Congressional Record, 1951: 8197).<br>
</p>

<p>Representative Boggs and others supported the mandatory
minimum sentences for drug peddlers because they felt that some
federal judges had been lax in enforcing the narcotic laws
(Congressional Record, 1951: 8197, 8207, 821 1). Public opinion
was overwhelming that harsh sentences, including the death
penalty for peddling narcotics to minors, would strangle the drug
monster then stalking the American youth (Kefauver Committee
Hearings, 1951: 430-431). </p>

<p>The Boggs Act was directed in large part at the federal
judiciary since a key provision removed judicial discretion in
sentencing by providing that upon conviction for a second or
subsequent offense the imposition or execution of the sentence
could not be suspended nor probation granted. </p>

<p>There had been no concerted lobbying effort by the judicial
community during the legislative process; however, James V.
Bennett, Director of the U.S. Bureau of Prisons, aroused the
judges in the Fifth U.S. Circuit District into eventually
recommending the amendment of the law to remove provisions for
mandatory minimum sentences (Yew Orleans Statesman, May 28, 1954;
New Orleans Times-Picayune, May 28, 1954). </p>

<p>Even while the Boggs Act was still pending in Congress, the
Bureau of Narcotics encouraged the states to modify their
existing narcotic and marihuana legislation to enact
&quot;penalties similar to those provided in the Boggs Bill
[which] would be of material assistance in the fight against the
narcotic traffic&quot; (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1950: 6). </p>

<p>Seventeen states and the territory of Alaska responded by
passing &quot;little Boggs Acts&quot; by 1953 and 11 other states
increased their penalties by 1956. Two of the latter group, Ohio
and Louisiana, enacted penalty provisions which were
substantially more severe than those passed previously in any
jurisdiction (Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 1956: 28). </p>

<p>The Ohio law, approved June 16,1955, provided a 20 to 40 year
sentence for the sale of narcotic drugs. The Louisiana measure,
adopted the following year, provided severe prison sentences
without parole, probation, or suspension for the illegal sale,
possession, or administration of a narcotic drug. The sentences
ranged from a five-year minimum to a 99-year maximum (Federal
Bureau of Narcotics, 1951: 8). </p>

<p>Underlying the inclusion of marihuana in the scheme of
increased penalties was the progression theory. In the Boggs
hearings many witnesses testified to the link between marihuana
use and ultimate heroin addiction. Commissioner Anslinger, for
example, testified: <br>
</p>

<p><i>The danger is this: Over 50 percent of these young addicts
started on marihuana smoking. They started there and graduated to
heroin; they took the needle when the thrill of marihuana was
gone </i>(Boggs Act Hearings, 1951: 206).<br>
</p>

<p>Representative Boggs himself summed up the stepping-stone
thesis in House floor debate:<br>
</p>

<p><i>Our younger people usually start on the road which leads to
drug addiction by smoking marihuana. They then graduate into
narcotic drugs-cocaine, morphine, and heroin. When these younger
persons become addicted to the drugs, heroin, for example, which
costs from $8 to $15 per day, they very often must embark on
careers of crime ... and prostitution ... in order to buy the
supply which they need</i> (Congressional Record, 1951:
8197-8198).<br>
</p>

<p>The stepping-stone theory thus supplanted the older hypotheses
which had linked marihuana to addiction, insanity and violent
crime. </p>

<p>In a paper filed as an exhibit to the hearings on the Boggs
Act, Dr. Harris Isbell, Director of Research at the Public Health
Service Hospital in Lexington, Kentucky, stated that marihuana
was not physically addictive, although he paid lip service to the
psychological dependence hypothesis (Boggs Act Hearings, 1951:
147-148). </p>

<p>Acknowledging the possibility of &quot;temporary
psychosis&quot; in &quot;predisposed individuals,&quot; Isbell
otherwise disputed the crime and insanity thesis. Before the
Kefauver Committee in the Senate he testified that: </p>

<p><i>[M]arihuana smokers generally are mildly intoxicated,
giggle, laugh, bother no one, and have a good time. They do not
stagger or fall, and ordinarily will not attempt to harm anyone. </i></p>

<p><i>It has not been proved that smoking marihuana leads to
crimes of violence or to crimes of a sexual nature. Smoking
marihuana has no unpleasant after-effects, no dependence is
developed on the drug, and the practice can easily be stopped at
any time. In fact, it is probably easier to stop smoking
marihuana cigarettes than tobacco cigarettes </i>(Kefauver
Committee Hearings, 1951: 119). <br>
</p>

<p>Some observers felt that the narcotics problem had disappeared
almost entirely from the national scene after the Boggs Act was
passed. Nevertheless, state and federal law enforcement
authorities, armed with data suggesting that the strengthening of
the drug laws had at least halted the increase in drug use,
pressed for further increases in penalties in order to root out
the drug menace entirely (Federal Bureau of Narcotics. 1956: 28).
Without extended debate or widened public interest, Congress
passed the Narcotic Control Drug Act in 1956 (Daniel Committee
Hearings, 1955: 57). </p>

<p>There was less attention paid to marihuana during
Congressional debate in 1956 than had been the case in 1951. But,
the established precedent of classifying marihuana with hard
narcotics continued and resulted in a proliferation of marihuana
offenses and a, further increase in penalties based on the theory
that the end of the American narcotics experience could thereby
be assured. </p>

<p>However, efficacy of still higher penalties was not uniformly
accepted among law enforcement officials; the Deputy Commissioner
of the FBN suggested that more severe penalties might press grand
juries not to indict and the petty juries not to convict in drug
cases. Others rejected this view and felt strongly that more
severe penalties were imperative if society was to be rid of its
present peddlers and if new entrants into the narcotics business
were to be deterred (Good, July 31, 1954). </p>

<p>Among congressmen considering the Bill, there was no dissent
from the proposition that harsher penalties were the means to
eliminate the illicit use and sale of all drugs (Congressional
Record. 1956: 10689). </p>

<p>In addition to facilitating enforcement of narcotics laws
through a number of ancillary provisions, the Narcotics Control
Act of 1956 established the following penalties:<br>
</p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td><b>Possession</b></td>
        <td><b>Minimum sentence</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>First offense</td>
        <td>2 years</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Second offense </td>
        <td>5 years</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Third and subsequent offense </td>
        <td>10 years</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Fine </td>
        <td>$20,000</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p></p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td><b>Sale</b></td>
        <td><b>Minimum sentence</b></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>First offense </td>
        <td>5 years</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Second offense</td>
        <td>10 years</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Sale to minor by adult</td>
        <td>10 years</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>Parole or probation were made unavailable to all except first
offenders in the possession category (26 TTSC, 1964). </p>

<p>The Act also created a new offense by prohibiting illegal
importation of marihuana. Simple possession was by statute
sufficient to convict the possessor of knowingly receiving
illegally imported marihuana (21 USC, 1964). </p>

<p>Few legislators recognized that marihuana was in any way
different from the physically addictive narcotics. The House
Subcommittee on Narcotics, which produced what became the
essentials of the 1956 Act, had inserted a footnote to the major
heading &quot;Narcotics&quot; which stated in fine print that the
term narcotics included marihuana (U.S. Code Cong. and Ad. News,
1956: 3294). Only once during the Congressional debates on the
House and Senate versions of the Bill was the subject of
marihuana as a separate substance even raised. </p>

<p>Moreover, in a statement reflecting the general acceptance of
the stepping-stone concept, Senator Daniel, Chairman of the
Senate Subcommittee that investigated the drug problem, described
marihuana: <br>
</p>

<p><i>That is a drug which starts most addicts In the use of
drugs, Marihuana, in itself a dangerous drug, can lead to some of
the worst crimes committed by those who are addicted to the
habit. Evidently, its use leads to the heroin habit and then to
the final destruction of the persons addicted </i>(U.S. Code
Cong. &amp; Ad. News, 1956: 3294).<br>
</p>

<p>By the fifties, marihuana had been fully integrated into the
narcotics legislation of every state in the Union and of the
national government. Possession of the drug, even for one's own
use, was a felony everywhere, and the user was subject to long
periods of incarceration as punishment for his indulgence.<br>
</p>

<p><b>1960-1970: NEW LEGISLATIVE APPROACH</b> </p>

<p>From the mid-fifties to the mid-sixties, federal activity in
marihuana and narcotic law enforcement was relatively stable. The
number of offenders apprehended and convicted in both areas
remained constant (U.S. Courts, 1956-1964). </p>

<p>However, in the early and mid-sixties a new phenomenon was
occurring. Drug abuse began to spread. It no longer confined
itself to the ghettos and certain socioeconomic and ethnic
groups; the new users were the sons and daughters of the middle
class. It began striking home at the average American and became
a national, major issue of concern (Rosevear, 1967: 117-131; U.S.
Bureau of Narcotics, 1966: 40). </p>

<p>The new middle class use of marihuana induced significant
medical inquiry into the nature of the drug and spurred a new
legislative approach. One commentator stated:<br>
</p>

<p><i>Nobody cared when it was a ghetto problem. Marihuana-well,
it was used by jazz musicians or the lower class, so you didn't
care if they got 2 to 20 years. But when a nice, middle-class
girl or boy in college gets busted for the same thing, then the
whole community sits up and takes notice. And that's the name of
the game today. The problem has begun to come home to roost-in
all strata of society, in suburbia, in middle-class homes, in the
colleges. Suddenly, the punitive, vindictive approach was
touching all classes of society. And now the most exciting thing
that's really happening is the change in attitude by the people.
Now we have a willingness to examine the problem as to whether
it's an experimentation, or an illness rather than 'an evil' </i>(New
York Times, Feb. 5, 1970: 14).<br>
</p>

<p>Congress initially acted by passage of the Drug Abuse Control
Amendments of 1965 (Public Law 89-74,1965). This legislation
established a Bureau of Drug Abuse Control within the Food and
Drug Administration and created criminal, misdemeanor penalties
for the illegal manufacture and sale of depressant and stimulant
drugs and hallucinogens. </p>

<p>The dramatic increase in the use of marihuana and other drugs
during the latter 1960's was a matter of high public visibility.
In response, President Johnson offered Reorganization Plan No. 1
of 1968 (H. Doe. No. 249,1968). This reorganization was effective
on April 8, 1968 and placed the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (of
Treasury) and the Bureau of Drug Abuse Control (of FDA) in the
Department of Justice and designated it the Bureau of Narcotics
and Dangerous Drugs. </p>

<p>What had been obvious with the passage of the 1965 Drug
Amendments became glaring with this reorganization, that is, the
tremendous disparity in penalties for violations involving
dangerous drugs as opposed to narcotics and marihuana. As a
result of increased medical and scientific inquiry, LSD and
several other drugs 'were acknowledged as being more powerful
hallucinogens than marihuana. </p>

<p>To compound the disparity, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the
major active ingredient in marihuana, was placed under controls
whereby someone in unauthorized possession of THC was subject to
no penalty, but someone in possession of marihuana was subject to
a minimum mandatory penalty of two years imprisonment (Federal
Register, 1968: 14880). Congress then changed the possession
penalty, tinder the Drug Abuse Control Amendments, to a
misdemeanor and increased the penalties for sale or manufacture
of LSD and the other controlled drugs to up to five years (Public
Law 90-639, 1968). </p>

<p>Nevertheless, a great disparity regarding penalties for these
substances still existed. The atmosphere for change was ripe.
Adding pressure to the situation was the criminalization of
increasing numbers of young persons whose sole crime was
possession of marihuana for their own use. </p>

<p>In late 1968, the newly formed Bureau of Narcotics and
Dangerous Drugs drafted legislation which would nationalize
control of the drugs under the Bureau's jurisdiction. The
proposed law vested on the commerce clause rather than on the
taxing powers. </p>

<p>The change in authority was prophetic because the Leary
decision, which was handed down by the Supreme Court on May 19,
1969, held that the order form procedure necessary to meet the
requirements of the Marihuana Tax Laws, forced an individual to
incriminate himself in violation of the Fifth Amendment (Leary v.
U.S., 1969). Ostensibly, this decision left BNDD with no
marihuana possession law and was another factor in evidence of
the need for a revision of the law. </p>

<p>This new bill , H.R. 13742, covered the regulation of narcotic
drugs, &quot;dangerous drugs&quot; and marihuana. It was
transmitted by President Nixon on July 14, 1969. </p>

<p>Emerging from this legislation was an overall balanced scheme
of criminal penalties. Minimum mandatory offenses were
essentially abolished and the offense of possession of a
controlled substance for one's own use was made a misdemeanor.
Further, in first-offense, simple possession cases, the court was
given the discretion to place a defendant on probation, for up to
one year. If, at the end of the probation period, the defendant
bad not violated any of the conditions of the probation, his
conviction could be expunged. </p>

<p>The same misdemeanor penalty and opportunity for first
offender treatment was provided for the distribution of a small
amount of marihuana for either: (1) no remuneration; or (2) the
cost of the drug. </p>

<p>This provision was included in recognition of the large number
of such transactions which take place among youth and in
recognition of a phenomenon which surfaced as a substantial
challenge to the traditional picture of the national marihuana
trade. Legislators had formerly stereotyped the
&quot;seller&quot; as the vicious criminal pushing his wares for
high profit and felt that extraordinarily harsh penalties were
justified for sellers (Narcotics Legislation Hearings, 1969: 4). </p>

<p>But several studies showed that the structure of marihuana
traffic bore little or no relation to the traditional stereotype.
One survey of 204 users found that 44% had sold to friends at
least once. Many casual users sold to leave themselves enough
profit to cover the amount of their own use (Goode, 1969: 7).
Under the new Act, they would not be punished as distributors. </p>

<p>The new legislation also made a distinction between marihuana
and narcotic drugs. Marihuana was placed in a category with
hallucinogenic drugs and their difference from narcotics was
emphasized by the difference in penalties as follows:<br>
</p>

<p><b>Maximum sentences<br>
</b></p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td></td>
        <td>Marihuana and other non-narcotic controlled
        substances </td>
        <td>Narcotics</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p></p>

<table border="1">
    <tr>
        <td></td>
        <td>lst offense</td>
        <td>2nd offense</td>
        <td>lst offense </td>
        <td>2nd offense</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Simple possession:*</td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Years</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>2</td>
        <td>1</td>
        <td>2</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Dollars</td>
        <td>5,000</td>
        <td>10,000</td>
        <td>5,000</td>
        <td>10,000</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Unlawful distribution, possession with intent to
        distribute, manufacture, importation or exportation: </td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
        <td></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Years</td>
        <td>5</td>
        <td>10</td>
        <td>15</td>
        <td>30</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Dollars</td>
        <td>15,000</td>
        <td>30,000</td>
        <td>25,000</td>
        <td>50,000</td>
    </tr>
</table>

<p>* Distribution of small amounts of marihuana for no
remuneration is treated the same as simple possession.<br>
</p>

<p>The bill was passed by Congress (and signed into law by
President Nixon) on October 27, 1970, as the Comprehensive Drug
Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. </p>

<p>In conjunction with this new federal law, a uniform state act
was drafted by the National Conference of Commissioners on
Uniform State Laws and approved by them as the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act at their annual conference August 1-7, 1970. </p>

<p>The following statement in the preface of the Act explains its
purpose:<br>
</p>

<p>This Uniform Act was drafted to achieve uniformity between the
laws of the several states and those of the Federal Government.
it has been designed to complement the new federal narcotic and
dangerous drug legislation and Provide and interlocking trellis
of Federal and state law to enable government at all levels to
control more effectively the drug abuse problem. </p>

<p>The Uniform Act does not recommend penalties except with
respect to possession for one's own use. For such offenses, the
Conference recommended that it be treated as a misdemeanor. </p>

<p>To date, 26 states and three territories have adopted the Act
in its entirety or in a varied form. Currently, 10 to 15 states
are considering it. </p>

<p>The most recent chapter in the legal history of marihuana
appears in other pages of this Appendix. The appointment of the
National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse and the issuance
of its Report are themselves significant events from an
historical point of view.<br>
</p>

<hr>

<h2>References<br>
</h2>

<p>Act of June 14,1930, Ch. 488,46 Stat. 585. </p>

<p>Act to Create a Bureau of Customs and a Bureau of Prohibition
in the Department of the Treasury, Ch. 348, 44 Stat. 1381 (1927).
</p>

<p>Anslinger, H. J., letter to Dr. Woodward (July 28,1930). </p>

<p>&quot;The Reason for Uniform State Narcotic Legislation,&quot;
Georgetown Law Journal, 21: 52 (1932). </p>

<p>letter to Judge Deering (August 1, 1932). </p>

<p>letter to Reverend John J. Burke (March 1, 1935). letter to
Miss Agnes Regan, Executive Secretary of the National Council of
Catholic Women (March 28, 1935).<br>
letter to Mrs. Roberta Lawson, President of General Federation of
Women's Clubs (January 13, 1936).<br>
letter to Frank Allen of the Cleveland Plain Dealer (October 22,
1936).<br>
letter to F. J. Reynolds, Director, Readers Research Bureau, P.
F. Collier and Son Corporation (December 23,1936).<br>
letter to Williams (April 11, 1938).<br>
and Cooper, C. R.: &quot;Marihuana: Assassin of Youth,&quot;
American Magazine, 18-19 (July, 1937).<br>
and Tompkins, W.: The Traffic in Narcotics, New York: Funk and
Wagnalls Co. (1953), P. 159.<br>
</p>

<p>Austin Texas Statesman (Austin, Texas), June, 1923.<br>
</p>

<p>Baskette, Floyd K., letter to Federal Bureau of Narcotics
(September 4,1936).<br>
</p>

<p>Birmingham Age-Herald (Birmingham, Alabama), August 22, 1935. <br>
</p>

<p>Boggs Act, Chapter 666, 65 Stat. 767 (November 2, 1951). </p>

<p>Boggs Act Hearings, &quot;Hearings on H.R. 3490 before the
Subcommittee on Narcotics of the House Committee on Ways and
Means,&quot; 82nd Cong., 1st Sess., 147-148 (1951). </p>

<p>Bromberg, Walter, &quot;Marihuana Intoxication: A Clinical
Study of Cannabis Sativa. Intoxication,&quot; American Journal of
Psychiatry (91) 1934. </p>

<p>Chicago Examiner (Chicago, Illinois), June 19, 1929. June
22,1929. </p>

<p>Chicago Tribune (Chicago, Illinois), June 3, 1929. July 1,
1929. October 17,1929. </p>

<p>Colorado, &quot;Colorado Laws.&quot; Chapter 95, 309 (1927). </p>

<p>Congressional Record, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., 5575, 5689-5692
(1937). </p>

<p>82nd Cong., 1st Sess., 8197-8198, 8207, 8211 (1951). 102:
10689 (1956). </p>

<p>Daniel Committee Hearings, &quot;Hearings on Illicit Narcotics
Traffic Before the Subcommittee on Improvements In the Federal
Criminal Code of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary,&quot;
84th Cong., 1st Sess., 57 (1955). </p>

<p>Dowling, Dr., letter to Acting Surgeon General Periz (December
3, 1920). </p>

<p>Federal Bureau of Narcotics,: &quot;The Need for Uniform
Narcotic Drug Act-White Paper&quot; (July, 1933). </p>

<p>: &quot;Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs,&quot; 59
(1937). </p>

<p>&quot;Traffic in Opium,&quot; 6 (1950). 8 (1951). 28 (1956). </p>

<p>Federal Register, 33: 14880 (October 4, 1968). </p>

<p>Gomila, F. R. and Lambow, M.C.: Marihuana: America's New Drug
Problems, Philadelphia: Lippincott (1938), pp. 29-31. </p>

<p>Good, 0. S., letter to H. J. Anslinger (July 31, 1954). Goode,
E.: &quot;The Marihuana Market,&quot;: Colum. P., 12: 7 (Winter,
1969). </p>

<p>1925 Handbook of the National Conference of Commissioners on
Uniform State Laws and Proceedings, pp. 977-985 (1925).<br>
</p>

<p>1928 pp. 75-78. 323-3-33 (1928). </p>

<p>1929 pp. 43, 332--340 (1929). </p>

<p>1930 pp. 97, 126-427, 485 (1930). </p>

<p>1931 pp. 127-128, 390-402 (1931). </p>

<p>1932 P. 107 (1932).<br>
</p>

<p>House Document No. 249, Transmitted to 90th Cong., 1st Sess.
(February, 1968). </p>

<p>House Report No. 91-1444 (Part 1) 91st Cong., 2d Sess.
(September 10, 1970). </p>

<p>Idaho, &quot;Idaho State Laws,&quot; p. 98 (1927). </p>

<p>Jones, letter in U.S. Surgeon General's files to R. P. Smith
(August 21, 1920). </p>

<p>Kefauver Committee Hearings, &quot;Hearings Before the Special
Senate Committee to Investigate Organized Crime in Interstate
Commerce,&quot; 82d Cong., Ist Sess., pt. 14, exhibit 1,
119,240-241, 430-431 (1951). </p>

<p>King: &quot;The Narcotic Bureau and the Harrison Act,&quot;
Yale Law Journal, 62: 736, 737-739 (1953). </p>

<p>Leary v. United States, 395 U.S., 6, 89 S. Ct. 1532 (1969). </p>

<p>Lindesmith, A. R.: The Addict and the Law, Bloomington:
Indiana University Press (1967), pp, 135-161. </p>

<p>Los Angeles Daily News (Los Angeles, California), June 18,
1951. </p>

<p>Montana, &quot;Montana Laws,&quot; Chapter 6, p. 5 (1929). </p>

<p>Montana Standard (Butte-Anaconda, Montana), January 22, 1929,
p. 3, col. 6. </p>

<p>Narcotics Legislation Hearings, &quot;Hearings Before the
Subcommittee to Investigate Juvenile Delinquency of the Senate
Committee on the Judiciary,&quot; 91st Cong., 1st Sess., 267, 4
(1969). </p>

<p>New Mexico, &quot;New Mexico Laws,&quot; Chapter 42, Sections
1-2, pp. 58-59 (1923). </p>

<p>New Orleans Statesman (New Orleans, Louisiana), May 28, 1954. </p>

<p>New Orleans Times-Picayune (New Orleans, Louisiana), May
28,1954. </p>

<p>New York, &quot;New York Laws,&quot; Chapter 363, p. 1695
(1927). New York City Mayor's Committee on Marihuana: The
Marihuana Problem in the City of New York, Lancaster: Jacques
Cattell. Press (1945), p. 12. </p>

<p>New York State Senate: &quot;Joint Legislative Committee to
Investigate the Laws In Relation to the Distribution and Sale of
Narcotic Drugs,&quot; Final Report, Doe. No. 35 (1918), as quoted
by Terry &amp; Pellens, The Opium Problem (1928), p. 834.<br>
</p>

<p>New York Times (New York, New York), July 30, 1914, pp. 6,8,
col. 12. </p>

<p>January 11, 1923, p. 24, col. 1. </p>

<p>September 16,1934, p. 6, col. 3. </p>

<p>June 19,1951, p. 25, col, 1. </p>

<p>February 5,1970, p. 14. </p>

<p>Nutt, Colonel L. C., Deputy Commissioner, Bureau of
Prohibition, letter to Walter Clephane, Chairman, Section on
Social Welfare, Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
(June 13, 1929). </p>

<p>Paul, A. E., Memorandum from Chief, Chicago Station, </p>

<p>Food, Drug and Insecticide Administration, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, to Chief, Central District, pp. 1, 4 (June 27,
1929). </p>

<p>Public Law 89-74, H.R. 2 (July 15, 1965). </p>

<p>Public Law 90-639, H.R. 14096 (October 24, 1968). </p>

<p>&quot;Report of Preliminary Conference on Fifth Tentative.
Draft of the Uniform State Narcotic Law,&quot; pp. 9-10, 23
(September, 1932). </p>

<p>Rocky Mountain News (Denver, Colorado), September 27, 1931. </p>

<p>Rosevear, J.: Pot: A Handbook of Marihuana, New Hyde Park:
University Book (1967), pp. 117-131. </p>

<p>San Antonio Light (San Antonio, Texas), May 4, 1931,
editorial. </p>

<p>Santa Fe New Mexican (Santa Fe, New Mexico), January 31, 1923.
</p>

<p>Saratogian (Saratoga, New York), September 9, 1936, P. 5. </p>

<p>Schaller, Michael: &quot;The Federal Prohibition of
Marihuana,&quot; Journal of Social History, 4: pp. 61-78 (1970).
Schmeckebler: &quot;The Bureau of Prohibition,&quot; in Brookings
Institute for Government Research Service Monograph (57) :143
(1929). </p>

<p>Siler, J. S., et al., &quot;Marihuana Smoking in Panama,&quot;
Military Surgeon, 73: 269-280 (1933). </p>

<p>Tennyson, A. L.: &quot;Consideration of a Uniform State
Narcotic Law by the National Conference of Commissioners of
Uniform State Laws at Atlantic City, New Jersey, September 9-12,
1931,&quot; memorandum for file dated September 16,1931. </p>

<p>_: &quot;Uniform State Narcotic Law,&quot; Federal Bureau
Association Journal 1: 55 (1932). </p>

<p>Terry, C. and Pellens, M.: The Opium Problem (1928), p. 834. </p>

<p>Texas, &quot;General Laws,&quot; Chapter 150, p. 278 (1919). </p>

<p>Texas, &quot;Special Session Laws,&quot; Chapter 61, pp.
156-157 (1923). </p>

<p>U.S. Bureau of Immigration: &quot;Commissioner General of
Immigration Annual Report&quot; (1915-1930). </p>

<p>U.S. Bureau of Narcotics: &quot;Traffic in Opium,&quot; 2: 40
(1966). </p>

<p>21 U.S. -Code, 174 (1964). </p>

<p>26 U.S. Code, 4741-4776, 7237 (1964). </p>

<p>U.S. Code Cong. and Ad. News, 3294 (1956). </p>

<p>U.S. Congress, &quot;Hearings Before the House Committee on
Ways and Means on H.R. 6385,&quot; 75th Cong., 1st Sess.,
Washington (1937), 6, 30, 32-37, 59-65, 67-86, 92, 93-95, 97,121.<br>
</p>

<p>-, &quot;Hearings Before the Senate Finance Committee on H.R.
6906,&quot; 75th Cong., 1st Sess., Washington (1937), 16, 33-34. <br>
</p>

<p>&quot;Report of the Committee on Ways and Means on H.R.
6385,&quot; 75th Cong., Ist Sess., Washington (1937), 1-2.<br>
</p>

<p>U.S. Courts, &quot;Disposition of Defendants Charged with the
Violation of Narcotic Drug Laws,&quot; Administrative Office,
Division of Information Systems (1956-1964). Washington Post
(Washington, D.C.), September 29,1934.<br>
</p>

<p>White, Dr. William, letter to Surgeon General Treadway (August
3, 1932). </p>

<p>Women',, Christian Temperance Union: Marihuana, Evanston: WCTU
Publishing House (1928), pp. 1, 3. </p>

<p>&quot;Union Signal&quot; (Evanston, Illinois), 1936, p. 285. </p>

<p>January 30, 1937, pp. 36, 75. </p>

<p>(yearly bound volumes). </p>

<p>Wood, Will S., letter to Mrs. Roberta Lawson, President of
General Federation of Women's Clubs (January 13, 1936). </p>

<p>Woodward, William, letter to Dr. S. L. Hilton (August 6,
1932). </p>

<p>World Narcotic Defense Association, letter to legislators
(February,1937). <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p><a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../../_private/scmj_sig_of_mis_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../studies.htm">Major Studies</a> </p>

<p><a href="ncmenu.htm">Marihuana, A Signal of Misunderstanding</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="38989" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>