
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B34-77</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000628-B029-314</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/lsd/lsd1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122062420 text/html 25790
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 06:23:57 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Wednesday, 01-Jan-97 22:26:10 GMT
Content-length: 25571
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Criticisms of LSD Therapy and Rebuttal</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR"
content="Internet Assistant for Microsoft Word 2.0z Beta">
</head>

<body>

<p> </p>
</body>

<body bgcolor="#ffffff">

<p><img src="../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<h1>Criticisms of LSD Therapy and Rebuttal</h1>

<p> <b>from: THE HALLUCINOGENS</b> </p>

<p> <b>A. Hoffer &amp; H. Osmond, 1967</b> </p>

<p> A C A D E M I C P R E S S, New York and London </p>

<p> COPYRIGHT 1967, BY ACADEMIC PRESS INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
ACADEMIC PRESS INC. 111 Fifth Avenue, New York, New York 10003 </p>

<p> <img src="../graphics/blueline.gif"> </p>

<p> <b>Introduction </b> </p>

<p> by Peter Webster </p>

<p> The following article is typical of the best of the
scientific community's resistance to the prohibition of further
use of psychedelics such as LSD, mescaline and psilocybin in
research and psychotherapy. By the mid-1960's, several important
studies had indicated not only the great safety of such use of
psychedelic drugs, but also the great utility of these age-old
medicines for a variety of modern curing techniques. The Canadian
government, for example, had approved psychedelic therapy as by
far the best and most effective treatment for alcoholism ever
devised. Yet the prohibitionists both in government and the
scientific establishment itself, soon carried the day and a Great
Inquisition began, first in the United States but later around
the world, in which even legitimate scientific research with
psychedelic drugs was completely stifled. A very small and
insignificant relaxation of these draconian restrictions has
recently occurred, but the research permitted of late has only
barely begun to re-trace the territory already well-covered in
the 1950's. The article is taken from pp 197-205 of The
Hallucinogens. <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p> </p>

<p> Within a few months after LSD was introduced into North
America the ideas generated by the LSD experience produced a good
deal of criticism. The unhappy Harvard affair brought this
situation to a boil and it spilled over into the popular press.
Critics have been very effective in creating a climate of opinion
hostile to the use of LSD. There is an inverse square law which
states that the degree of hostile criticism varies inversely with
the square of the distance from any first-hand experience and
knowledge of the drug. </p>

<p> Thus, in Canada the greatest resistance against LSD came from
the professors who were least familiar with it. Our criterion of
familiarity is the number of research papers published in
scientific journals. </p>

<p> This criticism seems entirely based on factors described by
Barber (1961). These include (a) substantive concepts and
theories held by scientists at any given time, (b) an
antitheoretical bias, (c) religious ideas, (d) professional
standing, (e) professional specialization, and (f) societies,
schools, and seniority. The criticism has sometimes taken on a
cultic attitude and there has been private circulation of papers
which have been unavailable to the general reader (Tyhurst,
1964b). In addition, critics have issued public pronouncements to
the press, radio, and television which have not been based upon
published data. It is therefore important to list the criticisms
and then examine them carefully in order to determine whether
they need be taken seriously or not. Before doing so we will
quote Michael Polanyi (1956) because he makes the case so well.
If we are to convince our opponents of the potential value of LSD
therapy they must be converted by exposing them to careful data,
reasoned argument, and a firm determination to do our work as we
see fit and not to become their laboratory technician trying to
disprove every will of the wisp they may conjure up.<br>
</p>

<p> &quot;Scientists - that is creative scientists - spend their
lives in trying to guess right. They are sustained and guided
therein by their heuristic passion. We call their work creative
because it changes the world as we see it, by deepening our
understanding of it. The change is irrevocable. A problem that I
have once solved can no longer puzzle me; I cannot guess what I
already know. Having made a discovery, I shall never see the
world again as before. My eyes have become different; I have made
myself into a person seeing and thinking differently. I have
crossed a gap, the heuristic gap which lies between problem and
discovery. </p>

<p> &quot;To the extent to which discovery changes our
interpretive framework, it is logically impossible to arrive at
it by the continued application of our previous interpretative
framework. In other words, discovery is creative also in the
sense that it is not to be achieved by the diligent application
of any previously known and specifiable procedure. Its production
requires originality. The application of existing rules can
produce valuable surveys, but they can as little advance the
principles of science as a poem can be written according to rule.
We have to cross the logical gap between a problem and its
solution by relying on the unspecifiable impulse of our heuristic
passion, and must undergo as we do so a change of our
intellectual personality. Like all ventures in which we
comprehensively dispose of ourselves, such an intentional change
of our personality requires a passionate motive to accomplish it.
Originality must be passionate. </p>

<p> &quot;But this passionate quest seeks no personal possession.
Intellectual passions are not like appetites; they do not reach
out to grab, but set out to enrich the world. Yet such a move is
also an attack. It raises a claim and makes a tremendous demand
on other men; first it asks that its gift - its gift of humanity
- be accepted by all. In order to be satisfied, our intellectual
passions must find response. This universal intent creates a
tension. We suffer when a vision of reality to which we have
committed ourselves is contemptuously ignored by others. For a
general unbelief threatens to evoke a similar response in us
which would imperil our own convictions. Our vision must conquer
or die. </p>

<p> &quot;Like the heuristic passion from which it flows, the
persuasive passion too finds itself facing a logical gap. To the
extent to which a discoverer has committed himself to a new
vision of reality, he has separated himself from others who still
think on the old lines. His persuasive passion spurs him now to
cross this gap by converting everybody to his way of seeing
things, even as his heuristic passion has spurred him to cross
the heuristic gap which separated him from discovery. </p>

<p> &quot;We can now see the great difficulty that may arise in
the attempt to persuade others to accept a new idea in science.
To the extent to which it represents a new way of reasoning, we
cannot convince others of it by formal argument, for so long as
we argue within their framework we can never induce them to
abandon it. Demonstration must be supplemented therefore by forms
of persuasion which can induce a conversion. The refusal to enter
on the opponent's way of arguing must be justified by making it
appear altogether unreasonable. </p>

<p> &quot;Such comprehensive rejection cannot fail to discredit
the opponent. He will be made to appear as thoroughly deluded,
which in the heat of the battle will easily come to imply that he
was a fool, a crank, or a fraud. And once we are out to establish
such charges we shall readily go on to expose our opponent as a
metaphysician, a Jesuit, a Jew, or a Bolshevik, as the case may
be or - speaking from the other side of the Iron Curtain - as an
'objectivist,' and 'idealist,' and a 'cosmopolitan.' In a clash
of intellectual passions each side must inevitably attack the
opponent's person.&quot; </p>

<p> Here are the current claims made by critics: </p>

<p> 1. LSD is a dangerous drug. </p>

<p> 2. Long-term personality changes cannot be produced by LSD. </p>

<p> 3. No good can come from a chemically induced delirium or
psychoses. </p>

<p> 4. It &quot;has not been proved to be effective or safe for
any psychiatric condition&quot; (Cole and Katz, 1964). </p>

<p> (a) because there are no detailed, carefully controlled
studies designed to be free from possible distortions due to bias
or enthusiasm, </p>

<p> (b) because explanations given are often formulations not
common either to medicine in general or psychiatry in particular,
</p>

<p> (c) because explanations have a mystical or philosophical
sound which appeals to enthusiasts - but are likely to produce
doubt or even violent disbelief and concern in physicians used to
a more pragmatic approach, </p>

<p> (d) because components of the therapeutic process described
may often have a bizarre - almost schizophrenic - component which
tends to make serious investigators discount this whole area as a
delusional belief shared by a group of unstable clinicians. </p>

<p> Please read Polanyi's argument again. The rebuttal to these
criticisms is not difficult. </p>

<p> 1. Is LSD a dangerous drug? Of course it is, so is salt,
sugar, water, and even air. There is no chemical which is wholly
safe nor any human activity which is completely free of risk. The
degree of toxicity or danger associated with any activity depends
on its use. Just as a scalpel may be used to cure, it may also
kill. Yet we hear no strong condemnatory statements against
scalpels, etc. When LSD is used as treatment by competent
physicians who are trained in its use it is no more dangerous
than psychotherapy. It certainly is less dangerous than ECT
insulin subcoma, and the use of tranquilizers and antidepression
compounds. Statements that LSD is dangerous really are
meaningless as they stand. Every clinician working with LSD who
has published his data uniformly agrees it must be used by
physicians with proper safeguards for the safety of the patient.
There are no known physical contraindications. </p>

<p> 2. Long-term personality changes cannot be produced. There is
a curious quality about these criticisms for while it is
generally denied that patients who experience LSD can be
permanently changed it is, on the contrary, assumed that
psychiatrists very readily suffer permanent deformations of their
personality, and it is claimed that they are now overly
enthusiastic and even delusional and no longer competent to
honestly judge their own therapeutic efforts. It has been stated
that only claims made by therapists who have not themselves taken
LSD are valid (see Cole and Katz, 1964). If this argument were
generally accepted in medicine no surgeon who had recovered from
an acute appendicitis by surgery would be competent to judge
results of his surgery on patients. </p>

<p> The claims of many authors that the psychedelic experience
could produce a permanent change in patients have been rejected
by many psychiatrists whose orientation is psychoanalytic. It is
basic to their belief to assume that each person has a stable
personality which is altered with great difficulty. People become
sick because their personality has been warped or not allowed to
develop due to pathological relationships with their parents. The
only sure way of changing these twisted personalities is by a
thoroughgoing analysis of many years duration during which all
the roots of the pathological personality are uncovered and
treated. Any other treatment, psychotherapy, or drug therapy is
considered merely symptomatic treatment which leaves the patient
superficially better. Obviously these psychiatrists cannot accept
rapid permanent personality changes. Another group are
psychologists who have accepted the hypothesis that personality
is a stable attribute to man. </p>

<p> This reluctance to believe that people can be permanently
altered in a short time seems strange. History is replete with
these sudden transformations. Religions and mass self-help
movements, for example Alcoholics Anonymous, originated from
these changes. William James described many of them in &quot;The
Varieties of Religious Experience&quot; (1902). Unger (1963a) has
given a particularly lucid account of the issue of rapid
personality change. Maslow (1959) has described this phenomena as
&quot;peak&quot; experience and Sargant (1957) tried to abstract
those factors which make man susceptible to these rapid changes.
According to Sargant two factors are essential, (a) a state of
increased excitation in the subject, (b) persuasion. He included
psychoanalysis as one of the conversion techniques together with
religious conversions, etc. </p>

<p> We have already referred to research reports where permanent
personality changes were demonstrated (McGlothlin, 1962, 1964;
McGlothlin et al., 1964; Mogar et al., 1963, Mogar and Savage,
1964). </p>

<p> 3. No good can come from a chemically induced delirium or
psychosis. This criticism so contradicts man's experience with
drugs that it requires no answer. </p>

<p> 4. LSD has not been proved to be effective or safe for any
psychiatric condition (Cole and Katz, 1964). These critics assume
that no therapy is &quot;proved&quot; unless a double blind
comparison experiment is conducted. The word &quot;proved&quot;
is a strange one in clinical science. Usually clinical scientists
define the level of confidence or proof by a probability. That
is, they will if they are statistically inclined, accept a 5%
level of confidence. They will accept as proof a finding if there
is only 5% chance the claims are wrong. Others may demand much
stronger evidence and some may be satisfied merely with an
indication. In general no statement demanding proof has any
scientific meaning unless the author indicates which level of
proof he would accept. Using a puristic point of view one could
claim no psychiatric therapy has been &quot;proven&quot; to be
effective for any psychiatric condition. </p>

<p> Criticism 4(a) really is a demand for double blind studies of
LSD. The answer consists of two parts, (a) are double blind
studies really superior to classical methods in proving drug
efficiency and (b) is it possible to double blind LSD. </p>

<p> The majority of clinicians have not accepted the oft-repeated
claim that double blind techniques are superior to classical
clinical methods. As an example Baird (1964) stated &quot;The
insistence in recent years on 'blindness' or 'double blindness'
in evaluating the effect of therapy is an insult to the
intelligence of the average clinician.&quot; In addition a large
number of scientists who have worked with double blind procedures
have become increasingly disenchanted with it. It has been a
clumsy expensive method which has; not convinced anyone of its
value and which is readily dispensed with when decisive action is
required. The toxicity of thalidomide was not proven by double
blind studies nor have the many new drugs removed from the market
been proven toxic by double blind studies. It appears that when
firm action is indicated classical clinical methods are adequate,
but when matters of efficiency are involved these methods
suddenly become much too crude. </p>

<p> If Baird were unsupported one could ignore him, but when in
fact he is supported by (a) eminent statisticians such as Hogben
(1957), R. A. Fischer (1963), Chassan (1961, 1963, 1964), Bellak
and Chassan (1964), and by others we have reported (Hoffer and
Osmond, 1961a, 1962a,b), and by (b) eminent clinicians including
S. Cohen, H. Lehmann, and many others, and also (c) eminent
psychologists like H. Kluver, then we must ask the proponents of
double blind methodology to prove at the usual 5% level of
confidence that their methods are more apt to show which
chemicals are effective for certain conditions and which are not
effective. Until this is done no clinician need feel guilty about
using the old-fashioned clinical methods including single case
studies, for these were the methods which introduced into
psychiatry ECT, tranquilizers, antidepression drugs, open wards,
eradication of pellagra psychosis and of general pareses of the
insane, and a host of other minor treatments. Better methods will
and must be found and double blind methods are indeed useful in
mopping up studies. They do serve a useful function as
large-scale human toxicity trials and they are more convincing to
inspectorial physicians concerned about global efficacy. However
they have hung a millstone around our necks which is steadily
becoming more burdensome. It is ironic that one man's observation
(Lehmann on chlorpromazine) recently required one million dollars
to be confirmed - see million dollar fizzle ( Margolis, 1964). </p>

<p> Some critics (see inverse square law, p. 197) have suggested
that a placebo be used to double blind LSD. This betrays an
extraordinary lack of experience with LSD. No experienced
therapist would be in any doubt within one hour about determining
whether distilled water or 200 mcg of LSD had been given even if
he were blind and could not see the pupillary dilatation produced
by LSD. Every scientist who has worked with LSD agrees with this.
Only a person completely unfamiliar with psychiatry and with LSD
could mistake situational anxiety for the LSD reaction in a
nonpsychotic subject. It has been suggested further that a new
compound should be developed which would produce the same (or
similar) visual changes as LSD. But this is not helpful, since no
such compound is known, and if it were, would not prove anything,
for it is possible these visual changes are responsible for the
therapeutic results. There is no valid reason to suppose LSD is
more effective than psilocybin or mescaline. It is the experience
not the compound which induces it which is responsible. </p>

<p> However if double blind studies were possible investigators
would use them, not because they are better, but because they are
more fashionable. Perhaps pretreatment with penicillamine would
provide such a design. Statistically identical groups could be
pretreated with penicillamine and with placebo. Then all would be
given LSD in the usual way. The penicillamine would not interfere
with the perceptual component of the experience but would dampen
its emotional component. It would be very difficult for
therapists to decide which patients had received placebo or
penicillamine. One could then conclude that the normal LSD
experience was or was not superior to penicillamine-LSD. Our data
suggests that the improvement rates would be 10% after
penicillamine-LSD and 50% after LSD. However, even such a
controlled double blind experiment would not persuade the critics
for by then they could have produced newer unverified
suggestions. </p>

<p> Criticism 4(b) means little. Any new explanation if it is to
be new must be uncommon in medicine or in psychiatry. Commonality
of ideas is usually not appealed to by scientists. It applies
more to legal and ethical requirements in a court of law. However
we find Cole and Katz' (1964) statement most surprising.
Presumably they are unfamiliar with the enormous range of
theoretical formulations from conservative Freudism to radical
biochemical reasoning. We find it difficult to understand how
modern psychiatry which bases so much on random events, dreams,
ideas, and lapsae linguae can find any formulation uncommon. </p>

<p> Criticism 4(c) is very like 4(b). It is an inevitable
consequence of any new idea that it should produce violent
disbelief and concern in physicians We should remember that many
novel ideas of our past are commonplace today. Just a few
examples will demonstrate how science has reversed itself at
times. Mendelian theory was resisted from 1865 until about 1900
because Mendel's conceptions ran counter to predominant
conceptions of inheritance (were not common to medicine in
general). Mendel's peers condescendingly considered his work
insignificantly provincial (not common to medicine). </p>

<p> The application of mathematics to biology was seriously
questioned for many years. In his biography of Galton, Pearson
reported that he sent a paper to the Royal Society in 1900 which
used statistics. Before it was published the Council of the Royal
Society passed a resolution &quot;that in future papers
mathematics should be kept apart from biological
applications.&quot; Galton founded a new journal and in its first
issue wrote &quot;a new science cannot depend on a welcome from
the followers of the older one.&quot; Harvey, Pasteur, Magendie,
Lister, Funk and Fleming all found their ideas severely tested by
unreasoning hostile criticism because their ideas were uncommon.
It seems new ideas rarely are accepted with an open mind. </p>

<p> Criticism 4(d) is another variant of 4(b) and 4(c). Any new
explanation, however sound it may eventually prove to be, seems
bizarre, almost schizophrenic, to the defenders of the faith. But
it goes a bit further by the adhominem diagnosis of scientists
who use LSD for therapy as having states of paranoia (that is
sharing a delusional belief). This is, of course, a redundant non
sequitur for the definition of delusion is an uncommon idea from
which its possessor will not part when confronted with common
ideas. This is what these authors have already said in 4(b) and
4(c). </p>

<p> Many factors have been suggested which could account for the
therapeutic results claimed by LSD therapists. The usual ones
include faith, bad samples, bias in observers, etc. These are
possible factors but are they merely possible or are they likely?
Before they can be seriously accepted it must be shown that these
variables do improve a proportion of alcoholics. Where are the
double blinds which prove that faith, bias, etc. can produce
equivalent results? We suggest that proponents of these variables
should provide data for their favorite hypothesis before they
expect others to work them into their clinical studies. The
critics of LSD therapy would enormously strengthen their position
if they would demonstrate a double blind study of placebo or
faith. </p>

<p> The scientific literature [excluding editorials (Grinker,
1963, 1964) and review articles] is singularly affirmative. Every
worker who has studied LSD's use for treating alcoholism is in
unusual agreement. The only study recorded where there is some
disagreement is the study of Ditman et al. (1962). They examined
the duration of claims for improvement made by subjects who had
been given LSD. The authors stated &quot;the subjects had
originally been given 100 mcg of LSD-25 orally in a permissive
but non-treatment(1) setting in order to compare the LSD
experience with that of delirium tremens.&quot; Ditman and
Whittlesey (1959) again stated &quot;our subjects received no
intended psychotherapy during the LSD experience.&quot;
Questionnaires were sent to their subjects about 1/2 to 1 1/2
years after their last LSD experience and of those who responded,
27 were alcoholics. Of this group of 27, 18 subjects claimed they
were better, that they were in more comfortable circumstances,
earning more money, and had decreased or stopped drinking. </p>

<p> In as much as this group had not been given LSD as therapy or
in a therapeutic setting and had only received 100 mcg of LSD,
which we have found is relatively ineffectual for most
alcoholics, this is indeed a surprising result. </p>

<p> However, a second questionnaire two years later was answered
by only 16. Of the other 11, 4 had died, 3 from drinking. Of this
group of 16, 11 still claimed periods of abstinence ranging from
1 to 1 1/2 years and twelve claimed lasting benefit. These
authors state that this indicated fewer claims but a chi square
analysis of their own reported data does not support this
contention. Thus, in their first questionnaire, 18 out of 27
claimed improvement; in their second questionnaire, 11 out of 16.
Chi Square is less than 0.5. These results are practically
identical. However, none had maintained their sobriety. We
interpret this to mean that although nearly 2/3 of the group
maintained they were improved at the time of the second
questionnaire, three- and-one-half years after having had
received an ineffectual dose of LSD, none had been continuously
sober that entire period. </p>

<p> We mention this report in some detail because other people
have made claims based on this report not made by Ditman et al.,
that is, that LSD was not an effective therapy for alcoholism.
Their concluding statement merely stated &quot;Three and one-half
years after exposure to LSD there remained only claims of slight
improvement and none of the alcoholic subjects had maintained
their sobriety.&quot; Had they given 200 mcg or more with a
therapeutic objective in a therapeutic setting by therapists
interested in the therapeutic experience and had they used the
community resources including A.A., perhaps at three and one-half
years about 50% of their subjects or better would have been
sober. </p>

<ol>
    <li>Emphasis is ours, not the author's. </li>
</ol>

<p> </p>

<hr>

<p> <a href="http://cliffcompaq/druglibrary/schaffer/index.htm">Cliff
Schaffer's Home Page</a> <br>
</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>