
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B19-156</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B046-152</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/olsen/COPTIC/LETTERS/jim-03.html 206.61.184.43 19970122073359 text/html 4558
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 07:33:41 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 01-Dec-96 17:04:22 GMT
Content-length: 4343
</DOCHDR>
<html>

<head>
<title>Tranmer, Jim - September 6, 1996</title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF" link="#0000FF" vlink="#FF0000"
alink="#FF00FF">
<tt><font size="+1"><a href="../ganjaman.html">

<p>James Tranmer</a> <br>
17547-050 <br>
P.O. Box 1000 <br>
Lewisburg, PA 17837 </p>

<p>September 6, 1996 </p>

<p>Carl, </p>

<p>I found a few minutes to write <a href="jim-02.html"> a few
lines</a> to <a href="../../MEDICAL/IOWA/harkin01.html"> Tom
Harkin</a>.&nbsp; I don't have much confidence, as you probably
know, in either the judicial or the legislative branches of the
U.S. Government.&nbsp; I tried to be brief and to the point and,
as you will see in reading the enclosed copy, I did not attempt
to employ diplomacy.&nbsp; It is difficult for me to see any of
these politicians, lawyers, judges, etc. as being the least bit
compassionate or even attempting to understand people who use
herb or advocate the use of herb. If these elected officials
sincerely believed that the herb is evil, I could more readily
accept their mealy-mouthed stance against its use in any
capacity.&nbsp; But I am thoroughly convinced of their conscious
participation in a heartless, esoteric ploy, the goal of which is
known by these fraudulent marionettes who masquerade as my
representative and who pretend to have my well-being as the
motive of their profession.&nbsp; I know that this is a lie and
that they represent the interests of those who have enabled them
to achieve the lofty position that is indicated by their
particular title.&nbsp; Pain and suffering are not their concern
unless it happens to befall them or their families. I'm sure my
letter will do neither good nor harm for <a
href="../../MEDICAL/HELMERS/helmers2.html"> Allen Helmers</a>'
tribulation because the political machine is determined to keep
marijuana from the people at all cost and these demons will treat <a
href="../../MEDICAL/HELMERS/helmers1.html"> Mr. Helmers</a> with
the same bloodstained hands with which the have slain so many
before him. I invoked the names of Jake and <a
href="../tropic.html"> Tommy</a> because the incident actually
took place and because there are warriors in this great conflict
who know something about this subject and they are both armed
with the spiritual weapons that can make these imposters
regurgitate.&nbsp; When and if they resurrect these dreadful
swords of the spirit is a question I am incapable or
addressing.&nbsp; We both know that some elementary exercises in
humility and some very real and elementary exorcisms of vanity,
pride, and ill-will are required on an individual basis before we
can once again proclaim with conviction, &quot;One God for us
all.&quot; Judy has spent some time this summmer with many
seemingly incompatible spirits from days gone by.&nbsp; Sisters
Billie, Eileen, Jane S., Jane Z., Blossom, Irene L., Cynthia,
Andy, Chris N., and probably a few more I cannot recall.&nbsp;
Brothers Booblius, Rich Cone, Nate, Marv, Chuck L., Joel Z., and
I know some others who slip my mind - Pops and Gary to name
two.&nbsp; Bobby Kleine, too.&nbsp; Plus having talked to Lancer
on the phone and having heard about dozens more via the old
grapevine.&nbsp; Several Jamaicans having joined Stevie
Kleinschmidt on the journey over yonder.&nbsp; Judy loved the
company of each one and longs to talk and sing with as many more
as would be physically possible because she feels a &quot;special
bond&quot; with all of these fine folks.&nbsp; No shit!!&nbsp; I
wonder why?&nbsp; Could it be that we hold something in common
that is magical in its mystery and yet so real to all of
us?&nbsp; We are only depriving ourselves of something holy and
divine if we attempt to exclude anyone.&nbsp; No one need
worry.&nbsp; I can't come just yet, but sometime in May of 2024
I'll be there.&nbsp; Save me a seat, Carl.&nbsp; Better get right
with God, come and do it now, and at the cross of King Alpha and
Queen Omega we lay our burden down!&nbsp; No one is better than
anyone else and, thank God, no one is any worse.&nbsp; What a
glory when we'll all be there.&nbsp; Have I lost my mind?&nbsp; I
actually do love all these characters, and more.&nbsp; Keep up
the good work. <a href="../ganjaman.html"> Jim</a> </font></tt> </p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>