
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B37-48</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B015-137</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/Misc/crack1.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122042910 text/html 8915
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:29:00 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:17:57 GMT
Content-length: 8698
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>The Effects of Crack</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_cocaine_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../cocaine/cocaine.htm">Cocaine and related drugs</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="15264" -->

<h1>The Effects of Crack </h1>

<p><b>by Professor Michael Gazzaniga</b> </p>

<hr>

<p>The following is an excerpt form &quot;Ain't Nobody's Business
If You Do&quot;, by Peter McWilliams. It is a discussion between
William F. Buckley, Jr. And Professor Gazzaniga (the Andrew W.
Thompson Jr. Professor of Psychiatry [Neuroscience] at Dartmouth
Medical School) which was originally published in the February 5,
1990, issue of the National Review. </p>

<p><b>Buckley: </b>It is said that the drug crack is
substantively different from its parent drug, cocaine, in that it
is, to use the term of Professor van den Haag,
&quot;crimogenic.&quot; In other words a certain (unspecified)
percentage of those who take crack are prompted to--well, to go
out and commit mayhem of some kind. Is that correct? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> No, not in the way you put it. What you are
asking is: Is there something about how crack acts on the brain
that makes people who take it likelier to commit crime? Let's
begin by making it clear what crack is. It is simply cocaine that
has been mixed with baking soda, water, and then boiled. What
this procedure does is to permit cocaine to be smoked. Now any
drug ingested in that way-- i.e., absorbed by the lungs--goes
more efficiently to the brain, and the result is a quicker, more
intense experience. That is what crack gives the consumer. But
its impact on the brain is the same as with plain cocaine and, as
a matter of fact, amphetamines. No one has ever maintained that
these drugs are &quot;crimogenic.' The only study I know about
that inquires into the question of crack breeding crime reports
that most homicides involving crack were the result NOT of the
use of crack, but of dealer disputes. Crack did not induce users
to commit crimes. Do some crack users commit crimes? Of course.
After all, involvement in proscribed drug traffic is dangerous.
Moreover, people who commit crimes tend to use drugs at a high
rate, though which drug they prefer varies from one year to the
next. </p>

<p><b>Buckley: </b>You are telling us that an increase in the use
of crack would not mean an increase in crime? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga:</b> I am saying that what increase there would
be in crime would not be simply the result of the pharmacology of
that drug. Look, let's say there are 200,000 users/abusers of
crack in New York City--a number that reflects one of the current
estimates. If so, and if the drug produced violent tendencies in
all crack users, the health-care system would have to come to a
screeching halt. It hasn't. In fact, in 1988 the hospitals in New
York City (the crack capital of the world) averaged only seven
crack-related admissions, city-wide, a day. The perception of
crack-based misbehavior is exaggerated because it is the cases
that show up in the emergency rooms that receive public notice,
and the whole picture begins to look very bleak. All of this is
to say: when considering any aspect of the drug problem, keep in
mind the matter of selection of evidence. It is prudent to recall
that, in the past, dangerous and criminal behavior has been said
to have been generated by other drugs, for instance marijuana
(you remember &quot;Reefer Madness&quot;?). And bear it in mind
that since cocaine is available everywhere, so is crack available
everywhere, since the means of converting the one into the other
are easy, and easily learned. It is important to note that only a
small percentage of cocaine users actually convert their stuff to
crack. Roughly one in six. </p>

<p><b>Buckley</b>: Then would it follow that even if there were
an increase in the use of crack, the legalization of it would
actually result in a decrease in crime? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga</b>: That is correct. </p>

<p><b>Buckley</b>: Isn't crack a drug whose addictive power
exceeds that of many other drugs? If that is the case, one
assumes that people who opt to take crack do so because it yields
the faster and more exhilarating satisfactions to which you make
reference. </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga</b>: That is certainly the current understanding,
but there are no solid data on the question. Current observations
are confounded by certain economic variables. Crack is cheap- </p>

<p><b>Buckley</b>: Why? If cocaine is expensive, how can crack be
cheap? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga</b>: Cocaine costs $1,000 per ounce if bought in
quantity. Once ounce can produce one thousand vials of crack,
each of which sells for $5. The drug abuser is able to experience
more drug episodes. Crack being cheap, the next high can come a
lot more quickly and since there is a down to every up, or high,
the cycle can become intense. So yes, crack is addictive. So is
cocaine. So are amphetamines. The special punch of crack, as the
result of going quickly via the lungs to the brain, may prompt
some abusers to want more. By the way, it is the public knowledge
that crack acts in this way that, as several studies document,
causes most regular cocaine users to be cautious about crack. The
casual- to-moderate user very clearly wants to stay in that
category. So, all you can say is that there is a *perception*,
widely shared, that crack is more addictive. Whether it is, isn't
really known. One thing we do know is that crack does not begin
to approach tobacco as a nationwide health hazard. For every
crack-related death, there are three-hundred tobacco-related
deaths. Another example of hyperbole is the recent claim that
there were 375,000 &quot;crack babies&quot; born last year; how
could that possibly be, when the government (the National
Institutes on Drug Abuse) informs us that there were only 500,000
crack &quot;users&quot; last year? Exaggeration and
misinformation run rampant on this subject. </p>

<p><b>Buckley:</b> Well, if crack were legally available
alongside cocaine and, say, marijuana, what would be the reason
for a consumer to take crack? </p>

<p><b>Gazzaniga</b>: You need to keep your drug classifications
straight. if your goal were, pure and simple, to get high, you
might try crack or cocaine, or some amphetamine. You wouldn't go
for marijuana, which is a mild hallucinogen and tranquilizer. So,
if you wanted to be up and you didn't have much time, you might
go to crack. But then if it were absolutely established that
there was a higher addiction rate with crack, legalization could,
paradoxically, diminish its use. This is so because if cocaine
were reduced to the same price as crack, the abuser,
acknowledging the higher rate of addiction, might forgo the more
intensive high of crack, opting for the slower high of cocaine.
Crack was introduced years ago as offering an alluring new
psychoactive experience. But its special hold on the ghetto is
the result of its price. Remember that--on another front--we know
that 120- proof alcohol doesn't sell as readily as 86 proof, not
by a long shot, even though the higher the proof, the faster the
psychological effect that alcohol users are seeking. <br>
</p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_cocaine_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../cocaine/cocaine.htm">Cocaine and related drugs</a></p>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="15264" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>