
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-7</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000625-B016-247</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/hf51_60.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122043540 text/html 41428
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 04:35:30 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 05:49:56 GMT
Content-length: 41210
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<title>Hemp facts 51 - 60</title>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 1.1">
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>Hemp FACT #51-1 Usage Pt.2 </p>

<p>Date: 95-03-06 11:16:33 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This here information ain't about none of that maryjeewanna
stuff, but I found it interesting. Maybe you will too. I
personally feel it goes to show that people that are addicted to
substances are going to do them come hell or high water. The
others try it and say adios. I'm sure the &quot;drug
warriors&quot; can make something else out of these FACTS. They
might as well. They never seem to come up with any on there own. </p>

<p>National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information </p>

<p>Preliminary Estimates from the 1993 National Household Survey
on Drug Abuse </p>

<p>Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration </p>

<p>Office of Applied Studies </p>

<p>U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Public Health
Services </p>

<p>1993 National Household Survey </p>

<p>Cocaine Use </p>

<p>In 1992, an estimated 1.3 million Americans were current
cocaine users. This represents 0.6 percent of the population aged
12 and older. </p>

<p>The number of cocaine users did not change between 1992 and
1993. It had been 5.3 million in 1985 (2.7 percent of the
population) and 1.9 million in 1991 (0.9 percent). This
represents a significant decrease in use between 1985 and 1993
and between 1991 and 1993. </p>

<p>There were an estimated one-half million (476,000, or 0.2
percent of the population) frequent cocaine users in 1993.
Frequent use, defined as use on a weekly basis during the past
year, was not significantly different than in 1992, when there
were an estimated 642,000. Since this measure of frequent cocaine
use was first estimated in 1985, no significant increases or
decreases have been detected by the NHSDA. It should be noted
that these estimates are subject to large sampling error and
potentially large nonsampling error. </p>

<p>However, the estimated number of occasional cocaine users
(people who used in the past year but less often than monthly)
has sharply declined from 8.1 million in 1985 to 3.0 million in
1993. </p>

<p>The estimated number of current crack users was less than
one-half million in 1993 and there has been no indication of any
increases or decreases in crack use since 1991. </p>

<p>Approximately 60 percent of current cocaine users were age
18-34 in 1993. As in the past, the rate of current cocaine use in
1993 was highest among 18-25 year olds (1.5 percent) and 26-34
year olds (1.0 percent). Rates were 0.4 percent for 12-17 year
olds and 0.4 percent for adults aged 35 and older. </p>

<p>The past month cocaine use prevalence rate for the 12-17 year
old age group has decreased from 1.4 percent in 1985 to 0.4
percent in 1993. Similarly, 18-25 year olds have seen dramatic
decreases in prevalence from 7.5 percent in 1985 to 1.5 percent
in 1993. For the 26-34 year old age group, the rate has declined
from 5.9 percent to 1.0 percent. The rate for persons age 35 and
older has shown variability but remained virtually unchanged
since 1985 (0.4 percent in 1985 and 0.4 percent in 1993). </p>

<p>The 1993 survey continued to show higher rates of cocaine use
among blacks (1.3 percent) and Hispanics (1.1 percent), compared
with whites (0.5 percent) Fifty-nine percent of current cocaine
users were white in 1993. Blacks comprised 23 percent and
Hispanics another 16 percent. During the peak year for cocaine
use (1985), whites comprised 80 percent, blacks comprised 13
percent, and Hispanics comprised 6 percent. </p>

<p>Significant decreases in use have been seen since 1985 for
whites (2.8 percent in 1985 and 0.5 percent in 1993), blacks (3.1
percent in 1985 and 1.3 percent in 1993) and Hispanics (2.3
percent in 1985 and 1.1 percent in 1993). </p>

<p>(See Appendix 2 for discussion of trends among blacks.) </p>

<p>Men continued to have a higher rate of current cocaine use
than women (0.9 percent and 0.4 percent, respectively, in 1993). </p>

<p>Significant decreases occurred for both men and women between
1985 and 1993. Rates had been 3.6 percent for men and 1.9 percent
for women in 1985. </p>

<p>In 1993 the rate of cocaine use was 0.8 percent in the West
region, 0.7 in the Northeast region, 0.6 percent in the South
region, and 0.5 percent in the North Central. </p>

<p>Continued </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #50-Drug Usage </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-05 11:58:37 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>The next series of posts will deal with the actual numbers of
people using and abusing (and there IS a difference) of various
drugs, both legal and illegal. It was obtained from
http://WWW.health.org. Maybe someday AOL will have their Web
Browser ready to go :-) </p>

<p>Until then..... </p>

<p>National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information
Preliminary Estimates from the 1993 National Household Survey on
Drug Abuse Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration Office of Applied Studies U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services Public Health ServiceAdvance </p>

<p>Report Number 7 </p>

<p>July 1994 </p>

<p><b>1993 National Household Survey</b> </p>

<p><b>Marijuana and Hashish Use</b> </p>

<p>In 1993, an estimated 9 million Americans were current
marijuana or hashish users. This represents 4.3 percent of the
population aged 12 and older. </p>

<p>Marijuana is by far the most prevalent drug used by illicit
drug users, as about three quarters (77 percent) of current (past
month) illicit drug users were marijuana or hashish users in
1993. Because of this, trends and demographic differences are
generally similar for any illicit use and marijuana/hashish use.
The number of marijuana and hashish users did not change between
1992 and 1993 (9.0 million in both years). However, use has
declined significantly since 1985, when there were 17.8 million
users. The rate of use declined from 9.3 percent in 1985 to 4.3
percent in 1993. </p>

<p>Frequent use of marijuana, defined as use on a weekly basis
during the past year, remained unchanged from 1991 through 1993
at about 5.1 million weekly users (2.4 percent of the population
in 1993) but was significantly lower than in 1985, when there
were an estimated 8.9 million weekly users (4.6 percent of the
population). </p>

<p>Trends in marijuana and hashish use by age group are similar
to the trends for any illicit drug use. Rates for 12-17 year
olds, 18-25 year olds and 26-34 year olds were significantly
lower in 1993 than for those age groups in 1985. There was no
change in the rate of use for the 35 and older age group. </p>

<p>The rate of marijuana use for 12-17 year olds was 4.0 percent
in 1992 and 4.9 percent in 1993. While this is not a
statistically significant change, it is still noteworthy given
the recently reported increase in marijuana prevalence among high
school students surveyed in the Monitoring the Future Study
(levels of prevalence are different in the two studies because of
different populations covered and different methodologies used).
In fact, the NHSDA did find a significant increase in past year
marijuana use among youths (8.1 percent in 1992 and 10.1 percent
in 1993). </p>

<p>Differences in rates of use between demographic groups were
also similar to the differences described above for any illicit
drug. </p>

<p>Later on folks and have a great day, even you grammone ;) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #51-2 Usage Pt.2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-06 11:18:17 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>....continued from previous post. </p>

<p>Since 1985, the difference in cocaine prevalence by population
density has narrowed. The rate dropped significantly in large
metropolitan areas from 3.6 percent in 1985 to 0.6 percent in
1993, in small metropolitan areas from 2.3 percent to 0.7
percent, and in non metropolitan areas (1.7 percent in 1985 and
0.6 percent in 1993). </p>

<p>Current cocaine use rates remained highly correlated with
educational status. Among 18-34 year olds in 1993, those who had
not completed high school had a current use rate of 2.4 percent.
The rate was 1.3 percent among those with just a high school
education, 0.7 percent among those with some college, and 0.8
percent among college graduates. </p>

<p>66 percent of all adult (age 18 and older) current cocaine
users in 1993 were employed either full or part time. This
reflects an estimated 0.8 million adult employed cocaine users. </p>

<p>The rate of current cocaine use was highest among the
unemployed, as 2.3 percent of unemployed adults were current
cocaine users in 1993, compared with only 0.7 percent of employed
adults. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #52-1 Usage Pt.3 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-07 12:47:01 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>It seems like education has reduced the number of people using
Alcohol part-time. The full time drunks remain the same. These
statistics somewhat match the stats for the decrease in Cocaine
use. I conclude that the laws make no difference; only education
and drug abuse awareness work. Remember not all people that use
alcohol are alcoholics. Not all people that use drugs are drug
addicts. And there are even people that only smoke cigarettes
when they are drinking and are not cigarette addicts. </p>

<p><b>1993 National Household Survey </b></p>

<p><b>Alcohol Use</b> </p>

<p>Estimates of the prevalence of alcohol use are presented in
terms of current use (any use in the past month) and heavy use.
For this report, heavy alcohol use is defined as drinking five or
more drinks per occasion on 5 or more days in the past month. </p>

<p>In 1993, approximately 103 million persons age 12 and over had
used alcohol in the past month, which was about 50 percent of the
total population age 12 and older. About 11 million Americans
(5.3 percent of the population) were heavy drinkers. </p>

<p>Alcohol usage was significantly lower in 1993 than it was in
1985 when 58 percent of the population (112 million) were
drinkers. Heavy alcohol use has changed little since 1985 when
the rate was 6.3 percent and there were an estimated 12 million
heavy drinkers. </p>

<p>Heavy drinkers were more likely to be illicit drug users in
1993. Of the 11 million heavy drinkers, 25.5 percent (3 million
people) were current illicit drug users. Among the 92 million
current drinkers who were not heavy drinkers, the rate of illicit
drug use was 7.6 percent. </p>

<p>For 1993, the rate of drinking remained highest among the 18
to 34 year olds with about 61 percent having used alcohol in the
past month. Current usage was 18 percent in the 12-17 age group
and 49 percent in the 35 and older age group in 1993. In 1993
there were 3.8 million current drinkers in the 12-17 age group,
16.8 million drinkers in the 18-25 age group, 23.3 million
drinkers in the 26-34 age group, and 58.8 million drinkers age 35
and older. </p>

<p>The 18-34 year olds also had the highest rate of heavy
drinking at 8.5 percent, with 10.4 percent of 18-25 year olds and
7.3 percent of 26-34 year olds reporting heavy drinking. </p>

<p>Following a decrease from 20.3 percent in 1991 to 15.7 percent
in 1992, the rate of current alcohol use among 12-17 year olds
increased to 18.0 percent in 1993. The 1993 rate is significantly
lower than it had been in 1985, when it was 31.0 percent. </p>

<p>In 1993, whites continued to have the highest rate of alcohol
use at 53 percent. Rates for Hispanics and blacks were 46 percent
and 38 percent, respectively. Rates of heavy use showed no
statistically significant differences by race/ethnicity (5.7
percent for whites, 5.2 percent for Hispanics, and 4.3 percent
for blacks). </p>

<p>Fifty-seven percent of men were past month alcohol users,
compared with 43 percent of women. Men were much more likely than
women to be heavy drinkers (9.5 and 1.5 percent, respectively). A
significant decrease in heavy drinking among women was seen in
1993. </p>

<p>The rate of current alcohol use was 54 percent in the
Northeast and West regions, 49 percent in the North Central
region, and 45 percent in the South in 1993. Heavy alcohol use
was 5.9 percent in Northeast and North Central, 5.5 percent in
the West and 4.5 percent in the South. </p>

<p>Since 1985, the difference in current alcohol prevalence by
population density has narrowed. The rate dropped significantly
in large metropolitan areas from 65 percent in 1985 to 52 percent
in 1993 and in small metropolitan areas from 56 percent to 48
percent, but has not significantly dropped in non metropolitan
areas. </p>

<p>Heavy alcohol use has dropped significantly in large
metropolitan areas (6.7 percent in 1985 and 4.1 percent in 1993)
but changed little in other areas. The rate of heavy drinking was
lower in large metropolitan areas than in small metropolitan
areas (6.2 percent) and non metropolitan areas (6.5 percent) in
1993. </p>

<p>Continued.... </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #52-2 Usage Pt.3 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-07 12:48:40 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>...Continued </p>

<p>In contrast to the pattern for illicit drugs, the higher the
level of educational attainment, the more likely was the current
use of alcohol. In 1993, 64 percent of adults with college
degrees were current drinkers, compared with only 36 percent of
those having less than a high school education. Among 18-34 year
olds, 69.6 percent of those with college degrees were current
alcohol users in 1993, compared with only 49.6 percent of those
having less than a high school education. However, the rate of
heavy alcohol use in this age group was 4.4 percent among those
who had completed college and 11.3 percent among those who had
not completed high school. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #53-2 Usage Pt.4 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-08 11:40:17 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>What's this? Do I see a trend? It appears that education is
working on lowering the rate of tobacco use in this country. The
same as it has done with alcohol. And the same as it has done
with other drug abuse. If money were spent on education instead
of proping-up Columbian drug lords, we may see a greater decrease
in drug abuse. For those that say the laws have reduced drug use,
I say bollocks. The laws didn't stop anyone from starting their
illicit drug use. </p>

<p><b>1993 National Household Survey</b> </p>

<p><b>Tobacco Use</b> </p>

<p>An estimated 50 million Americans were current smokers in
1993. This represents a smoking rate of 24 percent for the
population age 12 and older. </p>

<p>Current cigarette smoking declined from 26 percent to 24
percent between 1992 and 1993. In 1985, 31 percent of the
population, or 60 million Americans, had been smokers. </p>

<p>Current smokers are more likely to be heavy drinkers and
illicit drug users. Among smokers, the rate of heavy alcohol use
(five or more drinks on five or more days in the past month) was
11.1 percent and the rate of current illicit drug use was 12.3
percent. Among nonsmokers, only 3.4 percent were heavy drinkers
and 3.5 percent were illicit drug users. </p>

<p>An estimated 6.1 million Americans (2.9 percent of the
population) were current users of smokeless tobacco in 1993. </p>

<p>The rate of smoking was highest in the 26-34 year old age
group (30 percent) and the 18-25 year old age group (29 percent).
Rates were 24 percent among adults age 35 and older and 10
percent among 12-17 year olds. More than 2 million 12-17 year
olds were smokers in 1993. </p>

<p>Decreases in smoking since 1985 were apparent in every age
group. However, rates for 12-17 year olds appear to have
stabilized, as the rate was 9.6 percent in both 1992 and 1993. </p>

<p>In 1993, no significant differences in smoking rates by
race/ethnicity were found. Smokeless tobacco use was more
prevalent among whites (3.5 percent) than among blacks (1.5
percent) or Hispanics (1.1 percent). </p>

<p>Among adults, men had somewhat higher rates of smoking than
women, but rates of smoking were similar for males and females
aged 12-17. </p>

<p>Since 1985, the rate of smoking decreased among men (35
percent in 1985 and 26 percent in 1993), and among women (28
percent in 1985 and 22 percent in 1993). </p>

<p>The rate of smokeless tobacco use was significantly higher for
men than for women in 1993 (5.9 percent vs. 0.2 percent). Over 96
percent of smokeless tobacco users were men. </p>

<p>The rate of current cigarette use was similar across regions,
ranging from 23 percent to 25 percent in 1993. The rate of
smoking was 22 percent in large metropolitan areas, 25 percent in
small metropolitan areas, and 28 percent in non metropolitan
areas. </p>

<p>Level of educational attainment was correlated with tobacco
usage. Thirty-five percent of adults who had not completed high
school smoked cigarettes, while only 15 percent of college
graduates smoked. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #54- FAMM </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-09 11:16:14 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>This is an organization I came across. I will try to have the
next series of posts dedicated to the atrocities of minimum
sentences. Remember, &quot;Send a druggie to jail-- set a rapist
free&quot;. </p>

<p><b>FAMM: Families Against Mandatory Minimums</b> </p>

<p>Who's on drugs? You or the Feds? </p>

<p>The feds think you should spend more time in jail for doing
drugs than for rape or attempted murder. </p>

<p>In 1986, Congress passed laws that forced judges to give fixed
sentences to offenders convicted of drug crimes. In 1988,
Congress added certain gun crimes to the list of offenses that
required a minimum number of years behind bars, without parole.
These mandatory minimum sentences were determined solely by the
weight of the drugs, or the presence of a firearm at a drug
crime. </p>

<p>The sentences are mandatory in that judges must impose them,
regardless of the defendant's role in the offense, his
culpability, likelihood of rehabilitation, or any other
mitigating factors. Many states have adopted similar mandatory
minimum sentences (MMS). </p>

<p>What's wrong with MMS? </p>

<p>Mandatory minimum sentences undermine the basic traditions of
justice that Americans have enjoyed for 200 years -- that the
punishment fit the crime. </p>

<p>They strip judges of their power to determine the appropriate
sentence based on all of the facts of the case. They give
low-level offenders longer sentences than most king-pins. The
only way to avoid a mandatory minimum is to provide substantial
assistance to the prosecutor in exchange for a reduction in
sentence. Unlike the organizer, the minor player seldom has
valuable information to trade for a lower sentence. </p>

<p>Sending low-level offenders to prison overloads the prison
system and costs taxes payers a lot of money. They create
sentencing disparities based on race. Studies show that Blacks
and Hispanics are more likely to receive mandatory minimum
sentences more often than whites charged with the same crime.
(U.S. Sentencing Commission Report, 1991). </p>

<p>If anyone is interested in this organization, let me know and
I will either post or e-mail address. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #55- FAMM2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-10 11:05:59 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>I will get to atrocities later. This post may be a day late
and a dollar short, but it may not be too late to act on these
mandatory minimums. Maybe some &quot;staffers&quot; would be kind
enough to pass this own to their bosses. :-) </p>

<p><b>HELP Families against Mandatory Minimums</b> </p>

<p><b>REFORM MARIJUANA SENTENCING LAWS NOW!</b> </p>

<p>Congress has established that a marijuana plant be treated as
1000 grams of marijuana for sentencing purposes involving 50 or
more plants even though it is stated in the Sentencing
Guidelines, that a mature marijuana plant produces on the average
only 100 grams. In cases less than 50 plants the guidelines use
100 grams per plant or the actual weight of useable marijuana,
whichever is greater. This is a 10 to 1 disparity and it is
wrong! </p>

<p><b>PROPOSED MARIJUANA AMENDMENT </b></p>

<p>The U.S. Sentencing Commission is considering various proposed
amendments to the Federal U.S. Sentencing Guidelines. Among these
is Amendment #37, which proanging the weight equivalency for
marijuana plants from the current 1000 grams per plant to 100
grams per plant. Comment is sought on all proposals,
alternatives, and any other aspect of the Sentencing Guidelines,
policy statements, and commentary. </p>

<p>If you support a change in the weight equivalency of marijuana
plants, please WRITE the Commission voicing your support of
Amendment #37. </p>

<p>They are accepting Public Comment until March 7, 1995 (Sorry
I'm late with this). </p>

<p>The Commission will make recommendations to Congress before
May 1, 1995. Some forms of communication are more powerful than
others. Following is a list of the most effective to the least
effective means of impressing members of the U.S. Sentencing
Commission. IT IS CRITICAL for people on the &quot;outside&quot;
to do at least ONE of the Following: </p>

<p>Best - Handwritten letter in your own words. </p>

<p>2nd Best - Handwritten letter copied from a form letter. </p>

<p>3rd Best - A form letter with your signature, address, and the
date in your own handwriting. </p>

<p>4th Best - A petition with the signatures and addresses of as
many people as possible. </p>

<p>TELL them that the current guidelines are arbitrary and
irrational. </p>

<p>REQUEST that they be changed to 100 grams per plant rather
than 1000 grams per plant now in effect. </p>

<p>ASK that the mandatory minimums be changed to reflect this. </p>

<p>REQUEST that the changes to the guidelines be made
RETROACTIVE. </p>

<p>Also ask your friends to write. </p>

<p>Send your comments to: U.S. Sentencing Commission </p>

<p>One Columbus Circle, NE Suite 2-500 </p>

<p>Washington, D.C. 20002-8002 </p>

<p>ATTN: </p>

<p>Public Information : Amendment #37 </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #56- FAMM3 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-11 10:40:05 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>The Cost of Mandatory Minimums</b> </p>

<p>What do mandatory minimums cost taxpayers? </p>

<p>The average cost of incarcerating a federal inmate is $20,804
per year. (Bureau of Prisons, 1994) </p>

<p>Sixty-two percent of federal inmates are drug offenders, and
half of them are first offenders. (Bureau of Prisons testimony,
May 1993). </p>

<p>To feed, clothe, house, and guard the 54,000 federal drug
inmates costs taxpayers over $1.1 billion per year. </p>

<p>The Bureaus of Prisons budget increased by 1,350 percent
between 1982 and FY 1993, to a total of $2.3 billion annually.
(National Drug Control Strategy Budget Summary, 1992). </p>

<p>States spend more of their budgets on justice programs (6.4%)
than on housing and he environment (3.8) and nearly as much as on
health care (8.9%) (Bureau of Justice Statistics, September,
1992). </p>

<p>It costs more to send a person to prison for four years than
it does to send him to a private university for four years,
including tuition, fees, room, board, books and supplies. (Bureau
of Prisons). </p>

<p>Poster's Note: </p>

<p>What is not mentioned here is the fact that most of the people
serving mandatory minimums were gainfully employeed before they
met their fate. This adds untold millions in lost tax revenue
from these &quot;inmates&quot;. Personally, I feel these people
should be let out and put back to work. I'm tired of my tax
dollars going to support them when they are quite capable of
supporting themselves. I rather the govt. spend my money feeding
kids or helping the sick instead of on able-body ready-to-work
people that were the victim of the govt's misguided logic.
Remember, &quot;Send a druggie to jail, set a rapist free.&quot; </p>

<p>I wish the best to those in California. I hope your computers
float and that sunny days return. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #57- Atl. Mthly-1 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-12 14:56:12 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p>I am reposting this article from Atlantic Monthly. Just some
more enlightenment for those that need some. For those that are,
it makes for some interesting reading. </p>

<p><b>8/94: REEFER MADNESS (part 1)</b> </p>

<p>8/94: REEFER MADNESS </p>

<p>Marijuana has not been de facto legalized, and the war on
drugs is not just about cocaine and heroin. In fact, today, when
we don't have enough jail cells for murderers, rapists, and other
violent criminals, there may be more people in federal and state
prisons for marijuana offenses than at any other time in U.S.
history. </p>

<p>by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Copyright 1994, The Atlantic Monthly. </p>

<p>In the state of Indiana a person convicted of armed robbery
will serve about five years in prison; someone convicted of rape
will serve about twelve; and a convicted murderer can expect to
spend twenty years behind bars. These figures are actually higher
than the figures nationwide: eight years and eight months in
prison is the average punishment for an American found guilty of
murder. The prison terms given by Indiana judges tend to be long,
but with good behavior an inmate will serve no more than half the
nominal sentence. </p>

<p>Those facts are worth keeping in mind when considering the
case of Mark Young. At the age of thirty-eight Young was arrested
at his Indianapolis home for brokering the sale of 700 pounds of
marijuana grown on a farm in nearby Morgan County. Young was
tried and convicted under federal law. He had never before been
charged with drug trafficking. He had no history of violent
crime. Young's role in the illegal transaction had been that of a
middleman--he never distributed the drugs; he simply introduced
two people hoping to sell a large amount of marijuana to three
people wishing to buy it. The offense occurred a year and a half
prior to his arrest. No confiscated marijuana, money, or physical
evidence of any kind linked Young to the crime. </p>

<p>He was convicted solely on the testimony of co-conspirators
who were now cooperating with the government. On February 8,
1992, Mark Young was sentenced by Judge Sarah Evans Barker to
life imprisonment without possibility of parole. (Poster's
Note--Remember, &quot;Send a druggie to jail--set </p>

<p>a rapist free&quot;) </p>

<p>There was so much talk in the 1970s about the
decriminalization of marijuana, and the smoking of marijuana is
so casually taken for granted in much of our culture, that many
people assume that a marijuana offense these days will rarely
lead to a prison term. But in fact there may be more people in
prison today for violating marijuana laws than at any other time
in the nation's history. Calculations based on data provided by
the Bureau of Prisons and the United States Sentencing Commission
suggest that one of every six inmates in the federal prison
system--roughly 15,000 people--has been incarcerated primarily
for a marijuana offense. The number currently being held in state
prisons and local jails is more difficult to estimate; a
conservative guess would be an additional 20,000 to 30,000. And
Mark Young's sentence, though unusual, is by no means unique. A
dozen or more marijuana offenders may now be serving life
sentences in federal penitentiaries without hope of parole; if
one includes middle-aged inmates with sentences of twenty or
thirty or forty years, the number condemned to die in prison may
reach into the </p>

<p>hundreds. Other inmates--no one knows how many--are serving
life sentences in state correctional facilities across the
country for growing, selling, or even possessing marijuana. </p>

<p>More of this article to come over the next several days. </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #58- Atl. Mthly-2 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-13 11:09:49 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 2.</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>The phrase &quot;war on drugs&quot; evokes images of Colombian
cartels and inner-city crack addicts. In many ways that is a
misperception. Marijuana is and has long been the most widely
used illegal drug in the United States. It is used here more
frequently than all other illegal drugs combined. According to
conservative estimates, one third of the American population over
the age of eleven has smoked marijuana at least once. More than
17 million Americans smoked it in 1992. At least three million
smoke it on a daily basis. Unlike heroin or cocaine, which must
be imported, anywhere from a quarter to half of the marijuana
used in this country is grown here as well. Although popular
stereotypes depict marijuana growers as aging hippies in northern
California or Hawaii, the majority of the marijuana now
cultivated in the United States is being grown in the nation's
midsection--a swath running roughly from the Appalachians west to
the Great Plains. Throughout this Marijuana Belt drug fortunes
are being made by farmers who often seem to have stepped from a
page of the old Saturday Evening Post. The value of America's
annual marijuana crop is staggering: plausible estimates start at
$4 billion and range up to $24 billion. In 1993 the value of the
nation's largest legal cash crop, corn, was roughly $16 billion. </p>

<p>Marijuana has well-organized supporters who campaign for its
legalization and promote its use through books, magazines, and
popular music. They regard marijuana as not only a benign
recreational drug but also a form of herbal medicine and a
product with industrial applications. Marijuana's opponents are
equally passionate and far better organized. They consider
marijuana a dangerous drug--one that harms the user's mental,
physical, and spiritual well-being, promotes irresponsible sexual
behavior, and encourages disrespect for traditional values. At
the heart of the ongoing bitter debate is a hardy weed that can
grow wild in all fifty states. The two sides agree that countless
lives have been destroyed by marijuana, but disagree about what
should be blamed: the plant itself, or the laws forbidding its
use. </p>

<p>The war on drugs embraced by President Ronald Reagan began
largely as a campaign against marijuana organized by conservative
parents' groups in the late 1970s. After more than a decade in
which penalties for marijuana offenses had been reduced at both
the state and federal levels, the laws regarding marijuana were
made much tougher in the 1980s. More resources were devoted to
their enforcement, and punishments more severe than those
administered during the &quot;reefer madness&quot; of the 1930s
became routine. All the legal tools commonly associated with the
fight against heroin and cocaine trafficking--civil forfeitures,
enhanced police search powers, the broad application of
conspiracy laws, a growing reliance on the testimony of
informers, and mechanistic sentencing formulas, such as mandatory
minimums and &quot;three strikes, you're out&quot;--have been
employed against marijuana offenders. The story of how Mark Young
got a life sentence reveals a great deal about the emergence of
the American heartland as the region where a vast amount of the
nation's marijuana is now grown; about the changing composition
of the federal prison population; and about the effects of the
war on drugs, a dozen years after its declaration, throughout
America's criminal-justice system. Underlying Young's tale is a
simple question: How does a society come to punish a person more
harshly for selling marijuana than for killing someone with a
gun? (Poster's Note--Remember: &quot;Send a druggie, set a
MURDERER free) </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #59- Atl. Mthly-3 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-14 11:26:26 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 3</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>The Plant in Question </p>

<p>&quot;Marijuana&quot; is the Mexican colloquial name for a
plant known to botanists as Cannabis sativa. In various forms it
has long been familiar throughout the world: in Africa as
&quot;dagga,&quot; in China as &quot;ma,&quot; in Northern Europe
as &quot;hemp.&quot; Although cannabis most likely originated in
the steppes of central Asia, it now thrives in almost any
climate, spreading like milkweed or thistle, crowding out
neighboring grasses and reaching heights of three to twenty feet
at maturity. Marijuana has been cultivated for at least 5,000
years; it is one of the oldest agricultural commodities not grown
for food. The stalks of the plant contain fibers that have been
woven for millennia to make rope, canvas, and paper. Cannabis is
dioecious, spawning male and female plants in equal proportion.
The flowering buds of the female--and to a lesser extent those of
the male--secrete a sticky yellow resin rich with cannabinoids,
the more than sixty compounds unique to marijuana. Several of
them are psychoactive, most prominently
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). </p>

<p>Lester Grinspoon, an associate professor of psychiatry at
Harvard Medical School, believes that marijuana will someday be
hailed as a &quot;miracle drug,&quot; one that is safe,
inexpensive, and versatile. In his book Marihuana, the Forbidden
Medicine (1993) Grinspoon provides anecdotal evidence that
smoking marijuana can relieve the nausea associated with
chemotherapy, prevent blindness induced by glaucoma, serve as an
appetite stimulant for AIDS patients, act as an anti-epileptic,
ward off asthma attacks and migraine headaches, alleviate chronic
pain, and reduce the muscle spasticity that accompanies multiple
sclerosis, cerebral palsy, and paraplegia. Other doctors think
that Grinspoon is wildly optimistic, and that no &quot;crude
drug&quot; like marijuana--composed of more than 400
chemicals--should be included in the modern pharmacopoeia. They
point out that effective synthetic drugs, of precise dosage and
purity, have been developed for every one of marijuana's
potential uses. Dronabinol, a synthetic form of delta-9-THC, has
been available for years, though some clinical oncologists find
it inferior to marijuana as an anti-nausea agent. There have been
remarkably few large-scale studies that might verify or disprove
Grinspoon's claims. Nevertheless, thirty-six states allow the
medicinal use of marijuana, and eight patients are currently
receiving it from the Public Health Service. According to
Grinspoon, the federal government has always been far more
interested in establishing marijuana's harmful effects than in
discovering any of its benefits, while major drug companies have
little incentive to fund expensive research on marijuana. As
Grinspoon explains, &quot;You cannot patent this plant.&quot; </p>

<p>The long-term health effects of chronic marijuana use, and
marijuana's role as a &quot;gateway&quot; to the use of other
illegal drugs, are issues surrounded by great controversy.
Marijuana does not create a physical dependence in its users, but
it does create a psychological dependence in some. People who
smoke marijuana are far more likely to experiment later with
other psychoactive drugs, but no direct cause-and-effect
relationship has ever been established. Delta-9-THC is highly
lipid-soluble and has a half-life of five days, which means that
it diffuses widely throughout the human body and remains there
for quite some time: an occasional user can fail a urine test
three days after smoking a single joint, and a heavy user may
test positive after abstaining from marijuana for more than a
month. Delta-9-THC's persistence within various cells and vital
organs (also a characteristic of Valium, Thorazine, and quinine)
suggests that it could have the ability to exert subtly harmful
effects; few have yet been proved. </p>

<p>Part 4 Tomorrow </p>

<h3>Hemp FACT #60- Atl. Mthly-4 </h3>

<p>Date: 95-03-15 11:14:05 EDT </p>

<p>From: ADBryan </p>

<p><b>REEFER MADNESS -- Part 4</b> </p>

<p>REEFER MADNESS by Eric Schlosser </p>

<p>Originally published in Atlantic Monthly, August 1994 issue. </p>

<p>Studies of lifelong heavy marijuana users in Jamaica, Greece,
and Costa Rica reveal little psychological or physiological
damage. Much more research, however, needs to be done in the
areas of cognition, reproduction, and immunology. Adolescent
users in particular would be at risk if marijuana were found to
have pernicious systemic effects. Some studies have shown that
short-term memory deficiencies in heavy smokers, though
reversible, may endure long after the cessation of marijuana use.
Other studies have demonstrated in vitro and in laboratory
animals that marijuana may have a mild immunosuppressive effect,
but no study has conclusively linked delta-9-THC to immune-system
changes in human beings. Well-publicized horror stories from the
1970s--that marijuana kills brain cells, damages chromosomes, and
prompts men to grow breasts--were based on faulty research. </p>

<p>Smoking marijuana does seem to damage the pulmonary system, in
some of the ways that inhaling tobacco smoke does. In a study of
people who have smoked four or five joints a day for more than
ten years, the physician Donald P. Tashkin, of the University of
California at Los Angeles Medical Center, has found substantial
evidence that marijuana smoke can cause chronic bronchitis,
changes in cells of the central airway which are potentially
pre-cancerous, and an impairment in scavenger-cell function which
could lead to a risk of respiratory infection. A joint seems to
deliver four times as much carcinogenic tar as a tobacco
cigarette of the same size. Tashkin expects that some heavy
marijuana users will eventually suffer cancers of the mouth,
throat, and lungs, although none of his research subjects has yet
developed a malignancy. Oddly enough, the more potent strains of
marijuana may prove less dangerous, since less of them needs to
be smoked. </p>

<p>There is much less disagreement about the short-term health
effects of marijuana. According to the physician Leo Hollister, a
former president of the American College of
Neuropsychopharmacology, who now teaches at the University of
Texas, the occasional use of marijuana by a healthy adult poses
no greater risks than the moderate consumption of alcohol. For a
variety of reasons, however, marijuana should not be smoked by
schizophrenics, pregnant women, and people with heart conditions.
</p>

<p>Although the misuse of over-the-counter medications such as
aspirin, acetaminophen, and antihistamines each year kills
hundreds of Americans, not a single death has ever been credibly
attributed directly to smoking or consuming marijuana in the
5,000 years of the plant's recorded use. Marijuana is one of the
few therapeutically active substances known to man for which
there is no well-defined fatal dose. It has been estimated that a
person would have to smoke a hundred pounds of marijuana a minute
for fifteen minutes in order to induce a lethal response. </p>

<p>Part 5. Manana <br>
</p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_hemp_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="43885" -->

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
</DOC>