
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B22-38</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000632-B028-163</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/history/opium_ind1898.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122095839 text/html 10731
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 09:58:27 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Sunday, 19-Jan-97 10:59:03 GMT
Content-length: 10515
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>The Opium Industry in America - 1898</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY" startspan
-->

<p align="center"><img src="../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="28886" --><!--webbot
bot="Include" u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->

<hr>

<p><font size="3">Scientific American 1898, p. 147</font></p>

<p><font size="3">THE OPIUM INDUSTRY IN AMERICA</font></p>

<p><font size="3">BY C.F. HOLDER</font></p>

<p><font size="3">An attempt to raise the opium poppy has been in
progress for several years in California. The hot days seemed
altogether favorable for the production of the plant and drug,
but the accompanying cold nights and the absence of cheap labor
proved fatal to the project, and it has been given up as a
failure. The value of the drug as a means of money making was, of
course, the incentive, and the extraordinary and growing demand
for opium in all countries tells a suggestive story of the habit
that has obtained a firm hold among the people of all races.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In the very oldest books of the Arabs the poppy
is mentioned, showing that the use of the gum is one of the most
ancient of practices. The poppy used for the purpose is Papaver
somniferum, a plant discovered, in all probability, by the Arabs
and carried from Arabia by man over large portions of the globe.
At first opium was used as a medicine. Theophrastus was familiar
with it, and Dioscorides, in 77 A.D., wrote a learned paper on
its properties. Up to the twelfth century Asia Minor was the
source of supply, and from then on it was gradually distributed
over the globe. The Chinese first obtained the drug in the
thirteenth century, it being used purely as medicine; but
gradually its insidious effects were realized and it became so
important a drug in a commercial sense that in 1757 the great
monopoly was secured in India by the East India Company. The
business rapidly increased from one thousand chests in 1776 to
nearly five thousand in 1790. At this time the emperor Kea King
fully realized the effect the drug was having upon his people,
and in 1786 its importation was forbidden. Chinese caught smoking
were flogged and severely punished. This not having the desired
effect, those who were found using it were transported or
beheaded. Even this did not affect the sale, and in 1825 the
importation of opium into China had increased to 16,877 chests.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In 1839 the Chinese government made a desperate
effort to drive off the English opium sellers by ordering off the
English opium ships. This not being complied with, nearly thirty
thousand chests of opium were destroyed, entailing a loss of ten
million dollars. This led to the war and final treaty of Nankin
in 1842.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The Chinese government appreciates the
dangerous nature of the drug and its effect upon the nation, and
has never ceased its endeavors to stamp it out; but without
avail, and today China is probably the largest poppy producing
nation. The provinces famous for it are Chekeang, Yunnan, While
southwestern China produces 224,000 peculs, against 100,000
peculs from India. Today over half the provinces of China produce
opium, and the habit of opium smoking seems confirmed. Turkey is
noted for its production, and the best opium used in the United
States by druggists comes from there.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Some idea of the importance of the trade and
the amount used can be obtained from the following: In Macedonia
the crop is estimated at 140,000 pounds per annum. In Bengal,
where it is a government monopoly, the output is equal to about
90,000 chests, valued at $55,000,000. Persia produces about
10,000 chests: Egypt about $10,000 worth annually, and Mozambique
has 60,000 acres under cultivation. Opium has been raised in
Virginia and Tennessee, as well as California, but owing to the
lack of cheap labor and the uncertainty of the crops, due to
frosts, the business is unprofitable.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">Nearly all the opium smoked by the Chinese in
this country comes from the Fook Hing Company, of Hong-Kong,
which pays the government $300,000 per year for the privilege of
carrying on the business. The opium is packed in five-tael tins,
which bring in San Francisco $8 each. Some excessive smokers use
from four to eight dollars' worth a week.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">It has been estimated that in San Francisco
thirty per cent of the Chinese are addicted to smoking and that
ten per cent of the entire population of Chinatown are habitual
&quot;opium drunkards.&quot; The drug is smoked as freely as
tobacco. First, there are the opium dens. There are scores of
these dens in the Chinese quarter of every large city. There the
Chinaman can buy his pipe and smoke in peace. In San Francisco
white people are forbidden to visit these dens, but they have
such places of their own, which are well known to the police, and
the vice is ever spreading and increasing.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">It is somewhat difficult to determine the
amount of opium received in San Francisco, but during the past
decade about 600,000 pounds has been taken into that port. In one
year the importations for smoking purposes amounted to 100,000
pounds. Previous to 1883 the duty was but $6 per pound. At that
time it was increased to $10 per pound on the smoking extract and
$1 per pound for crude opium. This had little or no effect upon
the trade, as consumers were obliged to have the drug at any
price. In 1889 the McKinley bill raised the duty to $12 per pound
on opium of all kinds which contained less than nine per cent of
morphia. Even under this restriction, and despite the fact that
the exclusion bill was in full force, over 63,000 pounds of opium
were legitimately introduced in that year, and probably twice as
much more smuggled in, the government receiving nearly a million
dollars from the duties.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">At the present time the importation of crude
opium is decreasing. This is due to the law of 1889, which states
that only native Americans can legally manufacture the extract,
and the law also demands a tax of $10 per pound. The duty on the
best Patna opium is $12 per pound, and as it requires two and
one-half pounds of this to equal one of the extract, this would
make the latter cost about $30 per pound. To this would have to
be added $10 per pound revenue tax, which makes a total of $40
per pound on American made opium extract. It need not be said
that very little is made, as the Chinese preparation can be had
for $18 per pound. The great demand for the extract has induced
smuggling, and illicit stills were started everywhere. Opium was
and is still smuggled in at the Canada and Mexican lines. It is
landed at the islands off shore and brought in by Chinese
fishermen, smuggled in on steamers, dropped into the bay and the
law evaded in numerous ways familiar to the &quot;heathen
Chinee.&quot;</font></p>

<p><font size="3">In San Francisco hundreds of &quot;opium
kitchens&quot; were started. These were extremely difficult to
find. Some were established in boats, others in dark cellars,
others in the rear of private dwellings. Scores have been closed
up by the police, yet some undoubtedly thrive, just as the whisky
[sic] distillers escape the law in the wilds of Kentucky and
Tennessee. The city of San Francisco has aided the government in
restricting the sale. In 1881 the city passed a bill declaring it
unlawful for any one to sell opium for smoking purposes without a
license, the amount of the license being gagged by the amount of
business. Thus if a den did a business of $5,000, the owner was
charged $150 for the privilege. In 1889, at the earnest request
of reformers, an ordinance was passed making it illegal to sell
opium without a physician's prescription. There is also a law
which makes it illegal for any one to keep or even visit an opium
house. Three months' imprisonment is the punishment, but this has
no effect. The dens are crowded, as every tourist who goes
through Chinatown knows, and the only result is that whites are
not found in the Chinese dens; they start dens of their own.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">The difficulty of conviction lies in the
universality of the habit, as it pervades the home and business.
Wherever the Chinese are found there will be the odor of opium.
They smoke it as Americans do tobacco. Nearly every well
regulated Chinese home has its opium smoking outfit, where the
guest is invited to smoke. Many of the merchants have such a
retreat in the rear of their shops, into which a customer may be
asked to smoke as an American merchant is invited to take a
cigar. The difficulty, then, lies in the impossibility of drawing
the line between professional and private opium dens.</font></p>

<p><font size="3">[NOTE: The article from which this file was
excerpted may include additional text and accompanying
illustrations.]</font></p>

<hr>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../_private/sch_History_navbar.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p><a href="../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="history.htm"><font size="3">Historical Research</font></a></p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="64902" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>