
<DOC>
<DOCNO>WT01-B21-19</DOCNO>
<DOCOLDNO>IA087-000627-B014-281</DOCOLDNO>
<DOCHDR>
http://206.61.184.43:80/schaffer/hemp/medical/hollis2.htm 206.61.184.43 19970122051204 text/html 35128
HTTP/1.0 200 OK
Date: Wednesday, 22-Jan-97 05:11:54 GMT
Server: WebSitePro/1.1f (S/N wpo-0deb)
Allow-ranges: bytes
Content-type: text/html
Last-modified: Saturday, 28-Dec-96 06:04:47 GMT
Content-length: 34910
</DOCHDR>
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">

<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title>Marijuana and Immunity by Leo Hollister, M.D.</title>
<meta name="FORMATTER" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
</head>

<body stylesrc="../../../_private/schaffer_style.htm"
background="../../../images/whttxtr2.jpg" bgcolor="#F2F2F2">
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/schaffer_logo.htm" tag="BODY"
startspan -->

<p align="center"><img src="../../../images/schlogo_small.gif"
align="bottom" width="583" height="38"> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="1994" --><!--webbot
bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->

<h2>MARIJUANA and IMMUNITY </h2>

<p><b>by LEO E HOLLISTER, M.D. </b></p>

<p><b>Journal of Psychoactive Drugs p159-163 Vol.24 Apr-Jun 1992 </b></p>

<p><img src="../../graphics/blueline.gif" width="562" height="19">
</p>

<p>Few areas of scientific research have been as controversial as
the effect of marijuana on immune defenses. The effects of
marijuana on health in general have been marked by polarities of
belief or interpretation of evidence often due to the prejudices
of investigators. In addition, evidence of altered immune
functions is derived mainly from in vitro tests or ex vivo
experiments, which employed doses of cannabinoids far in excess
of those that prevail during social use of marijuana. Finally,
the clinical significance of the experimental observations is
difficult to assess. The present review will attempt to
objectively assess the evidence. Other recent reviews of the
subject have also appeared, with varying degrees of intensity of
coverage (Hollister 1986); Maykut 1985; Munson &amp; Fehr 1983;
Rosenkrantz 1976). For purposes of a more systematic discussion,
immunity will be considered as several separate topics: (1)
cell-mediated immunity, (2) humoral mechanisms, (3) cellular
defenses, and (4) immunogenicity of marijuana or cannabinoids. </p>

<p>CELL-MEDIATED IMMUNITY LYMPHOCYTE TRANSFORMATION Lymphocytes
exposed to several mitogens divide rapidly, increase protein and
nucleic acid synthesis, and show morphological changes resembling
blasts. This test of the ability of T-lymphocytes to transform
themselves measures one potential aspect of cell-mediated
immunity. A direct way to measure the activation of lymphocytes
is to measure the rate of incorporation of nucleic acid, such as
3H-thymidine, into the cells following addition of the mitogen to
the culture. All studies are conducted in vitro. </p>

<p>An early study (Nahas et al. 1976) measured 3H-thymidine
uptake in normal human lymphocytes stimulated by both
phytohemagglutinin (PHA) and allogenic cell mixed lymphocyte
culture (MLC). The incorporation of 3H-thymidine was equally
inhibited by 10-5M to 10-4M concentrations of
D9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), D8-tetrahydrocannabinol (D8-THC),
their corresponding 11-OH metabolites, a variety of other
inactive cannabinoids, and olivetol. THC in similar
concentrations also depressed 3H-uridine uptake, indicating an
effect of protein and RNA synthesis as well. These concentrations
were 10 to 20 times greater than those reported earlier by the
same group (Nahas et al. 1974) as having similar effects. In this
study, cell-mediated immunity was evaluated in 51 young, chronic
marijuana smokers whose lymphocytes were stimulated in vitro by
PHA and MLC. As compared with normal controls, 3H-thymidine
uptake was reduced. </p>

<p>Klein and colleagues (1985) added the predominantly T-cell
mitogens, PHA and concanavalin A (Con A), and the B-cell mitogen,
E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS), to mice spleen cells treated
with varying concentrations of THC and its active metabolite
11-OH-THC. Both T-cell lymphocyte and B-cell lymphocyte
proliferation in response to mitogens were suppressed by THC, but
considerably less by 11-OH-THC. Proliferation of both types of
lymphocytes was completely inhibited by concentrations of THC
(10ug/ml) that were not directly lytic to the cells. Lower
concentrations of THC were found to inhibit B-cell lymphocytes
than those required for T-lymphocytes, suggesting that humoral
immunity was more impaired than cell-mediated immunity in this
system. </p>

<p>By no means have all studies of cell-mediated immunity in
marijuana smokers or in vitro exposure of T-cells to
cannabinoids-often conducted in exactly the same way-shown
evidence of immunosuppression. Indeed, the inconsistency of study
findings has led to the present state of ambiguity. </p>

<p>White, Brin and Janicki (1975) obtained peripheral blood
lymphocytes from 12 healthy long-term marijuana smokers. The
blastogenic response to PHA and pokeweed mitogen were measured in
vitro by 3H-thymidine uptake. The responses of lymphocytes from
the marijuana smokers were not significantly different from those
who did not smoke the drug. </p>

<p>Lau and colleagues (1976) observed eight chronic smokers of
marijuana in a hospital setting over a 30-day period. Each
subject received a placebo during the first six days, followed by
THC in oral doses up to 210 mg/day for the next 18 days, then a
placebo for the last six days. The response of their lymphocytes
to PHA stimulation, as measured by 3H-thymidine uptake, was no
different in either of the three periods. </p>

<p>Rachelfsky and Opedz (1977) stimulated normal human
lymphocytes with PHA and with MLC, and 3H-thymidine uptake was
measured. The uptake of thymidine was unchanged in lymphocytes
exposed to 1.9 x 10-4M or 12.0 x 10-4M concentrations of THC.
Higher concentrations of THC precipitated in the medium. Changes
were comparable in cells exposed to THC and in those not so
exposed. </p>

<p>Kaklamani and colleagues (1978) obtained peripheral
lymphocytes from 12 chronic users of marijuana and 15 nonusing
control subjects. Lymphocytes from the experienced marijuana
users were obtained before and after smoking hashish.
Incorporation of 14C-thymidine, after PHA stimulation and
formation of rosettes of sheep erythrocytes, was no different
between the normal controls and the marijuana users either before
or after the latter had smoked hashish. </p>

<p>Whatever immunosuppressive effects marijuana may have, they
are not dependent on psychoactive components. A variety of
cannabinoids, which have no apparent central nervous system
activity, share an apparent immunosuppressive action (Smith et
al. 1978). </p>

<p>T-Lymphocyte Rosette Formation Another commonly used measure
of cell-mediated immunity is the ability of T-lymphocytes to form
in vitro rosettes of sheep erythrocytes surrounding T cells. A
dose-related decrease in rosette formation was found in
sensitized T cells exposed in vitro to various concentrations of
THC in this medium (Cushman, Khurana &amp; Hashim 1976). Cushman
and Khurana (1977) tested 10 subjects during a four-week cycle of
marijuana smoking, so that the subjects were exposed chronically
rather than acutely, and the results showed a decrease in early
T-cell formation, but no change in either late T-cell or B-cell
rosettes. When Gupta, Grieco and Cushman (1974) compared 23
chronic marijuana smokers with 23 nonsmokers, T-cell rosettes
were decreased in the users as compared with nonusers, but
associated with B-lymphocytes were not different, suggesting a
selective effect on cell-mediated immunity. </p>

<p>Petersen, Graham and Lemberger (1976) tested three subjects
who smoked &quot;street&quot; marijuana for rosette formation and
blastogenesis. Two of three showed decreased rosette formation
and impaired blastogenesis following stimulation of their
lymphocytes with PHA. In another trial, rosette formation was
measured in six persons three to six hours after they smoked a
marijuana cigarette containing 10mg of THC. Rosette formation was
impaired in five of the subjects, and became normal 24 hours
later in all but one subject. Thus, it appeared that the effects
of marijuana on T-lymphocytes are variable and reversible,
suggesting that factors other than exposure to marijuana itself
may be involved. </p>

<p>Mice immunized with sheep erythrocytes were treated with
intraperitoneal doses of 10, 25, and 40mg/kg/day of THC for seven
to eight days. Both plaque-forming and rosette-forming cells were
decreased by the 25mg/kg/day dose (Lefkowitz et al. 1978).
Monkeys were exposed to three levels of marijuana smoke over a
six-month period. Plasma immunoglobulins (IgG and IgM) were
decreased in those monkeys exposed to medium and high
concentrations of smoke. In vitro tests by Dual and Heath (1975)
of the response of lymphocytes to Con A were decreased. Thus,
both humoral and cell-mediated immunity appeared to be affected.
However, the authors asserted that it is impossible to assess the
in vivo implications from tests of this sort. </p>

<p>Cushman and Khurana (1977) tested 10 subjects during a
four-week cycle of marijuana smoking, so that the subjects were
exposed chronically rather than acutely. the results showed a
decrease in early T-cell rosette formation, but no change in
either late T-cell or B-cell rosettes. </p>

<p>These studies also indicated that T-lymphocyte function, as
measured by rosette formation, was decreased when the cells are
exposed to cannabinoids either in vitro or ex vivo. However,
these impairments were rapidly reversible. </p>

<p>Other Measurements of Cell-mediated Immunity A number of other
measurements of cell-mediated immunity have pointed in the same
direction. Although both impaired allograft rejection and
decreased hemagglutinin titers were found in animals treated with
cannabinoids, the effect on allograft rejection as a measure of
cell-mediated immunity was greater (Munson et al 1976).
Susceptibility to infection with herpes simplex virus type 2
applied directly to the vagina was increased in mice that had
received doses of 100mg/kg/day of THC (Mishkin &amp; Cabral
1985). A similar increased susceptibility was found in guinea
pigs treated with doses of 4.0 and 10mg/kg/day (Cabral et al.
1986). </p>

<p>Morohan and colleagues assessed the LD50 dose of Listeria
monocytogenes in mice treated with THC in doses of 38, 75 and
150mg/kg. The LD50 was decreased 10-, 17- and 657-fold by each
dose, respectively. The marijuana extract was less active. A
similar challenge with herpes simplex type 2 virus showed a
96-fold decrease following administration of marijuana extract.
These situations are not at all comparable to human exposure. </p>

<p>The vast majority of people can be made sensitive to
dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB), a powerful skin sensitizer. DNCB is
often used with &quot;recall&quot; antigens (eg. tuberculin and
mumps) to test patients for anergy. Sensitivity to DNCB was found
in all 34 chronic marijuana smokers who were tested as compared
with 96 percent of 279 healthy nonsmokers. On the other hand, 384
patients with cancer, whose cell-mediated immunity is sometimes
decreased, showed a positive reaction in only 70 percent of those
tested (Silverstein &amp; Lessin 1974). Such evidence raises
questions about the clinical significance of experiments that
have shown evidence of cell-mediated immunity from cannabinoids. </p>

<p>It has been hypothesized that the membrane-disordering effects
of THC may affect the binding of antigens to cellular receptors,
accounting for a decrease in cell-mediated immunity. On the other
hand, the combination of increased membrane disorder and
inhibition of acyltransferase activity in B cells and T cells
could impair the transfer of cellular constituents (Baczynsky
&amp; Zimmerman 1983b). Regardless of whether the action is a
nonspecific one at the cell membrane or at a more primary site,
impaired immunity remains precisely that. However, a cell
membrane site of action could explain the apparent transitory
nature of the observed alterations in cell-mediated immunity, as
well as the requirement for much larger concentrations of
cannabinoids than those usually encountered during social use of
marijuana </p>

<p>Summary of Effects of Cell-mediated Immunity In summary, the
effects of cannabinoids on cell-mediated immunity are
contradictory. Such evidence as has been obtained to support such
an effort has usually involved doses and concentrations that are
orders of magnitude greater than those obtained when marijuana is
used by human subjects. Clinically, one might assume that
sustained impairment of cell-mediated immunity might lead to an
increased prevalence of opportunistic infections, or an increased
prevalence of malignancy, as seen in the current epidemic of
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). No such clinical
evidence has been discovered or has any direct epidemiological
data incriminated marijuana use with the acquisition of human
immunodeficiency virus infection or the clinical development of
AIDS. Even though some degree of impairment of immune responses
were to occur, the remaining immune function may be adequate,
especially in the young persons who are major users of cannabis. </p>

<p>HUMORAL IMMUNITY Transformation of B-Lymphocytes
Transformation of B cells stimulated by the mitogen PLPS was
inhibited more than were T cells stimulated by PHA following the
same doses of THC in mice (Klein et al. 1985). This evidence of
diminished B-cell reactivity following the administration of THC
was confirmed in another study (Munson et al. 1976) that showed a
dose dependent suppression from doses of 50, 100, and 200mg/kg of
THC in mice. These doses are enormous, of course. </p>

<p>Antibody Formation A frequently used measure of humoral
immunity is the ability of splenic lymphocytes from mice that are
immunized against sheep erythrocytes to form plaques when exposed
to in vitro to sheep erythrocytes. Levy and Heppner (1981) found
that both THC and haloperidol produced dose-dependent reductions
in hemolytic plaque-forming cell (PFC) numbers at the time of
peak reactivity (day 4) in control mice. Treatment with THC and
haloperidol only delayed the time of peak PFC formation by 24 to
48 hours (doses were high enough to produce signs of gross
behavioral toxicity). Neither THC nor other cannabinoids had any
effect on the titer of serum hemagglutinating antibody measured
seven days after immunization. </p>

<p>Baczynsky and Zimmerman (1983a) immunized mice with sheep
erythrocytes on Day 1 (primary immune response) and on Days 1 and
28 (secondary immune response) and measured hemagglutinin titers.
Mice treated with 10 mg or 15 mg of THC during the primary
immunization period exhibited a suppression of the primary
humoral immune response. These doses also suppressed the
secondary immune response, even when given during the period of
primary immunization. Mice treated with THC during the secondary
immunization period showed no measurable response. Other
cannabinoids had no effect. </p>

<p>Immature mice immunized with sheep erythrocytes also showed
suppression of the immune response when treated with THC in doses
of 1.0, 5.0, and 10.0 mg/kg. Splenic weight was reduced and PFC
as well as hemagglutinin titers were lower than controls. The
suppression was specific for THC and was not observed with
cannabidiol or cannabinol, even at doses of 25 mg/kg (Zimmerman
et al. 1977). Some evidence of tolerance or hyporesponsiveness to
this humoral antibody suppression by THC was found when mice were
treated with THC for five days prior to immunization as well as
afterward (Loveless, Harris &amp; Munson 1981-82). </p>

<p>Rosenkrantz, Miller and Esber (1975) immunized rats with a
single intraperitoneal dose of sheep erythrocytes during, before
and after administration of THC in order to determine its effect
on the inductive and productive phases of the primary immune
response. following a dose of 10 mg/kg, THC decreased the primary
immune response 33 to 40 percent; the inductive phase was
decreased by 48 to 78 percent by all doses of THC and the
productive phase was decreased by 26 to 59 percent by the higher
doses. </p>

<p>The same group (Luthra et al. 1980) tested the primary immune
response of rats to intraperitoneal administration of sheep
erythrocytes after five to 26 days following pretreatment with
THC in order to determine if tolerance developed to the
immunosuppressant effects. As measured by splenic
antibody-forming cells and hemagglutinin/hemolysin titers, no
evidence of tolerance was found. </p>

<p>Summary of Effects of Humoral Immunity In summary, humoral
immunity, as tested by a number of in vitro procedures, seems
also to be impaired by cannabinoids, but this effect was most
evident for THC. The clinical significance of such changes is
questionable due to the great concentrations of cannabinoids used
and the lack of any epidemiological evidence of increased
bacterial infections in chronic users of marijuana. </p>

<p>CELLULAR DEFENSES Leukocytes and Lymphocytes When 10 subjects
were followed through a four-week cycle of marijuana smoking, no
change was observed in either peripheral leukocyte or absolute
lymphocyte counts (Cushman &amp; Khurana 1977). Leukocytes from
five chronic marijuana smokers were compared with those from five
nonusers of the drug for their ability to migrate after exposure
to THC or marijuana extract. Both treatments inhibited leukocyte
migration without killing the cells, both in cells from users and
nonusers of marijuana. The prevailing THC concentration needed to
accomplish this was 2.0ug/ml, a couple of orders of magnitude
greater than any THC plasma concentrations usually found
clinically (Schwartzfarb, Needle &amp; Chavez-Chase 1974). </p>

<p>Natural Killer-cell Activity Natural killer-cell activity in
rats was decreased by subchronic treatment (25 days) with THC,
but not after acute treatment (one day). this effect was not
found in rats treated simultaneously with naloxone, suggesting
possible involvement with the opiate system (Patel et al 1985).
when injected into mice, both THC and its active metabolite
11-OH-THC suppressed splenic natural killer-cell activity in
vitro. The tissue concentrations of the cannabinoids were
reported as being 5.0-10.0 ug/ml, about two orders of magnitude
greater than those that might be experienced during the social
use of marijuana (Klein, Newton &amp; Friedman 1987). </p>

<p>Macrophages Macrophages work closely with T-cells as part of
the immunological defense system. On glass surfaces, macrophage
cultures normally show spreading, which is an indication of their
mobility. the addition of THC to the medium inhibited the degree
of spreading. It also inhibited the phagocytosis of yeast
particles (Lopez-Cepero et al 1986). However, another experiment
(Munson et al. 1976) using intact mice that were treated with a
single dose or multiple doses of THC could not demonstrate
impairment in reticuloendothelial activity, as measured by the
intravascular clearance of colloidal carbon. </p>

<p>Summary of Effects on cellular Defenses It is somewhat
surprising that newer techniques of cell sorting, which permit
determination of absolute counts of T- and B-lymphocytes as well
as subsets of T-lymphocytes, have not been utilized. the evidence
from the in vitro studies is weakened by the high concentrations
of drug that were used. Clinically, evidence for impairment of
cellular defenses has not been forthcoming. </p>

<p>IMMUNOGENICITY OF CANNABINOIDS Laboratory Studies It has been
hypothesized that THC, a relatively simple chemical, can act as a
hapten and become an immunogen. If such were the case, tolerance
to THC might be explained on an immunological basis as well as
the rare reports of allergic reactions. Azathioprine, an
immunosuppressant, had a modest effect in mitigating the
hypotensive effects of THC in spontaneously hypertensive rats.
Spleen cells from mice treated with THC showed slightly more
blast transformation in culture than untreated spleen cells,
either with or without THC being added to the culture medium.
However, the degree of blast transformation was far less than
that produced by PHA. This somewhat weak evidence for an
immunogenic action of THC came from a laboratory that later
stressed the immunosuppressant effects of marijuana (Nahas,
Zugary &amp; Schwartz 1973). </p>

<p>Watson, Murphy &amp; Turner (1983) employed a technique used
to test compounds for their potential for producing allergic
contact dermatitis and that also maximizes the degree of skin
sensitization of guinea pigs. Sensitivity was greatly increased
by THC and cannabinol, but less so with other cannabinoids. </p>

<p>Clinical Studies In a clinical study conducted in the
southwestern United States (Freeman 1983), skin tests were
applied to 90 patients with various forms of atopy. The test was
positive for 63 patients for marijuana pollen as compared to only
18 who reacted to tobacco leaf. However, it is unlikely that
marijuana pollen contains many cannabinoids, but rather contains
proteins that many be sensitizing. </p>

<p>A series of 28 marijuana smokers showed precipitins for
Aspergillus antigens: 13 were positive as compared to one of 10
controls. Lymphocytes showed significant blastogenesis in three
of those subjects who tested positive. Seven of these 23 subjects
reported bronchospasm following the smoking of marijuana, and one
patient had evidence of systemic aspergillosis (Kagen et al.
1983). As it is well known that marijuana contains contaminants,
including molds and fungi, it is not surprising that these should
cause allergic reactions in some users. The study does not
indicate that cannabinoids themselves are immunogens. </p>

<p>Skin testing with cannabinoids seems to be useless for
determining the rare patient with sensitivity to marijuana. A
variety of intradermal tests with various cannabinoids and common
allergens was applied to 63 marijuana users by Lewis and Slavin
(1975). Two users, who were clearly atopic with a past history of
bronchial asthma, also reported experiencing asthma after some
exposures to marijuana. A third subject with a history of
allergic rhinitis also experienced similar symptoms following
marijuana use. All three of these subjects had negative skin
tests to cannabinoids. On the other hand, seven subjects who
tested positive for hemp and one who tested positive to D8-THC
had no clinical manifestation of marijuana sensitivity. </p>

<p>A 29-year-old woman (known to be allergic to ragweed)
experienced symptoms of ananaphylactoid reaction that lasted 20
to 30 minutes immediately after smoking marijuana. Skin tests
with THC showed a 2+ reaction, and with cannabidiol a 1+ reaction
(Liskow, Liss &amp; Parker 1971). The weakly positive skin tests
do not necessarily indicate that the reaction was due
specifically to cannabinoids. </p>

<p>Summary of Immunogenicity While it is possible that a few
persons may become truly allergic to cannabinoids, it is far more
likely that allergic reactions, which have been exceedingly rare
following the use of marijuana, are due to contaminants.
Marijuana is grown in the field and harvested along with
everything else (eg., bacteria, fungi, molds, parasites, worms,
chemicals) that may be found in such field plants. That such
impure material, when smoked and inhaled into the lungs, causes
so little trouble is really a marvel. </p>

<p>SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Despite the fairly large literature
that developed during the past 15 years or so, the effect of
cannabinoids on the immune system is still unsettled. The
evidence has been contradictory and is more supportive of some
degree of immunosuppression only when one considers in vitro
studies. These have been seriously flawed by the very high
concentrations of drug used to produce immunosuppression and by
the lack of comparisons with other membrane-active drugs. The
closer that experimental studies have been to actual clinical
situations, the less compelling has been the evidence. </p>

<p>Although the topic was of great interest during the 1970s, as
indicated by the preponderance of references from that period,
interest has waned during the present decade. This waning of
interest suggests that perhaps most investigators feel that this
line of inquiry will not be rewarding. the AIDS epidemic has also
diverted the attention of the immunologists to the far more
serious problem of the truly devastating effects a retrovirus can
have on a portion of the immune system. </p>

<p>The relationship between the use of social drugs and the
development of clinical manifestations of AIDS has been of some
interest, however. Persons infected with the virus but not
diagnosed as AIDS have been told to avoid the use of marijuana
and/or alcohol. This advice may be reasonable as a general health
measure, but direct evidence that heeding this warning will
prevent the ultimate damage to the immune system is totally
lacking. </p>

<p>ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The author wishes to thank Matthew Edlund,
M.D., who provided useful critical comments during the
preparation of this article. </p>

<hr>

<h2>REFERENCES</h2>

<p>Baczynsky, W.O. &amp; Zimmerman, A.M. 1983a. Effects of D9
tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabinol and cannabidiol on the immune
system of mice. I. In vivo investigation of the primary and
secondary immune response. Pharmacology Vol. 26(1):1-11. </p>

<p>Baczynsky, W.O. &amp; Zimmerman, A.M. 1983b. Effects of D9
tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabinol and cannabidiol on the immune
system of mice. II In vitro investigation using cultured mouse
splenocytes. Pharmacology Vol. 26(1):12-19. </p>

<p>Bradley, S.G.; Munson, A.E.; Dewey, W.L. &amp; Harris, L.S.
1977. Enhanced susceptibility of mice to combinations of
D9-tetrahydrocannabinol and live or killed gram negative
bacteria. Infection and Immunity Vol. 17:325-329. </p>

<p>Cabral, G.A.; Mishkin, E.M.; Marciano-cabral, F.; Coleman, P.;
Harris, L. &amp; Munson, A.E. 1986. Effect of
D9-tetrahydrocannabinol on herpes simplex virus type 2 vaginal
infection in the guinea pig. Proceedings of the Society for
Experimental Biology and Medicine Vol. 182:181-186 </p>

<p>Cushman, P. &amp; Khurana, R. 1977. A controlled cycle of
tetrahydrocannabinol smoking: T and B cell rosette formation.
Life Sciences Vol. 20: 971-980. </p>

<p>Cushman, P. &amp; Khurana, R. &amp; Hashim, G. 1976
Tetrahydrocannabinol: Evidence for reduced rosette formation by
normal T lymphocytes. In: Braude, M.C. &amp; Szara, S. (Eds.).
The Pharmacology of Marihuana. New York: Raven Press. </p>

<p>Dual, C.B. &amp; Heath, R.G. 1975. The effect of chronic
marihuana usage on the immunological status of rhesus monkeys.
Life Sciences Vol.17:875. </p>

<p>Freeman, G.L. 1983. Allergic skin test reactivity to marijuana
in the Southwest. Western Journal of Medicine Vol.
138(6):829-831. </p>

<p>Gupta, S.; Grieco, M.A. &amp; Cushman, P. 1974. Impairment of
rosette forming T lymphocytes in chronic marihuana smokers. New
England Journal of Medicine Vol. 291:874-877. </p>

<p>Hollister, L.E. 1986. Health aspects of cannabis.
Pharmacological Reviews Vol. 38(1):1-20.<br>
</p>

<p>Kagen, S.L.; Kurup. V.P.; Sohnle, P.G. &amp; Fink, J.N. 1983.
Marijuana smoking and fungal sensitization. Journal of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology Vol. 71(4):389-393. </p>

<p>Kaklamani, E.; Trichopoulos, D.; Koutselinis, A.; Brouja, M.
&amp; Karalis, B. 1978. Hashish smoking and T-lymphocytes.
Archives of Toxicology Vol. 40: 97 101. </p>

<p>Klein, T.W.; Newton, C. &amp; Friedman, H. 1987. Inhibition of
natural killer cell function by marijuana components. Journal of
Toxicology and Environmental Health Vol. 20(4):321-332. </p>

<p>Klein, T.W.; Newton, C.; Widen, R. &amp; Friedman, H. 1985.
The effect of D9 tetrahydrocannabinol and
11-hydroxy-D9-tetrahydrocannabinol on T lymphocyte and
B-lymphocyte mitogen responses. Journal of Immunopharmacology
Vol. 7:451-456. </p>

<p>Lau, R.J.; Tubergen, D.G.; Barr, M., Jr.; Domino, E.F.;
Benowitz, N. &amp; Jones, R.T. 1976. Phytohemagglutinin-induced
lymphocyte transformation in humans receiving
D9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Science Vol 192:805-807. </p>

<p>Lefkowitz, S.S.; Klager, K.; Nemeth, D. &amp; Preuss, M. 1978.
Immunosuppression of mice by D9-THC. Research Communications in
chemical Pathology and Pharmacology Vol.19:101-107. </p>

<p>Levy, J.A. &amp; Heppner, G.H. 1981. Alterations of immune
reactivity by haloperidol and D9-tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of
Immunopharmacology Vol. 3:93-109. </p>

<p>Levy, J.A.; Munson, A.E.; Harris, L.S. &amp; Dewey, W.L. 1974.
Effect of D8- and D9-tetrahydrocannabinol on the immune response
in mice. Pharmacologist Vol. 16:259. </p>

<p>Lewis, C.R. &amp; Slavin, R.G. 1975. Allergy to marihuana: A
clinical and skin-testing study. Journal of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology Vol. 55:131-132. </p>

<p>Liskow, B.; Liss, J.L. &amp; Parker, C.W. 1971. Allergy to
marihuana. Annuls of Internal Medicine Vol. 75:571-573. </p>

<p>Lopez-Cepero, M.; Friedman, M.; Klein, T. &amp; Friedman, H.
1986. Tetrahydrocannabinol-induced suppression of macrophage
spreading and phagocyte activity in vitro. Journal of Leukocyte
Biology Vol. 39:679-686. </p>

<p>Loveless, S.E.; Harris, L.S. &amp; Munson, A.E. 1981-1982.
Hyporesponsiveness to the immunosuppressant effects of
D9-tetrahydrocannabinol Journal of Immunopharmacology Vol.3
(3-4):371-383. </p>

<p>Luthra, Y.K.; Esber, H.J.; Laviriere, D.M. &amp; Rosenkrantz,
H. 1980. Assessment of tolerance to immunosuppressive activity of
in rats. Journal of Immunopharmacology Vol. 2:245. </p>

<p>Maykut, M.O. 1985 Health consequences of acute and chronic
marijuana use. Progress In Neuropsychopharmacology and Biological
Psychiatry Vol. 9(3):209-238. </p>

<p>Mishkin, M.O. &amp; Cabral, G.A. 1985. D9-tetrahydrocannabinol
decreases host resistance to herpes simplex virus type 2 vaginal
infection in the B6C3F1 mouse. Journal of General Virology Vol.
66:2539-2549. </p>

<p>Morahan, P.S.; Klykken, P.C.; Smith, S.H.; Harris, L.S. &amp;
Munson, A.E. 1979. Effects of cannabinoids on host resistance to
Listeria monocytogenes and herpes simplex virus. Infection and
Immunity Vol. 23:670-674. </p>

<p>Munson, A.E. &amp; Fehr, K.O. 1983. Immunological effects of
cannabis. In: Fehr, K.O. &amp; Kalant, H (Eds.). Cannabis and
Health Hazards. Toronto: Addiction Research Foundation. </p>

<p>Munson, A.E.; Levy, J.A.; Harris, L.S. &amp; dewey, W.L. 1976
Effects of D9 tetrahydrocannabinol on the immune system. In:
Braude, M.C. &amp; Szara, S. (Eds.). </p>

<p>Nahas, G.G.; Desoize, B.; Armand, J.P.; Hsu, J. &amp;
Morishima, A. 1976 Natural cannabinoids: Apparent depression of
nucleic acids and protein synthesis in cultured lymphocytes. In:
Braude, M.C. &amp; Szara, S. (Eds). The Pharmacology of
Marihuana. New York: Raven Press. </p>

<p>Nahas, G.G.; Suciv-Foca, N.; Armand, J.P. &amp; Morishima, A.
1974. Inhibition of cellular mediated immunity in marihuana
smokers. Science Vol. 183:419 420. </p>

<p>Nahas, G.G.; Zagury, D. &amp; Schwartz, I.W. 1973. Evidence
for the possible immunogenecity of D9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
in rodents. Nature Vol. 243:407-408. </p>

<p>Patel, V.; Borysendo, M.; Kumar, M.S.A. &amp; Millard, W.J.
1985. Effects of acute and subchronic D9-tetrahydrocannabinol
administration on the plasma catecholamine,B-endorphin, and
corticosterone levels and splenic natural killer activity in
rats. Proceedings of the Society of Experimental Biology and
Medicine Vol. 180:400-404. </p>

<p>Petersen, B.H.; Grahan, J. &amp; Lemberger, L. 1976.
Marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol, and T-cell function. Life
Sciences Vol. 1976:395 400. </p>

<p>Rachelfsky, G.S. &amp; Opedz, G. 1977. Normal lymphocyte
function in the presence of D9-THC. Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics Vol. 21:44 46. </p>

<p>Rosenkrantz, H. 1976. The immune response and marihuana. In:
Nahas, G.(Ed.). Marihuana: Chemistry, Biochemistry, and Cellular
Effects, New York: Springer-Verlag. </p>

<p>Rosenkrantz, H.; Miller, A.J. &amp; Esber, H.J. 1975.
D9-Tetrahydrocannabinol suppression of the primary immune
response in rats. Journal of Toxicological and Environmental
Health Vol. 1:119. </p>

<p>Schwartzfarb, L.; Needle, N. &amp; Chavez-Chase, M. 1974.
Dose-related inhibition of leukocyte migration by marijuana and
D9 tetrahydrocannabinol. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology Vol.
14:35-41. </p>

<p>Silverstein, M.J. &amp; Lessin, P.J. 1974. Normal skin test
responses in chronic marijuana users. Science Vol. 186:740-741. </p>

<p>Smith, S.; Harris, L.; Uwaydah, L. &amp; Munson, A. 1978.
Structure-activity relationships of natural and synthetic
cannabinoids in suppression of humoral and cell-mediated
immunity. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics
Vol. 207:165-170. </p>

<p>Watson, E.S.; Murphy, J.D. &amp; Turner, C.E. 1983. Allergenic
properties of naturally occurring cannabinoids. Journal of
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics Vol. 72: 954-955. </p>

<p>White, S.C.; Brin, S.C. &amp; Janicki, B.W. 1975.
Mitogen-induced blastogenic responses of lymphocytes from
marihuana smokers. Science Vol. 188:71 71. </p>

<p>Zimmerman, S.; Zimmerman, A.M.; Cameron, I.L. &amp; Laurence,
H.L. 1977. D9-tetrahydrocannabinol, cannabidiol, and cannabinol
effects on the immune response of mice. Pharmacology Vol.
15:10-23. </p>

<hr>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
<!--webbot bot="Include"
u-include="../../../_private/sch_hemp_medical_navbar.htm"
tag="BODY" startspan -->

<p><a href="../../../toc.htm">Contents</a> | <a
href="../../../feedback.htm">Feedback</a> | <a
href="../../../search.htm">Search</a> </p>

<p><a href="../../../index.htm">DRCNet Library</a> | <a
href="../../index.HTM">Schaffer Library</a>&nbsp;| <a
href="../hempmenu.htm">Hemp (Marijuana)</a> | <a
href="medical.htm">Medical Information</a> </p>
<!--webbot bot="Include" endspan i-checksum="55454" -->
</body>
</html>
</DOC>